BX  6275  .E92  v. 2 

Evans,  B. 

The  early  English  Baptists 


THE  BUNYAN  LIBRARY: 

FOR    THE   rUELICATIOX    AND    KEPUBLICATIOX     OF    STAXDARD     WORKS 

BY  EMINENT  BAPTIST  AUTHORS. 

VOL.    VIII. 

THE  EARLY  ENGLISH  BAPTISTS.— Vol.  IL 


THE 


EARLY  ENGLISH  BAPTISTS. 


VOL.  II. 


B.  EVANS,  D.D. 


LONDON: 
J.  HEATON  &  SON,  42,  PATERNOSTER  ROW. 

1864. 


LONDON  : 

PRINTED  BY  J.   HILVTON  AND  SON, 

PATERNOSTEK  EOV/. 


PREFACE. 


Only  a  very  few  words  arc  necessary  in  introducing 
this  volume  to  the  attention  of  the  reader.  He  will 
find  in  the  preface  to  the  former  one  the  principles 
which  have  guided  me,  and  the  end  I  have  had  in 
view  in  writing  this  work.  The  few  sentences  I  pen 
belong  to  the  apologetic  class. 

When  I  consented  to  prepare  a  sketch  of  Early 
Baptist  History  for  the  BuNYAN  Library,  I  had  no 
idea  that  it  would  swell  into  its  present  magnitude. 
As  the  work  progressed,  the  materials  multiplied;  but 
I  hoped  that,  by  condensation,  the  present  volume 
would  exhaust  my  resources.  Many  of  the  incidents 
which  form  the  staple  of  the  works  of  my  prede- 
cessors, have  been  reduced  in  this  work  to  the 
narrowest  bounds.  I  have  done  what,  honestly  and 
justl}^,  I  could  do.  Much  that  is  new  and  illustrative 
of  our  history  lies  unused  before  me.  The  volume 
might  have  been  enlarged  greatly;  but  at  some  cost 
of  feeling  I  have  steadily  checked  this,  and  omitted 
much  whiclv  might  have  given  something  like  com- 
pleteness to  my  outline.  I  have  felt  the  evil  of  writing 
to  order.  My  work  is  necessarily  incomplete.  Under 
other  chapters,  much  would  be  introduced  which  forms 
an  important  element  in  Baptist  history.  Whether 
tlie  outline  already  sketched  in  tlie  first  volume  will 


vi  PREFACE. 

ever  be  completed,  it  is  not  for  me  to  say.    It  rests 
with  the  publishers,  and  perhaps  with  the  subscribers, 
to  determine  if  a  third  volume  shall  make  a  part  of 
the  Bun  VAN  Library.    I  regret  this  necessity.    I  have 
done  what  I  could  to  escape  from  it;  and  I  now  leave 
it  with  my  readers  to  judge,  after  reading  the  volume, 
how  far  I  could  have  avoided  this  result.     I  await 
their  decision  without  alarm.    Grateful  for  the  kind- 
ness with  which  the  former  volume  was  received,  I 
venture  to  hope  that  the  present  will. not  be  found 
unworthy  of  the  same  favour.    Only  in  one  instance 
have  I  been  censured  for  failure — not  in  what  I  enga- 
ged to  do,  but  for  not  doing  more  than  I  promised, 
and  indeed  felt  that  any  one  could  do.    My  work,  says 
my  re\dewer,  should  have  been  a  history,  not  a  sketch. 
Indeed!     The  opinion  shows  the  utter  incompetency  of 
this  gentleman  to  sit  in  the  critic's  chair,  and  satisfies 
me  that  he  is  profoundly  ignorant  of  the  matter  on 
which  he  writes.    I  repeat  again,  what  he  knows  to  be 
true,  if  he  knows  anything  about  it,  that  the  history 
of  the  Baptists  cannot  yet  be  wi'itten.    I  have  read 
much ;  I  have  added  here  and  there  a  fragment  to  the 
labours  of  my  predecessors;  but  there  are  masses  of 
still  unexplored  materials  which,  when  examined,  will 
throw  much  light  on  the  character  and  principles  of 
our   brethren    during    the   period  over  which    these 
volumes  have  carried  my  readers.     The   libraries  at 
Lambeth,  at  Sion  College,  Red  Cross  Street,  the  British 
Museum,  and  the  State  Paper  Office,  con|^in  hundreds 
of  volumes  of  MSS.  never  yet  examined  for  this  end. 
Only  at  some  of  them  have  I  glanced,  but  the  mass  are 
yet  untouched  by  us.    I  advert  to  this,  not  for  the  sake 
of  controverting  this  dictum  of  my  reviewer — I  am  not 
troubled  at  it;  but  mainly,  if  possible,  to  excite  the 


PREFACE.  Vil 

attention  of  my  brethren  to  this  course  of  investiga- 
tion. Many  might  easily  do  what  it  would  take  the 
life  of  one  man  to  accomplish.  A  sample  of  this  was 
given  in  the  Baptist  Magazine  only  a  few  months  ago; 
and  ft  lis  is  only  a  specimen  of  the  wealth  which  is  yet 
unexplored  by  us.  If  Nonconformists  would  employ 
some  competent  persons  to  investigate  these  hidden 
sources  of  their  history,  the  church  and  the  nation 
would  be  alike  benefited  by  it.  I  hope  to  aid  in  this; 
and,  if  spared,  to  render  at  some  future  time  this  work 
more  worthy  of  the  body  to  illustrate  whose  progress 
it  has  been  professedly  devoted. 

I  have  only  to  add,  what  indeed  justice  to  myself 
demands,  that  it  is  possible  here  and  there  an  error  may 
be  detected,  especially  in  the  notes.  I  am  not  aware 
that  it  is  so;  but  as  most  of  this  volume  has  been 
corrected,  and  no  small  portion  of  it  written,  whilst 
travelling  about  the  country,  far  from  my  books,  the 
probability  may  be  in  that  direction.  I  owe  no  apology 
for  the  time  at  which  the  volume  is  published. 


B.  EVANS. 


Scarborough, 

August,  1864. 


CONTEiNTS. 


Preface            ..... 

V 

CHAPTER  I. 

CHARLES  THE  FIEST. 

The   Character   of    the    Monarch    at    liis   Accession    to  the 

Throne 1 

Parties  iu  the  State         .... 

3 

The  Coronation        .... 

5 

The  Church— Abbott      .... 

7 

Laud— his  influence 

9 

The  condition  of  the  people 

12 

Tlie  morals  of  the  Clergy    . 

14 

The  Puritan  element      .... 

18 

The  prevalence  of  Baptist  principles 

20 

Letters  to  the  Diitch  Churches  . 

.    /    21 

The  mode  of  Baptism 

ol 

53 

54 

Church  at  Stoney  Stratford 

The  conflict  of  the  Commons  with  the  Kirig    . 

57 

The  Second  Parliament 

GO 

The  Third  Parliament    .... 

62 

Elevation  of  Laud  to  the  Primacy . 

05 

His  policy           ..... 

(38 

The  Star  Chamber — Nonconformist  sufferings 

71 

Piise  of  Particular  Baptists 

75 

Influence  of  the  Laudian  School     . 

80 

Nonconformists  emigrate  to  Holland      . 

S3 

Episcopacy  and  the  Scottish  Chiu-cli 

85 

Baptists  in  Wales           .... 

88 

in  England             .... 

89 

CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE   CIVIL   W.\B. 

State  of  parties  .... 

The  feeling  in  the  Commons'  House 

The  Star  Chamber 

The  labour  of  the  Patriots  . 

Peeling  against  Laud 

Anabaptists  before  the  Lords,  &c.  . 

Hostility  to  the  Bishops 

Remonstrance  of  the  Commons 

Charles's  attempt  on  the  Five  Members 

John  Canne  and  the  Baptists 

Works  on  Baptism 

Vavasoiir  Powell  in  Wales  . 

Dr.  Feately  and  the  Baptists  in  Southwark 

Charles  denounces  them 

raises  the  standard  of  Civil  War 

Character  of  the  Cavaliers  . 

of  the  Parliamentarians 

Baptists — their  aim  in  engaging  in  the  War 
Thomas  Lamb — his  sufferings    . 

Rise  of  sects 

Influence  of  Presbyterians 

Meeting  of  the  Assembly  of  Divines 

Influence  of  this  on  the  Baptists 

Cause  of  their  increase 

Confession  of  Faith 

Increase  of  Baptists 

Efforts  for  religious  freedom 

Tyranny  of  Presbyterians  . 

Baxter  and  Cox  at  Coventry      . 

Progress  of  Baptist  sentiments 

Dispiite  with  Calamy     . 

H.  Denne— his  sufferings     . 

Laying  on  of  hands  on  the  baptized 

John  Tombes  embraces  Baptist  views 

Henry  Jessey  embraces  Baptist  views  • 

Presbyterian  hatred 

Colonel  Hutchinson  adopts  Baptist  views 

Intolerant  Ijaw 


Xl 


Progress  of  the  War 
Duplicity  of  Charles 
Death  and  character  of  Charles 


TAGE 

154 
155 
156 


CHAPTER  III. 

THE  COMMONWEALTH. 

The  spread  of  Republican  principles           .            .             .       .       1G9 

The  strength  of  parties  in  the  nation    . 

170 

Abolition  of  the  Monarchy 

172 

Ireland   ...... 

.       172 

Charles  II.  proclaimed  by  the  Scots 

.       173 

Cromwell  in  Scotland     .... 

174 

Moral  state  of  Wales          .             .             .             . 

175 

Petition  of  the  Anabaptists  in  London 

176 

Religious  freedom    ..... 

176 

State  of  the  Universities 

178 

Baptists  in  the  Principality 

180 

Tombes  and  Baxter         .... 

184 

Baptists  in  Ireland    ... 

187 

O        4-1         ^ 

189 
191 

•    m  ocotianci        .... 
Political  changes      ..... 

Cromwell  Lord  Protector 

193 

Party  feeling            ..... 

194 

The  "Tryers"    ..... 

196 

Baptists  opposed  to  them     .... 

198 

Protector  favourable  to  the  Baptists     . 

199 

They  are  hostile  to  his  Government 

200 

Major-General  Harrison 

202 

Feake,  Powell,  and  others,  against  the  Protector  . 

203 

Letter  of  Thomas  Harrison  on  Baptists  in  Ireland,  &c 

208 

Fifth  Monarchy  men            .... 

212 

Colonel  Lilburne  in  Scotland     . 

215 

Letter  to  the  Church  at  Hexham    . 

220 

Rise  of  Associations        .... 

223 

Various  sects            ..... 

225 

Baptists  opposed  to  Fifth  Monarchy  Men 

226 

Closing  scene  of  the  Protector's  life 

228 

Character  of  Oliver         .... 

229 

Moral  state  of  the  country 

235 

Eichard  proclaimed        .... 

State  of  parties        .... 

The  feeling  of  Baptists  .... 

Case  of  Colonel  Overton 

Hostility  between  the  Civil  and  Military  Powei'S 

Royalist  rising  .... 

Monk— his  duplicity,  &c. 

Baptists — persecuted 

The  Restoration  .... 


CHAPTER  IV. 


CHAKLES  THE  SECOXD. 


The  joy  of  the  nation 

The  Presbyterians  aid  in  the  Restoration 

Calainy  and  others  at  Breda 

Condiict  of  the  Cavaliers 

The  Regicides  .... 

General  Harrison  .... 

The  bodies  of  Cromwell  and  others  dishonoured 

Restoration  of  Episcopacy,  &c. 

Savoy  Conference  .... 

The  spirit  of  the  Presbyterians 

The  spirit  of  the  Church 

Sufferings  of  Baptists 

John  Bunyan      ..... 

Venner  and  the  Fifth  Monarchy  Men 

[Moral  state  of  the  nation 

Emigrants  to  Holland 

Hostility  to  Baptists      .... 

Trial  and  martj^rdom  of  John  James 

Vavasour  Powell  and  the  Welsh  Baptists 

(character  of  the  House  of  Commons 

Passing  of  the  Corporation  Act 

Episcopacy  in  Scotland 

Uniformity  Bill  ..... 

Prayer  Book  modified 

Ejected  Baptists  .... 

Feelings  of  the  ejected        .  .  . 

Indulgence  promised      .... 


CONTENTS. 

xiii 

PAGE 

Sheldon— his  hostility  to  the  Nonconformists  .      .             .       • 

298 

Charles  and  his  Court     ...••• 

299 

Sufferings  of  Nonconformists           .             .             .             •       • 

300 

William  Klflin    ....... 

303 

Trial  of  Keach         ....... 

306 

Spirit  of  the  Episcopate             ..... 

310 

State  of  the  Court  and  CJovernment           .             .            .       . 

312 

The  "Cabal" 

3L5 

Cromwell  and  Charles's  Government           .             .             .       . 

317 

Toleration  promised       ...... 

319 

The  growth  of  Popery         .             .             .             .             .       . 

320 

The  Test  Act      . 

321 

Sufferings  of  the  Baptists    .             .             .             .             .       . 

322 

Conflicts  with  the  Quakers        ..... 

324 

George  Fox  and  the  Baptists  in  Leicester,  Carlisle,  and  Scotland 

326 

French  influence      .             .             .             .             .             .       . 

328 

The  University  of  Oxford  issues  its  famous  decree  on  Passive 

Obedience    ....... 

330 

Attitude  of  the  Patriots      .             .             .             .             .       . 

332 

Scheme  of  Comprehension          ..... 

333 

Baptist  sufferings — Delaune             .             .             .             .       . 

334 

Efforts  for  training  ministers      ..... 

339 

Last  days  and  death  of  Charles       .             .             .             .       . 

341 

Character  of  Charles      .             .             .            . 

346 

EARLY  ENGLISH  BAPTISTS. 


THE 

EARLY  ENGLISH  BAPTISTS, 


CHAPTER    I. 

CHARLES  THE   FIRST. 

The  accession  of  Cliiirles  was  viewed  by  the  nation  with 
some  degree  of  hopefulness.  "His  coming  to  the  crown  was 
very  joyous  to  the  well-affected,  but  to  the  Papists  not  very 
welcome."'"'  There  were  many  features  in  his  character  which 
adapted  him  for  his  position,  and  which  were  likely  to  make 
him  popidar  with  the  people.  "  Charles  was  temperate, 
chaste,  and  serious  :  so  that  the  fools  and  bawds,  mimics 
and  catamites,  of  the  former  court  grew  out  of  fashion  : 
and  the  nobility  and  courtiers  who  did  not  quite  abandon 
their  debaucheries,  had  yet  that  reverence  to  the  king 
as  to  retire  into  corners  to  jiractise  them  :  men  of 
learning  and  ingenuity,  in  all  arts,  were  in  esteem,  and 
received  encouragement  from  the  king,  who  was  a  most 
excellent  judge  and  a  great  lover  of  paintings,  carvings, 
gravings,  and  many  other  ingenuists  less  offensive  than  the 
bawdry  and  profane  abusive  wit,  which  was  the  only  exercise 
of  the  other  court. t'     From  the  pen  of  the  Puritan  matron 


*  Diary  of  J.  Rouse,  p.  1.     Camden  Society. 
+  Mrs.  Hutchinson,  p.   20.     "I  am  aware,"  says  a  competent  judge, 
"  that  lie  was  not  the  i)erfect  saint  as  well  as  martyr  which  his  panegyrists 
represent  him  to  have  been. " — Hallam,  vol.  i. ,  p.  874.   ' '  The  persons  belong- 
ing to  the  new  court  were  required  to  be  strictly  moral  in  their  conduct ; 


2  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

this  is  no  common  praise.  Charles  had  probably  been  destined 
by  his  father  for  the  highest  offices  in  the  church.  During  his 
youth  no  pains  had  been  spared  to  cultivate  his  mind.  With 
the  theological  controversies  which  were  agitating  the  entire 
kingdom  he  was  somewhat  familiar.  His  discussion  with 
Henderson  discloses  no  small  mental  acumen  and  theological 
knowledge.  The  admirers  of  the  monarch  attribute  Hen- 
derson's death  to  his  defeat  by  the  royal  theologian.  Upon 
other  subjects,  of  what  may  be  called,  even  then,  polite 
litei'ature,  Charles  was  by  no  means  deficient.*  The  death 
of  his  brother,  Prince  Henry,  supposed  by  poison,  opened  to 
him  the  path  to  the  throne.t 

But  these  excellences  were  impaired  by  other  elements  of 
character  of  the  very  worst  kind.  Macaulay  has  graphically 
sketched  them  : — "  He  had  inherited  from  his  father  politi- 
cal theories,  and  was  much  more  disposed  than  his  father  to 
carry  them  into  practice.  He  was,  like  his  father,  a  zealous 
Episcopalian.     He  was,  moreover,  what  his  father  had  never 


fools  and  buffoons,  whom  James  loved  to  have  about  Mm,  were  kept  at  a 
distance ;  able  men  employed,  artists  and  men  of  learning  encouraged." — 
Raumer's  Political  History,  vol.  i.,  p.  466.  "Perhaps  the  most  bitter 
political  enemy  of  Charles  I.  will  have  the  candour  to  allow  that,  for  a 
prince  of  those  times,  he  was  truly  and  eminently  accomplished.  His 
knowledge  of  the  arts  was  considerable  :  and,  as  a  patron  of  art,  he  stands 
foremost  amongst  all  British  sovereigns  to  this  hour-,"  &c.  -De  Quincey's 
Works,  vol.  XV.,  p.  15  (Note). 

*  Thompson's  Buckingham,  vol.  i.,  p.  121.  "  He  is  well  known  to  have 
been  a  great  student  in  his  younger  days,  that  his  father  would  say  he 
must  make  him  a  bishop.  He  had  more  learning  and  dexterity  in  state 
affaii-s,  imdoubtedly,  than  all  the  kings  in  Christendom." — Cook's  Speech, 
intended  to  have  been  delivered  before  the  High  Court  of  Justice. — Col- 
lection of  Tracts.    London,  1748,  vol.  iv.,  p.  192. 

"t"  The  baptism  of  this  prince  was  by  immersion.  "And  incontinent, 
the  prince  was  put  into  the  font,  the  officers  of  anns  put  on  their  coats, 
and  all  the  torches  were  lighted,  and  then  entered  the  Earl  of  O.xenford." 
— Antiquarian's  Repertory,  vol.  i.,  p.  353.  There  is  a  curious  plate  of  the 
procession  in  the  same  volume.  An  account  of  the  prince's  baptism  ^vilI 
be  found  in  a  volume  of  Tracts  on  Scottish  History.     Edinbiu-gh,  ]836. 


CHARLES   THE    FIRST.  .> 

been,  a  zealous  Arminian,  and,  though  no  Papist,  liked  a 
Papist  much  better  than  a  Puritan.  .  .  .  Faithlessness 
was  the  chief  cause  of  his  disaster,  and  is  the  chief  stain  on 
his  memory.  He  was,  in  truth,  imj^elled  by  an  incurable 
propensity  to  dark  and  ci-ooked  -ways.  It  may  seem  strange 
that  his  conscience,  which,  on  occasion  of  better  moments, 
was  sufficiently  sensitive,  should  never  have  reproached  him 
with  this  vice.  But  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  he  was 
perfidious,  not  only  from  constitution  and  from  habit,  but 
also  on  principle.  He  seems  to  have  learned  from  the 
theologians  whom  he  most  esteemed,  that  between  him  and 
his  subjects  there  could  be  nothing  of  mutual  contract :  that 
he  could  not,  even  if  he  would,  divest  himself  of  his  despotic 
authority;  and  that  in  every  promise  which  he  made,  there 
was  an  implied  reservation  that  such  promise  might  be 
broken  in  case  of  necessity,  and  that  of  the  necessity  he  was 
the  sole  judge."* 

The  state  of  parties  at  this  time  demands  a  passing 
remark,  inasmuch  as  the  sufferings  of  the  nation  and  the 
death  of  the  monarch  may  be  traced  to  causes  already 
operating,  t  We  have  indicated  before  that  the  spirit  of 
liberty  had  to  no  inconsiderable  extent  pervaded  the  nation. 
It  was  born  during  the  Tudor  dynasty.  J  Through  the  reign 
of  the  fii'st  Stuart  it  had  grown,  and  now  in  both  Houses  of 
the  Legislature  it  had  assumed  an  attitude  at  once  command- 
ing and  imposing.  The  worthless  favourite,  Buckingham, 
had  roused  the  self-respect  of  the  Peers,  if  not  their  love  of 
popular  freedom.    The  galling  yoke,  which  this  unprincipled 


*  History,  vol.  i.,  p.  83. 

t  Beaumont,  the  Frencli  ambassador,  says: — "I  discover  so  many 
seeds  of  disease  in  England,  so  much  is  brooding  in  silence,  and  s<i 
many  events  seem  inevitable,  that  I  am  inclined  to  affirm,  that  for  a  cen- 
turj-  from  this  time,  this  kingdom  will  hardly  alji^se  its  prosperity,  except 
to  its  rain."— Raumer's  Political  History  of  England,  vol.  i.,  p.  4.58. 

t  Pari.  Hist.,  vol.  L,  pp.  794-7;  Guizot's  Hist.  E.  Kevolution;  Appen- 
dix, pp.  430,  443. 


4  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

upstart  liacl  imposed  on  them,  was  awakening  tlieir  anger 
and  rousing  them  to  eflbrt.*  In  the  Commons  a  still  bolder 
spirit  spoke.  The  voice  was  clear,  strong,  and  distinct; 
respectful,  nay,  courteous  to  royalty,  but  bold  and  manly  for 
the  people.  In  their  first  gathering  the  Commons  demanded 
a  redress  of  grievances.  With  an  avowed  and  unquestioned 
ret\diness  to  sustain  the  prerogatives  and  even  the  splendour 
of  royalty,  there  was  a  calm  and  dignified  assertion  of  popu- 
lar rights.  In  the  front  they  placed  this  claim.  The  national 
cry  was  loud ;  they  demanded  that  it  should  be  heard.  Its 
weakness  is  the  peril  of  the  thi'one ;  its  oppression  the  death 
of  liberty.  First  grant  us  freedom,  then  the  basis  and 
power  of  the  throne  will  be  a  nation's  aflTections.  So  rea- 
soned the  representatives  of  the  people.  Around  the 
monarch,  and  crowding  every  avenue  to  the  court,  was  a 
very  different  but  a  large  and  influential  class,  politicians 
and  churchmen,  led  by  Buckingham  and  Laud, — men  who 
held  the  loftiest  notions,  and  proclaimed  the  monarch 
as  the  "  Lord's  Anointed,"  the  Vicegerent  of  Heaven, 
responsible  to  none,  above  all  law,  and  to  whom  a  nation's 
welfare  was  only  subordinate  to  the  gratification  of  his 
own  supreme  desires.  Loud  and  long  were  the  utterances  of 
the  clergy  on  the  exalted  condition  of  royalty.  From  many 
a   pulpit   the   doctrine    of   passive   obedience  was   urged.f 

*  "I  have  heard  it  undoubtedly  related  that  a  little  before  the  Earl  of 
Pembroke  brought  Mr.  VUliers  unto  the  king's  knowledge,  he  was  at  a 
horserace  in  Cambridgeshire,  in  an  old  black  suit,  broken  out  in  divers 
places ;  and  at  night,  much  of  the  company  lying  at  Linton,  near  which 
town  the  race  had  been,  he  could  not  get  a  room  in  the  inn  to  lodge  in, 
and  was  therefore  glad  to  lie  in  a  trundle-bed  in  a  gentleman's  chamber, 
of  a  mean  quality  also  at  that  time,  from  whose  own  mouth  I  heard  this 
relation,  who  was  himself  an  eye-witness  of  it." — D'Ewes,  vol.  i.,  p.  86. 

t  The  Poiver  of  Princes  as  taught  by  such  men  as  Hobbes:—'' To 
make  men  know  that  it  is  their  duty  to  obey  all  laws  whatsoever  that 
shall  by  the  authority  of  the  king  be  enacted,  till,  by  the  same  authority, 
they  shall  be  repealed.  That  the  civil  laws  are  God's  laws,  as  they  that 
make  them  are  appointed  by  God  to  make  them  ;  and  to  make  men  know 
that  the  people  and  the  church  are  one  thing,  and  that  no  man  has  title 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  5 

Dr.  Maiiiwaring,  in  a  sermon  before  Charles,  said,  "  Tlio 
king  is  not  l»ound  to  observe  the  laws  of  the  kingdom 
respecting  tlie  rights  and  privileges  of  his  subjects.  Every 
royal  coinniand,  for  instance,  in  respect  to  taxing  and  laws, 
binds  tlie  consciences  of  the  subjects  on  pain  of  eternal 
damnation.  He  who  resists  commits  a  sin  against  tlie  law 
of  God  and  the  supreme  authority  of  the  king.  He  is 
guilty  of  impiety,  disloyalty,  and  rebellion :  for  the  consent 
of  Parliament  is  not  necessary  for  the  imposing  of  taxes," 
ifec*  This  is  only  a  sample  of  High  Church  doctrine.  Main- 
wariiig  was  subsequently  raised  to  the  Episcopal  bench. 

In  the  boldest  antagonism  to  these  "  High  Church  prin- 
ciples" was  the  Puritan  element.  It  had  not  been  repressed, 
much  less  annihilated,  by  the  policy  of  James.  The  political 
tendencies  of  the  court,  as  well  as  the  persecuting  spirit  of 
the  hierarchy,  had  only  strengthened  it.  Pojjular  fjivour 
was  daily  gathering  around  it;  and  in  the  Commons  House 
its  advocates  were  increasing.  Such,  in  brief,  were  some  of 
the  elements  pervading  the  Commonwealth  at  this  period  of 
our  national  history. 

Early  in  the  reign  of  this  infatuated  monarch,  suspicion 
was  excited  that  his  religious  opinions  were  more  Popish 
than  Protestant.  His  Spanish  journey,  the  concessions  of 
his  father  to  Pome  in  relation  to  the  Spanish  match, 
Charles's  subsequent  marriage  with  a  daughter  of  France, 
and  the  manifest  tendencies  of  the  hierarchy,  ajiparently 
warranted  the  suspicion. 

"  The  enthroning  of  the  young  king,  &c.,  was  marked  by 
circiimstances  which   many  regarded   as  ominous  of   evil. 


to  govern  iinder  him.  That  the  king  owes  his  crown  to  God  only,  and  to 
no  man,  ecclesiastic,  or  others,"  &c.  So  ivrote  the  great  philosopher  of 
Jlalniesburj'. — Behemoth,  Maseres.  Tr.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  511. 

Moral  state  of  the  universities:— "I  have  often  heard  the  complaint  of 
parents,  that  their  children  were  debauched  there  to  drunkenness,  wan- 
tonness, gaming,  and  other  vices  consequent  to  these." — Hobbes,  Behe- 
moth, Maseres.  Tr.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  598. 

*  Eaumer,  vol.  i.,  p.  492. 


6  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

From  some  cause, — some  say  his  wife,  others  attribute  it  to 
the  pernicious  councils  of  Laud, — the  day  of  his  coronation 
was  linked  with  the  Romish  festival,  the  purification  of  the 
Virgin  Mary;  and,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  multitude, 
instead  of  appearing  in  the  Impei'ial  purple,  the  colour  of 
the  dress  worn  by  the  English  monarchs  on  these  occasions 
for  centuries,  the  king  presented  himself  clothed  in  white. 
The  Bishop  oT  Carlisle,  too,  addressed  to  the  monarch  a 
sermon  from  a  text  which  might  have  marked  the  close, 
rather  than  the  beginning  of  his  reign, — '  I  will  give  to  thee 
a  crown  of  life.'  Superstition,  by  no  means  feeble  at  this 
time,  laid  hold  of  these  things,  and  drew  conclusions  from 
them  by  no  means  favourable  to  the  future.  Popular  feeling 
was  very  mingled,  and  amidst  the  joyousness  of  the  occasion 
there  was  underlying  it  one  of  gloom  and  fear."* 

The  impression  was  so  general,  that  the  king  thus  adverts 
to  it,  "  Some  malicious  men  have  given  out,  that  I  am 
not  so  true  a  keeper  and  maintainer  of  the  true  I'eligion  that 
I  profess.  I  assure  you  that  I  may,  with  St.  Paul,  say  that 
I  was  trained  up  at  Gamaliel's  feet ;  and,  although  I  shall 
never  be  so  arrogant  as  to  assume  unto  myself  tlie  rest,  T 
shall  so  far  show  the  end  of  it,  that  all  the  world  may  see 
that  no  man  hath  been,  nor  ever  shall  be,  more  desirous  to 
maintain  the  religion  I  profess,  than  I  shall  be."t 

Charles's  tendencies  speedily  developed  themselves,  and 
every  encounter  with  the  popular  power  only  strengthened 


*  Vide  Heylin'3  Laud,  p.  145.     Thomson's  Buck.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  283. 

+  King's  Speech  to  his  first  Parliament.  Pari.  Hist.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  1.  "  In 
the  beginning  of  his  reign,  lie  married  a  daughter  of  France,  who  was 
not  wanting  on  her  part  to  press  him,  upon  all  occasions,  to  pursue 
the  design  of  enlarging  his  power;  not  omitting  to  solic-it  him  also 
to  mould  the  Church  of  England  to  a  nearer  compliance  with  the  See 
of  Rome  :  wherein  she  was  but  too  well  seconded  by  corrujjt  Ministers  of 
State,  of  whom  some  were  professed  Papists,  and  an  ambitious  clergy, 
whose  influence  on  the  king  was  always  greater  than  could  weU  consist 
with  the  peace  and  happiness  of  England."— Ludlow's  Memoirs,  p.  1. 
London,  1771. 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  7 

them.  Buckingham,  unprincipled,  vicious,  and  reckless  of 
all  consequences,  sustained  the  monarch,  and  laboured  in 
eveiy  way  to  uproot  constitutional  government,  and  to 
establish  the  unfettered  authority  of  the  Crown.  Against 
this  minion,  the  voice  of  the  Commons  had  l)een  raised 
during  the  previous  reign.  Louder  and  louder  the  hall  of 
St.  Stephen's  echoed  with  denunciations  against  him.  To  his 
pernicious  counsels  the  oppressions  of  the  people,  and  the 
burdens  under  which  the  nation  were  groaning,  were  attri- 
l)uted.  Shdtered  for  a  time  by  his  sovereign  from  the 
righteous  demands  of  insulted  justice,  he  bid  defiance  to  his 
foes;  but  every  year  augmented  their  number,  and  multi- 
plied their  power. 

The  state  of  the  church  was  by  no  means  improved.* 
The  hierarchy  Avas  at  this  time  presided  over  by  Abbott.  In 
many  respects,  he  was  a  great  contrast  to  his  predecessors. 
"  Bancroft  sought  to  deliver  the  church  from  the  Calviniau 
party,  and  very  much  subdued  the  unruly  spirit  of  the  Non- 
conformists. If  he  had  tried,  he  would  quickly  have  ex- 
tinguished all  that  fire  which  had  been  kindled  at  Geneva, 
or  if  he  had  been  succeeded  by  Bishop  Andrews,  Bishop 
Overal,  or  any  one  who  understood  and  loved  the  church." 
Thus  writes  Clarendon,  t  Abbott  was  strongly  attached  to 
the  dogmas  of  the  Swiss  Reformer,  and  aided  in  every 
way  the  professors  of  that  faith.  Under  his  Episcopal  sway 
the  Puritans  suffered  less.  His  jialace  was  a  sanckiary  for 
many  of  them,  and  the  shield  of  his  protection  interposed 
between  them  and  their  bitter  foes.  "  By  him  their  most 
pernicious  writings  were  licensed."  +    But  with  the  court  his 


*  '"Tlius  much  we  can  say  foi-  divers  of  our  divines,  some  doctors,  par- 
sons, and  preacliei-s  in  the  county  (Lancaster) :  they  are  so  ordinary  com- 
panions of  gamesters,  sorting  and  suteing  witli  some  of  greater  and  some 
of  meaner  place,  in  carding,  diceing,  and  talking  with  them,  that  they 
seem  to  make  no  more  conscience  of  breaking  their  canons  than  children 
do  of  breaking  sticks,"  &c.^Diary  of  Assheton,  p.  24.    Cheetham  Society. 

t  History,  vol.  i,,  p.  88.  J  Ibid,  vol.  1.,  p.  89,; 


8  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

influence  was  feeble.  Before  James's  death  it  had  declined. 
Tlie  cause  was  obvious.  The  growing  corruptions  of  the 
church  met  in  him  a  firm  and  consistent  opposition. 
Arminianism,  too,  was  widening  the  circle  of  its  operations, 
and  increasing  its  influence.*     We  have  indicated  its  rise 

*  Notvvitlistanding  the  mildness  of  Abbott's  government,  and  the  general 
tenderness  of  his  spirit,  yet  the  feeling  of  the  true  Churchman  could 
be  evoked ;  and  he  could  hunt  a  heretic  to  death,  with  almost  as  much 
zest  as  the  red  deer,  in  the  pursuit  of  which  the  accident  occurred  which 
clouded  the  remainder  of  his  life  with  sadness.  The  following  letters 
have  fallen  in  our  way  since  the  fii'st  volume  of  this  work  was  issued. 
They  need  no  comment.  The  character  of  the  lawn  and  the  ermine  are 
alike  displayed : — 

"To  the  Eight  Honourable  my  veiy  good  L ,  the  Lord  EUesmere,  Lord  Chan- 
cellor of  England,  geve  these. 

"  My  very  good  Lord, — His  Magestie  being  carefuU  that  justice  should  proceede 
against  these  two  blasphemous  heretekes,  Legate  and  Whiteman,  gave  me  in  charge 
that  before  the  terme,  when  the  judges  drewe  towards  the  towne,  I  should  make 
his  Magesties  pleasure  knowne  unto  your  Lordship.  And  that  is,  that  your  Lord- 
ship should  call  unto  you  3  or  4  of  the  judges,  and  take  their  resolution  concerning 
the  force  of  the  law  in  that  behalf,  that  so  with  e.xpedition  these  evil  persons  may 
receive  the  recompence  of  their  pride  and  impiety.  His  Magestie  did  thinke  the 
Judges  of  the  Kinges  Benche  to  bee  fittest  to  be  dealt  withaU  in  this  argument,  as 
unto  whom  the  knowledge  of  causes  capital  doth  most  ordinarily  appertaine. 
And  as  I  conceived,  his  Highness  did  not  muche  desire  that  the  Lord  Coke  should 
be  called  thereunto,  least  by  his  singularitie  in  opinion  he  should  give  staye  to  the 
business.  So  hopeing  shortily  to  see  your  Lordship  abroade,  with  remembrances 
of  my  best  love,  I  remain, 

"Your  Lordship's  very  loveing  friend, 

"G.   C.A.NT.  (Abbott\ 

"Lambich,  Januar.  21,  1011." 

(Egerton  Papers,  p.  447.     Camden  Society.) 

"To  the  Right  Honourable  my  veiy  good  L ,  the  Lord  EUesmere,  Lord  Chan- 
cellor of  England. 
"  My  very  good  Lord, — I  cannot  chuse  but  well  approve  your  Lordship's  choice  of 
the  Judges.  And  if  any  more  should  be  added,  I  distrust  not  but  that  Justice 
.  Crooke  would  do  well.  Mr.  Justice  Williams  was  with  me  the  other  day,  who  makes 
no  doubt  but  that  the  lawe  is  cleere  to  burn  them.  Hee  told  me  also  of  his  utter 
dislike  of  all  the  Lord  Coke  his  courses,  and  that  himself  and  Baron  .\.ltham  did 
once  very  roundly  let  the  Lord  Coke  knowe  their  minds,  that  he  was  not  such  a 
maister  of  the  lawe  as  hee  did  take  on  him,  to  deliver  what  he  list  for  lawe,  and  to 
despise  all  others.  I  finde  the  Kinges  Attorney  and  Solicitor  to  bee  thoroughly 
resolved  in  this  present  business.  My  servant  Hart  is  at  this  present  out  of  the  way, 
but  as  soone  as  hee  cometh  in  hee  shall  waite  upon  your  Lordship.  And  so 
wishing  your  Lordship  ease  and  health,  I  remaine, 

"  Your  Lordship's,  very  ready  to  do  you  service, 

"G.   Cant. 
"Lambich,  Januar.  22,  IGll."  _ 

Papers,  p.  448.     Camden  Society. ) 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  9 

already.  In  the  court  circle  it  was  popular*.  Its  advocates 
lauded  the  prei'ogatives.  Laud,  who,  during  the  close  of  the 
previous  reign,  had  rapidly  advanced,  was  now  wielding  an 
influence  the  results  of  which  ultimately  involved  himself 
and  his  order.  In  eai'ly  life,  he  had  placed  himself  in  an- 
tagonism to  the  Pi'imate  and  the  prevailing  theology.  "  In 
these,  his  youthful  days,"  says  his  last  and  partial  biographer, 
"  he  was  esteemed,  by  all  who  knew  him,  a  very  forward, 
confident,  aiid  zealous  persou."'"  The  head  of  his  college  had 
reproved  him  for  his  theology  when  taking  his  degree ;  but 
this  had  no  influence.  The  doctrines  of  the  Geneva  Re- 
former, and  the  simplicity  of  his  ecclesiastical  life,  were 
hated  with  an  intensity  of  feeling  which  grew  with  his 
years,  and  his  energies  were  ceaselessly  employed  to  anni- 
hilate them.  Nothing  could  check  the  "little  doctor." 
Mistaking  the  form  for  the  substance,  the  outer  for  the 
inner  life  of  Christian  piety,  his  narrow  and  little  super- 
stitious soul  glowed  with  intense  delight,  as  he  saw  the 
Anglican  Church  approximating  nearer  to  the  imperial 
splendour  of  Rome. 

"His  manners  appear  to  have  been  singularly  ungracious 
and  unpopular ;  and  his  temper  offensively  irascible  and  hot. 
If  we  are  to  trust  the  representations  of  him  left  us  either  by 
friend  or  foe,  he  must  have  been  one  of  the  most  disagreeable 
persons  in  the  three  kingdoms,  except  to  those  who  were 
intimately  acquainted  with  his  worth.  There  was  nothing 
affable  or  engaging  in  his  general  behaviour.  His  very  integ- 
rity was  often  made  odious,  by  wearing  an  aspect  of  austerity 
and  haughtiness.  It  would  almost  seem  as  if  prudence  had 
been  struck  out  of  his  catalogue  of  the  cardinal  virtues." 
So  writes  one  of  his  latest  apologists,  f 

*  Le  Bass,  p.  5.     Ibid,  p.  133. 

t  Le  Bass,  p.  331. 

1634.    "  Dr.  W.  Laud,  Bishop  of  London,  a  little,  low,  red-faced  man,  of 

mean  parentage,  succeeded  him.     I  shall  need  say  no  more  of  him  here, 

because    his    own    speech,    made    in   the    Star    Chamber,    Wednesday, 


10  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

Hyde  complains  of  his  want  of  courtesy  and  condescen- 
sion in  the  treatment  of  persons  of  rank  and  distinction,  in 
their  intercourse  with  him.  His  defence  was,  that  his  rank 
in  the  Church  and  State  demanded  it.  The  dignity  of  truth 
was  best  sustained  by  the  influence  of  her  professed  High 
Priest:  the  sweet  and  attractive  grace  of  piety,  by  outbursts 
of  temper  and  holy  indignity. 

No  means  were  amiss  to  his  lordship.  The  end  justified 
them  abundantly.  To  Buckingham  he  could  cringe ;  on 
Williams,  his  eai'ly  patron,  he  could  trample ;  and  luxuriate 
in  the  torture  of  his  foes.  Nor  was  he  alone  in  this.  Men 
of  kindred  spii-it  filled  the  high  places  of  the  church,  Wil- 
liams,* Niel,  and  others,  wei-e  illustrious  examples  of  the 
time-server.  To  exalt  the  royal  prerogatives,  to  oppress  the 
godly,  and  to  gratify  the  court,  was  their  daily  study.t  An 
attached  friend  to  Episcopacy  says,  "  Laud  saw  the  church 
decaying  in  power  and  patrimony;  her  patrimony  dilapi- 
dated by  the  avarice  of  several  bishops,  in  making  havoc  of 
their  woods  to  enrich  themselves;  and,  more  than  so,  in 
filling  up  their  grants  and  leases  to  the  utmost  terra,  after 
they  had  been  nominated  to  other  bishopricks,  to  the  great 
wrong  of  their  successors."  % 

"  The  divines  selected  for  promotion  in  the  church,  were 
those  in  whose  pulpits  the  prerogative  had  been  pi-eached 
above   the    laws,    superstitious   formalities   elevated  above 


January  14,  1637,  at  the  censure  of  some  godly  men,  being  since  printed, 
sufficiently  shows  his  allowance  and  practice  of  the  adoring  or  bowing 
to  and  towards  the  altar,  with  other  tenets,  which  made  me  even  tremble 
when  I  read  it."— D'Ewes,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  100, 101. 

*  Raumer  attributed  the  offer  of  a  cardinal's  hat  to  this  prelate.  More 
than  this,  that,  when  Lord  Keeper,  he  actually  tried  to  be  made  a  cardi- 
nal.— Vide  Blencone's  Sydney  Papers,  pp.  261-3.  Note  {a).  Le  Bass's  Life 
of  Laud,  p.  372. 

+  "About  this  time  the  most  profitable  preferments  in  the  English 
Church  were  given  to  those  of  the  clergy  who  M-ere  most  forward  to  pro- 
mote the  imposition  of  new  cei-emonies  and  superstitions." — Ludlow,  p.  3. 

X  Heylin's  Life  of  Laud,  pp.  198,  199.     Le  Bass,  p.  133. 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  11 

religion,  and  the  property  and  rights  of  the  subject  most 
divided,  and  it  became  quite  the  fashion  to  put  forth  these 
doctrines  in  public  and  solemn  sermons  before  the  king." 
"  Ministers  in  the  pulpit,"  said  Wentworth,  afterwards  Earl 
of  Strafford,  "  have  preached  it  as  gospel,  and  damned  the 
refuser  of  it."* 

Laud  became  the  founder  of  a  new  school  of  theology  in 
the  church.  Ho  did  more,  for  he  claimed  for  himself  and 
his  followers  to  be  the  true  church.  All  others  "  were 
Schismatics,  Genevans,  Calvinists, — worse  than  all,  they  were 
Puritans. "+  The  seeds  which  he  scattered  so  lavishly, 
speedily  ripened  to  a  bloody  harvest.  The  divisions  of  High 
and  Low  Church  were  laid  by  him;  and  now  the  formalist 
and  the  ceremony -monger  of  the  present  day,  point  with  grati- 
tude and  delight  to  the  doctrinal  teaching  and  the  imposing 
ceremonies    of   the    Laudian   Church. |     The    present    full- 


*  Forster's  Essays,  vol.  i. ,  p.  53. 

f  Marsden's  Early  P\xritans,  pp.  364,  365.  "Bishop  Laud,  of  London,  is 
also  powerful  in  his  way,  for  he  sits  at  the  helm  of  the  Church,  and  doth 
more  than  any  of  the  two  Archbishops,  or  all  the  rest  of  his  twenty-two 
brethren  besides." — Howell,  p.  226. 

+  The  author  cannot  deny  himself  the  pleasure  of  giving  the  following 
gi-aphic  sketch  from  the  pen  of,  perhaps,  one  of  the  most  eminent  Anglo- 
Saxon  scholars  of  modern  times: — "The  germ  of  the  Low  and  High- 
Church  parties,  big  with  future  convulsions,  had  already  shown  themselves. 
The  successor  of  Cranmei-,  and  the  predecessor  of  Laud,  were  already 
raeasiu'ing  one  another's  powers  for  a  deadly  struggle  :  and  Puritanism, 
bred  in  the  midst  of  civil  discord,  growled  and  scowled  in  the  distance. 
The  unanimity  which  had  now  been  attained  vmder  the  leaden  despotism 
of  a  church  which  stiained  every  nerve  to  repress  it,  was  better  likely  to 
result  from  the  studies  of  a  thousand  men,  of  all  varying  powers, — the 
.sternly  logical,  the  imaginative,  the  enthusiastic,  the  savage  and  perse- 
cuting, the  refined  and  instructed.  The  Bible  had,  indeed,  been  proclaimed 
the  sole  rule  of  faith,  but  then  there  were  differences  of  translators  as  to 
various  passages,  differences  of  opinion  as  to  its  doctrines,  and  nearly 
as  many  controversies  as  readers.  For  the  great  misfortune  of  man- 
kind its  chapters  had  been  divided  into  verses,  which  might  be 
quoted  for  every  purpose,  good  or  bad,  without  reference  to  the  con- 
text. Many  still  hankered  after  what  their  adversaries  called  the  flesh- 
pots    of  Egypt;  and,  even  less  complimentarUy,   the   abominations  of 


12  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

grown  Puseyite  is  only  a  reproduction  of  a  choice  specimen 
of  the  Laudian  school.* 

We  must  not  overlook  the  condition  of  the  people. 
Beyond  all  doubt,  socially  and  morally,  it  was  very  bad. 
The  minions  of  arbitraiy  power  touched  all  their  iuterests. 
Imposition  in  one  form  or  other  affected  all  the  necessaries 
of  life,  and  increased  their  cost  if  they  did  not  limit  their 
supply.  The  oppression  was  intolerable.  Nothing  was  safe. 
No  source  from  which  gain  could  be  extracted,  was  neglected. 
New  modes  were  devised  for  infringing  on  the  rights  and 
liberties  of  the  people.  Upon  the  bench  the  very  fountain 
of  justice  was  corrupt.  For  money  any  office  was  purchased. 
"  Nothing  was  left  to  any  one  which  he  could  safely  call  his 
own,  except  the  wi'ong  and  the  patient  endui'ance  of  it."t 
From  two  independent  sources  we  have  glimpses  of  some 
phases  of  the  grinding  oppi*essions  of  the  people.  Sir  J. 
Culpepper,  in  his  place  in  Parliament,  said,  "  That  these 
monopolists  and  projectors  were  a  nest  of  wasps,  or  swarm 
of  vermin,  and,  like  the  frogs  of  Egypt,  had  got  possession 
of  our  dwellings,  scarce  a  room  free  from  them.  They  sup 
in  our  cup  (wine),  dip  in  our  dish  (licence  to  dress  in  towns), 

the  harlot  that  sitteth  on  Seven  Hills.  In  fact,  it  is  not  very  easy,  after 
an  eartliquake,  to  reconstruct,  upon  the  old  model,  the  palaces  and  houses 
it  has  levelled  with  the  ground.  So  the  tradesmen  and  shopkeepers,  and 
soldiers  and  peers,  and  country  gentlemen,  continued  to  read  the  Hebrew 
and  Greek,  and  the  works  of  the  Fathers,  and  bandied  amongst  themselves 
the  heavy  blows  they  had  unanimously  bestowed  on  the  common  enemy. 
The  cup  of  polemical  bitterness  was  full  to  ovei-fiowing." — I.  M.  Kemble's 
Introduction  to  Sir  R.  Twisden  on  the  Government  of  England,  pp.  9,  10. 
Camden  Society. 

*  "Two  opposite  principles  of  church  government  Avere  now  brought  into 
direct  conflict.  They  were  represented  in  the  persons  of  the  two  dis- 
tinguished prelates,  Abbott  and  Laud,  who  had  from  an  early  period  been 
personally  opposed  to  each  other,  and  were  now  jjlaced  in  situations  of 
great  and  rival  eminence,  the  one  filling  the  highest  station  in  the  church, 
and  the  other  enjoying  the  unbounded  confidence  of  the  Sovereign."— 
Gardwell,  vol.  ii.,  p.  165  (Note). 

t  Forater,  vol.  i.,  pp.  42,  43.  "People  begin  to  say  in  town  that  the 
judges  have  destroyed  the  law,  and  the  bishops  the  Gospel." 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  13 

sit  by  our  fire  (coals),  are  in  the  dye-vat,  washbowl  {soap), 
and  powdering  tub  (salt),  and  share  with  the  butler  in  hi.s 
box  (cards  mul  dice).  They  have  marked  and  sealed  us 
from  head  to  foot,  and  will  not  bate  us  a  pin.  We  may  not 
buy  our  own  clothes  without  their  brocage."*  Denzill 
Hollis,  in  a  letter  to  Wentworth,  thus  describes  it : — 
"  Since  these  wars  all  trading  is  dead,  our  wools  lie  on  our 
hands,  our  men  are  not  set  on  work,  our  ships  lie  in  our 
ports  unoccupied;  land,  sheep,  cattle,  nothing  will  yield 
money ;  not  to  speak  of  the  soldiers  ravishing  men's  wives 
and  daughters,  killing  and  carrying  away  beeves  and  sheep 
off  tlie  ground  (stealing  of  poultry  was  not  worth  the 
speaking  of) ;  killing  and  robbing  of  men  on  the  highway 
(nay,  in  foil's  and  towns),  for  to  meet  a  poor  man  coming 
from  market  with  a  pair  of  new  shoes,  or  a  basket  of 
eggs  or  apples,  to  take  them  from  him  was  but  sport  and 
merriment;  and  a  thousand  such  petty  pranks,"  &c.t 
We  only  add  one  other  illu.stration : — "For  now,  instead 
of  the  late  favourite,  my  great  officer  and  Lord  of  the 
Council  proved  a  very  tyi-ant;  and  it  appears  that  not 
their  vii-tues  but  the  former  favourite's  power  only  restrained 
them  from  being  so ;  for  that,  falling,  and  thus  left  to  their 
own  arbitrary  power,  you  would,  verily,  have  believed  that 
hell  had  been  broke  loose.  .  .  .  And  in  sober  sadness, 
they  all  might  truly  have  undergone  the  name  of  legion,  for 
they  were  all  many  devils;  and,  like  true  devils,  took  pleasure 
in  tormenting.''^ 

It  is  difficult  to  give  a  correct  view  of  the  moral  condition 
of  the  people  in  a  few  sentences.  In  many  of  the  lai-ge 
towns  it  was  bad,  in  the  rural  districts  much  worse.  The 
pulpit  was  occupied  in  many  places  by  vicious  and  ignorant 

*  Riisliworth,  vol.  iii.,  p.  4.     Burton's  Diary,  vol.  iv.,  p.  93. 

+  Strafford's  Letters,  vol.  i.,  j).  40.  Faii-fax's  Correspondence,  ch.  i., 
vol.  i.,  p.  84. 

+  Sir  A.  Weldon's  Character  of  Charles  the  First.  See  History,  vol.  ii., 
pp.  49,  50. 


14  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

men.  Men  of  form,  but  without  power ;  wlio  refuted  by 
their  lives  the  great  virtues  they  professed  to  teach.  Their 
aim  was,  as  Lord  Faulkland  says,  to  establish  "an  English, 
though  not  a  Roman  Popery  :  so  it  seemed  their  woi-k  was 
to  try  how  much  of  a  Papist  might  be  brought  in  without 
Popery,  and  to  destroy  as  much  as  they  could  of  the  Gospel 
without  bringing  themselves  into  the  danger  of  being  des- 
troyed by  the  law."*  D'Ewes,  whilst  showing  his  intense 
hatred  to  Anabaptists,  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  the  conduct  of 
others  : — "  But  I  see,  by  daily  experience,  when  divines, 
scholars,  and  others  are  given  -ap  to  a  profane,  vicious,  and 
atheistical  life,  they  so  far  detest  and  hate  such  as  be  godly, 
as  by  a  just  judgment  of  God  they  are  at  length  given  up  to 
the  hatred  of  the  truth  itself  also,  and  readily  take  in  their 
defence  and  creed,  any  Popish,  Pelagian,  or  Anabaptistical 
errors."t  A  more  competent  witness  J  says : — "The  clergy  of 
those  jjarts  (Salop)  were,  generally  speaking,  lazy  and  vicious. 
Some,  by  forging  orders,  had  compassed  even  from  the  stage 


*  Lord  Nugent's  Hampden,  vol.  i.,  p.  191.  There  is  a  curious  note  from 
Bishop  Gibson  to  Pepys,  illustrative  of  the  learning  of  the  clergy  in  the 
former  reign.  "Tlie  other  day  I  met  -vvith  a  Catalogue  of  the  Clergy  in 
the  Aichdeaconry  of  Middlesex,  taken  in  1563,  with  an  account  of  each 
man's  learning  and  abilities :  in  short,  observing  the  strangeness  of  the 
characters,  I  ran  over  the  whole,  and  as  I  went  along,  branched  them 
under  different  heads,  whereby  their  several  abilities  in  learning  are 
there  expressed.  It  is  a  fancy  I  know  you  will  be  pleased  with,  and, 
therefore,  I  make  bold  to  give  you  this  short  view  of  the  learning  of 
those  times  : — 

Docti  Latine  et  Grace       .     .       iii.     Latine    per  quani    ut   cunq\ie 
Do.  do.  ....      ?di.         aliquid,    pauca   verba,    kc, 

Mediocriter  Docti    ....        ii.         intellex xlii. 

Latine  Docti Lx.     Latine  non  Docti xiii. 

Do.  Mediocriter  intell  .     .     .  xxvi.     Indocti iv. 

If  the  London  clergy  were  thus  ignorant,  what  must  Me  imagine  the 
county  divines  Vi^ere?"— Bishop  Gibson  to  Pepys;  Diary,  voL  v.,  pp. 
229,230, 

t  D'Ewes,  vol.  ii.,  p.  114. 
t  Calamy's  Abridgment  of  Baxter's  Life,  kc,  p.  5. 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  15 

to  the  pulpit.  With  amazement  be  it  mentioned,  several 
in  that  neighbourhood  of  the  sacred  ministerial  function 
wex'e  more  noted  for  their  gaming  and  drinking,  than  either 
their  good  principles  or  good  living.  There  were  not  above 
three  or  four  competent  preachers  all  round  the  county; 
and  though  all  except  one  were  conformable,  they  were 
divided  by  the  common  people  as  Puritans,  because  not  so 
careless  as  their  neighbours.  In  a  word,  there  was  scarce 
the  face  almost  of  religion  left.  In  the  village  we  lived  in, 
not  a  sermon  was  heard  from  year  to  year.  And  the  ser- 
vice was  run  over  very  ciu'sorily  and  in-everently ;  and  when 
that  was  done,  the'  rest  of  the  Lord's  day  was  profanely 
spent  by  the  whole  town  in  dancing  under  a  May]>ole  and  a 
great  tree."* 

In  the  higher  ecclesiastical  cu'cles  morals  Avere  low. 
Bishop  Williams,  we  are  told,  could  relieve  the  solemnities 
of  an  ordination  service  by  the  exhibitions  of  the  theatre. 
Lord  Campbell  says: — "He  used  to  have  the  players  down 
from  London  to  Buckden,  when  the  hall  of  the  Episcopal 
Palace  was  converted  into  a  theatre,  whei'e  comedies  were 
performed,  even  on  a  Sunday.  Collins,  in  his  '  Annals  of  the 
Stage,'  asserts  that  '  The  Midsummer  Night's  Dream'  was 
exhibited  there  on  Sunday  the  27th  of  Septembei-,  1631; 
and  others  add,  that  on  that  very  day  he  had  held  an  Episcopal 
ordination,  so  that  the  play  was  for  the  amusement  of  the 
young  priests."+     Judging  from  the  state  of  the  universities, 


*  Morals  of  the  People,  &c.  "Now because  Popery  and  prophaneness, 
two  sisters  in  evil,  had  consented  and  conspiied  in  this  parish  (Whalley), 
as  in  many  other  places,  to  advance  their  idols  against  the  arke  of  God, 
and  to  celebrate  their  solemn  feasts  of  their  Popish  saints,  as  being  Dii 
Tutelares,  the  special  patrons  and  protectors  of  their  chui-ch  and  parish, 
by  their  wakes  and  vigUs,  kept  in  commemoration  and  honour  of  these, 
in  all  riot  and  excess  of  eating  and  drinking,  dalliance  and  dancing, 
spoi-ting  and  gaming,  and  other  abominable  impieties  and  idolation,"  &c. 
— Diai-y  of  Assheton,  p.  30  (iSTote).     Cheetham  Society. 

t  Lives  of  the  Chancelloi'S,  vol.  ii.,  p.  496. 


16  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

the  bishop  would,  find  these  young  successors  to  the  apostles 
ready  for  this  or  any  other  pleasure.* 

The  influence  of  such  things  told  on  the  morals  of  the 
population.  The  Sabbath  and  the  holy  days,  precious  as  the 
right  hand  or  the  right  eye  to  Laud  and  his  followers,  were 
anything  but  hallowed.  They  were  periods  of  festi\dty  and 
vice.  Brutal  and  brutalizing  sports  were  common.  Bull- 
baiting,  bear-baiting,  dancing,  interludes,  and  other  kindred 
sports,  entertained  the  rustic  and  supplied  the  citizen  with  no 
mean  gratifications.  These  were  not  alone.  Debauchery  in 
every  foi'm  was  rank.  The  head  and  the  members  were 
tainted  by  it.  Referring  to  tliis  period,  Guizot  says  : — "  On 
the  sacred  day  of  the  Sabbath  did  true  Christians  desii-e  to 
pei-form,  in  the  retii-ement  of  their  homes,  their  pious 
exercises.  In  every  square,  in  every  street,  the  noise  of 
games  and  dancing,  the  riots  of  drunkenness,  insultingly 
broke  in  upon  theii'  meditations.  And  the  bishops  were 
not  satisfied  with  permitting  these  profane  pastimes  :  they 
I'ecommended,  nay,  almost  commanded  them,  lest  the  jieople 
should  acquii-e  a  taste  for  more  holy  pleasures."t 

"  There  were  some  places  in  England,"  said  Sir  B.  Rudyard, 
"  in  the  fii-st  year  of  Charles's  reign,  which  were  scarce  in 

*  D'Ewes  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  the  inner  life  of  one  of  these  famous 
seats  of  learning : — "But  the  main  thing  which  made  me  weary  of  the 
coUege  was,  that  swearing,  drinking,  rioting,  and  hatred  of  all  piety  and 
virtue,  under  false  and  adulterate  nicknames,  did  abound  there,  and 
generally  in  all  the  university.  Nay,  the  very  sin  of  lust  began  to  be 
known  and  practised  by  very  boys  :  so  as  I  was  fain  to  live  .almost  a 
I'ecluse's  life,  conversing  cheerfully  in  our  own  college  with  some  of  the 
honest  fellows  thereof.  But  yet  no  Anabaptistical  or  Pelagian  heresies 
against  God's  grace  and  providence  were  then  stirring,  Ijut  the  truth  was 
in  all  public  sermons  and  divinity  acts  asserted  and  maintained.  None 
then  dared  to  commit  idolatry  by  bowing  to  or  towards  or  adoring  the 
altar,  the  communion  table,  or  the  bread  and  wine  in  the  sacrament  of 
the  Lord's  Supper.  And  the  power  of  godliness  in  respect  of  the  practice 
of  it,  was,  in  a  most  atheistical  and  unchristian  manner,  contemned  and 
scoffed  at." — Vol.  i.,  p.  15. 

t  English  Revolution,  b.  ii.,  p.  59.  The  whole  section  is  woiih  the 
attention  of  the  reader. 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  17 

Christendom,  where  God  was  little  better  known  than 
among  the  Indians.  I  exampled  it  in  the  North,  whert; 
the  prayers  of  the  common  people  are  more  like  spells  and 
charms  than  devotions."*  Wales  Avas  still  worse,  and  Ire- 
land only  a  little  removed  from  heathenism. t 

The  representatives  of  the  people  were  not  insensible  to  this 
state  of  things.  Against  the  lofty  pretensions  of  the  Crown 
they  assumed  a  firmer  attitude.  The  first  Parliament  was 
marked  by  a  calm  and  manly  statement  of  grievances,  and  a 
request  for  redress.  It  touched  both  elements  which  were 
working  so  disastrously  on  the  best  interests  of  the  nation. 
We  have  seen  that,  in  the  last  reign,  the  Commons  had  assumed 
the  functions  of  conservators,  not  only  of  liberty,  but  of 
Christian  doctrine.  It  was  increasingly  so  now.  The  ten- 
dencies of  church  principles,  as  propounded  by  Laud  and  his 
colleagues,  filled  them  with  intense  alarm.  They  denounced 
them  as  dangerous  to  ti-ue  piety,  and  not  less  so  to  civil 
freedom.  Again  and  again  the  hall  of  St.  Stephen's  echoed 
with  denunciations  against  the  Arminiau  and  Popish  tenden- 
cies of  the  courtly  divines.  :j:     Again  and  again  were  they 


*  Collier's  E.  H.,  p.  743. 

t  Bishop  Bramliall  tells  us  that  in  the  metropolis  of  Ireland,  churches 
were  converted  to  all  manner  of  uses.  One  was  a  stable  for  the  Lord 
Deputy ;  another,  a  dwelling-house  for  a  noble  lord ;  the  choir  of  a  third 
for  a  tennis-court.  Fearful  the  grasping  spirit  of  the  clergy,  those  of  the 
higher  orders  especially.  One  bishop  held  twenty-three  benefices  with 
cures.  This  curious  document  will  be  found  in  Collier,  p.  579.  Referring 
to  Wales,  "Wlaitelocke  says,  "That  some  of  their  ministers  here  are 
miserably  debauched." — Life  of  AVhitelocke,  p.  11.     London,  1860. 

t  "Great  also  was  the  zeal  of  that  House  during  the  time  the  Session 
of  Parliament  continued,  before  the  fatal  and  dismal  abortive  dissolution 
of  it,  for  the  glory  of  God  in  the  maintenance  of  the  true  religion  :  that 
it  might  not  be  intermixed  with  Popish  ceremonies  or  idolatrous  actions, 
nor  the  pure  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England  be  cormpted  with  the 
blasphemous  tenets  of  the  Anabaptists  in  derogation  of  God's  grace  and 
providence,  which  tenets  had  been  broached  by  Sebastian  Castellio,  in 
Latin,  and  by  Anabaptists,  in  English,  about  seventy  years  past,"  &c. — 
D'Ewes,  vol.  i.,  pp.  399,  400.  Other  allusions  to  these  topics,  and  the 
influence  of  Anabaptistical  errors,  will  be  found  in  pages  405,  406. 


18 


EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 


denounced  as  most  dangerous  to  national  libert/.  More 
than  this.  The  House  not  only  took  religion  under  its 
protection,  but,  what  appeared  as  a  necessaiy  consequence, 
and  was  doubted  by  only  a  few  obscure  sectaries,  assumed 
to  itself  the  power  of  judging  and  punishing  error.  Before 
a  Committee  of  the  House,  Montague,  Mainwaring,  and 
Sibthorpe  were  humbled,  not'v\itlistanding  the  protection  of 
the  court.* 

But  amidst  all  the  decay  of  piety  and  the  prevalence  of 
formalism  and  popery,  we  must  not  overlook  an  important 
conservative  power.  Puritanism  still  lived.  In  defiance  of 
Laud,  there  Avere  men  in  the  Anglican  Church  of  high  moral 
character,  whose  ministry  and  conduct  shed  the  pure  light 
of  Heaven  on  the  moral  darkness  which  surrounded  them. 
Their  aim  was  lofty,  their  zeal  was  untii-ing,  and  their  con- 
versation was  holy.  In  the  market-place,  in  tlxe  halls  of  the 
rich  and  the  noble,  and  in  the  churches  to  which  they 
had  been  appointed  by  the  affluence  of  the  wealthy,  they 
preached  with  earnestness  and  success  the  Gospel  of  Chx'ist.f 
Nor  were  the  Separatists  from  the  church  powerless.  The 
rise  of  the  Presbyterians  and  the  Indejoendents  we  have 
already  stated.  Their  numbei's  and  theii-  influence  had  not 
diminished.      As  a  whole,  they  were  men  of   more  light, 


*  Mainwaring  was,  by  the  decision  of  the  Commons,  sentenced  to  be 
imprisoned  during  its  pleasure,  fined  £1,000,  suspended  for  three  j'ears 
from  the  ministry,  and  to  be  disabled  for  ever  from  hokling  any  offlce, 
or  preaching  at  court. — Pari.  Hist.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  388.  Le  Bass's  Laud,  p.  76. 
In  defiance  of  this  censure,  the  impolitic  monarch  speedily  raised  the 
delinquent  to  the  Episcopal  bench. — Vide  Rushworth,  pp.  593-612;  Neal, 
vol.  i.,  p.  416;  Collier,  pp.  734,  736,  737,  743,  744. 

+  As  early  as  1627  a  nymber  of  individuals  had  combined  to  buy  up 
certain  impropriations,  in  order  to  employ  the  money  arising  from  them 
in  tlie  employment  of  lectui-ers  to  preach  in  various  parts  of  the  coimtiy. 
Laud  ultimately  succeeded  in  putting  down  this  organization. — Collier, 
p.  754;  Priee,  vol.  i.,  p.  58. 

"The  feoff ers  that  pretended  to  buy  in  the  impropriations  were  disabled 
in  the  Chequer  Court.  They  were  the  main  instruments  for  the  Puritan 
faction  to  undo  the  church." — Laud's  Diary,  p.  47. 


CHARLES   THE    FIRST.  19 

many  of  them  of  equal  learning,  and  far  more  correct  views 
of  the  spiritual  nature  of  Christ's  kingdom,  than  the  Confor- 
mists. Persecutions,  imprisonments,  and  suffering  in  every 
form  never  moved  them  from  their  stedfiustncss.  The  martp-- 
dom  of  Greenwood,  Barrow,  and  Penryn,*  only  made  them 
grasp  with  more  tenacity  their  great  principles.  Unabashed 
by  the  lofty  bearing  of  their  great  foe,  death  had  no  terrors 
for  them.  They  counted  not  their  lives  dear  to  them.  Tnith 
with  them  was  everything.  It  was  with  them  a  living 
piinciple,  more  pi'ecious  than  a  monarch's  favour,  more 
dear  than  life.  From  the  woods  and  secluded  spots,  where 
they  were  fi'equently  compelled  to  worship,  a  power  went 
forth  which  told  upon  the  masses,  the  senate,  and  the 
hiemrchy.  Hunted  by  the  spies  of  the  bishops,t  driven 
from  place  to  place,  they  scattered  in  their  wanderings  the 
seeds  of  truth,  which,  in  a  few  years,  ripened  into  a  rich 
and  glorious  harvest.  With  many  errors,  they  were  noble 
men,  whose  worth  the  moral  and  intelligent  of  the  future, — 


*  AVe  have  some  diificulty  in  hai-monizing  the  conflicting  opinions  about 
this  niiistrious  martyr.  Dr.  Some,  in  his  reply  to  Penryn,  says,  "He  hath 
broached  many  proud  and  blasphemous  and  Anabaptistical  fancies.  The 
mask  that  Mr.  Penri  levels  at  is,  I  fear  me,  to  shake  hands  with  Anabap- 
tistical recusants  ;  some  parts  of  his  writings  looke  shrewdly  that  way." 
lu  another  place  he  calls  liim  "an  heretical  Catabaptist." — Mr.  Some 
laid  open  by  an  Oxford  Man,  p.  13.  No  date.  Vide  pp.  4,  7,  16.  Still 
Hanbuiy  affii-ms  that  he  was  not  a  Baptist;  Brook  is  doubtful;  Wood 
says  that  he  "became  a  notorious  Anabaptist;"  and  Joshua  Thomas, 
in  a  MS.  History  quoted  by  Brook,  says  that  "he  was  probably  the 
iirst  since  the  Reformation  who  openly  and  publicly  preached  the 
doctrines  of  adult  baptism."  In  his  History  of  the  Welsh  Associations, 
he  states  this  unhesitatingly.  If  any  of  our  readers  are  ia  possession  of 
additional  proof,  we  should  be  glad  to  receive  it. — Hanbui-y's  Memorials, 
vol.  i.,  p.  75.  Brook's  Puritans,  vol.  ii.,  p.  67.  Wood's  Albe.  Ax., 
vol.  i.,  227.  Thomas's  Histoiy  of  the  Welsh  Associations,  p.  5. 
Waddington  agrees  with  Hanbuiy. 

+  "Laud,  like  the  illustrious  Burleigh,  kept  by  him  a  catalogue  of  the 
principal  nobUity  and  gentry  in  the  realm,  with  a  notice  of  their  respec- 
tive interests  and  inclinations.  And  it  was  observed  by  him  that  no  man 
was  more  perfectly  acquainted  than  he  with  the  joints  and  fiexmes  of 
every  party  in  the  state. "— Le  Bass,  p.  348. 


20  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

despite  the  sneei-s  of  the  Clarendons,  the  Humes,  and 
Macaulays,  at  tlieir  fanaticism, — will  recognise,  and  truth, 
sooner  or  later,  will  hail  them  as  large  contributors  to  the 
stately  and  \inequalled  fabric  of  our  national  liberty.*  This 
advertence  to  these  topics  we  feel  to  be  necessary  to  our 
readers,  in  entering  on  another  chapter  of  the  "  Early 
English  Baptists." 

The  prevalence  of  Baptist  principles,  and  the  moral 
heroism  of  many  who  held  them  in  the  past  reign,  have 
already  been  noticed,  yet  only  glimpses  of  their  organization 
can  we  gather  from  the  records  of  those  times.  Their  exis- 
tence is  certain,  but  beyond  this  we  can  scarcely  affirm. 
Crosby  supposes  them  mixed  up  with  other  bodies,  and  their 
distinct  organization  as  a  separate  community  he  finds  at  a 
later  period.  In  one  view  the  historian  is  right,  in  another, 
beyond  all  doubt,  he  is  wi-ong.  The  Calvinistic  body  may 
date  its  existence  from  the  period  which  he  and  Ivimey 
indicate :  to  the  Arminian  portion  of  it  a  much  earlier 
origin  must  be  accorded.  In  almost  every  page  of  con- 
temporary history,  the  Anabaptists  are  associated  with 
Arminians,  and  in  certain  circles,  we  have  no  doubt,  their 
attachment  to  these  dogmas  exposed  them  to  scorn  and 
insult.f  The  reader  will  find  examples  of  this  in  the  former 
volume:  they  could  be  greatly  multiplied.  Daring  this 
reign,  however,  the  light  is  clearer  and  the  facts  become 
more  abundant.  From  their  hiding-places  our  brethren 
came,  and  as  the  power  of  spiritual  despotism  weakens,  their 
principles  fill  a  wider  circle,  and  their  power  and  moral 
worth  ai'e  more  fully  recognised.  But  we  must  not  antici- 
pate. 

The  intercourse  of  the  "  Early  English  Baptists"  with  the 

*  The  reader  is  referred  for  fuller  information  on  the  character  of  these 
men,  to  the  pages  of  Neal,  Fletcher,  Marsden,  and  Price. 

t  "  In  your  false  doctrine  of  Free  Will  and  falling  from  gi-ace,  you  agree 
with  the  antient  Anabaptists  also."— Truth's  Victory,  &c.  London,  1645. 
p.  15. 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  21 

Mennoiiite  Churcli  in  Holland  has  already  appeared.  Many 
of  the  ilhistrious  men  whose  histoiy  Ave  have  traced  were 
closely  connected  with  them.  In  many  cases  their  dogmas, 
their  practices,  and  their  ecclesiastical  polity  were  modified, 
if  they  did  not  entirely  originate  with  them.  For  some 
time  this  union  was  maintained.  Indeed  it  is  difficult  to 
affirm  with  certainty  when  it  ceased.  Evidence  exists  which 
makes  this  manifest,  far  beyond  what  has  hitherto  been 
known.  We  see  it  not  in  one  place  only,  but  in  many. 
Not  only  in  London,  where  churches  existed  who  sympathised 
with  their  views,  and  held  fraternal  intercourse  with  them, 
but  in  the  Western  and  Eastern  parts  of  the  kingdom.  In 
this  relationship  they  rejoiced;  to  the  brethren  they  appealed 
to  solve  any  difficulty  which  perplexed  them,  and  by  their 
advice  they  were  in  most  cases  guided.  Though  a  little 
anticipatory  as  to  time  in  one  or  two  of  the  documents,  yet 
■we  think  it  better  to  place  them  at  once  before  our  readers. 
The  first  of  these  more  particularly  belongs  rather  to  the 
last  reign  than  to  the  present.*     The  first  is  as  follows  : — 

"  Very  dear  Friends, — We  inform  you  that  we  have  received 
your  earnest  and  gracious  answer,  which  has  produced  great  joy  in 
all  our  souls,  for  you  have  very  fitly  spoken  in  it  to  our  hearts  ; 
which,  properly  speaking,  is  done  liy  God  himself,  by  the  light  of 
Christ,  according  to  the  Spirit.  And  as  soon  as  we  had  received  your 
letter  (for  we  had  a  timely  messenger)  we  immediately  asseml)led,  in 
order  to  consider  what  answer  should  be  sent  unto  you.     In  conse- 


*  The  author  is  indebted  to  his  learned  friend  Dr.  Miiller  for  these 
valuable  documents.  Tlie  originals  are  in  the  archives  of  the  Amsterdam 
church.  A  word  in  the  translation  is  changed  here  and  there,  to  render 
tlie  sense  more  clear.  The  author  must  add  here  a  sentence  or  two  from 
his  friend's  letter  on  the  relations  of  the  Dutch  and  English  churches.  "On 
the  -whole  I  cannot  say  that,  after  consulting  all  the  written  documents  in 
the  archives  of  our  chm-ch,  sufficient  light  is  thrown  on  the  relations 
which  e.^isted  between  the  English  Baptists  and  the  Netherlands  Doops- 
gezinden.  This  is  evident,  in  my  opinion,  that  these  relations  liave  been 
intimate,  at  least  more  intimate  than  we  know  or  think  now-a-days,  and 
that,  therefore,  the  fate  of  the  one  church  is  iu  many  respects  connected 
with  the  other." 


22  E.VRLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

quence  of  this  we  now  write  you  about  the  matters  about  which  j^ou 
desire  we  should  exphain  our  opinions. 

"  1.  We  perceive  that  you  think  that  we  have  failed  in  the 
breaking  of  bread,  or  the  celebrations  of  the  Lord's  Supper  mth 
each  other,  since  our  excommunication,  &c.  To  which,  we  answer : 
2.  We  are  still  of  opinion,  that  a  private  brother  is  allowed  to 
minister  the  sacraments,  when  the  congregation  calls  him  to  it,  though 
he  be  not  in  possession  of  the  ministerial  office  :  on  condition,  how- 
ever, that  the  church  has  no  minister,  for,  if  it  have,  we  think  that 
a  private  brother  may  by  no  means  do  it.  But  also,  in  this  matter, 
we  are  very  desirous  to  know  whether  we  are  wrong.  3.  We  do  not 
think  it  objectionable  to  fly  in  time  of  persecution  to  other  countries, 
and  live  there.  Many  among  us  now  were  of  opinion  that  it  was. 
4.  We  do  not  think  that  the  holy  and  peacefiU  doctrine  of  toleration 
is  misused  if  some  remain  in  our  communion  (if  they  are  quiet),  who 
know  not  yet  what  they  shoidd  think  of  Christ's  deity,  namely,  if 
they  only  believe  that  their  salvation  is  in  Christ,  and  if  they  are  sin- 
cere in  all  things  to  which  they  have  once  consented,  as  we  understand 
that  the  deity  of  Christ  reveals  itself  most  clearly  in  the  fruits  of 
this  sincerity,  which  assure  us  that  they  are  the  people  of  God, 
though  they  have  not  yet  appropriated  to  themselves  this  mystery  by 
their  reason.  But  if  it  were  that  some  of  them  contradicted  the 
general  opinions  of  the  congregation  in  this  or  other  doctrines,  or 
that  they  discovered  an  unquiet  or  ambitious  spirit,  w-e  surely  think 
that  such  should  not  be  tolerated,  but  ought  to  be  avoided  for  their 
unquietness,  and  because  they  wish  to  exercise  authority  over  others. 

"Further,  we  inform  you,  that  there  is  nobodj'  amongst  us  who 
denies  the  deity  of  Christ ;  but  there  are  two  or  three  who  have  a 
somewhat  different  opinion  than  we  maintain  in  general,  though,  we 
think  that,  after  all,  it  comes  to  the  same  end.  We,  in  general,  think 
that  his  deity  consists  in  the  endlessness,  or  the  incomprehensible 
substance  of  the  Godlike  nature  only;  the  others  think  that  it  should 
be  understood  as  the  natural  emanation  (just  as  the  light  of  the  sun) 
out  of  the  eternal  substance,  and  that  this  emanation  takes  place  also 
in  many  other  cases,  just  as  we  see  that  one  body  consists  of  many 
members.  So  also  is  Christ  (1  Cor.  xii.  12).  It  is  Godlike  strength, 
wisdom,  mercy,  justice,  &c.,  &c.,  that  God  has  sent  out  to  make  the 
world,  and  to  reconcile  fallen  man.  This,  in  short,  is  the  reason  of 
our  difference  about  the  deity  of  Christ ;  and  shall  we  condemn  each 
other  for  these  opinions  ?  That  be  far  from  us.  But  if  we  see  that 
some  crucify  Christ,  or  the  Godlike  nature  which  they  partake  of,  by 
the  wickedness  of  sin,  then  we  condemn  them,  as  we  surely  know 
that  the  Word  of  God  has  already  condemned  them.     Also,  in  these 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  23 

matters,  we  are  desirous  to  know  what  Clod  has  given  in  your  hearta. 
We  leave  it  to  your  discreet  consideration. 

"5.  An  oath  is  not  many  times  demanded  from  us,  and  some  of  us 
may  refuse,  witliout  much  guilt  or  disadvantage.  But  refusing  an 
oath  would  be  giiilty  or  hurtful  in  our  country,  as  some  would  think 
that  we  refused  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  our  king,  so  that  we  should 
bo  called  traitors,  and  if  they  should  deal  with  us  very  severely,  they 
could  ai)pl3'  their  law  to  us  as  though  we  were  traitors;  and  the 
holy  truth  also,  which  we  confess,  would  be  esteemed  an  ill  by  some 
wicked  men,  and  we  should  be  esteemed  as  ill  by  some  wicked  men, 
and  should  be  considered  as  dangerous  and  unquiet  people  in  the 
country,  that  will  not  do  what  we  are  sure  that  we  may  do  in  such  a 
particular  case  as  this.  We  desire  to  know  from  you,  what  you  think 
worse,  either  to  take  an  oath  or  to  refuse  it  ?  and  whether  we  should 
tolerate  with  peace  those  who  were  compelled  by  necessity  to  take 
one?  You  should  take  into  consideration,  that  if  we  refuse  an  oath 
in  our  countrj'^,  we  could  not  be  made  free  citizens  in  our  cities ;  nor 
could  we  leave  our  country,  it  may  be  to  carry  on  our  affairs  and 
trade,  or  to  fly  persecution  for  conscience  sake.  However,  we  will 
avoid  all  this  and  all  other  things,  as  much  as  possible,  now  and  for 
ever. 

"  As  concerns  magistracy  and  weapons,  or  the  profession  of  arms, 
we  will  by  no  means  either  take  or  assume  one  of  them.  Some  of 
us  will  not  do  so  for  conscience  sake,  others  for  that  of  peace,  now 
and  for  ever. 

"Thus  we  have,  with  few  words,  answered  according  to  your 
desire,  while  we  have  no  time  to  write  now  more  about  these  things, 
and  if  we  had,  we  could  not,  at  all  events,  force  you.  We  hope  that 
you  are  in  or  near  the  fulness  of  joy,  and  the  point  of  perfectness 
in  all  things,  which  we  believe,  but  from  which  we  are  still  far.  But 
wo  will  not  cease  praying,  that  He  which  hath  begun  a  good  work 
may  perfonn  it  in  yoxi  and  us  to  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ.  All  of  us 
salute  you  most  heartily  in  the  Lord.     Mercy  be  with  you.     Amen. 

"  We  pray  you  also  that,  if  you  may  receive  us  in  your  communion, 
that  it  may  please  you  to  write  a  few  words  to  John  Morton  and  his 
friends,  in  order  to  augment  peace  and  welfare.  We,  from  our  side, 
Avill  do  as  much  as  we  can  to  bring  this  matter  to  an  end.  Many 
that  are  with  him  are  ready  to  comply  with  the  doctrine  of  toleration 
in  order  to  promote  peace.  There  are  two  (that  were  at  his  side)  who 
have  paid  attention  to  the  personal  succession  from  the  time  of  the 
apostles,  and  they  wished  to  know  whether  some  of  those  which  pro- 
fess to  be  true  constituted  churches,  can  say  that  they  have  their 
origin  from  the  times  of  the  apostles.    They  are  good  people,  and  -wish 


24  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

to  please  God  and  to  live  in  a  true  way;  therefore,  we  hope  you  will 

do  what  is  possible  to  pacify  them. — Your  friends  in  and  for  the  holy 

truth  and  the  heavenly  life,* 

"Elias  Tookey,  and  the  others. 
"Jan.  3,  1624.    London." 

This  letter,  and  some  wliicli  follow,  throw  light  on  some 
points  of  our  history  hitherto  vinknown.  Tookey  and  his 
friends  were  members  of  a  church  which  had,  probably,  been 
formed  by  Helwys,  but  at  this  time  was  under  the  pastoral 
care  of  Morton,  his  companion  in  suffering,  and  who  had 
returned  with  him  to  England.  The  points  in  dispute,  and 
the  cause  of  their  disunion,  will  become  manifest  from  subse- 
quent letters,  if  they  are  not  so  already  from  the  one  before 
the  reader. 

Keconciliation  was  difficult ;  but  efforts  Avei-e  made  by  both 
parties  to  secure  the  favour  of  the  Dutch  brethren.  Morton, 
and  his  friends  in  various  parts  of  the  country,  sent  a  depu- 
tation to  Holland  to  lay  their  case  before  the  brethren  there. 
The  following  extract  of  a  letter  from  Cornells  C.  Aresto, 
minister  of  the  United  Waterland  and  High  German 
church  at  Amsterdam,  to  Hans  de  Ries,  eldest  minister  at 
Alkmaar,  Nov.  13th,  1626,  will  be  read  with  interest: — ■ 

"Dear,  and,  in  God,  beloved  Father  in  Christ,  Hans  de  Ries. 
Peace  be  with  you ! 

"To-day,  two  English  have  visited  us  as  being  commissioners  of 
five  churches  in  England,  and  who  had  carried  with  them  a  certain 
letter  for  you,  Renier  Wybrant,  and  the  other  ministers  of  our 
church,  which  letter  is  translated  by  one  of  our  English  brethren 


*  "  I  am  lodged  in  a  Frenchman's  house,  who  is  one  of  the  deacons  of  our 
English  Brownist  Church  here.  1  believe  in  the  street  where  I  lodge 
there  be  well  near  as  many  religions  as  there  be  houses ;  for  one  neigh- 
bour knows  not,  nor  cares  not  much,  Avhich  religion  the  other  is  of :  so 
that  the  mxmber  of  conventicles  exceeds  the  number  of  churches  here." — 
Howell's  Familiar  Letters,  p.  26.     London,  1754. 

"  Here  also  is  a  French  church  (Dort) ;  Aiminians,  Brownists,  Anabap- 
tists, and  Mennonites  do  lurke  here  and  also  swarm,  but  not  so  much 
tolerated  here  as  at  Kotterdam." — Brereton's  Travels,  1634,  p.  13.  Cheet- 
ham  Society. 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  2/5 

from  English  into  Latin ;  froni  which  we  uhderstaud  that  they  have 
read  our  Confession,  and  (as  they  have  written)  must  carefully  have 
reflected  on  it,  and  therefore  should  be  inclined  to  unite  themselves 
with  us,  as  they  are  of  the  same  opinion  in  everything  of  it,  except 
the  article  on  the  oath.  2.  That  they  also  think  that  the  Lord's 
Sujiper  ought  to  be  celebrated  every  Sunday,  unless  it  be  hindered  by 
a  reasonable  difficulty.  3.  That  the  brethren,  without  imposition 
(of  hand)  or  being  ordained  to  it  by  the  bishop  (pastor),  are  allowed 
and  ought  to  preach  and  to  administer  the  Sacraments  when  the 
bishops  are  absent.  4.  They. are  of  opinion  that  the  offices  of  the 
authority  or  Government  may  be  observed  by  a  Christian,  though 
they  cannot  be  reckoned  to  belong  to  the  church,  but  are  worldly 
offices.  As  a  proof  of  their  opinions  they  use  some  reasons,  the 
principle  of  which  is,  that  the  office  is  good  in  itself,  and  that  they, 
therefore,  take  it  that  the  use  of  it  does  not  keep  or  put  one  out  of 
the  church,  nor  hinder  that  he  be  a  Christian. 

"This  is,  in  short,  their  intention,  jxirpose,  and  the  cause  of  their 
coming  to  us,  while  we  were  requested  that  we  should  sjieak  with 
these  their  two  commissioners,  and  forward  them  an  answer  on  paper. 
We  have  told  them,  that  we  should  ask  for  your  advice,  as  the  letter 
was  directed  especially  to  you.  Therefore,  in  consecpience  of  this, 
we  request  your  advice  how  to  do  in  this  affair,  whether  it  suits  you 
to  come  hither,  or  that  we  send  them  to  you ;  and  also,  whether  we 
shall  give  them  a  written  answer  to  their  letter,  or  that  we  should 
send  it  after  them.  May  it  please  you  to  let  us  know  your  opinion 
as  soon  as  possible.  We  have  delayed  them,  therefore ;  and  mean- 
while ordered  our  English  that  they  should  show  them  our  last 
answer  to  Elias  Tookey,  as  he  has  spoken  of  the  same  matter,  which 
they  have  agreed  to  do :  but  these  have,  concerning  the  oath  and  the 
offices  of  authority,  a  somewhat  different  opinion  to  that  of  Elias 
Tookey  and  his. 

"These  count  a  number  in  England  of  undoubtedly  150  persons. 
They  have  separated  from  Elias  Tookey,  and  belong  to  the  people  of 
Jan  Morton  and  Thos.  Denys.  *  These  two  here  seem  to  be  clever 
men,  and  tolerably  excellent  in  their  habits ;  they  have  also,  as  the 
others  write  us,  suffered  very  much  for  the  name  of  Christ,  and  have 
been  a  long  time  prisoners." 


*  "  Probably  the  same  Thomas  who  (June  8,  1620)  was  ordained  to  the 
full  service  by  Renier  Wybrant  and  Peter  Andi-iessen,  in  order  to 
secure  the  Enghsh  part  of  the  United  Congregation."— Dr.  Midler, 
vol.  i. 


2Q  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

The  following  is  the  letter  these  brethren  were  commis- 
sioned to  carry : — 

"To  our  dear  friends,  Hans  de  Ries  and  Eeuier  Wybrant,  and 
their  churches,  with  all  the  other  servants  and  churches  walking  in 
the  same  way  with  them,  and  living  in  Holland  and  those  neighbour- 
hoods ;  with  the  churches  of  Jesus  Christ  which  are  in  England,  and 
live  in  London,  Lincoln,  Sanim,  Coventry,  and  Tiverton,*  all  salva- 
tion, while  they  heartily  wish  that  much  mercy  may  be  multiplied 
from  God  the  Father  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

' '  Dear  friends,  after  presenting  you  our  salutations,  we  heartily 
wish  you  a  continual  welfare  and  salvation,  because  you  love  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  his  l>lessed  truth.  It  becomes  all  of  us  who 
love  the  same  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  his  truth  to  try  for  unity  in  all 
manners,  and  to  walk  with  all  and  every  one,  as  belonging  to  the 
same  society.  And  so  we  thought  it  an  agi-eealile  work  to  the  Lord, 
a  work  v/hich  is  praiseworthy,  as  it  will  be  to  the  welfare  of  the 
people  of  God,  to  help  and  to  confirm  them  in  the  truth.  Formerly 
we  were  very  much  inclined,  very  desirous  to  conclude  the  peace  and 
unity  between  us ;  and  though  the  most  principal  among  us  are  now 
dead  and  rest  now  with  the  Lord,  we  that  remain  still  are  full  of  the 
same  desire  to  augment  the  glory  of  God  and  the  welfare  of  his 
people,  and  therefore  we  resume  the  same  attempts.  For  this  pur- 
pose, we  have  sent  to  you  these  two  beloved  friends  and  bretliren, — 
men  that  are  approved  among  us,  and  have  proved  their  constancy 
and  faithfulness  to  the  cause  of  Christ,  by  continually  suffering  a  long 
and  troublesome  captivity  almost  to  their  whole  ruin.  They  shall 
point  out  to  you  (as  far  as  it  is  wanted)  our  mind  and  purpose,  be- 
sides all  which  is  written  and  revealed  in  our  letter. 

"As  regards  the  articles  of  your  faith  which  you  have  published 
before  the  whole  world,  that  every  one  may  know  what  you  believe 
(at  least  with  respect  to  the  foundations),  and  which  you  formerly 
have  sent  to  us,  we  have  read  them  with  all  diligence  and  carefully 


*  The  present  pastor  says : — "  We  have  no  doubt  that  the  Baptist  church 
in  Tiverton  existed  very  early  in  1600,  or  even  before,  but  we  have  no 
positive  evidence.  Our  second  church-book  begins  with  1G78,  and  at  that 
time  the  church  consisted  of  120  members,  nearly  60  of  them  men.  The 
following  is  the  heading  of  the  second  church-book  : — '  A  record  or  register 
of  the  Church  of  Christ  in  Tiverton,  and  of  the  affairs  and  proceedings 
thereof,  since,  by  the  mercy  and  providence  of  God,  we  have  the  enjoy- 
ment of  liberty  and  peace,  in  the  year  1687.  Our  former  book,  containing 
matters  of  this  nature,  being  lost  in  the  late  time  of  trouble.'" 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  Zi 

considered.  Wc  have  highly  praised  with  a  sincere  heart  the  AI- 
miglity  God  aud  his  holy  name,  that  our  dift'erences  are  not  greater, 
and  that  the  principles  or  foundations  of  Clirist's  doctrine  so  very 
purely  are  acknowledged  by  you ;  while,  at  the  same  time,  we  have 
noted  the  opinions  of  some  things  in  which  we  seem  to  differ  from 
each  other.  However,  if  we  do  not  misunderstand  each  other,  and 
when  we  have  taken  all  things  into  consideration,  we  believe  that  we 
do  not  differ  at  all.  Therefore,  we  ]iray  you  to  send  us  with  these 
our  messengers  your  opinions,  and  to  inform  them  also  about  the; 
same  opinions  with  your  own  words. 

"I.  We  say,  then,  that  we  Ijelieve,  just  as  you  have  written  and 
acknowledged  that  you  do,  that  Christ  is  God  and  man  in  one  person, 
according  to  j^our  eighth  article,  though  yon  say  that  you  do  not 
know  whether  he  has  assumed  his  substance  from  Mary  or  not.  This 
is  not  directly  against  the  belief  of  others  who  say  that  he  may  be 
admitted,  and,  therefore,  may  remain  and  be  sufTered,  in  the  society 
of  the  true  believers,  without  being  excommunicated  or  condemned. 

"II.  As  regards  the  oath,  we  do  not  see  any  difiference  in  this  matter, 
as  we  are  informed,  and  partly  kno^^'  it,  that  you  think  it  right  and 
allowed  to  speak  the  truth  before  the  magistrates,  or  somebody  else, 
and  to  take  the  praiseworthy  name  of  God  as  a  witness  in  a  just 
affair,  as  it  is  proved  by  the  following  places  in  the  Scriptures: — 
Eom.  i.  9 ;  2  Cor.  i.  2  and  3 ;  Phil.  1.  8.  And  that  we  else  never 
may  swear,  according  to  the  following  places : — Matt.  v.  34 ; 
Jas.  v.  12. 

"III.  We  say  also,  that,  when  there  are  important  alTairs  which 
prevent  it,  the  Lord's  Supper  may  be  left  away  till  the  things  which 
hinder  are  taken  away.  Otherwise,  we  do  not  dare  to  neglect  it  on 
every  Sabbath  when  we  come  together  for  other  godly  things  of  the 
pubhc  service.  Herein  we  have  the  example  of  the  churches  of  God 
which  grant  us  this  matter.  And  as  it  is  also  an  important  part  of 
our  spiritual  comfort  and  union  with  Christ,  and  miitual  unity  as  well 
as  any  other  part  of  the  divine  service,  so  we  are  resolved  to  continue. 
We  hope  you  will  allow  us  to  do  it  seven  years,  if  we  like  it.  For 
why  should  not  also  the  other  parts  of  the  public  service,  which  are 
of  the  same  nature  and  weight,  be  differed? 

"  IV.  We  acknowledge  that  the  ministering  of  the  holy  sacraments 
unseparately  is  united  with  the  ministering  of  the  Word,  and  that 
not  every  member  of  the  body  may  minister  the  sacraments.  But  we 
say  also  this,  that  those  also  are  servants  of  the  body  who  are  not 
installed  in  the  episcopal  office  by  imposition  of  hands,  but  preach, 
convert,  baptize,  aud  build  churches  and  perform  other  public  actions 
with  the  consent  of  the  church  when  the  bishops  are  not  present,  who 


28 


EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 


only  may  perform  all  public  actions,  as  being  tbe  public  and  common 
servants  of  the  church. 

' '  V.  As  regards  the  fulfilment  of  an  office  of  magistrature,  we 
understand,  first,  that  your  judgment  does  not  extend  so  far  that 
you  do  not  suffer  one  of  a  contrary  opinion,  but  that  you  admit  some 
who  are  not  quite  of  the  same  opinion  with  you.  Indeed,  we  are  in- 
formed that  you  really  suffer  some  offices  of  magistrature  in  which 
the  questions,  affairs,  and  quarrels  about  jjossession  and  other 
worldly  things  are  regulated,  if  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  blood, 
Avar,  and  weapons.  And  so  it  is  evident  that  our  difference  does  not 
concern  the  office  of  magistrature  itself,  but  the  manner  of  execution, 
namely,  not  whether  the  office  is  without  the  church,  and  by  no 
means  may  exercise  its  worldly  authority  in  the  spiritual  kingdom  of 
Christ  or  of  the  church;  but  more  this,  whether  the  magistrature 
may  use  the  sword  which  is  given  her  by  God  to  the  protection  of  the 
right  of  the  good  siibjects  of  this  world  against  all  invasions,  wrongs, 
and  similar  crimes,  and  with  which  she  punishes  the  murderers. 
This  is,  according  to  oiir  opinion,  the  difference. 

"That  it  may  please  yoii  to  suffer  our  freely  informing  you  about 
our  opinion  in  this  matter;  while  we  confess  that  we  are  very  -willhig 
to  be  instructed  l>y  you,  or  anybody  else,  and  in  what  case  it  may  be, 
and  that  we  will  accept  all  what  will  be  evident  to  our  conscience  by 
the  Word  of  truth.  As  regards  magistracy  itself,  we  acknowledge 
with  you,  according  to  your  37th  article,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
has  not  established  in  his  spiritual  kingdom  or  chnrch  of  the  New 
Testament  neither  magistracy  nor  any  other  part  of  its  power,  nor 
that  the  church  has  anything  to  do  with  the  execution  of  it ;  for 
his  kingdom,  arms,  servants,  and  all  things  that  belong  to  it,  are 
spiritual.  We  should  neither  make  any  distinction  of  persons  in  this 
spiritual  kingdom,  or  suffer  that  there  are  many  masters.  But  in 
worldly  things  the  saints  ought  to  respect  the  magistracy,  just  as  all 
good  subjects  do  those  that  are  above  them,  and  as  children  do  their 
parents.  In  the  church  there  are  many  masters, — even  all  of  us  are 
masters, — but  in  all  things  of  the  world  her  believers  are  servants, 
and,  therefore,  they  possess  an  office  of  magistracy  not  in  ecclesias- 
tical, but  in  worldly  affairs.  For  the  worldly  ordinations  are  from 
God,  and  are  good ;  and,  therefore,  we  ask.  Can  those  things  which 
are  good  be  an  obstacle  that  one  can  be  a  disciple  of  Christ,  or  that 
he  may  be  a  Christian  ?  Or  are  men  hindered  by  the  church  to  do 
those  things  which  are  good?  She  may  liy  no  means  do  so.  There 
is  nothing  which  seduces  us  from  God,  but  only  sin,  which  is  not 
good,  but  evil.  If  magistracy  impedes  us  from  Christianity,  then  it 
must  be  considered  as  sin  and  evil;  and  then  we  must  desire  its  niin 


CHARLES    xilE    FIRST.  29 

and  not  pray  for  it,  neither  thank  God  for  it  as  a  good  ordinance  of 
him.  But  it  is  no  evil  and  no  sin.  We  must  pray  and  thank  God 
for  it  as  a  good  ordinance  established  by  him,  _as  it  is  in  reality; 
and,  tlierefore,  it  cannot  hinder  one  to  be  a  Christian.-  Must  we 
compel  a  man  who  desires  to  become  a  Christian,  to  leave  anything 
else  but  sin?  Baptism,  for  which  we  resist  the  world,  is  a  baptism 
of  conversion  to  the  forgiving  of  sins  which  all  those  are  to  receive 
who  repent  for  their  sins  and  believe  in  the  doctrine  of  the  (JospeL 
Shall  we  make  or  suspect  a  sin  in  their  eyes  which  is  a  good  ordinance 
of  God?     This  be  far  from  us. 

"We  could  say  very  much  about  this;  but  as  you  yourselves 
acknowledge  the  authority,  so  we  shall  only  speak  of  the  execution, 
or  the  office  itself. 

"  It  is  evident,  that  he  who  has  established  this  good  ordinance  of 
(xod,  has  given  the  sword  in  their  hands  to  revenge  on  him  who 
commits  evil,  and  to  protect  him  who  acts  rightly.  If  you,  then, 
take  away  the  s\\'ord,  you  take  away  the  authority.  For  what  wise 
man  will  think  that,  if  the  magistrates  intend  to  do  justice  in  order 
to  pimish  the  wicked  men,  there  will  be  anybody  who  will  esteeni 
their  command,  if  they  have  not  the  power  to  compel  one  to  the 
things  that  are  right  by  the  sword  ?  The  magistrates  cannot  put  an 
example,  if  they  had  not  the  power  of — according  to  God's  command 
— shedding  the  blood  of  those  who  shed  the  blood  of  men.  What, 
would  the  murderer  ask  for  magistracy?  Or  how  could  he  be  hin- 
dered of  shedding  continually  blood?  And  so  we  see  of  the  weapons, 
that  the  Lord  allows  them  in  the  possession  of  the  disciples,  but  that 
he  does  not  allow  to  use  them  to  protect  his  spiritual  kingdom, 
nor  in  making  one's  self  the  king  of  that  kingdom,  for  which 
reason  the  Jews  sought  to  kill  him.  Therefore,  arms  are  good, 
and  the  possession  of  them  right  among  the  disciples  just  as  all  other 
Avorldly  things.  But  they  may  not  use  those  arms  in  his  king- 
dom, as  the  arms  of  the  host  of  his  kingdom  are  not  carnal,  but 
spiritual,  and  its  subjects  have  only  a  Spiritual  King.  Therefore, 
also,  they  may  not  exercise  authority,  the  one  over  the  other,  as  the 
princes  of  the  Gentiles  do,  because  his  kingdom  is  not  like  the  king- 
doms of  this  world.  Many  other  things  are  said  to  lielong  to  that 
kingdom,  as  the  spiritual  treasures  and  purses  (Luke  xii.  33) ; 
spiritual  building  (Ex.  ii.  20);  spiritual  apparel  (1  Peter  iii.  3); 
spiritual  meat  (John  vi.  27 — Rom.  xiv.  — ).  Now  then,  because  all 
these  things,  and  many  others,  are  said  to  be  found  in  the  Kingdom 
of  Christ,  may  we,  therefore,  not  use  them  in  the  world,  namely — 
treasures,  purses,  buildings,  apparel,  and  meats?  We  hope  that  no- 
body will  deny  this. 


^JU  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

"Besides,  tliat  you  write  that  j'oii  think  it  is  not  allowed  to  you 
to  use  arms,  seems  A'eiy  surprising  to  us.  The  magistrates  who  are 
sure  of  the  faithfulness  of  their  subjects  who  are  inclined  to  protect 
their  government,  will  take  much  more  care  in  order  to  promote  the 
peace  of  these  subjects,  than  for  those  who  could  suffer  that  they  and 
their  authority  were  ruined  and  the  inhabitants  were  attacked,  in- 
stead of  protecting  them  against  murderers,  thieves,  and  others,  who 
may  attack  their  country.  We  are  sure,  at  least,  that  it  is  so  in  our 
country,  however  it  may  be  in  yours,  and  with  your  magistrates. 
And  as  regards  suffering  persecution,  we  see  that  godlj'  magistrates 
have  often  suffered  dreadful  persecution  from  their  own  subjects 
(Num.  xiv.  2 — x.  6 ;  1  Sam.  viii.  S ;  Dan.  vi.  2 — v.  12 ;  Jolin.  vii.  50). 
These  are  some  of  our  reasons  among  so  many  about  our  judgment 
and  opinions  in  this  matter.  And  these  are  all  the  differences  which 
we  think  to  exist.  The  first  of  your  articles  we  acknowledge  freely 
as  well  with  our  hearts  as  with  our  mouths,  and  we  shall  adhere  to 
them,  -vdth  the  help  of  God,  to  owe  death. 

' '  "We  pray  you,  that  it  may  please  you  to  consider  earnestly  all 
these  differences ;  and  to  write  us,  after  that  consideration,  whether 
you  coidd  suffer  us,  as  we  can  suffer  you  in  these  matters,  that  we 
then  may  be  together  as  members  of  one  body,  of  which  Christ  is  the 
head,  and  that  we,  walking  in  one  society,  may  be  of  good  concord, 
living  together  in  the  union  and  truth  of  Christ  Jesus  as  brethren, 
that  it  may  prove  whose  disciples  we  be  in  reality,  namely,  those  of 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  only  Saviour,  to  whom  be  the  praise  ever- 
lastingly.    Amen. 

"And  thus,  dear  and  very  beloved  friends,  taking  leave,  we  re- 
commend yoii  with  all  our  hearts  to  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  whom  we  most  earnestly  pray  that  he  may  lead  you  in  all 
truth  as  well  as  us,  and  so  will  keep  us  irreproachable  to  the  re- 
velation of  His  glory." 

[Translated  into  Dutch  from  the  Latin  manuscript,  which  was  translated 
from  the  English  in  which  it  was  originally  written,  Nov,  IS,  1626.] 

Whether  the  deputies  were  received  by  Ries,  we  have  no 
information ;  but,  on  receipt  of  the  letter,  he  drew  up  a 
series  of  questions,  and  forwarded  them  to  the  two  brethren. 
The  queer  and  brief  answers  to  some  of  them,  are  as  follows : 

"List  of  Questions  written  by  Hans  de  Eies,  and  put  before  the 
deputies  of  the  five  churches  in  England,  followed  by  some  Answers 
at  the  foot  of  the  page : — 

"Whether  the  churches  which  they  mention  are  acquainted  and 
have  knowledge  of  their  coming  to  us  ? 


CHARLES   THE   FIRST.  31 

"Whether  they  he  ordered  by  these,  with  all  concord,  to  come  to 
us? 

"Whether  they  are  all,  aud  unanimously,  of  the  same  opinion,  ac- 
cording to  the  contents  of  their  letter ;  especially,  whether  there  be 
no  difference  between  their  doctrine  and  onrs,  but  only  in  those 
articles  they  mention  in  their  writing? 

' '  As  we  have  here  some  that  are  of  their  nation  who  are  excom- 
municated by  theirs,  wherefore  do  they  take  them  now? 

"Whether  thej^  think  them  worthy  to  be  excommunicated  that 
came  from  England  and  took  Tip  their  residence  here ;  and  think  that 
they  who  live  here  are  obliged  to  live  again  in  England? 

"  Whether  they  think  it  to  be  right,  and  would  suffer  and  directlj' 
carry  on,  that  every  brother,  without  having  an  orderly  vocation  or 
charge,  may  serve  the  sacraments ;  and  also  women,  if  there  were  no 
man  ? 

"Whether  there  are  no  other  forms  of  words  in  use  in  their 
coimtry  with  swearing  an  oath,  than — 'God  is  my  witness'? 

' '  Whether  they  could  bear  with  it  when  they  were  in  England, 
that  some  churches  only  sometimes  in  the  year  take  the  Lord's 
Supper? 

"  Wliether  any  brother  in  their  church,  and  living  in  their  place, 
who  did  not  think  it  according  to  the  command  of  God  to  break 
bread  every  Sunday,  and  who,  therefore,  did  not  celebrate  the  Lord's 
Supper  on  every  Sunday,  would  be  tolerated  among  them  ? 

' '  Whether  they  woidd  think  to  be  obliged  (as  for  the  promise  of 
being  ready  to  service,  promised  to  the  king)  to  assist  the  king  with 
weapons,  and  to  protect  themselves  and  their  weapons  even  with 
then-  blood? 

"According  to  what  law  they  think  that  a  Chi-istian  authority  is 
obliged  to  punish  the  evil,  to  carry  on  war,  and  to  deal  with  its 
enemies  ?  ^ 

' '  Whether  a  Christian,  alsS  in  the  quarrels  of  his  king  and  in  the 
resistance  against  his  enemies,  may  touch  the  goods  of  these  enemies, 
may  extort  them,  and  take  them  away ;  also  whether  he  may  possess 
and  keep,  as  free  and  own  goods,  those  that  are  taken  away  ? 
[answers.] 

"Tlie  five  churches  have  not  every  one  a  minister.  Those  that 
have  no  minister  wait  w,ith  the  service  till  one  is  coming ;  therefore, 
it  is  not  i)0ssible  to  break  bread  every  Sunday. 

"They  do  not  suffer  that  somebody  teaches  the  congregation  with- 
out being  acknowledged  that  he  is  able  to  do  it. 

' '  They  make  a  difference  between  one  that  teaches  and  serves  the 
sacraments,  and  one  that  stands  in  full  service. 


32  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

"  Two  different  opinions  of  foreign  chiirclies. 

"Whether  they  would  receive  the  English,  is  doubtful. 

"  Whether  it  may  be  thought  necessary  by  all  of  them  to  celebrate 
the  Lord's  Supper*  every  Sunday, — they  do  not  know  that. 

"They  have  neither  command  nor  law  to  break  bread  every  Sun- 
day ;  but  they  do  not  see  any  ofTence  in  it,  if  a  minister  woidd  do  so 
on  Sunday." 

To  the  dissidents  under  Elias  Tookey,  tlie  minister  of 
tlie  church  at  Amsterdam  had  written  in  May,  1624.  The 
letter  is  in  the  name  of  the  United  Church  of  the  Dutch 
and  English. 

"Augmentation  of  divine  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  the  divine 
truth,  we  wish  with  all  our  hearts  our  beloved  friends  who  have  the 
foretaste  of  the  heavenly  things  (sixteen  in  number),  with  all  those 
who  are  near  them  and  are  zealous  for  the  truth  of  God  the  Father 
and  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  general  Saviour.     Amen. 

"Very  dear  friends, — We  have  recently  received  your  letter,  dated 
March  29,  st'do  antlquo,  and  have  read  it  with  a  great  joy,  whUe  we 
thanked  God  for  his  mercy  which  he  has  poured  out  over  you  in 
great  abundance,  though  undeserved  and  only  by  his  great  love  and 
clemency,  and  which  consists  herein,  that  he  makes  shine  in  you  the 
evangelical  truth  in  this  dark  world,  that  he  enlightened  the  eyes  of 
your  mind,  and  has  endued  you  Mith  the  acknowledgment  of  his 
will,  to  his  glory  and  the  promotion  of  your  salvation. 

"We  pray  the  good  God  that  he  will  bless  the  conrmienced  work 
by  the  service  of  Clirist,  and  that  he  will  allow  that  the  sun  which 
l)egius  to  rise  at  the  break  of  day  and  goes  on  to  the  full  day,  shines 
in  its  glory  in  your  hearts ;  that  he  will  give  you,  at  the  same  time, 
heavenly  strength  and  mercy,  that  you^may  reveal  and  promote  by  a 
holy  life  much  light  among  this  imtoward  generation  which  has  its 
walks  in  the  midst  of  darkness  and  sin,  to  the  honour  of  God  and  the 
augmentation  of  your  own  salvation,  and  the  conversion  and  illumi- 
nation of  many.     Amen. 

' '  We  are  most  instantly  moved  to  answer  you,  and  to  prove  you 
our  heartily  tender  and  Christian  affection,  as  well  as  the  joy  we  have 
experienced  about  the  commencement  of  your  illumination.  Your 
Christian  salutation  was  very  agi'eeable  to  us ;  and  though  the  number 
of  those  whom  it  has  pleased  the  Lord  to  grace  with  the  knowledge 


*  The  writing  is  here  illegible,  but  the  meaning  is  clear,  as  it  is  ex- 
pressed here. 


CHARLES   THE   FIRST.  33 

of  tnitli  is  still  very  small,  we  were,  however,  very  glad,  aud  believed 
that  God  will  cause  the  light  of'his  truth  to  shiue  before  many.  Just 
as  the  birth  of  Christ,  according  to  the  flesh,  was  only  informed  to 
few,  but  afterwards  is  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the  whole  world, 
so  we  are  in  good  hope  that  the  birth  and  knowledge  of  Christ, 
according  to  the  spirit,  which  has  begun  in  you,  will  extend  more  and 
more  to  the  salvation  of  many. 

"With  much  desire  we  have  waited  for  your  writing,  as  we  under- 
stand also  that  you  were  very  desirous  to  receive  some  lines  from  us. 
You  write  us  about  the  causes  of  your  delay.  We  accept  them  with 
love.  Our  reason  was,  that  we,  after  your  taking  leave  of  us,  have 
not  received  an)'-  information  about  the  accejjtance  of  our  writings  and 
the  reasoumgs  which  we  had  with  your  messengers.  We  hope  it 
may  please  you  to  accept  this  excuse  also.  We  learn  from  your 
letter,  that  you  are  excommunicated  or  excluded  from  their  meetings 
by  .John  Morton  and  his  friends.  *  The  chief  cause  of  it  would  be, 
your  o])iiiion  about  bearing  with,  and  tolerating,  the  weak  or  those  of 
little  understanding  about  scriiitural  matters,  who,  however,  are  very 
conscious  in  everything  they  know,  and  peaceful  and  quiet  in  the 
church.  We  were,  indeed,  very  sorry  to  hear  this,  and  it  disi)leased 
us  very  much.  We  wish  those  who  have  rejected  you  more  wisdom ; 
and  yoii,  that  you  may  bear  with  patience  all  the  injiu-ies  which 
have  befallen  you,  and  which  have  not  been  few,  and  are  still  con- 
tinuing ;  aud  that  you  rely  on  your  own  pure  hearts,  on  the  justice  of 
yoiu-  cause,  and  the  promises  of  God.  In  doing  so,  you  do  as  it  be- 
comes Christians,  and,  therefore,  we  were  akeady  very  glad  that  we 
heard  you  did  so.  We  admonish,  pray,  and  beseech  you,  remain  on 
that  same  way ;  do  not  reward  evil  with  evil ;  do  not  rail  on  those 
that  injure  you,  but  look  for  the  footsteps  of  Christ,  and  follow  the 
examjtle  of  the  patience  of  the  saints,  and  take  care  that  your  love 
and  kindness  become  known  to  every  one.  Let  it  be  a  very  small 
thing  to  you,  as  it  was  to  St.  Paul,  to  be  judged  of  man's  judgment. 
Have  compassion  with  such  men  and  their  foolishness,  and  behave 
yourselves  in  such  storms  according  to  the  words  of  the  same  ajiostle 
(1  Cor.  vi. ),  as  servants  of  God,  with  great  patience  and  prudence; 
aud  let  your  prayers  for  those  who  grieve  you  rise  to  God,  according 
to  the  example  of  Christ.     Remember  that  you  yourselves  have  been 

*  "Sir,  I  perceive  you  are  an  Anabaptist,  and  therefore  I  shall  speedily 
make  good  my  promise ;  and,  indeed,  some  thirty  years  ago,  Mr.  Morton, 
a  teacher  of  a  church  of  Anabaptists  in  Newgate,  then  ijjs  confessions 
comprehended  all  the  errors  of  the  Arminians,  which  now  of  late  many 
that  go  under  your  name  in  and  about  London,  dissent  from." — Truth's 
Victory,  London,  164.5,  p.  19. 

C 


34  EAKLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

foolish,  and  probably  have  condemned  unjustly  and  in  a  -wrong  time. 
If  you  behave  yourselves  thus,  you  will  prove  to  tha  world  that  you 
know  the  words  of  Christ,  written  in  the  tables  of  your  heart  with 
the  fingers  of  God ;  and  your  wisdom,  patience,  and  kindness  will  be 
a  light  to  the  foolish,  and  will  serve  them  to  a  better  understanding. 

"That  you  have  used  many  means  to  remain  in  the  unity  with  those 
that  have  excon>muuicated  you,  makes  us  very  glad ;  for  it  is  chris- 
tian to  endeavour  for  peace  and  luiity.  The  Holy  Ghost  admonishes 
to  do  this.  We  are  very  sorry  that  your  efforts  were  in  vain  in  this 
matter,  and  that  you  are  now  without  any  hope  to  do  something  that 
will  be  fruitful  in  these  praiseworthy  matters.  However,  do  not 
repent  of  all  your  endeavours,  for  they  vdll  always  contribute  to  a 
good  conscience,  which  is  to  be  esteemed  above  all  treasm-es.  But 
those  who  have  oppressed  and  contempted  you,  will  suffer  affliction 
and  re])entance  when  they  shall  have  obtained  better  knowledge,  which 
we  hope  that  very  soon  will  happen,  before  the  day  is  passed  for  them. 

"  You  wished,  as  we  perceive,  that  your  affair  were  brought  to  the 
judgment  of  the  Dutch  aud  English  church  here.  We  also  wish  to 
hear  your  affair  iu  an  impartial  manner  and  to  decide  it,  that  the 
quarrels  may  be  finished,  and  peace  may  be  preserved.  But  how  is 
it  possible  to  perform  this,  when  your  parties  will  not  understand 
each  other?  It  must  be  recommended  to  the  care  of  God,  and  left  to 
the  course  of  time. 

"If  John  Morton,  or  somebody  of  his  followers,  comes  to  us  with  a 
kind  heart  and  a  manageable  mind,  we  shall  be  very  glad  to  see  him. 
We  wished  that  God  allowed  that  he  appeared  in  such  a  manner, 
then  there  might  follow  a  good  consequence  out  of  his  coming.  If  it 
happened  that  he  came  in  another  manner,  you  must  not  think  that 
they  wiU  cause  here  any  trouble  at  all.  Our  communion  has  learned 
by  experience,  and  by  taking  into  consideration  the  many  quarrels 
caused  by  the  peevish  people  round  us  who  lack  the  peace-feeding 
doctrine  of  tolerance,  how  amiable,  costly,  and  good  it  is  that 
brethren  dwell  together  (Ps.  xxxiii. ) ;  so  that  we  do  not  fear  any  dis- 
turbance among  ours  by  the  arrival  of  whomsoever.  As  regards  the 
letter  which  we  gave  to  your  messengers,  and  which  has  been  with- 
holden  from  you  as  you  complain,  and  which  was  signed  by  two  of 
our  ministers  (Hans  de  Eies  and  Eenier  Wybrant),  we  affirm  in 
this,  that  the  contents  were  the  general  opinion  and  the  doctrine  of 
all  in  our  church,  especially  in  that  of  tolerance.  This  article  is  held 
among  all  of  us  as  one  which  we  embrace  with  all  our  heart,  as  it  is 
one  of  the  fHit  causes  of  peace,  and  the  unity  or  keeping  together  of 
the  communion.  If  John  Morton,  or  somebody  of  his  friends,  says 
otherwise,  we  must  suffer,  and  christianly  bear  with  that ;  biit  if  he 


CHAKLES    THE    FIRST.  35 

comes  to  us,  it  will  be  evident,  after  examination,  that  our  opinion  is 
as  we  have  "v^Tittcn,  and  write  once  again  here.  Therefore,  we  have 
no  fear  for  his  or  another's  arrival,  as  we  cannot  think  that  one  in 
our  church  will  be  seduced  from  our  peacefulness  by  such  a  means. 

"You  should  not  derive  from  this  fact,  however,  that  we  push  on 
tolerance  out  of  its  due  limits,  as  if  we  allow  a  place  among  us  to  all 
errors,  ho^v  great  or  of  what  nature  they  may  l)e.  By  no  means !  but 
we  limit  it  according  to  the  Scriptures,  and  consider  it  with  all  wisdom. 

"  We  learn  that  you  are  very  well  pleased  with  the  reasons  which 
we  have  cited  for  our  not  having  supplicated  to  our  magistrates, 
according  to  your  desire.     We  have  no  objection  against  tills. 

' '  Thus  we  were  also  pleased  with  all  that  you  have  written  about 
the  first  separation,  namely,  that  you  see  that  the  sej^aratists  are 
guilty,  because  they  have  not  joined  a  real  communion,  but  have 
formed  a  new  sect  according  to  their  arbitrary  opinion,  and  in  an 
irregular  manner;  also,  that  they  have  misused  the  discipline  of 
Christ,  &c.  And  so  we  conclude  that  you  are  enlightened  by  the 
mercy  of  God,  that  you  can  see  these  mentioned  deficiencies ;  while 
we  pray  and  admonish  you,  that  you  most  diligently  take  cai-e  wisely 
to  use  your  knowledge,  and  that  you,  by  no  means,  resemble  the 
unwise  doings  which  you  have  seen.  We  have  often  warned  them 
in  the  begimiing  of  the  separation,  and  disadvised  them  such  dis- 
order, and  admonished  them  to  patience  and  tolerance ;  but  our 
reasons  have  not  found  a  kind  ear  with  them. 

"With  gi'eat  jileasure  we  have  read  in  yoiu*  wi'iting,  that  you  are 
not  of  opinion  that  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  break  bread  on  every 
first  day  of  the  week,  but  that  you  give  liberty  about  this  to  every 
church,  as  you  yourselves  exercise  this  libei-ty.  By  this  expression, 
'as  you  yourselves  exei'cise  this,'  we  understand  that  you  break 
among  each  other  the  holy  bread  of  the  Lord,' or  celebrate  the  Lord's 
Supper  with  each  other.  If  we  understand  this  in  the  right  way,  we 
cannot  see  but  that  you  do  the  same  that  you  rebuke  in  otliers, 
namely,  that  you,  before  you  have  joined  another  communion,  and 
are  taken  up  by  it  to  the  Christian  church,  establish  a  new  chui'ch, 
l)y  which  fact  you  fall  within  the  judgment  of  your  adversaries. 
And  as  we  cannot  command  you,  so  we  can  only  advise  and  admonish 
you,  to  be  quiet  in  such  chiu-ch  matters,  that  all  things  among  you 
may  be  done  in  good  order,  and  have  a  scriptural  form.  Before  the 
beginning  of  your  sejDaration  your  opinion  was,  that  no  private 
brother,  without  the  calling  of  the  congregation,  might  distribute  the 
sacraments ;  and  also  that  it  was  not  allowed  in  the  time  of  persecu- 
tion to  fiy  to  another  country,  and  to  live  there.  We  should  be  very 
glad  to  learn  whether  there  is  now  another  opinion  among  you,  or 


36  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

whether  you  still  are  of  the  same  principles.  When  your  messengers 
■were  here,  and  we  spoke  with  them,  we  declared  then  that  those  who 
have  different  opinions  about  the  origin  of  the  human  body  of  Christ 
are  esteemed  among  us  as  to  be  borne  with,  as  they  still  belong  to 
those  who  do  not  deny  tlie  humanity  of  Christ,  but  confess  that  he  is 
truly  7iian.  But  if  one  would  extend  it  so  far,  that  we  should  esteem 
it  excusable  that  somebody  might  deny  the  deity  of  Christ,  or  denied 
that  Christ  was  really  God,  he  Avould  not  iinderstand  us  well,  but 
very  wrongly.  And,  therefore,  we  hope  that  it  may  i>lease  you  to 
explain  to  us  how  we  should  understand  these  words: — 'Wt  do  not 
compel  one  to  believe  of  Christ  what  we  do,  l)ut  bear  with  each 
other. '  We  desire  to  know  whether  this  is  only  said  of  the  origin  of 
Christ's  body,  or  whether  the  article  of  the  deity  of  Christ  should  be 
contained  within.  If  you  bear  also  with  those  who  deny  the  deity  of 
Christ,  or  do  not  confess  that  Christ  is  truly  God  in  the  Father,  and 
with  the  Father,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  hope  you  will  be  so  kind  as  to 
write  your  true  meaning  about  this  to  ixs.  As  regards  the  doctrine  of 
the  oath  and  magistracy,  you  write  that  some  are  with  us  and  others 
not.  That  it  may  please  you  to  write  us,  whether  those  who  do  not 
agree  with  us  about  both  the  articles  will  forsake  the  practising  of 
their  opinions  for  the  love  of  the  peace  and  edification  of  the  church, 
or  whether  they,  when  they  are  called  for  it,  especially  for  the  use  of 
arms,  would  persevere  in  their  opinions.  We  think  it  necessary  to 
have  true  knowledge  of  this. 

' '  That  all  the  other  articles  which  are  mentioned  in  our  confession 
are  considered  by  you  as  Christian,  and  that  you  acknowledge  to 
have  received  much  illumination  by  them — we  thank  for  this  the 
good  God  who  is  the  origin  and  commencer  of  all  good  things,  and 
from  whom  all  good  and  perfect  gifts  descend.  We  i)ray  him  that 
he,  for  his  own  honour  and  the  welfare  of  all  of  you,  will  give  you 
mercy,  force,  and  good  gifts,  that  you  maj'  increase  and  grow  up  in 
the  commenced  knowledge  and  truth.  Persevere  also  continitally  in 
a  holy  life  with  beseeching  and  prajnng  to  the  Almightj'.  Remember 
that  he  is  faithful  who  will  fulfil  his  promises  in  you,  and  make  them 
yea  and  amen. 

"With  much  joy  and  gladness  we  have  learned  that  it  is  j^our 
holy  intention  to  be  admit  in  our  brotherhood,  and  to  lie  united 
with  our  communion  also  by  the  outward  bonds.  We  also  are  in- 
clined to  it,  and  we  intend  to  perform  it,  with  the  help  of  God,  in  good 
order,  when  we  have  received  j'^our  answer  on  this,  and  have  learned 
that  we  have  such  harmony  in  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  that  we 
may  trust  to  live  in  fuU  peace  the  one  with  the  other,  as  it  becomes 
true  Christians. 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  37 

"We  have  not  received  any  writing  or  complaint  from  your  adver- 
saries which  was  offending  you.  If  something  will  be  delivered  us 
after  this,  we  shall  act  with  it,  and  behave  ourselves  as  it  becomes 
impartial  men. 

"We  suppose  that  the  money  which  we  have  delivered  to  your 
messengers  really  has  reached  you  in  due  time,  as  we  have  trusted  it 
to  your  messengers  with  perfect  confidence. 

' '  Now  then,  as  we  have  answered  yoiir  letter,  which  pleased  us  so 
very  much,  we  conclude  this,  and  shall  expect  your  kind  answer  with 
much  desire.    The  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  all  of  you. 

"Amsterdam,  —  May  — ,  Ao.  1024. 

"Signed  with  the  consent  and  allowance  of  the  ministers  and  ser- 
vants of  the  Dutch  and  English  churches  of  Jesus  Christ  in  that  place." 

The  reply  to  tliis  letter  lies  before  us,  and  we  give  it  entire. 

' '  Letter  written  by  Elias  Tookey  to  Hans  do  Ries  and  the  elders 
of  the  church  at  Amsterdam.  An  answer  to  the  letter  from  Amster- 
dam, May,  1024  : — 

"To  the  holy  and  discreet  elders,  IIcdis  de  jRks  and  Reiner 
Wyhrant,  we  wish  augmentation  of  all  heavenly  wisdom  and 
spiritual  knowledge  (to  the  use  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  which  you 
defend),  from  God  the  Father,  by  Jesus  Christ,  as  well  your  Lord  as 
ours,  that  immortality  may  be  reached  by  all  of  ns.     Amen. 

"We  inform  yon,  beloved  and  very  reverend  fathers,  that  your 
being  silent  such  a  long  time  (which  we,  however,  do  not  take  amiss) 
was  almost  the  cause  that  we  supjiosed  that  you  had  neglected  our 
interests  on  purpose ;  though,  as  soon  as  your  letter  reached  ns,  we  saw 
clearly  that  this  was  not  the  case,  for  which  we  are,  indeed,  very  glad. 

"In  this,  your  kind  letter,  you  admonish  us  firstly  to  persevere 
in  holy  prayers,  godly  exercises,  and  a  holy  life,  which  all  of  us  will 
endeavour  to  do,  with  the  help  of  God  ;  and  to  that  end  we  meet 
continually,  though  in  a  deficient  manner.  However,  we  do  not 
minister  the  sacraments  nor  the  church  discipline,  as  we  have  pro- 
mised you  in  our  last  letter. 

"  You  are  so  very  sorry,  as  you  say,  that  we,  who  are  of  so  small 
a  numV)er,  differ  among  each  other  in  such  a  considerable  manner, 
while  you  fear  that,  if  we  increase,  we  shall  occasion  troubles,  dis- 
cord, and  schism,  &c.  :  on  which  we  answer,  that  it  grieves  us  that 
you  are  so  very  sorry,  while  we  inform  you  at  the  same  time  that, 
though  we  at  present,  or  afterwards  when  we  increase,  differ  in  some 
opinions  of  our  understanding,  we,  however,  continually  persevere  in 
holiness  of  life,  and  can  bear  with  each  other  in  peace  ;  which  Chris- 
tian tolerance,  we  think,  to  be  a  preservative  of  the  church  to  pre- 


38  EAKLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

vent  the  above-mentioned  jeopardy,  as  minute  examinations,  limita- 
tions, censures,  and  condemnations  only  for  opinions,  occasion 
esi)ecially  the  inconveniences  you  spoke  about.  We  believe  that 
the  Holy  Scriptures  can  prove  this. 

"In  your  letter  you  have  mentioned  three  different  matters  which 
you  consider  as  encumbrances  which  prevent  our  being  received 
among  your  brotherhood,  namely,  the  deity  of  Christ,  the  oath,  and 
the  war.  We  are  of  opinion  that  all  troubles  about  these  three 
matters  may  be  taken  away  by  Christian  love,  and  the  above-men- 
tioned tolerance,  if  a  part  of  the  truth  of  God  is  not  contempted. 

"  As  regards  the  deity  of  Christ,  and  to  bear  with  each  other  •with 
respect  to  this  doctrine — we  are  with  you  of  the  same  opinion,  unless 
you  would  compel  us  to  believe  three  different  persons  in  the  Deity, 
which  inanner  of  speaking  is  not  found  in  the  Scriptures.  But  we 
surely  believe  that  there  is  but  one  single  God  rev^ealed  under  three 
distinguished  names — Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost ;  and,  in  order  to 
answer  directly,  as  you  desire  it,  we  do  not  say  only  that  there  is 
nobody  among  us  who  denies  that  Christ  is  God,  but  we  undoubtedly 
believe  that  Christ,  according  to  the  Spirit,  is  from  the  same  being 
and  substance  with  the  Father,  and  that.  Go(i  is  in  the  Father,  with 
the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  you  affirm  it. 

"As  regards  the  oath  and  the  war,  you  direct  us  to  your  first 
propositions,  [the  unsound  opinions?]  which  are  maintained  by  our 
adversaries  [?]  as  we  told  you  before.  We  have,  however,  most 
diligently  examined  your  arguments  about  the  two  questions,  as  they 
are  collected  by  you  chiefly  out  of  the  words  of  Christ  on  the  moun- 
tain, which  are  added  to  the  other  ones  in  your  memoir,  and,  after 
that  examination,  there  were  three  who  were  then  of  the  same 
opinion  with  you ;  but  the  others  were  not,  as  they  think  that, 
according  to  the  words  of  Christ,  it  ought  to  be  as  follows : — 

"  The  oath  was  not  a  manner  of  use  assumed  by  men,  but  used  by 
God  himself,  and  was  often  exerted  by  the  Jews,  and  those  who 
were  converted  to  their  religion  in  good  and  righteous  matters ;  as 
they  before  the  Gentiles  (Jos.  ix.  19,  xx.  2  ;  2  Sam.  xxi.  2) ;  and  the 
Gentiles  before  the  Jews  (Gen.  xxvi.  28,  xxix.  34).  When  we  con- 
sider all  this,  we  are  obliged  to  think  that  the  oath  has  not  only  been 
a  mere  figure  to  be  annihilated  by  Christ,  as,  if  this  were  the  case, 
the  holy  people  would  not  have  used  it. 

"We  do  not  explain  the  words  of  Christ,  Swear  not  at  all,  that 
Christ  has  prohibited  the  oath  over  good  and  righteous  matters,  but 
misusing  the  oath,  as  the  Jews  did  in  their  iisual  conversations,  and 
which  is  also  prohibited  by  him  to  the  Christians.  We  only  think 
that  the  meaning  of  the  words  Sivear  not  at  all  is,  Swear  not  by 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  39 

heaven,  nor  earth,  nor  Jerusalem,  nor  by  the  temple,  and  similar 
creatures.  Again,  Swear  not  at  all,  in  yonr  ordinary  conversations, 
but  your  word  be  yea,  yea ;  nay,  nay,  in  all  your  usual  seasons.  Do 
j'ou  think  that  all  true  words  in  your  ordinary  conversations  must  be 
affirmed  with  an  oath?  or  that  the  Lord  demands  to  please  him  in 
such  a  manner?  or  that  he  has  ordered  an  oath  over  important 
matters  ?  To  such  questions  we  are  moved,  and  the  more  for  this, 
that  St.  Paid  has  written  in  the  same  manner — (2  Cor.  i.  2.3 ;  Gal.  i. 
20;  and  also  the  Angel,  Apoc.  x.  G;  and  to  the  Hebrews  vi.) — so 
that  wc  have  examples  as  well  of  God  as  of  men  that  an  oath  was 
sworn  in  righteous,  good,  and  important  matters.  We  think  also 
that  much  good  is  produced  in  that  way,  as  well  for  the  body  as  for 
the  soul  of  men ;  so  that  we  truly  think  that  it  was  really  the  inten- 
tion of  Christ  not  only  to  take  away  the  corrupted  misuse  of  swear- 
ing, but  also  to  affirm  the  right  manner  of  swearing  an  oath,  as  he 
does  also  in  the  same  chapter  with  other  commandments  ;  for  he  has 
not  come  to  annihilate  even  the  least  commandment,  but  to  fultil  it. 
But,  in  order  to  inform  you  clearly  what  is  the  opinion  of  some 
among  us,  we  mention  that  we  have  some  oaths  in  our  eonntry  which 
we  do  not  venture  to  consider  as  those  of  the  church,  or  an  oath  in 
matters  of  offices,  or  by  authority,  as  their  tendency  is  to  change  the 
belief  and  to  hurt  our  neighbours. 

"As  regards  war,  some  of  us  are  of  the  same  oi:)inion  with  you, 
on  account  of  these  words  of  Christ  (Matt.  v. ),  /  say  unto  you,  that 
ye  resist  )wt  the  evil;  which  words,  you  yourselves,  as  we  remember, 
use  to  prove  your  opinion.  Now,  then,  these  words  Besist  not  evil, 
which  are  spoken  negatively,  have  their  limits,  as  other  words  on 
other  places,  as,  for  instance.  Labour  not  (St.  John  vi.  27) ;  Ov:e  no 
man  anything  (Kom.  xiii.  8) ;  Lend  not,  hoping  from  this  again  {Dwich 
version]  (Luke  vi.  xxxv. ).  All  of  which  words  have  their  limitations, 
and  ought  to  be  considered  in  connexion  Math  each  other,  as  you 
yourselves  know  very  well.  Not  less  have  these  words.  Resist  not 
THE  evil  [Dutch  version],  a  special  meaning,  though  they  are  so 
general  by  themselves.  And  we  think  that  the  meaning  is  this :  Do 
not  resist  the  evil  in  a.  tvrong  or  bad  uxiy.  Math  such  faults  as  your 
enemies  do  about  you,  but  resist  the  evil  with  all  good  means  ; 
firstly,  as  it  can  be,  by  admonishing  (Lev.  xix.  17);  secondly,  by 
praying  (Matt.  v.  44)  ;  thirdly,  if  these  means  do  not  avail  veiy 
much,  and  if  the  Christians  can  apply  to  worldly  judges  who  can 
assist  them  in  righteoiis  matters ;  also  when  they  are  wronged  for 
conscience's  sake,  they  may  resist  the  evil  actions  which  they  have 
suflfered  by  this  means.  Thus  St.  Paul  has  availed  himself  of  the 
same  means  (Acts  xvi.  37),  where  the  servants  of  the  Emperor  are 


40 


EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 


ioxind  guilty,  and  (Acts  xxiii.  12-32)  where  St.  Paul,  defending  him- 
self against  the  Jews  who  intended  to  kill  him,  uses  worldly  power, 
in  which  defensive  measures,  warriors,  cavaliers,  and  weapons  were 
made  ready,  which  he  would  have  used  if  he  had  been  in  want  of 
them;  and  (according  to  my  ojiinion)  when  he  demands  protection 
FROM  others,  he  may  not  do  less  in  a  just  matter  for  others.  Other- 
wise how  could  the  commandment  of  Christ  be  fulfilled  when  he 
says,  '  Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even 
so  to  them'  (Matt.  vii.  12)?  and,  attain,  when  he  says,  '  "Wliosoever 
shall  say  to  his  brother,  Raca,  shall  be  in  danger  of  the  council' — if 
we  did  not  imderstand  by  this  that  Christ  confirms  the  authority 
which  punishes  an  evil  tongue?  And  to  these  words  (2  Cor.  x.  4), 
Fvr  the  lueajjorifi  of  our  warfare  are  not  carnal,  we  answer  that,  as 
we  must  use  spiritual  weapons  in  a  spiritual  war,  it  follows  simply 
that  it  is  allowed  to  Christians  to  use  worldly  weapons  in  a  worldly 
warfare  for  a  righteous  matter  ;  for  formerly  warriors  have  used  Ijoth 
(for  instance,  Heb.  xi.  32,  33,  34).  Indeed,  we  think  that  it  is  now 
not  less  allowed  to  Christians  to  use  worldly  weapons  or  arms  in  a 
just  war,  with  which  they  must  jirotect  themselves,  as  it  has  been 
before,  and  even  to  perform  all  other  exercises,  on  condition  only 
that  they  govern  their  warfare  by  justice,  faith,  sufferance,  fear, 
contentment,  and  all  other  virtues  (virtues  like  some  warriors  for- 
merly possessed),  and  that  they  keep  themselves  free  from  covetous- 
ness,  revenge,  anger,  pride,  and  ambition,  and  not  enter  in  an  unjust 
cause — which  sins  particularly  must  be  avoided  by  the  army  of  God. 
We  are  also  of  opinion  that,  if  the  enemies  who  carry  on  an  unjust 
war  are  killed  in  that  war,  their  blood  will  be  on  their  heads,  while 
the  defenders  are  innocent.  Now,  then,  this  is  our  opinion  about  the 
war,  and  we  think  to  be  able  to  prove  it  with  many  witnesses.  But 
if  we  err,  we  pray  you  once  again  to  help  us  as  nauch  as  it  is  possible 
in  all  love.  And  though  our  o}iinion  is,  as  we  have  explained  to  you, 
we,  nevertheless,  intend  to  alistain  from  all  warfare  and  the  use  of 
arms,  by  which  our  friends,  or  the  church  of  God,  or  any  member  of 
it  whatever,  might  be  offended.  However,  we  cannot  change  our 
opinions,  which  are  the  voice  of  our  conscience.  Therefore,  if  you 
can  admit  us,  and  you  have  no  objection  against  that  Avhich  we  have 
said  here,  we  shall  be  very  glad ;  but  if  you  cannot  admit  us,  we  will 
wait  till  God  gives  us  in  our  hearts  what  may  please  him ;  and  we 
shall  expect  that  he  works  in  us  the  desire  to  bear  with  each  other, 
though  we  differ  in  our  oi^nions,  it  ma}''  be,  in  the  above-mentioned 
affairs,  or  in  othei's  which  do  not  tend  to  the  destruction  of  the  true 
Christendom. — Your  kind  and  sincere  friends,  eighteen  in  number, 
living  in  London. 

"  March  17,  1G25  (Old  Style  J." 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  41 

Beyond  tbis,  oxir  information  about  these  parties  does  not 
extend.  There  are  before  ns  two  other  documents,  in  relation 
to  these  matters,  wliich,  though  anticipating  a  year  or  two 
in  our  narrative,  maybe  as  well  introduced  here.  The  first  is 
from  the  church  at  Lincoln,  one  of  the  five  churclies  referred 
to  in  a  former  letter  : — 

"  I  acknowledge,  beloved  and  loving  friend,  that  T  have  received 
your  letter  (from  the  hands  of  John  Drew,  our  beloved  friend,) 
which  was  sent  to  us,  and  the  others  of  our  brethren  among  this 
nation ;  and  as  we  lind  in  it  an  evidence  of  your  good  opinion 
towai-ds  us  as  regards  our  Christian  condition,  we  may  not  neglect 
to  return  you  our  gratitude  for  it,  while  we  heartily  wish  that  you 
and  we  may  come  to  the  unity  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  to  those 
bonds  of  i)eace  which  are  in  the  truth.     Amen. 

"  We  inform  you,  however,  good  friend,  that  we  cannot  consider 
that  the  affair  which  you  impose  on  lis,  and  which  you  wish  to  be 
concluded  so  hastily,  is  of  so  little  importance  as  you  seem  to  con- 
sider it.  As  for  ilatt.  xviii. ,  according  to  which  you  wish  that  we 
should  not  i)uuish  every  difference  of  opinion  or  action — we  know 
that  it  is  evident  that,  in  everything  by  which  one  of  the  brethren  is 
offended  with  reason,  repentance  is  required ;  and  that,  when  this  is 
refused,  he  who  will  not  repent  must  be  considered  as  a  Gentile  and 
publican.  This  is  also  taught  by  our  Saviour,  St.  Matt,  v.— ('  There- 
fore, if  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar,  &c.')  And,  that  it  maj'^ 
not  be  of  too  little  importance  in  your  opuiion,  we  advise  you  to 
consider  attentively  the  words  of  our  Saviour  about  the  beginning  of 
the  18th  chapter,  where  he  says :  '  But  whoso  shall  offend  one  of 
these  little  ones  which  Ijelieve  in  me,  it  were  better  for  him  that  a 
millstone  were  hanged  about  his  neck,  and  that  he  were  drowned  in 
the  depth  of  the  sea.' 

"And  when  you  think  that  we  have  more  of  the  spirit  of  the 
disciples  of  Christ  than  that  of  our  Saviour,  ^ — if  you  meau  that 
spirit  when  they  wished  fire  from  heaven  to  consume  the  Samaritans 
— we  may  fully  say  that  your  opinion  is  very  wrong.  For  we  do  not 
venture  to  give  room  to  a  single  thought  of  corporal  op}iression  or 
sorrow  to  our  neighbours,  either  as  regards  religion  or  matters  of 
conscience.  Before  all  things,  we  strive  against  this  with  all  men. 
Nor  are  we  (as  we  hope,  at  least)  governed  by  a  spirit  of  ambition 
or  authority:  on  the  contrary,  we  receive  very  willingly  the  right 
opinions  of  our  Saviour.  But  when  you  will  explain  that  expression 
by  assuming  that  the  spirit  is  willing  but  the  flesh  weak,  we  must 


42  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

acknowledge  that  it  is  so  with  us,  though  we  dare  'to  hope  that  the 
Lord  will  fulfil  his  promise  in  accepting  our  goodwill  for  the  action, 
and  even  that  it  will  be  found  that  we  have  in  some  measure  the 
spirit  of  Christ;  otherwise,  we  are  none  of  his.      (Rom.  viii.  0.) 

"But  j'ou  say  that  Christ  Lore  with  unbelief,  offence,  ignorance, 
and  blind  zeal  in  his  disciples,  and  that  he  only  admonished  them, 
&c.  Indeed,  you  might  justly  rebuke  us  if  we  did  not  act  according 
to  that  rule.  But  if  we  punish,  we  do  so  with  those  who  are  worthy 
of  punishment,  or  have  given  offence,  in  order  that  they  may  con- 
vert themselves.  Or  do  you  think  that  Christ  could  have  borne 
with  his  disciples  if  they  had  resisted  his  rebuke  or  had  refused  his 
teaching  and  admonition  ?  Take  care  that  you  may  not  suffer  such  a 
thought  among  you.  It  may  be  true  that  he  went  not  farther  than 
admonishing  them ;  but  it  is  also  true  that  they  were  always  willing 
to  receive  his  admonition,  and  to  become  informed  and  reformed  by 
it.  Every  one  who  reads  may  take  heed  that  he  is  teaching  us  by 
many  opportunities  how  to  act  with  irregular  persons  and  those  who 
are  obstinate.  And,  then,  when  you  i">roceed  to  speak  about  the 
abuses  or  errors  in  the  church  of  Corinth,  and  the  other  churches 
built  by  the  apostles  (just  as  if  you  do  not  think  it  necessary  that 
one  must  repent  or  may  be  excluded),  we  pray  you  to  consider  how 
much  confusion  and  misery  would  arise  if  we  consented  in  this 
matter,  and  suffered  that  people  came  to  the  table  of  the  Lord 
intoxicated,  sleepy,  or  ungodly  in  other  respects,  that  they  were 
quarrelling  and  sowing  discord,  that  they  denied  the  resurrection, 
that  they  maintained  justification  by  the  law  without  Christ,  and 
thus  fell  out  of  mercy,  &c.  If  such  things  shoiild  be  suffered,  the 
church,  instead  of  being  a  congregation  of  holy  individuals,  would 
grow  a  company  of  wicked  and  ungodly  persons.  It  is  true  that  we 
do  not  read  of  any  person  who  was  excluded  from  the  church  of 
Corinth,  but  only  for  unchastity ;  nor  do  we  read  that  one  single  sin 
for  which  the  apostle  rebukes  the  church,  was  that  of  some  indi- 
vidual in  particular,  so  that  the  Avhole  communion  could  deal  with 
him  as  it  was  necessary ;  but  the  whole  church  was  so  generally 
infected  that  all  of  them  must  correct  themselves,  or  must  be  rebuked 
by  the  apostle;  therefore,  he  calls  his  third  admonition  his  third 
witness,  while  he  -said  that,  if  he  returned  to  them,  he  might  not 
spare  them :  which  cannot  signify  anything  else  than  that  he  should 
be  obliged  to  proceed  with  them  to  the  most  extreme  punishment, 
according  to  the  strength  the  Lord  had  given  him.  You  should 
observe  also  that  the  church  of  Ephesus  is  threatened  that  her 
candlestick  should  be  removed  out  of  its  place,  as  she  had  left  her 
first  love.     But  let  us  turn  to  the  church  of  Corinth.     The  apostle 


CHARLES    TUK    FIRST.  43 

says  that  if  one  calls  himself  a  brother  and  becomes  unchaste, 
covetous,  &c,  we  should  not  eat  with  him.  Now,  we  think  that  here 
is  meant  a  npiritual  eating,  and  not  a  usual  dinner,  for  that  would  be 
Pharisaical ;  and  so  you  may  see  that  there  are  still  other  sins  besides 
unchastity  for  which  one  may  be  excluded  :  even,  we  think,  all  sins 
for  which  the  church  might  be  slandered,  according  to  the  actions  of 
the  apostles  themselves  with  Hymeneus  and  Alexander.  Besides, 
the  apostle  desires  also  that  they  who  troubled  the  church  of  the 
(Jalatians  (Gal.  v.  10,  12)  with  false  doctrines  should  be  cut  oS", 
which,  as  wc  hope,  you  will  understand  with  us,  means  excommuni- 
cation, and  not  corporal  death.  And,  once  again,  how  can  they  be 
avoided  who  occasion  quarrels  and  discords  (Rom.  16,  17)  but  only  by 
excommunication  ?  And  how  can  we  separate  those  who  preach 
against  the  l)lesscd  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Init  only  by 
excommunication  ?  And  do  you  not  see  that  the  Lord  threatens  to 
fight  against  the  church  of  Pergamos  with  the  sword  of  his  mouth, 
because  she  suffered  among  her  those  that  hold  the  doctrine  of 
Balaam  ?  And  when  you  say  that  the  Lord  gave  to  Jesabel  a  time 
for  repentance,  we  hope  that  you  will  consider  that  among  us  the 
time  for  repentance  is  not  passed  if  some  are  excommunicated  or 
excluded  from  the  church.  It  is  true  that  all  things  must  be  done 
in  love  and  in  the  spirit  of  meekness  (and,  therefore,  if  we  must 
be  ])unished  for  forgetting  this,  it  be  far  from  us  that  we  should  not 
suffer  this  and  give  promises  of  correction) ;  but  it  is  also  necessary 
that  we  may  not  leave  rebuking  those  who  err,  for  suffering  their 
abuses  would  not  be  an  action  of  love,  but  of  hatred  (Levit.  xix, 
and  xvii.).  Besides,  a  kingdom  is  not  divided  in  itself  by  pimishing, 
chastising,  or  cutting  off  the  evil-doers ;  but  its  peace  and  rest  will 
rather  be  established  by  doing  so.  We  know,  beloved  brethren, 
that,  as  Christ  forgives  us,  we  should  do  so  one  the  other ;  Ijut  we 
must  consider  also  that  Christ  did  not  forgive  anybody  but  him  who 
repented  and  turned  towards  him  (Acts  iii.  19,  20) ;  and,  therefore, 
how  shall  we  venture  to  do  more  ?  Indeed,  we  desire  most  sincerely 
the  reconciliation  of  all :  but  reconciliation  can  only  be  established 
on  the  acknowledgment  of  guilt  and  the  promise  of  correction,  and 
cannot  be  united  with  stubborn  resistance  or  perseverance  in  sin. 
And  though  we  were  considered  as  hasty  and  severe  men,  we  know 
this,  that  though  not  one  of  us  is  ever  excommunicated,  we  shoidd 
certainly  receive  him  again  (suppose  we  were  obliged  to  exclude 
one  for  our  love  of  God  or  the  zeal  of  our  religion)  if  he  repented  and 
were  inclined  to  make  peace.  And  now,  to  come  to  a  conclusion,  we 
acknowledge,  with  you,  that  it  is  a  deplorable  and  pitiful  thing  to  see 
that  the  spiritual  stones  of  the  Lord's  building  are  thrown  to  the 


44  EAKLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

ground  and  scattered;  but,  alas!  how  shall  we  always  be  able  to 
prevent  this?  By  suffering  them  in  their  wickedness?  But  this 
would  be  to  make  the  Lord's  house  a  den  of  thieves,  and  most 
awfully  to  bring  imder  his  eyes,  and  in  his  holy  temple,  uncircumcised 
persons.  So  there  would  be  neither  a  place  nor  a  people  where  or  by 
whom  could  be  offered  him  spiritual  offerings  agreeable  unto  him  by 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  so  we  thank  you  for  your  love,  and  we 
pray  the  Lord  to  reward  you  by  keeping  you  in  this  true  love,  and  by 
increasing  this  and  your  zeal  in  the  glorious  Gospel  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  We  ])ray  him,  that  you,  by  him,  may  enjoy 
the  abundant  gifts  of  his  Holy  Spirit  to  your  sanctification  in  this, 
and  the  glorification  in  the  life  to  come.  This  may  the  Giver  of  all 
good  gifts  give  both  you  and  us,  and  all  who  love  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  Amen.- — With  our  very  kind  greetings  to  you  and  all  friends 
of  the  holy  trutli,  we  recommend  you  to  the  protection  and  guidance 
of  the  Lord,  whose  peace  and  blessings  be  with  you  eternally  (we 
pray).  Amen. — Your  most  sincere  friends  in  the  Lord,  the  brethren 
who  live  there. 

"Lincolne,  September  5,  1630." 

"Copied  May  31,  and  June  ^j/'iwio,  1631,  by  your  servant  and 

^^I'^^^Cl''  "SWITHUNE   GrYNDALL." 

The  last  of  the  letters  is  from  Tiverton.  This  letter  is 
rather  obscure  here  and  there,  though  it  is  literally  trans- 
lated : — 

"  Your  kind  acceptance  of  my  letter,  and  the  care  you  took  to  an- 
swer it,  afford  me  now  the  opportunity  to  express  my  ga-atitude  for 
the  kindness  you  showed  me  and  all  others  here,  who  are  the  friends 
of  the  truth  which  is  to  be  found  in  Christ  Jesiis  our  Lord.  All  of 
them  can  bear  witness  that  I  have  received  your  kind  letter,  dated 
Sept.  13,  1630,  in  which  you  desire,  as  you  say,  -with  a  sincere  heart, 
the  zeal  of  God  and  his  truth,  which  we  also  earnestly  desire  with  a 
most  sincere  heart,  and  for  which  we  strive  continually.  However, 
we  must  know  this,  that  our  zeal  must  be  founded  on  knowledge, 
and  kindled  by  the  lire  of  Heaven,  otherwise  it  would  be  more  mad- 
ness than  zeal.  '  This  we  see  in  the  sad  example  of  the  Jewish  people, 
who  possessed,  according  to  the  words  of  the  apostle,  the  zeal  of 
iioA,  but  not  founded  on  knowledge,  and  so  they  were  ignorantly 
raging  in  such  a  manner  that  they  crucified  the  Messiah  himself, 
whom  they  expected  a  long  time  and  very  ardently,  as  they  hoped 
he  woidd  deliver  Israel  (Luke  xxiv.  21).  And  so  we  acknowledge 
with  you  that  we  can  often  err  by  ignorance,  that  we  can  be  erring 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  45 

in  the  fulfiliiieut  of  all  we  ought  to  do  accordiug  to  our  knowledge, 
often  perforniing  the  things  more  hastily  or  more  slowly  than  they 
ought  to  be  performed.  Nevertheless,  the  Lord  shows  us  in  his 
Word  his  desire  in  a  clear  way  about  the  tilings  which  we  ought  to 
do  and  can  do,  otherwise  the  guilt  be  ours.  With  all  this,  we  hojie  that 
God  will  have  mercy  upon  us,  and  will  not  impute  to  us  our  weak- 
ness and  imperfectness,  nor  what  we  misdo  in  consequence  of  this ; 
while  we  are  striving  every  day  to  coiTect  ourselves,  and  to  grow 
from  perfection  to  perfection ;  though  we  must  acknowledge  also  that, 
if  we  try  to  do  only  our  own  desire,  and  if  we  are  contented  with  the 
ordinary  customs  and  practices  of  others  whom  we  love,  &c.,  we  may 
not  expect  any  other  revelation  of  God's  will  to  lis,  nor  any  mercy 
out  of  his  hands. 

"  Let  us  now  go  to  the  answer  on  my  letter  in  which  you  say,  that 
the  cause  for  which  you  suffer  and  bear  with  a  brother  also  after  re- 
buke, who  has  heard  a  sermon  in  England,  is  that  you  do  not  dare  to 
deliver  liim  to  the  Satan,  if  he  has  an  understanding  to  hear,  and  is 
able  to  be  edified  by  hearing  one  who  hohls  other  opinions  ;  and 
secondly,  that  the  action  of  hearing  itself  is  not  bad  or  carnal,  but 
that  the  doctrine  or  person  may  be  disputable,  &c.— in  which  words 
of  j'onrs  there  are  two  reasons.  The  first  is,  as  you  say,  that  he  has 
a  judgment  that  he  may  do  such,  and  if  doing  such,  may  be  edified 
by  a  person  of  other  opinions ;  the  second,  you  say,  is  that  the  mere 
action  of  hearing  is  not  simply  [?]  evil  or  carnal.  To  the  first  reason 
we  say  that,  if  you  suppose  that  a  usual  understanding  of  a  brother, 
even  if  he  were  the  most  holy  one  that  ever  lived  on  earth,  can  ])e  a 
good  rule  for  his  own  or  others'  direction  in  the  service  of  God  with- 
out any  assurance  out  of  God's  Woixl,  we  surely  think  that  it  is  un- 
tenable; for  that  would  be  to  make  a  private  judgment  of  a  mortal 
man  of  the  same  value  with  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  assertion 
would  not  be  better  than  blasi)hemy.  What  wickedness,  soever,  is 
there,  which  would  not  be  suffered  and  excused,  or  which  would  not 
assume  an  appearance  of  good,  if  a  man's  private  judgment  were  a 
rule?  just  as  you  say  about  hearing  a  false  prophet  (for  so  you  judge 
of  them,  or  wherefore  do  you  call  him  an  adversary?)  to  be  edified. 
We  have  here  some  among  us  who  think  it  allowed  to  hear  a  false 
prophet,  but  not  in  order  to  give  God  honour  or  praise,  or  to  use  that 
opportunity  to  do  good  to  man.  To  go  on  such  or  similar  purpose  is 
wickedness,  as  it  is  emphatically  said.  But  you  and  yours  think  it 
to  be  allowable  to  hear  for  edification.  Can  a  fountain  (says  St. 
James)  give  drinkable  water  and  bitter  'at  the  same  time'  ?  Just  so 
is  it  impossible  (we  may  freely  say  this)  that  a  false  2)rophet  can 
edify  or  teach  Christ's  church,  or  any  member  of  it.     For,  as  the 


46  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

tnie  prophets  of  Christ  ecTify  and  augment  the  church  of  Christ,  so 
the  false  proi)hets  do  the  kingdom  of  the  Antichrist.  These  two 
works  cannot  be  united  in  the  service  of  the  Lord,  nor  tend  to  the 
completement  of  the  church  of  Christ— no  more,  and  even  less,  than 
the  imion  of  the  Gentiles  and  the  Jews  to  the  accomiilishment  of  the 
material  temple.  (Ezra  iv. )  Only  the  people  of  God,  the  Jews,  must 
build  the  material  temple,  and  so  the  Lord's  prox)hets,  or  people  only 
who  are  sent  by  him,  have  the  calling  from  their  Master  Christ  to 
build  his  spiritual  temple.  Neither  Simon  Magiis,  nor  any  other 
false  prophet  whosoever,  has  a  part  in  this  work.  We  are  ad- 
monished by  St.  Jude  to  build  up  ourselves  in  the  holy  faith;  and, 
therefore,  if  we  went  to  our  adversaries  in  order  to  ask  their  assist- 
ance, we  might  incur  the  punishment  of  the  Lord,  as  he  says  to  the 
Jews  that  they  had  forsaken  the  foimtains  of  the  living  waters,  and 
had  made  them  wells  which  cannot  keep  water.  The  whole  Scripture 
is  against  such  Balaamitic  and  wavering  transactions.  If  the  religion 
■which  yoii  confess  to  be  true,  is  the  true  one,  that  of  your  adversaries 
must  be  false. 

"Now  we  pass  to  the  second  part  of  your  reasoning,  namely,  that 
the  action  of  hearing  is  not  directly  evil  or  carnal,  &c.  To  this  we 
answer,  that,  if  you  mean  the  action  of  hearing  a  false  prophet  or 
prophets,  preaching  or  praying  in  consequence  of  their  spiritual  voca- 
tion, as  it  seems  that  you  do — and  we  are  of  opinion  that  you  will  not 
deny  that  one  can  sin  by  hearing,  as  well  as  by  seeing,  speaking, 
&c. — we  think  that  all  such  hearing  is  evil  and  carnal  bej^ond  any 
doubt,  and  not  a  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  nor  affirmed  by  his 
Word,  as  these  places  of  the  Scripture  may  prove : — Jer.  xxiii.  16, 
where  the  Lord  advises  his  people,  saying,  'Hear  not  the  words  of 
the  prophets  who  teach  and  prophesy  you  vanity;'  Hos.  iv.  15, 
'Come  not  to  Gilgal  uor  go  to  Beth-haven;' — in  the  former  place  they 
are  forbidden  to  hear  with  the  corpoi'al  ear,  and  in  the  latter  even  to 
come  to  the  place  of  the  false  religion  in  order  to  hear  or  to  see  it. 
And  the  voice  from  the  Heavens  said  (Matt.  xvii.  5),  '  This  is  my 
beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased :  hear  ye  him ;'  and  John  x., 
'  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  but  a  stranger  they  will  not  follow ;'  and 
again,  Jesus  said  of  those  whom  he  sent  out:  'He  who  hears  you, 
hears  me ;'  but  he  never  says  this  of  his  adversaries.  Therefore,  we 
conclude  that,  if  it  is  forbidden  the  people  of  God  to  hear  the  ser- 
mons, prayers,  or  commandments  of  the  false  prophets,  as  it  is  proved 
by  all  the  above-cited  words  of  the  Scriptures, — then,  we  say,  is  it  by 
no  means  allowed  to  the  sheep  of  Christ  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  the 
foreigners,  especially  at  the  time  and  place  appointed  to  the  meetings 
of  those  -who  are  meeting  in  the  name  of  Christ.     But  you  say  that 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  47 

one  does  it  out  of  the  faith  iu  himself  [?].  Oh,  do  not  shut  your  eyes, 
we  pray  you.  What  faith  can  he  have,  wlien  there  is  no  word  in  the 
whole  of  the  Book  of  the  Lord  in  favour  of  such  an  exercise  ?  The 
Holy  Ghost  says  that  faith  comes  from  hearing,  and  hearing  from  the 
word  of  the  Lord ;  and  he  has  no  word  of  God  for  this  his  faith,  and, 
therefore,  he  cannot  have  a  belief  in  it.  And  all  what  is  not  from 
the  faith  is  sin,  especially  when  one  perseveres  iu  the  exercise  of  evil 
— for  you  yourselves  think  it,  otherwise  why  do  you  advise  him  not 
to  attend  it?  Will  you  admonish  one  for  something  else  but  sin? 
and,  therefore,  when  this  hearing  has  taken  place  once,  it  becomes  a 
sin,  as  we  have  jirovcd.  And  if  he  does  not  rei)ent  when  he  is  ad- 
monished the  lirst,  second,  and  third  time,  and  according  to  the 
established  rule  of  our  Master  Christ  Jesus,  the  only  legislator  of  his 
church,  let  him  be  to  you  as  the  Gentile  and  publican,  &c. ;  but  if  he 
do  repent,  forgive  him,  not  otherwise.  This  is  the  law  of  Christ,  and 
those  who  will  not  obey  it  are  not  worthy  the  name  of  Christians ; 
for  nobody  is  a  Christian  but  only  those  who  are  obedient  and  sub- 
jected to  his  laws  and  commandments,  just  as  nobody  can  be  called 
the  king's  subject  who  will  not  obey  his  just  laws— so  in  Christ's 
spiritual  kingdom,  as  all  his  laws  are  decidedly  just,  he  who  does  not 
obey  him  cannot  be  his ;  and  if  he  be  not  his,  he  cannot  possess  the 
spirit  of  Christ ;  and  if  he  have  not  the  spirit  of  Christ,  it  is  beyond 
all  question  that  he  or  she  and  all  their  doctrines  are  evil  and  carnal 
— both  the  projjhets  and  the  people  who  listen  to  them,  and  whoso- 
ever they  may  be  who  belong  to  the  adversaries  of  the  Christian 
faith.  But  you  think  it  lit  to  bear  with  him  in  meekness,  &c.,  and 
even  to  pray  the  Lord  for  his  enlightening,  &c. ,  as  it  is  said  in  the 
letter  of  your  German  brethren.  We  agree  with  you,  that  we  should 
deal  with  such  an  one  as  with  a  brother,  and  not  esteem  him  as  an 
enemy  during  the  whole  of  the  time  that  he  is  admonished ;  but  it  is 
just  this  which  we  would  jiray  you  to  point  out  in  your  letters,  how 
long  we  must  bear  with  a  brother  in  his  sin ;  whether  it  must  be  al- 
ways, or  only  during  the  time  that  he  is  kindly  admonished  the  first, 
second,  and  third  time,  or  during  a  period  Avhich  God  gives  men  for 
repenting,  as  he  did  Jezebel?  In  this  case,  we  must  consider  that 
God  gives  sometimes  men  a  very  long  time  for  repenting, — some- 
times sixty  or  eighty  years,  and  even  the  whole  time  of  theii-  life; 
while  he  has  limited  his  church  with  three  admonitions,  and  if  he 
does  not  repent,  then  he  must  be  as  the  Gentile  and  publican.  Now 
it  is  true  that  he,  after  that  moment,  is  not  yet  deprived  of  all  means 
of  repentance,  but  this  is  the  last  remedy  which  is  in  the  power  of 
the  church  to  use  with  him  and  to  bring  him  to  repentance,  when  all 
admonition  does  not  avail;  so  that  you  may  see  that  Christ  has 


48  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

pointed  out  a  time  to  bis  church  which  that  chiu-ch  may  never  pass. 
I  would  pray  you,  at  the  same  time,  to  show  us  where  the  apostles 
have  suffered  (aud  very  long,  as  you  say)  great  sins.  I  cannot 
remember  to  have  ever  read  that  the  ai)ostles,  or  any  one  of  the  first 
church,  have  suffered  a  brother  above  the  time  appointed  by  our 
Saviour,  as  it  is  said  before.  And  ^^'hen  you  say  in  your  letter,  that 
the  words  of  the  Scripture  which  I  cited  (those  to  the  church  of 
Ephesus,  Apoc.  ii.  2)  do  not  serve  me,  then  I  must  say  again  that 
they  do  serve  me  without  doubt ;  for  how  can  you  restrain  the  signi- 
fication only  to  evil  teachers  [ministers]  when  the  words  are  general : 
— 'And  thou  canst  not  bear  them  which  are  evil;  and  thou  hast 
tried  them  which  say  they  are  apostles,  and  are  not,  and  hast  found 
them  liars ;'  which  last  words  you  take  and  explain  as  the  evil  for- 
merly mentioned,  though  they  are  taken  together  [the  evil  ?],  and  de- 
nominated with  a  word  which  exi)resses  a  general  quality,  so  that  all 
evils  are  meant  in  general,  and  then  pointed  out  with  a  name: — 
'Them  which  say  they  are  apostles,  and  are  not,'  &c.  Now  then,  to 
follow  the  rule  of  God's  Word  is  the  best  and  safest  way  to  walk  to 
the  reformation  both  of  little  and  great  sins;  if  this  is  our  purpose, 
we  shall,  undoubtedly,  not  act  in  the  wrong  way.  And  though  we 
jnight  take  other  ways  in  human  government,  yet  government  which 
is  human  may  not  take  place  in  Christ's  church.  If  we  are  desirous 
to  seek  for  reformation,  then  we  must  do  it  according  to  his  Word; 
and  then,  also,  we  may  be  sure  that,  in  reforming  little  sins,  we  may 
prevent  the  greater  ones,  and,  at  the  same  time,  build  up  the  church 
of  Christ  in  love.  And  how  shall  we  show  more  love  to  our  brother 
but  bj'  drawing  him  out  of  his  sin,  and  especially  to  do  this  by  the 
means  which  Christ  himself  has  proposed  and  ordered?  If  a  worldly 
friend  had  some  disease,  so  that  one  of  his  members  must  be  cut  off, 
imless  all  his  body  linger  away,  would  it  not  be  a  much  greater  love 
showed  him  to  cut  off  the  whole  raeml)er,  than  to  cause,  by  too  great 
tenderness,  that  all  his  body  is  left  in  jeopardy?  And  of  the  same 
nature  is  sin  if  it  is  left,  and  if  we  suffer  it  in  the  church ;  it  will  go 
through  all  the  dough,  while  it  draws  over  the  whole  of  the  church 
the  anger  of  God,  as  you  may  see  in  the  church  of  Corinth,  because  they 
suffered  the  unchaste  among  them,  more  than  fitted  them  (1  Cor.  v. ) ; 
and,  as  it  seems,  they  exercised  the  same  doctrine  of  tolerance  as  you 
do,  for  which  they  were  sharply  rebuked  by  the  apostle. 

"As  regards  the  fusion  or  union,  you  say  that  the  fault  is  at  our 
side,  because  some  of  us  keep  and  use  the  material  sword,  which,  as 
you  say,  neither  Christ  nor  the  apostles  ever  did, — an  assertion  of 
which  we  do  not  imderstand  how  you  contrive  it,  as  the  Scriptures 
prove  that  even  among  the  disciples  of  Christ  who  always  accom- 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  49 

panied  him,  swords  were  used.  This  is  evident  from  the  fact,  that 
our  Saviour,  a  short  time  before  his  suffering  or  ai)prehensiou  iu  the 
garden,  gave  them  direction  and  taught  them  their  duty,  saying: — 
'When  I  sent  you  without  purse  and  scrip  and  shoes,  lacked  ye 
anything?  ....  And  he  that  has  no  sword,  let  him  sell  his 
garment  and  buy  one.  And  they  said,  Lord,  behold  here  are  two 
swords. '  And  Peter  had  a  sword,  which  he  misused  as  he  cut  off  the 
ear  of  Malchus  ;  but  this  is  a  fact,  before  he  misused  it,  he  was  never 
rebuked  for  having  it.  So  it  is  beyond  all  doubt  that  he  used  it 
formerly  in  some  lawful  manner,  which  he  may  have  done  also  after- 
wards, and  should  have  done  at  that  moment ;  for  how  was  it  possible 
that  they  otherwise  could  be  ordered  to  have  one,  and  even  that  they 
must  sell  their  garments  and  buy  swords?  So  that  we  conclude  that 
they  might  use  it  iu  some  cases  and  for  some  purposes.  And  when 
the  soldiers  came  to  .John  the  Baptist,  they  asked  him  what  they 
must  do,  and  he  answered  them,  that  they  shoidd  not  trouble  any- 
body :  so  that  he  taught  them  how  to  act  as  Christians,  and  never- 
theless to  keep  their  office  as  soldiers.  If  you  still  would  say  that 
neither  Christ  nor  the  apostles  ever  used  the  material  sword,  then  we 
pray  you  to  explain  in  your  next  letter  what,  according  to  your  judg- 
ment, they  did  with  the  swords  above-mentioned.  If  they  by  no 
means  might  use  them,  we  acknowledge  with  you  that,  according  to 
the  words  of  the  Scriptures  cited  by  you,  and  many  other  places 
mentioned  in  your  letter,  and  which  prove  your  assertion — the 
material  sword  ought  not  to  be  found  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 
Just  so  neither  purse,  scrip,  nor  shoes,  &c.,  nor  many  other  things  of 
the  same  nature — though  we,  as  we  are  flesh  or  men  of  this  world, 
may  lawfully  use  them  for  the  maintenance  of  our  natural  life,  which 
we  are  obliged  to  keep  and  to  preserve  ;  just  as  even  our  Saviom-  did 
when  he  parted  from  this  world.  He  says,  if  one  has  a  purse,  let  him 
take  it,  &c. — among  which  things  the  material  sword  was  found  also. 
However,  we  see  that  they  might  not  use  it  in  the  protection  of  their 
Christian  profession,  or  that  of  their  Master  and  Lord  Christ,  as  he 
said,  when  he  punished  Peter,  'Put  your  sword  in  the  sheath,'  &c. ;  and 
so  we  do  not  think  it  is  allowed  to  use  it  in  the  defence  of  our  own 
life,  as  we  are  confessors  of  the  Gospel  for  which  we  are  suffering 
and  ought  to  suffer  persecution,  nor  to  obtain  any  worldly  crown  or 
worldly  dignity  which  we  long  for.  But,  according  to  our  duty  to 
the  king  aud  to  the  country  in  which  we  live,  and  in  all  civd  things 
which  are  lawful;  and,  if  we  are  worldly  subjects  in  a  kingdom  of 
this  world,  in  the  defence  of  our  king,  his  dignity  and  empire,  we 
use  the  material  sword.  It  is  our  conviction  that  it  is  allowed  to  use 
it  in  such  a  manner.     Nevertheless,  we  say  also  and  we  judge  that, 


50  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

if  there  vrere  never  an  occasion  to  use  the  sword,  it  were  much  better. 
We  also  do  not  condemn  you  or  any  other  person  who  refuses  to  use 
it  any  way ;  but  we  are  sure,  as  we  beheve,  that,  if  we  use  it  in 
some  occasions,  we  do  not  sin  at  all.  Yoii,  however,  are  now  of 
opinion  that  we  are  unworthy  of  some  union  or  community  in  Christ's 
church,  on  account  of  this  our  use  and  opinion,  though  you  see 
clearly  that  we  can  prove  it  with  the  Word  of  God.  Nor  will  you 
allow  us  to  have  any  community  with  you,  unless  we  forsake  all 
offices  of  government  or  authority  and  the  use  of  the  material  sword. 
The  office  of  authority  is,  as  the  Holy  Ghost  teaches  us,  a  good  ordi- 
nation of  God ;  and  should  we,  or  any  other  person  who  wishes  to  be- 
come a  member  of  the  church  of  Christ,  forsake  then  what  is  good, 
or  otherwise  deny  him?  That  be  far  from  us.  Only  sia  can  make 
one  unfit  to  become  a  Christian.  And  for  every  sin,  how  little  it  may 
be,  one  must  repent ;  for  if  it  be  sin,  it  is  a  transgression  of  the  law, 
and  every  transgression  of  it  will  receive  its  just  rewai'd  if  no  repent- 
ance follows,  namely,  the  anger  of  God.  But  to  hoar  a  false  pro- 
phet, if  it  does  not  offend  the  brethren,  or  to  avoid  persecution,  &c. — 
which,  however,  is  public  evil,  as  we  have  already  pointed  out, — you 
do  not  think  this  of  sufficient  importance  to  excommunicate  one, 
though  he  does  not  repent  for  having  done  this.  You  think  it  better 
to  bear  with  such  (though  they  are  evil),  and  thus  to  bear  with  those 
that  are  evil,  for  which  fact  we  think  that  you  are  guilty,  and  that  the 
cause  comes  from  your  side  that  there  be  no  unity  between  us.  If  we 
had  known  that  you  had  such  opinions  when  we  asked  for  union  with 
you,  we  should  first  have  worked  at  your  reformation.  Therefore, 
we  pray  you  to  consider  all  what  is  written  here,  and  also  what  is 
written  by  our  friends  and  beloved  brethren  of  Lincolu,  as  an  answer 
on  your  letter,  and  afterwards  to  send  us  your  understanding  or 
opinion  about  these  matters,  that  we — just  as  we  try  and  contend  for 
one  thing,  namely,  the  sincerity  in  the  profession  of  the  Gospel — may 
be  one  and  of  the  same  mind  as  those  who  are  from  the  family  of 
faith,  founded  and  established  on  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and 
prophets,  and  of  which  Jesus  Christ  is  the  chief  corner-stone,  and 
that  we  so  may  grow  up  to  life  everlasting.  As  regards  the  oath, 
the  matter  stood  as  follows,  if  I  recollect,  when  we  were  with  you  last 
time,  namely,  that  there  was  no  difference  in  our  practice,  though  we 
called  an  oath  what  you  did  not  call  so ;  for  you  also  will  give  wit- 
ness of  a  thing  before  the  authority  by  uttering  the  great  name  of 
God,  and  this  we  esteem  allowed  if  we  are  called  for  it,  but  not  other- 
wise. We  offer  you  our  kind  and  sincere  greeting,  also  your  wife  and 
the  other  beloved  friends  living  with  you,  namely,  Alexander 
Hodgkin,  John  Drew,  with  their  wives,  and  all  others — not  forgetting 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  51 

the  four  elders,  whom  you  should  inform,  as  we  pray  you,  the  con- 
tents of  this  letter,   and  that  of  the  other  written  hy  our  beloved 
friends  at  Lincoln.     The  Lord  lead  you  always  in  the  truth.    Amen. 
"Written  from  Tivei-ton. 

"  Your  sincere  and  faithful  friends  in  the  Lord, 

"James  Joppe,  and  Isabel,  his  Wife." 

"  Translatcil  from  the  English  language,  June  5,  1031. 

"Your  brother,  Swithune  Gryndall." 

The  value  of  these  documents  needs  no  comment.  They 
give  us  interesting  -glimpses  of  the  theological  dogmas  and 
teachings  of  the  Netherland  Baptists  and  their  brethren  in 
Enghmd.  Many  of  their  opinions  are  now  obsolete;  still 
tlieir  anxiety  to  know  the  truth,  their  forbearance,  their  zeal, 
and  their  sufferings,  will  clothe  their  memory  with  undying 
interest.  Nor  is  this  all:  from  these  documents,  Crosby's 
statement  that,  up  to  the  formation  of  the  first  Pai-ticular 
Baptist  church,  our  brethren  were  mingled  with  other  Chris- 
tian societies,  may  be  estimated  at  its  true  value.  In  one 
sense  it  may  be  true,  but  in  the  sense  in  which  he  uses  it,  it 
is  a  mistake.  That  many  Baptists  were  mingled  with  other 
Chx'istian  organizations  is  more  than  probable,  but  their 
existence  as  separate  churches  is  now  beyond  all  doubt. 
Other  evidences  of  this  fact  will  presently  be  laid  before  our 
readers. 

Before  dismissing  this  matter,  another  subject  may  claim 
our  attention; — the  mode  of  baptism  practised  by  these 
sufferers  for  the  truth.  We  have  to  deal  with  it  in  the  spirit 
of  history,  not  of  controversy.  Only  as  an  historic  fact  do  we 
touch  it.  Again  and  again  it  has  been  asserted  that  at  this 
period  immersion  was  not  the  mode  adopted  by  these  heroic 
confessors.  The  question  is  only  of  moment  in  the  light  of 
hijstory.  Beyond  this  its  intei-est  and  value  do  not  go. 
Truth  is  more  important  to  us  than  theory.  In  this  spirit 
we  shall    enter  on   the  inquiry. 

In  a  letter  of  G.  "W.  Altute,  a  Genevan  author,  on  the 
religious  state  of  Great  Britain,  he  says,  "  Till  the  beginning 


52  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

of  tlie  17th  century,  the  Baptists  in  England  only  I'ejected  the 
baptism  of  infants,  and  they  insisted  not  on  immersion ;  but 
immersion  was  inti'oduced  among  them  by  I.  Smith.  From 
that  time  immersion  is  practised  and  considered  necessary."* 
The  editor  of  Robinson's  Works  has  expressed  the  same 
opinion.  "Nothing,"  says  he,  referring  to  Smith  and  Helwys, 
"  appears  in  these  controversial  writings  to  warrant  the  sup- 
position that  they  regarded  immersion  as  the  proper  and 
only  mode  of  administering  the  ordinance,"  &c.t  In  this 
opinion,  Dr.  Miiller  fully  agrees.  But  was  it  sol  "We 
cannot  pronounce  positively,  but  are  bound  to  confess  that 
the  probabilities  are  greatly  in  its  favour.  The  harmony  of 
opinion,  and  the  anxiety  for  agreement,  which  their  Dutch 
brethren  manifested  in  the  documents  laid  before  our  readei's, 
would  more  than  wai-rant  this  conclusion.  Add  to  this  the 
fact  stated  by  Ivimey,  that,  on  the  formation  of  the  first  Par- 
ticular Baptist  church  in  England,  an  individual  was  sent 
over  to  Holland  to  be  immersed.  Now,  this  could  not  arise 
from  there  being  no  Baptists  in  the  country.  We  have  seen 
that  the  very  opposite  was  the  fact.  Other  churches,  too,  as 
will  be  seen  presently,  existed  in  this  country.  Only  from 
one  of  two  causes  could  this  conduct  arise :  dislike  to  the 
Arminian  doctrines,  or  dissatisfaction  with  the  mode  of 
baptism.  Which  of  these  operated,  it  is  difficult  to  say. 
Probably  both  had  an  influence  in  determining  their  course. 
Later  still,  there  is  positive  proof,  if  credit  is  to  be  given  to 
the  testimony  of  men  living  at  the  period,  that  there  were 
communities  in  existence  then  who  conformed  entirely  to 
the  mode  adopted  by  our  Dutch  brethren.  The  reference  is 
to  Chelmsford.  "  But  since  this  magnified  Reformation  was 
set  on  foot,  this  town  (as,  indeed,  most  corporations,  as  we 
find  by  experience,  are  nurseries  of  faction  and  rebellion)  is 
so  filled  with  sectaries,  especially  Brownists  and  Anabaptists, 

*  Vol.  iF.,p.  900. 
t  Vide  note,  Early  English  Baptists,  vol.  i.,  p.  203. 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  53 

that  a  third  part  of  tlie  people  refuse  to  communicate  in  the 
Church  Liturgy,  and  half  refuse  to  receive  the  communion 
of  the  blessed  sacrament,  unless  they  may  receive  it  in  what 
position  they  please  to  take  it.  They  have  amongst  them 
two  sorts  of  Anabaptists :  the  one  they  call  the  Old  Men, 
or  Aspersi,  because  they  were  but  sprinkled;  the  other  they 
call  the  New  Men,  or  Tlie  Immersi,  because  they  were  over- 
whelmed in  their  rebaptization."* 

This  fact  is  important  on  more  accounts  than  one;  whilst 
it  can  leave  no  doubt  upon  the  mind  of  the  reader  that,  at 
this  time,  both  modes  were  practised.  Judging  from  the  fol- 
lowing account  of  the  method  of  baptizing  in  Holland  about 
this  time,  their  manner  was  different  from  the  modern  method 
of  squeezing  a  few  drops  of  water  on  the  face  of  the  infant. 
Sir  W.  Brereton  says,  "  The  minister  here  (in  Amsterdam) 
baptized  after  sermon  fourteen  children;  the  water  not 
sprinkled  upon  their  faces,  but  the  predicant  doth  pull  back 
the  cloth  and  dressing  on  the  head,  so  that  all  the  skull  of 
the  child's  head  is  bare,  and  holding  the  face  downwards,  he 
is  sufficiently  prodigal  of  water,  pouring  divers  handfuls 
iipon  the  child's  head,  and  holding  his  hand  on  the  child's 
head,  rubbing  the  same  during  all  the  time  that  he  is  pro- 
nouncing the  words  of  baptism,  which,  as  I  conceived, 
were  equivalent  to  those  of  ours: — 'I  baptize  thee  in  the 
name  of  the  Father,  Son,'  &c,  using  as  long  a  speech  whilst 
he  held  the  child  in  his  anns,  as  our  ministers  do.  I  ob- 
served diligently,  and  he  used  not  the  sign  of  the  cross, 
which  all  the  Dutch  churches  reject.  Here  were  no  god- 
fathers; those  that  brought  and  carried  the  children  gave 
the  name  unto  the  predicant,  and  all  those  were  women  that 
held  and  brought  the  children."t 


*■  Mercurius  Rusticus,  pp.  25,  20. 

t  Travels,  by  Sir  W.  Brereton,  in  Holland,  &c.,  1634  to  1635,  p.  M. 

Cheetham  Society.     The  same  writer  gives  us  an  accoixnt  of  a  baptism  in 

Edinbro'  in  1635 : — "Here  I  saw  the  sacrament  of  baptism  (in  the  College 

Kirk)  administered  in  this  manner : — The  preacher  standing  in  the  pulpit, 


54  EARLY    EXGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Of  the  existence  of  otlier  Baptist  churches  during  this 
period  there  is  no  doubt.  The  limits  of  this  work  forbid 
the  notice  of  them  individually;  yet  the  following  may  be 
regarded,  in  its  main  features,  as  a  sample.  The  church  at 
Stoney  Stratford  is  one  of  the  earliest  of  them.  The  fol- 
lowing narrative  is  condensed  from  an  old  church-book,  now 
unfortunately  lost.  "  The  Baptist  church  at  Stoney  Strat- 
ford dates  its  origin  as  early  as  1625.  At  that  time,  there 
were  a  few  Puritans  living  at  Stratford,  who  united  together 
to  uphold  the  principles  of  the  Gos})el,  in  doing  which  they 
were  often  placed  in  circumstances  of  great  difficulty,  and 


and  there  being  placed  and  fastened  into  the  same  a  frame  of  iron,  shaped 
and  proportioned  to  a  basin,  wherein  there  stands  a  silver  basin  and  ewer ; 
here  the  minister  useth  an  exhortation  of  gratitude  for  God's  goodness, 
in  admitting  thom  to  this  privilege,  &c.,  demanding  from  the  witnesses 
(which  are  many — sometimes  12,  sometimes  20),  according  to  a  printed 
form  of  baptism,  the  parent  receives  the  child  from  the  midwife,  presents 
the  same  unto  the  preacher,  who  doth  baptize  it  without  any  manner  of 
ceremony,  giving  a  strict  care  of  Christian  and  religious  education,  first 
unto  the  parent,  then  to  the  witness." — Ibid,  p.  110.  Cheetham  Society. 
It  may  not  be  uninteresting  to  the  reader  to  have  an  allusion  to  one  of 
an  earlier  date,  in  another  part  of  the  Netherlands.  During  the  perse- 
cutions of  Mary,  a  gi-anddaughter  of  Sir  W.  Lock  fled  with  her  husband 
to  Antweip,  and  the  following  is  her  description  of  the  baptism  of  her 
daughter: — "The  fashion  was  to  hang  a  piece  of  lawn  out  at  the  window 
when  the  child  was  to  be  Ijaptized ;  and  her  house  having  two  doors  into 
two  streets,  she  hung  lawn  out  at  each  door,  so  the  neighbours  of  each 
side,  thinking  the  child  was  can-ied  out  at  one  door,  inquired  no  farther. 
The  hazard  she  run  was  great,  for  she  says  that  the  hatred  which  was 
borne  by  the  townsmen  to  the  Anabaptists,  the  magistrates  used  to  come 
at  midnight  into  houses  where  any  children  were  suspected  to  be  kept 
unbaptized,  and  if  they  found  any  such,  they  used  to  put  them  into  a 
sack,  and  throw  them  into  the  sea  and  drown  them :  which  cruelty  to 
avoid,  she  did,  as  is  before  said,  hang  out  the  la-wn,  and  there  being  a 
secret  congregation  of  Protestants  in  the  town,  she  procured  her  child  to 
be  carried  there,  when  it  was  baptized,"  &c.  She  stayed  at  Antwerp  till 
Mary  died.  —  Sir  John  Bramston's  Autobiography,  p.  11.  Camden 
Society.  The  notorious  "Wren,  Bishop  of  Norwich,  in  1G36,  issued  in- 
junctions to  his  deacons,  which  give  us  singiilar  glimpses  of  ecclesiastical 
manners.  In  the  XIV.,  he  orders  that  "the  fonts  at  baptism  be  filled 
with  clean  water,  and  no  dishes,  pails,  nor  basins  be  used  in  it,  or  instead 
of  it."— Cardwell,  vol.  ii.,  p.  204. 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  55 

sometimes  even  of  imminent  danger;  in  order  to  escape  wliich 
thej  were  obliged  to  meet,  sometimes  in  the  neighbouring 
forest,  at  other  times  under  the  trees  and  hedges  in  the 
adjoining  fields,  or  in  private  houses  about  Stoney  Stratford. 
It  appears  that  so  formidable  was  the  opposition  raised 
against  them  at  one  time,  that  they  were  pursued  by  a  body 
of  armed  men,  who  followed  them  on  the  road  to  Newport 

Pagnall;    but,   being   met    by   Sir  Henry  ,   who    was 

secretly  the  friend  of  the  Nonconformists,  he  succeeded  in 
bringing  their  pursuers  back  to  Stratford,  and  detained 
them,  by  giving  them  ale,  till  the  persecuted  little  flock  had 
effected  their  escape.  They  were,  however,  not  always  so 
successful,  and  some  of  them  are  said  to  have  been  sent  to 
prison  for  their  nonconformity.  After  some  time,  they  were 
able  to  obtain  a  piece  of  ground,  and  soon  afterwards  a  small 
chajiel, capable  of  holding  about  a  hundred  people,  was  erected ; 
but  such  was  the  spirit  of  the  times,  that  they  could  not  always 
hold  their  meetings  in  it.  They  do  not  appear  to  have  had 
any  settled  minister  at  first,  nor,  indeed,  for  a  long  time 
after  they  were  formed  into  a  congregation.  The  aflairs  of 
the  churcli  were  superintended  by  deacons,  of  whom,  in 
consequence  of  the  advanced  age  at  which  they  were  chosen, 
they  had  a  very  quick  succession.  Whenever  deacons  were 
to  be  oi'dained,  or  set  apart,  a  day  of  fasting  and  prayer  was 
appointed  :  and  the  abstinence  of  those  days  forms  a  striking 
contrast  to  the  feasting  and  toast-drinking  of  some  modern 
ordinations."*  From  a  wide  district,  the  members  of  this 
church,  like  many  others,  were  gathered.  We  have  seen 
that,  in  early  times,  Kent  was  distinguished  by  the  large 
supply  of  consecrated  sufferers  for  Christ.  It  was  not  des- 
titute, at  this  time,  of  noble-minded  men.  As  early  as 
1G26,  Thomas  Brewer,  "a  zealous  minister  of  the  Baptist 
persuasion,"  was  arrested  in  his  work  by  the  emissaries  of 
Laud.      Brook  gives   us   the    following    information  about 

*  Kindly  supplied  by  the  Eev.  E.  L.  Forster. 


56  E.VKLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

him.  "The  first  account  of  him  we  meet  with,  is  that,  in 
the  year  1626,  he  was  a  preacher  among  the  Separatists  in 
and  about  Ashforcl,  in  Kent.  In  that  year,  through  the 
instigation  of  Laud,  he  was  persecuted  and  censured  in  the 
High  Commission  Court,  and  committed  to  prison,  where 
lie  remained  no  less  than  fourteen  years.  The  Archbishop, 
speaking  of  the  mischief  done  by  the  nonconformity  of  Mr. 
Brewer  and  Mr.  Turner,  says,  'The  hurt  which  they  have 
done  is  so  deeply  i-ooted,  that  it  is  impossible  to  be  plucked 
up  on  a  sudden;  but  I  must  crave  time  to  work  it  oif  by 
little  and  little.'  His  Grace,  however,  certainly  fixed  on  the 
most  direct  and  efiectual  method  of  doing  this.  For,  in  his 
account  of  his  province,  addressed  to  the  king,  in  1637,  he 
says;  '  I  must  give  your  Magesty  to  understand,  that  at  and 
about  Ash  ford,  in  Kent,  the  Separatists  continue  to  hold 
their  conventicles,  notwithstanding  the  excommunication  of 
so  many  of  them  as  have  been  disclosed.  Two  or  three  of 
their  principal  ringleaders,  Brewer,  Fenner,  and  Turner, 
have  been  long  kept  in  prison,  and  it  was  once  thought  fit 
to  proceed  against  them  by  the  statute  of  abjuration.  Not 
long  since.  Brewer  slipt  out  of  prison,  and  went  to  Roches- 
ter and  other  parts  of  Kent,  and  held  conventicles,  and  put 
a  great  many  people  into  great  distemper  about  the  church. 
He  is  taken  again,  and  was  called  before  the  High  Commis- 
sioner, when  he  stood  silent,  but  in  such  a  jeering,  scornful 
manner,  as  I  scarcely  ever  saw  the  like.  So  in  prison, 
he  remains.'"*     In   1640,   Brewer  was  liberated  from  his 


*  Brook's  Puritans,  vol.  ii.,  p.  444.  Collier's  account  of  the  latter  part 
is  somewhat  varied  from  Brook's.  In  the  Archbishop's  account  of  his 
province  this  year,  he  acquaints  the  king,  that  "in  his  diocese  near  Ash- 
ford,  several  Anabaptists,  and  other  Separatists,  stood  out  so  obstinately 
against  the  customs  of  the  church,  that  there  was  no  other  way  of  dealing 
with  them  but  having  recourse  to  the  Statute  of  Abjuration,  or  applying 
some  other  way  to  the  assistance  of  the  Temporal  Courts.  But  whether 
tliis  remedy  was  proper  or  not,  at  this  disturbed  juncture,  is  referred  to 
his  Majesty." — Vol.  ii.,  p.  791.  Charles  wrote  against  this  report: — 
"Keep  these  particular  persons  fast,  luitil  you  think  what  to  do  with  the 


CHARLES   THE    FIRST.  ■)  t 

confinement  l)y  order  of  the  House  of  Commons.  We  have 
no  evidence,  or  if  there  is  any  it  is  scant,  which  shall  enable 
us  to  determine  to  which  section  of  the  body  these  men  be- 
longed. It  is  enough  for  us  to  know,  that  with  them  religion 
was  a  living  power,  and  that  for  propagating  these  views  of  its 
renewing  and  sanctifying  influence,  they  encountered  the  hos- 
tility of  the  High-Priest  of  formalism,*  to  embalm  them  in 
onr  memoiy,  and  to  give  them  a  ])lace  in  these  pages. 

Our  Avork  is  not  the  history  of  the  nation,  but  we  cannot 
avoid  an  allusion  to  some  of  the  events  which  marked  the 
early  period  of  Charles's  reign.  We  have  already  indicated 
the  existence  of  opposing  elements  in  the  empire.  The 
aggressions  of  royalty  soon  brought  them  into  collision.  It 
was  well  knoAvn  that  the  king's  notions  of  his  prerogative 
and  power  were  of  the  loftiest  order.  His  ministers 
nourished  them.  Buckingham  and  his  satellites  everywhere 
inculcated  them.  Side  by  side  was  growing  up  with  this, 
more  enlightened  views  of  religion  and  constitutional  free- 
dom. The  wealth,  the  intelligence,  and  commercial  power 
of  the  nation  were  probably  with  the  latter.t  The  national 
mind  was  roused.  Hope  and  fear  agitated  it.  Into  every 
circle  these  antagonistic  influences  entered.  In  the  seats  of 
industry,  by  the  stui'dy  yeomen  of  the  country,  in  the  home 

rest."  "If  I  Late  any,"  said  a  courtier  of  those  times,  "it  is  those  schis- 
matics that  puzzle  the  sweet  i^eace  of  oiir  church ;  so  that  I  could  he  con- 
tent to  see  an  Anabaptist  go  to  hell  on  a  Brownist's  back."  This  was  the 
utterance  of  a  man  who  fasted  and  prayed  according  to  the  Laudian 
teaching. — Howell's  Letters,  p.  270. 

*  "His  little  Grace  did  also  foment  and  maintain  an  opinion,  that  the 
Pope  was  the  metropolitan  bishop  of  the  world,  and  that  there  could  be 
no  true  church  with  bishops." — A  Perfect  Diurnal,  No.  5,  p.  404.  "  The 
great  design  of  the  High  Church  party,"  said  Rudyard,  "theii-  great  de- 
sign, their  masterpiece,  now  is  to  make  all  those  of  the  true  religion  to  be 
the  suspected  party  in  the  kingdom." — Foster,  vol.  i.,  p.  55. 

+  "Puritans  in  the  better  ranks,  and  in  every  rank,  abounded.  Ah-eady, 
either  in  conscious  act,  or  in  clear  tendency,  the  far  greater  serious 
thought  and  manhood  of  England  had  declared  itself  Puritan." — Carlyle's 
Cromwell,  vol.  i.,  p.  41. 


58  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

of  the  artizan,  and  in  the  mansion  of  the  wealthy,  these 
political  aspects  of  the  times  were  examined,  and  theii" 
tendencies  discussed."'  But  the  great  theatre  of  conflict  was 
in  tlie  chamber  of  St.  Stephen's. 

No  sooner  had  the  Commons  assembled,  than  two  things 
claimed  theii-  attention, — the  grievances  under  which  the 
nation  laboured,  and  the  state  of  religion.  The  representa- 
tives of  the  court  demanded  money.  The  necessities  of  the 
king  were  urgent;  the  nation  was  on  the  eve  of  a  war.  By 
the  patriots  his  claim  was  recognised;  but  the  crying 
evils  demanded  removal.  The  two  are  inseparable,  said 
they.  Remove  the  one,  and  we  will  grant  the  other.  Upon 
this  ground  they  took  their  stand,  and  no  threatening  could 
move  them.  The  Lord-Keeper  indeed  uttered  high-sounding 
words,  the  monarch  frowned,  and  the  imperious  favourite 
and  minister  threatened :  but  in  vain.  The  men  were  un- 
moved. Like  some  vast  rock  against  which  the  wild  wave 
breaks,  they  stood  unmoved  by  the  tempest. 

The  pulpit  was  made  to  pander  to  the  Royal  passions, 
and  to  subvert  the  liberty  of  the  people.  The  clerical 
circle  was  crowded  with  this  class  of  men.  Amongst  these 
time-servers,  ignorant  alike  of  the  teaching  of  their  master 
and  the  origin  of  civil  power,  was  Dr.  Mainwaring.  He 
taught  "  that  the  king's  royal  command,  imposing  taxes  and 
loans  without  the  consent  of  Parliament,  did  so  far  bind  the 
conscience  of  the  subjects  of  the  kingdom,  that  they  could 
not  refuse  the  payment  without  peril  of  damnation."  Still 
more,  "that  the  authority  of  the  Parliament  Avas  not  neces- 
saiy  to  the  raising  of  aids  and  subsidies,  "f 


*  "Tlie  nobility  and  genti-y  of  England  were  then  a  strange  body  of 
men.  The  English  squire  of  tlie  seventeenth  century  clearly  appears  to 
Lave  believed  in  God — not  as  a  iigure  of  speech,  but  as  a  very  fact,  very 
awful  to  the  heart  of  the  English  squire.  '  He  wore  his  Bible  doctrines 
round  him,'  says  one,  '  as  our  squire  wears  his  shot  belt :  went  about 
with  it,  nothing  doubting.' " — Carlyle's  Cromwell,  p.  45.  Marsden's  Later 
Puritans,  p.  5. 

+  Pari.  History,  vol.  ii.,  p.  379.     Vide  Pym's  Speech  on  this  subject. 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  59 

The  Commons  fell  into  au  error,  by  no  means  uncommon, 
and  which  can  scarcely  excite  our  wonder, — mischievous  then, 
and  fraught  still  with  danger  to  the  interests  of  truth, — they 
regarded  themselves  as  the  great  conservators  of  religion. 
Nor  did  they  fail  in  exercising  the  authority  with  which 
they  sujoposed  God  had  invested  them.  Before  them  the 
divine  was  called.  A  fine  of  £1U00  was  imposed  on  him ;  he 
was  to  be  imprisoned  during  the  pleasure  of  the  House;  sus- 
pended for  three  years ;  disabled  from  preaching  at  court,  and 
from  holding  any  ecclesiastical  or  civil  office ;  and  his  book  was 
ordered  to  be  burnt  by  the  hands  of  the  common  hangman.* 
Popery  and  Arminianism  were  alike  denounced.  Against 
them  both  the  voice  of  the  Legislature  was  raised.  "  About 
this  time,"  says  the  authority  last  quoted,  "the  Commons 
voted  that  Dr.  Neal,  Bishop  of  "Winchester,  and  Dr.  Laud, 
Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells,  be  named  to  be  those  near  about 
the  king  who  are  suspected  to  be  Arminians,  and  that  they 
are  justly  reputed  to  be  unsound  in  their  opinions  that  way."t 
Alarmed  at  these  proceedings,  at  the   risk  of  losing  what 


Ibid,  390,  401.  "To  counteract  these  proceedings,  hath  it  not  been 
preached  (or  rather  prated)  in  our  pulpits,  that  all  we  have  is  the  king's, 
jure  divino,  say  these  time-servers ;  they  forsake  theii-  own  functions, 
and  turn  ignorant  statesmen ;  we  see  how  willingly  they  will  be  to  change 
a  good  conscience  for  a  bishoprick." — Sir  F.  Seymour.  Rush  worth,  p.  495. 
"The  puljjit,"  says  Disraeli,  "was  resounding  the  most  slavish  tenets, 
and  proclaiming  as  rebellious  those  who  refused  their  aid  to  Government. 
One  of  these  had  dared  to  avow,  in  his  Lent  sermon,  that  '  all  we  have  w 
the  kinr/'s,  bi/  Divine  ri<iht\'  During  James's  time,  the  clergy  were 
characterised  as  si^aniels  to  the  court,  and  wolves  to  the  people." — Com- 
mentaries, vol.  ii. ,  p.  84. 

*  Pari.  Hist.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  415. 

t  Ibid,  p.  420.  "So  are  the  hearts  of  your  good  subjects  no  less  per- 
plexed, when  ^vith  sorrow  they  behold  a  daily  gro^vth  and  spread  of  the 
factious  Arminians ;  that  being,  as  your  Majesty  well  knows,  but  a  cimning 
way  to  bring  in  Popery,"  &c.  — Remonstrance  of  the  Commons  against  the 
Duke  of  Buckingham,  1628.  Pari.  Hist.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  422.  "Arminianism 
and  Pelagianism  do  much  spread  in  divers  parts  of  this  realm,  and  many 
bishops  infected  therewith." — Diary  of  W.  Yonge,  p.  93.    Camden  Society. 


60  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

^yas  now  an  urgent  necessity — the  subsidies  wliicli  had  been 
provided — Charles  dissolved  the  Parliament.* 

Freed  for  a  season  from,  the  hated  control  of  the  Com- 
mons, the  monai'ch  entered  on  a  course  which  only  aggra- 
vated his  difficulties,  Mid  increased  the  power  of  his  op- 
ponents. The  leading  Protestants  wei-e  made  to  feel  his 
■wrath.  Elliot,  Diggcs,  and  others,  were,  in  violation  of  all 
law,  imprisoned  in  the  Tower.  It  only  weakened  the  in- 
fluence of  the  monarch,  and  clothed  their  cause  with  an 
increased  popular  interest.  He  was  adding  another  buttress 
to  the  stronghold  into  which  liberty  had  retired.  His 
threats  were  powerless,  and  the  struggle  between  those  con- 
flicting elements  was  beginning.  Failures  marked  the  des- 
potic course  of  Charles. 

The  necessities  of  the  monarch  soon  compelled  him  to  call 
together  the  representatives  of  the  people.  With  here  and 
there  an  exception,  the  same  men  were  returned.  They 
came  with  deeper  convictions  that  all  they  held  dear  was  in 
peril.  Their  aims  were  loftier,  and  their  purpose  was  fixed. 
The  conduct  of  the  king  and  his  ministers,  during  the  re- 
cess, had  done  this.  The  morning  of  the  opening  of  the 
session  in  St.  Stephen's  was  one  full  of  significancy.  Both 
parties  felt  it.  Both  had  taken  their  stand  on  great,  but 
ojjposite,  principles.  "  Divine  rights,"  and  "  popiilar  freedom," 
were  to  be  the  watchwords.  Calm  and  silent  stood  the 
select  band,  whilst  Charles,  by  his  Ministers,  bullied  them, 
and  the  voice  of  the  Lord-Keeper  had  scai'cely  died  away, 
before  the  old  topic  was  resumed.  Redress  of  giuevances  and 
subsidies  were  again  united.  The  granting  of  the  one  de- 
pended on  the  removal  of  the  other.  This  was  the  basis  on 
which  they  took  their  stand.  Experience  justified,  nay, 
compelled  them.     Confidence  in  the  monarch  was  giving 

*  To  the  charge  of  the  Commons  against  Laud  and  Neal,  Charles  re- 
plied, in  dissolving  the  Parliament  of  1659,  "that  great  -m-ong  was  done 
to  two  eminent  prelates  that  attend  cm-  person,"  &;c. — Kush worth, 
vol.  ii.,  p.  2. 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  61 

way.  Buckingham  had  long  forfeited  it.*  All  respect  for 
law  had  long  retired  from  his  mind.  He  could  tolerate  no- 
thing which  interfered  with  his  imperial  pride,  or  the  grati- 
fication of  his  lust  of  dominion.  If  his  power  had  been  equal 
to  his  will,  the  throne  of  the  monarch  would  have  been  based 
on  the  ruins  of  the  constitution,  and  the  liberties  of  the  nation 
would  have  been  sacrificed  to  despotic  authority.  All  doubt 
had  vanished.  Against  this  proud  minion  the  voice  of  the 
country  had  been  heard,  like  the  sound  of  distant  thunder. 
Noblemen  in  the  senate  had  again  and  again  denounced  him. 
as  the  enemy  of  his  country,  and  the  source  of  danger  to  the 
throne.  During  the  recess,  the  flagrancy  of  his  conduct  had 
increased.  Patience  was  exhausted;  and  the  monarch  and 
his  master  were  alarmed  by  the  patriots  sending  up  to  the 
Upper  House  a  messenger,  impeaching  George'  Duke  of 
Buckingham  of  high  treason.  The  blow  was  well  directed. 
It  told  with  fearful  power.  The  court  circle  staggered 
under  it,  and  Charles  could  only  save  the  guilty  one  by  an 
exercise  of  his  prerogative,  disastrous  alike  to  himself  and 
confirmatory  of  the  guilt  of  the  accused.  Against  the  wishes 
of  the  best  friends  of  the  monai-ch,  the  Parliament  was  dis- 
solved.t 

*  "  Tlie  Marqviis  of  Buckingham  continued  still  in  the  fulness  of  grace 
and  favour;  the  Countess,  his  mother,  sways  also  much  at  court.  She 
brought  Sii-  Henry  Montague  from  delivering  law  on  the  King's  Bench,  to 
look  to  his  bags  in  the  Exchequer,  for  she  made  him  Lord  High  Treasurer 
of  England;  but  he  parted  with  his  solute  staff  before  the  year's  end, 
thougli  his  purse  had  bled  deeply  for  it  (above  £20,000)." — Howell's 
Letters,  p.  116.  "The  Duke's  power  with  the  king  for  certain  is  very 
great ;  and  who  he  will  advance  shall  be  advanced,  and  who  he  doth 
frowTi  upon  must  be  thrown  down.  All  the  great  officers  of  tlic  kingdom 
be  now  his  creation,  and  at  his  commancL" — Strafford's  Letters,  i).  28. 
"In  1G14,  we  see  him  at  Cambridge  races,  in  ragged  clothes,  subsisting 
on  £50  per  annum.  A  few  years  afterwards  at  covu't,  \vith  £300,000 
worth  of  diamonds.  The  king  compared  his  appearance  to  that  of 
Stephen,  'whose  face  was  as  the  face  of  an  angel.'  Hence  the  name  of 
'Steeuie,'"  &c. — Warburton's  Prince  Rupert,  vol.  i.,  p.  146. 

+  "Infinite  almost  was  the  sadness  of  each  man's  heart,  and  the  dejec- 
tion of  his  countenance,  that  truly  loved  the  church  and  common- 


62  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

In  1 628  the  council  of  tlie  nation  again  met.  It  was  the  third 
Parliament  since  the  beginning  of  the  reign.""'  The  necessities 
of  the  court  compelled  the  meeting.  Despotism  had  been  de- 
feated in  all  its  illegal  attempts  to  carry  on  the  Government. 
Disaster  had  marked  its  foreign  policy,  and  want,  with  rapid 
strides,  was  pi-essing  on  the  Exchequer,  so  that  Charles  had 
no  alternative.  Both  pai'ties  had  jjut  forth  vigorous  efforts 
at  the  poll-booths,  for  both  felt  that  a  crisis  had  come.  The 
nation  was  v/aking  up  and  rousing  itself  for  action.  Men  of 
the  right  stamp  were  again  returned.  They  were  loyal,  but 
patriotic :  with  deep  sympathy  with  monarchy,  but  intensely 
hating  the  lofty  pretensions  of  Charles's  claim  to  reign 
by  Divine  right;  regarding  Episcopacy  and  a  State  Church 
as  in  fullest  harmony  with  God's  Word,  but  dissenting  from 
the  tyranny  of  the  bishops  and  their  Popish  and  Armiuian 
tendencies.  With  aims  very  limited,  but  clear  and  definite 
conceptions  of  the  wants  of  the  people,  they  entered  on  their 
mission.  Charles  opened  the  session  in  person.  His  tone 
was  offensive  to  the  manly  independence  of  his  hearers. 
More  significant  still  was  the  utterance  of  the  Lord-Keeper. 
"  This  way  of  Parliamentary  supplies,"  said  the  oflicial,  "  as 
his  Majesty  told  you,  he  hath  chosen,  not  as  the  only  way, 
but  as  the  fittest, —  not  because  he  is  destitute  of  others, 

wealth,  at  the  sudden  and  abortive  breach  of  the  present  Parliament. 
All  men  that  truly  loved  God,  their  king  and  country,  had  just  cause  to 
lament  so  dismal  and  sad  an  accident." — D'Ewes,  vol.  i.,  p.  301. 

*  "The  wealthiest  men  in  the  country  now  composed  the  House  of 
Commons.  The  aristocracy  of  wealth  had  already  begun  to  form  a  new 
class  in  the  community,  influenced  by  new  interests,  new  principles,  and 
anew  spiritof  independence." — Disraeli,  vol.  ii.,  p.  8(j,  87.  "Previously  to 
its  assembling  [Parliament],  he  released  a  considerable  number  of  gentle- 
men and  others  who  had  been  committed  for  their  refusal  of  the  loan. 
These  were,  in  many  cases,  elected  to  the  new  Parliament :  coming 
thither  with  just  indignation  at  their  country's  wrongs,  and  unpardonable 
resentment  at  their  own.  No  year,  indeed,  within  the  memory  of  any 
one  living,  had  -witnessed  such  violations  of  public  liberty  as  1627. 
Charles  seemed  born  to  carry  into  daily  practice  those  theories  of  absolute 
power  which  had  been  promulgated  from  his  father's  lips." — Hallara, 
voL  i.,  p.  387. 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST. 


63 


but  because  it  is  most  agreeable  to  the  goodness  of  liis  own 
most  gracious  disposition,  and  to  the  desire  and  weal  of  his 
people.  If  this  be  deferred,  necessity  and  the  sword  make 
for  others.  Remember  his  Majesty's  admonition!  I  say, 
remember  it  ! "  Never  was  a  mistake  more  signal.  Upon 
the  ears  of  the  noble  band  it  fell  powerless.  No  cheek 
blanched,  no  spirit  quailed  before  the  imperial  frown.  The 
cost  had  been  counted,  and  with  clean  hands  and  bold  hearts 
they  entered  on  their  work.  No  impartial  mind  can  reflect 
on  the  conduct  of  the  House  but  with  ai)proval.  The  wants 
of  the  monarch  were  at  once  admitted,  but  the  necessities  of 
the  people  were  urged.  Upon  this  rock  the  Commons  took 
their  stand.  Money,  without  redress  of  grievances,  would 
only  have  bound  the  yoke  closer,  and  made  its  weight  more 
difficult  to  bear.  Day  by  day  this  position  was  occupied. 
Wentworth,  Elliot,*  Pym,  and  others,  whilst  expressing  their 
profoundest  devotedness  to  the  king,  vindicated  the  claims  of 
the  people  with  an  eloquence  and  power  which  has  placed 
them  in  the  highest  rank  of  British  statesmen.  Their  pro- 
gress was  slow,  but  safe.  From  the  reluctant  monarch  con- 
cessions were  wrung.  To  detail  these  is  all  but  impossible. 
The  commonest  of  our  histories  records  them.  "  The  Petition 
of  Right"  w'as  the  most  important.  By  this  document  the 
freedom  of  the  people  was  secured.f     It  provided  "  that  no 

*  "One  of  the  most  illustrious  confessors  in  the  cause  of  liberty  whom 
that  time  produced." — Halhun,  vol.  L,  p.  379. 

"t"  The  following  petition  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  the  oppressions  complained 
of  :— "The  rents  and  revenues  of  your  country  greatly  and  generally  di- 
minished ;  farmers,  to  secure  themselves  from  the  soldiers'  insolence,  being 
by  the  clamour  of  the  solicitations  of  their  fearful  and  injui'ed  wives  and 
children,  enforced  to  give  iip  their  wonted  dwellings,  and  to  retire  them- 
selves into  places  of  more  secure  habitation.  Husbandmen,  that  are,  as  it 
were,  the  hands  of  the  country,  corrupted  by  the  ill  examples  of  the  sol- 
diers, and  encouraged  to  idle  life,  give  over  work,  and  rather  seek  to  live 
idly  at  another  man's  charges  than  by  their  own  labour.  Tradesmen  and 
artificers  almost  discoiu-aged,  and  being  enforced  to  leave  their  trades,  and 
to  employ  their  time  in  preserving  themselves  and  their  families  from 
cruelty.     Markets  unfrequented,  and  our  ways  grown  so  dangerous  that 


64 


EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 


man  hereafter  be  compelled  to  make  or  yield  any  gift,  loan, 
benevolence,  tax,  or  such  like  charge,  without  common  con- 
sent by  Act  of  Parliament;  and  that  none  be  called  to 
answer  or  take  such  oath,  or  to  give  attendance,  or  be  confined 
or  otherwise  molested  or  disquieted  concerning  the  same,  or 
for  refusal  thereof:  and  that  no  freeman,  in  any  such 
manner  as  befoi'e-mentioned,  be  imprisoned  or  detained: 
and  that  your  Majesty  will  be  pleased  to  remove  the  said 
soldiers  and  marines,  and  that  your  people  may  not  be  so 
burdened  in  time  to  come :  and  that  the  aforesaide  commis- 
sion, for  proceeding  by  martial  law,  may  be  revoked  and 
annulled :  and  that  hereafter  no  commission  of  the  like 
nature  may  issue  forth  to  any  person  or  persons  Avhatever, 
to  be  executed  as  aforesaid,  lest  by  colour  of  them  any  of  your 
Majesty's  subjects  be  destroyed  or  piit  to  death  contrary  to 
the  laws  and  franchises  of  the  land.""'  Such  was  the  result 
of  the  conflict.  The  "  Petition  of  Ptight"  only  soi^ht  to  en- 
force existing  laws,  but  which  had  been  long  violated  by  the 
monarch  and  his  minions.  Charles  laboured  in  every  pos- 
sible way  to  defeat  this.  To  means,  discreditable  to  him  as 
a  man,  and  still  more  so  as  a  sovereign,  he  had  recourse. 
Want,  not  a  sense  of  justice — the  necessities  of  his  Govern- 
ment, not  the  people's  benefit,  compelled  his  reluctant 
consent.  ,  No  unseemly  exultation  marked  the  assembly; 
but  at  once  they  voted  him  .£350,000.  Their  existence  was 
but  short,  for  they  were  speedily  dismissed  to  their  homes, 
to  diflfuse  amongst  their  countrymen  their  fears  and  their 
aspirations  for  the  future.     In  this  department  their  labours 


the  people  dare  not  pass  to  and  fro  upon  their  usual  occasion.  Frequent 
robberies,  assaults,  batteries,  burglaries,  rapes,  rapieries,  mxirders,  bar- 
barous cruelties,  and  other  most  abominable  vices  and  outrages,  are  gene- 
rally complained  of  from  all  parts  where  these  companies  have  been  and 
had  their  abode, — few  of  which  insolences  have  been  so  much  as  ques- 
tioned, and  fewer,  according  to  their  demerit,  punished." — Petition  from 
the  Commons  to  the  King.  Eiishworth,  p.  548,  549 ;  also  vol.  i., 
pp.  420,  477. 

*  Hallam,  vol.  i.,  p.  391,  392.     See  the  whole  statute  in  Hume. 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  b'j 

were  not  in  vain.  The  seed  sown  rewarded  theui  with  an 
;il>undant  and  mature  crop. 

Other  events  now  claim  a  brief  attention.  The  power  of 
Laud  continued  to  increase.  Upon  him  fresh  honours  were 
showered.  Raised  to  the  metropolitan  see,  he  prosecuted  his 
designs  with  sleepless  activity.  "With  the  infotuated  monarch 
his  influence  was  unbounded.  Politics  and  religion  were 
alike  moulded  by  his  will.*  The  remonstrances  or  the  com- 
])laints  of  the  Commons  were  met  by  his  ready  pen.  The 
death  of  Buckingham  augmented  his  influence.f  "  The 
king  seemed  to  take  none  to  favour  so  much  as  Dr.  Laud, 
Bishop  of  London,  to  whom  he  sent  many  gracious  messages, 
and  also  writ  him  with  his  own  hand,  the  which  contained 
much  grace  and  favour,  and  immediately  afterwards  none 
became  so  intimate  with  his  Majesty  as  the  said  bishop. 
In  the  University  of  Oxford,  Bishop  Laud  bore  the  sway. 
The  Lord  Chancellor  (William,  Lord  Pembroke)  committing 
his  power  into  his  liands."|. 

The  death  of  Abbott  now  placed  within  his  reach  the  goal 
of  his  ambition.  There  was  no  one  to  compete  with  him. 
On  his  first  appearance  at  court  after  the  death  of  his  rival, 
Charles  signified  his  decision  in  the  following  terms: — "My 
Lord  Grace  of  Canterbury,  you  are  very  welcome."||  In  the 
month  of  September,  his  enthronement  was  completed,  and 
a  splendid  banquet  closed  the  imposing  ceremonial  of  this 
successor  of  the  apostles.  His  pathway  was  now  clear.  The 
whole  power  of  the   church  was  in  his  hands;  the   court 


*  The  State  Papers  of  Clarendon  not  only  prove  the  attention  of  Laud 
to  all  political  matters,  but  his  all  but  boundless  influence  -witli  Ms 
infatuated  master,  and  at  the  council  table. — Vide  vol.  ii.  "The  news 
here  is,  that  Lambeth  House  bears  all  the  sway,  and  that  the  Lord 
Deputy  kings  it  notably  in  Ireland.  Some  that  love  them  best  coiild 
wish  them  a  little  more  modei-ate." — Howell,  p.  337. 

+  ' '  All  the  kingdom,  except  the  Duke's  o^vu  dependents  and  kindi-ed, 
rejoiced  in  the  death  of  this  Duke." — Mrs.  Hutchinson,  p.  29. 

i  Kushworth,  p.  649. 

U  Le  Bass,  pp.  168,  169, 


()6  EARLY    EXGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Avoiilcl  support  liim,  and  his  enemies  sliould  conform,  or  tlie 
■wliole  weight  of  Episcopal  vengeance  would  fall  upon  them. 
It  was  well  known  that  the  primate  had  long  entertained 
the  notion  that  the  veiy  Lest  way  to  consolidate  the  power 
and  influence  of  the  church,  was  to  fill  its  highest  offices 
with  churchmen.*  "  The  swoi-d  of  the  Lord  and  of  Gideon" 
had  done  wonders  before.  He  would  restore  the  good  old 
practice  of  the  past.  For  this  he  could  plead,  moreover,  the 
example  of  his  own  age.  The  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  his  early- 
patron,  thovTgh  afterwards  the  victim  of  his  hostility,  had 
filled  the  office  of  Loi'd-Keeper.f  The  thought  was  worthy 
of  the  man  and  of  the  system.  Truth  could  not  act  alone. 
Moral  power  could  give  but  little  support.  The  State  should 
shield  the  creators  of  its  power ;  and  under  its  ample 
shadow  no  weapon  formed  against  it  could  prospei-,  and 
every  tongue  that  rose  up  against  it  the  church  could 
condemn. 

This  policy  had  already  guided  him,  as  opportunity  offered. 
No  doubt  at  his  suggestion,  the  same  course  was  adopted  in 
Scotland.  The  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews  was  made  Chan- 
cellor of  that  kingdom,  and  others  of  the  hienirchy  were 
made  Lords  of  Session  or  Privy  Councillors,  and  their  moral 
and  political  suppoi't  was  secured  in  favour  of  those  mea- 
sures which  were  so  disastrous  to  Laud,  and  finally  to  his 


*  "Laud  did  really  believe  that  notHiig  more  contributed  to  the 
Ijenefit  and  advancement  of  the  chm-ch,  than  the  promotion  of  churchmen 
to  places  of  the  gi-eatest  honour,  and  offices  of  the  gi-eatest  trust.  This 
opinion,  and  the  prosecution  of  it,  was  the  unhappy  foundation  of  Ids  own 
ruin,  and  the  prejudice  toward,  malice  against,  and  almost  destruction  of, 
the  church." — Napier's  Life  of  Montrose,  p.  37  (Note).' 

t  "'Williams,  when  Lord-Keeper,  was  famous  for  having  a  large 
number  of  spies  about  him.  He  had  petitioned  Buckingham  for  the 
metropolitan  see,  but  failed.  He  had  nine  livings  at  the  same  time,  and 
asks  that  he  may  retain  one  or  two  of  them  in  commendum." — Cabala, 
p.  374.  A  curious,  though  disgraceful,  illustration  of  the  meanness  to 
which  the  Bishop  could  descend,  is  given  by  Lord  Campbell, — Lives  of 
the  Chancellors,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  4G7,  408. 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  G7 

master.  Juxon,"  his  friend  and  tool,  was  raised  to  the  see 
of  London,  with  the  full  expectation  that  it  would  contri- 
bute beyond  anything  else  to  the  consummation  of  his  own 
plans.  In  the  same  feeble  hands  the  Lord  Treasurer's 
staff  was  soon  after  placed,  f  Everything  was  favourable  to 
his  views.  The  law  of  action  of  the  new  primate  was  the 
reverse  of  that  of  his  predecessor,  as  the  religion  and  teaching 
of  the  one  stood  in  the  boldest  contrast  to  the  other.  Still 
they  were  characteristic  of  the  two  men,  and  emljodied  theii- 
spirit.  The  one  was  yielding,  the  other  despotic :  the  one 
would  sacrifice  form  to  the  living  spirit,  the  other  would 
tolerate  no  moral  worth  if  it  violated  an  outward  and  visible 
sign:  the  one  could  see  the  highest  forms  of  religious  life 
and  unity  in  harmony  with  variety,  the  other  had  no  con- 

*  From  the  Diary  of  Laud,  it  appears  that  Juxon  was  sworn  Clerk 
of  the  Court  at  his  special  request,  "that  he  might  have  one  that  he 
could  trust  near  his  Majesty."  And  how  much  he  gloried  in  procuring  for 
Ids  friend  the  Treasurer's  Staff,  vnU.  best  appear  from  the  following 
memorandum : — "  1G35.  March  Gth,  .Sunday.  — William  Juxon,  Lord 
Bishop  of  London,  made  Lord  High  Treasurer  of  England.  No  church- 
man had  it  since  Henry  the  Seventh's  time.  I  pray  God  bless  him  to 
carry  it,  so  that  the  Church  may  have  honoiu-,  and  the  State  service  and 
contentment  by  it.  And  now,  if  the  church  will  not  hold  up  themselves 
xmder  God,  I  can  do  no  more."  Notwithstanding  this  high  strain  of 
self-congratulation  upon  a  step  which  he  concluded  so  beneficial  for  the 
church,. Laiid's  policy,  in  filling  up  so  high  an  oflSce  in  such  a  manner,  -vviU 
appear  suspicious,  when  the  importance  of  the  situation,  and  the  expecta- 
tions of  the  powei-ful  nobles,  who  looked  upon  it  as  their  bii-thxight,  are 
fully  considered.  Clarendon  informs  us  that  Juxon's  promotion  "did  not 
only  increase  the  general  envy  and  malice  against  Laud,  but  did  even, 
although  unjustly,  indispose  many  towards  the  church  itself,  which  they 
looked  upon  as  a  gulph  ready  to  swallow  up  all  the  great  offices  of 
State." — Memoirs  of  Sir  P.  Warwick,  p.  101. 

+  "Laud's first  care  was,  that  the  place  he  was  removed  from  (London) 
might  be  supplied  by  a  man  who  would  be  vigUant  to  pull  up  those  weeds 
which  the  London  soil  was  too  apt  to  nourish,  and  so  drew  his  old  friend 
and  companion.  Dr.  Juxon,  as  near  to  him  as  he  covdd;  when,  on  a 
sudden,  the  staff  was  put  into  the  hands  of  the  Bishop  of  London,  a  man 
so  vmknown  that  his  name  was  scarce  heard  of  ia  the  kingdom." — Claren- 
don, vol.  i.,  pp.  91,  99.  Juxon  was  distinguished  as  a  hunter.  He  kept 
the  best  hounds  in  the  co\intry. — "NVTiitelocke,  vol.  i.,  j).  69. 


68  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

ception  of  i-eligious  liberty,  separate  from  a  cold  and  power- 
less uniformity.  Abbott's  favourite  maxim  was,  "  Yield,  and 
they  will  be  pleased  at  last."  The  other  said,  "  Resolve,  for 
tliere  is  no  end  of  yielding." 

Aided  by  members  of  the  Episcopate,  Laud  now  sought 
the  full  development  of  his  policy.  Intense  in  his  hate  to 
Puritanism  in  every  form,  he  sought  to  root  it  out,  and  to 
conform  the  teaching  of  the  English  church,  in  its  dogmas 
and  cei'emonial,  to  the  church  from  which  she  had  descended. ■"■ 
No  higher  model  could  he  conceive.  Externally,  the  dif- 
ferences between  the  two  churches  constantly  diminished, 
whilst  in  many  of  the  rural  as  well  as  in  the  higher  circles 
of  the  church,  the  errors  of  Home  wei'e  the  spiritual  food  of 
the  people.  "  The  celebration  of  mass,  though  illegal,  was 
openly  connived  at;  but  woe  to  the  Protestant  who  declined 
attending  at  his  parish  church,  because  he  would  not  bow 
down  at  the  altar!  He  was  punished  first  by  fine,  and,  on 
a  repetition  of  his  refusal,  to  transportation."t  Romanists 
enjoyed    all    encouragement,    both    from     the    court    and 

*  "The  system  pursued  l)y  Bancroft  and  liis  imitators,  Niel  and 
Laud,  -ttdtli  the  approbation  of  the  king,  far  opposed  to  the  healing  coun- 
sels of  Burghley  and  Bacon,  was  just  such  as  low-born  and  little-minded 
men,  raised  to  power  by  fortune's  caprice,  are  ever  found  to  pursue. 
They  studiously  aggi-avated  every  difference,  and  created  every  wound," 
&c. — Hallam,  vol.  i.,  p.  395. 

-t-  Forster's  Essays,  vol.  i.,  p.  59.  "  Tlie  bishops  and  the  rest  of  the 
Poutifician,  or  rotten-headed  clergy  and  Arrainian  factions,  \iuder  a  pre- 
tence (forsooth)  of  peace,  uniformity,  and  conformity,  have,  like  so  many 
fiery  Caesars,  triumphed  in  the  chariots  of  their  spiritual  courts,  by  their 
suspensions,  excommunications,  deprecations,  and  degradations  of  divers 
painful,  learned  and  pious  pastors  of  our  church,  and  in  the  vexatious 
and  grievous  grinding  ojipressions  of  great  number  of  his  Majesty's  good 
subjects."  "  The  most  public  and  solemn  sermons  at  court  before  the 
king  were  nothing  else,  for  the  most  part,  but  either  to  advance  the 
king's  prerogative  above  the  laws,  and  to  l)eat  down  the  subjects'  just  pro- 
priety in  their  estate  and  goods,  or  full  of  such  like  kind  of  frothy  invec- 
tive." *  *  *  "  And  tlien  also  labouring  to  make  tliose  men  odious  to  the 
king  and  state  who  conscientiously  sought  to  maintain  tlie  religion,  laws, 
and  liberties  of  the  kingdom,"  &c, — Vicar's  Jehovah  Jireh,  pj).  10,  11. 
London,  1644. 


CHARLES   THE    FIUST.  G9 

luaiiy  of  the  bishops.  Nor  was  this  all.  From  the  pulpits 
and  the  press,  the  dogmas  of  that  anti-christiau  community 
wt're  inculcated.  It  was  more  dangerous  to  teach  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Evangel,  as  expounded  by  Calvin,  than  to  teach 
tlie  creed  of  Pius  VII.  "Lord  Falkland,"  one  of  the 
noblest  men  of  his  time,  "  distinctly  charged  the  bishops 
with  having  destroyed  unity  under  pretence  of  uniformity; 
Avith  having  brought  in  superstition  and  scandal,  under  the 
letter  of  reverence  luid  decency;  with  having  defiled  the 
church,  by  adorning  the  church,  and  destroyed  the  Gospel  as 
much  as  they  could  without  bringing  themselves  into  danger 
of  being  destroyed  by  the  law."  "  The  design  has  been  to 
l)ring  in  an  English,  though  not  a  Eoman,  Popery.  I  mean 
not  only  the  outside  and  dress  of  it,  but  an  absolute  and 
blind  dependence  of  the  people  upon  the  clergy,  and  of  the 
clergy  on  themselves.""  Even  Lingard  himself  confesses, 
what  indeed  no  one  can  well  deny,  that  many  of  the  bishops 
under  Laud  were  anxious  for  a  reunion  with  the  church  of 
Rome.  Goodman,  of  Gloucester,  Montague,  of  Chichester, 
were  prominent,  if  not  enthusiastic,  in  this  matter.t  With 
such  intenseness  was  this  movement  watched  at  Rome,  with 
such  satisfaction  was  it  marked,  that  the  highest  dignity 
next  to  the  tiara  was  offered  to  the  primate,  and  the 
ecclesiastical  head  of  the  Anglican  church  might  have  been 
raised  to  the  cardinalate  in  the  sister  communion.;}:  "Under 
the  influence  of  the  Laudian  school,"  says  a  candid  Episco- 
palian, "change  was  rapid  and  comj^rehensive.  Efforts  were 
made,  and  with  uncommon  vigour,  too,  to  soften  down  the 

*  Forster,  vol.  i.,  pp.  32,  39. 

t  History,  vol.  x.,  p.  7. 

'^  "The  affair  unquestionably  has,  at  first  sight,  a  very  strange  appear- 
ance, and  to  our  apprehension,  the  mystery  is  not  cleared  up  by  the 
language  and  demeanotir  of  the  archbishop  on  the  occasion,"  &c. — Le 
IJass,  p.  371.  "  Dr.  Price,  one  of  the  king's  chaplains,  died  two  nights 
ago,  as  reported  by  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  a  Papist.  Hopes  it  will  prove 
a  fable."— Letter  of  William  Murray  to  Sir  H.  Vane,  Dec.  18,  1631. 
Calendar  of  State  Papers.     Domestic.     Ch.  i.,  p.  205. 


70  EARLY  ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

points  of  difference  between  the  two  churclies,  whilst  the 
points  of  agreement  were  set  foi-th  in  the  most  commanding 
light.  Rome  ceased  to  be  Babylon — the  man  of  sin,  the  son 
of  perdition,  the  antichrist,  in  their  language.  Nor  was 
this  all.  Sacramental  efficacy  was  unblushingly  affirmed. 
The  Supper  of  the  Lord,  the  simple  commemorative  act  of 
the  New  Testament,  was  now  a  sacrifice,  and  a  sacrifice,  was 
inseparable  from  an  altar;  and  there  followed,  as  a  necessary 
consequence,  the  inference  of  the  real  presence.  Baptism, 
we  are  told,  was  regarded,  ia  opposition  to  the  doctrine  of 
the  Reformers,  as  conferring  the  grace  of  regeneration  upon 
all  who  received  it  alike; — that  is,  they  affirmed  that  all 
baptized  persons  were  introduced  in  baptism  into  a  state  of 
grace  and  acceptance.""' 

Conformity  was  the  idol  of  Laud's  intensest  worship. 
Deviations  from  the  external  unity  of  the  church  was  a  sin  of 
no  ordinary  magnitude.  The  want  of  moral  principle  in  the 
officiating  priesthood  could  be  tolerated;  but  not  the  absence 
of  a  vestment  or  a  genufluxion  at  the  altar.  The  weightier 
matters  of  the  law  might  be  ignored,  but  not  the  mint  and 
cummin  of  the  churcLf     With  this  devout  attachment  to 


*  Marsden,  p.  354.  No  doubt  of  tliis.  It  was,  and  is,  the  logical  con- 
sequence of  infant  baptism.  From  Austin  till  now,  it  is  the  same.  "It 
introduces  them,"  says  a  modern  wi-iter,  "into  the  covenant  of  grace, 
the  everlasting  covenant,  including  all  that  God  can  give,  and  that  man 
can  receive." — Vide  Dr.  F.  Burder  on  Infant  Baptism. 

f  Lord  Falkland  thus  refers  to  them: — "We  shall  find  them  to  have 
tithed  mint  and  anise,  and  to  have  left  undone  the  weightier  matters  of 
the  law;  to  have  been  less  eager  against  those  who  damn  our  church, 
than  against  those  who,  upon  weak  conscience,  and  perhaps  as  weak 
reason  (the  dislike  of  some  commanded  gaiinent  or  some  uncommanded 
posture),  only  abstained  from  our  church.  The  conforming  to  ceremonies 
has  been  more  insisted  on  than  the  conforming  to  Clu-istianity.  The 
most  frequent  subjects  of  their  preaching  being  the  jus  divinum  of  bishops 
and  tithes,  the  sacredness  of  tithes,  the  building  of  the  in-erogative,  the 
introduction  of  such  doctrine  as  (admitting  them  true)  the  truth  would 
not  recompense  the  scandal.  And  some  have  evidently  labom-ed  to  bring 
in  an  English,  though  not  a  Eoman,  Popery;  nay,  common  fame  is  more 
than  ordinarily  false,  if  none  of  them  have  found  a  way  to  reconcile  the 


CHARLES    THE    BURST.  71 

the  sensuous  and  formal,  the  archbishop  had  imbibed  the 
spii-it  of  the  olden  church.  There  were  two  courts  through 
which  Laud  could  wield  liis  power  to  crush  the  Puritan 
factions.  These  were  the  High  Commission  Court,  and  that 
of  the  Star  Chamber.  He  found  them  ready  to  his  hands — 
engines  by  which  he  could  carry  out  his  plans  without 
let.  The  Royal  pedant  of  the  former  reign  thus  refers  to 
it:— 

^^  The  Starre  Chamber. — It  hath  a  name  from  heaven;  a 
starre  placed  in  it;  and  a  starre  is  a  glorious  creature,  and 
seated  in  a  glorious  place,  next  unto  the  angels.  The  Stai-re 
Chamber  is  also  glorious  in  substance;  for  in  the  compo- 
sition, it  is  of  foure  sorts  of  persons.  The  first  two  are  privy 
councillors  and  judges, — the  one  by  wisdom  in  matters  of 
State;  the  other,  by  learning  in  matters  of  law :  to  direct  and 
order  all  things  both  according  to  law  and  State.  The  other 
two  sorts  are  bishops,  and  peers  of  the  realm  and  bishops: 
the  peers  are  there,  by  reason  of  their  greatness,  to  give 
authority  to  that  court;  the  bishops,  because  of  their 
learning  in  divinity."* 

"It  took  cognizance,  principally,"  says  Lord  Bacon,  "of 
four  kinds  of  causes — forces,  fmuds,  crimes,  various  of 
stellionate,  and  the  indication  or  middle  acts  towards  crimes, 
capital  or  heinous,  not  actually  committed  or  perpetrated. 


opinions  of  Rome  with  the  preferment  of  England,  being  yet  so  cordially 
Papist,  that  it  is  all  £1500  a  year  can  do  to  prevent  them  from  confessing 
it.  They  appeared  ever  for^vard  for  monopolies  and  ship-money,  and  if 
any  were  backward  to  comply,  they  blasted  both  them  and  their  prefer- 
ment with  the  utmost  expression  of  their  hatred— the  title  of  Puritan. 
They  had  done  us  far  more  miscliief,  if,  by  the  grace  of  God,  their  share 
had  not  been  as  small  in  the  subtility  of  serpents  as  in  the  innocency  of 
doves." — Vide  his  Speech  against  Episcopacy.  "We  well  know,"  said  the 
patriotic  E-udyard,  "how  the  whole  church  has  been  troubled  how  to 
place  an  altar.  We  have  seen  ministers,  their  wives  and  families, 
undone  against  law,  against  conscience,  against  aU  bowels  of  compassion, 
for  not  dancing  on  a  Sunday,"  &c. — Vide  Lathorp's  E.  Eps.,  p.  114. 
'■  James's  Works,  p.  559. 


72  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

scandalous  reports  of  persons  in  power,  seditious  news,"  etc.'"' 
Tlie  High  Commission  Court,  of  a  later  date  tlian  the  Star 
Chamber,  was  instituted  "  to  correct  and  amend  all  heresies, 
schisms,  abuses,  and  offences  whatever,  which  fall  under  the 
cognizance,  and  are  subject  to  the  correction,  of  spiritual 
authority."t  From  this  agency,  it  was  difficult  for  any  man 
to  flee.  It  could  be  made  to  meet  him  at  all  points;  and, 
when  worked  by  a  man  of  Laud's  spii-it,  there  was  no  escape 
from  the  meshes  of  these  infernal  machines.  Besides,  we 
should  form  but  an  imperfect  conception  of  the  power  of 
these  courts,  if  we  did  not  state  another  fact — we  mean  the 
oath  ex-officio.  "  It  was  one  whereby  any  person  might  be 
obliged  to  make  any  presentment  of  any  crime  or  offence,  or 
confess  or  accuse  himself  of  any  criminal  matter  or  thing, 
whereby  he  might  be  liable  to  any  censure,  penalty,  or 
punishment  whatsoever."  Whitegift  regarded  it  as  "medi- 
cine," tending  to  the  reformation  of  the  delinquents  and 
the  satisfaction  of  the  church.  Charles  issued  a  letter  to  the 
High  Commissioners,  urging  them  to  proceed  against  all  who 
refused  to  take  the  oath  (1C37),  and  to  treat  them  "as  though 
they  had  confessed  and  been  legally  convicted  of  all  the 
articles  and  matters  to  which  he  so  refuseth  to  be  sworn."J 
From  another  source  we  have  a  glimpse  at  the  evils  of 
the  ex-officio  oath: — "The  exercising  of  ex-officio  oaths  and 
proceedings,  by  way  of  inquisition,  reaching  even  to  men's 
thoughts;  the  apprehending  and  detaining  of  men  by  pur- 
suivants; the  frequent  suspending  and  depriving  of  minis- 
ters; the  fining  and  imprisoning  of  all  sorts  of  people, 
bx'eaking  up  of  men's  houses  and  studies,  and  taking  away 
their  books,  letters,  and  other  writings ;  ser\ang  iipon  their 
estates,  removing  them  from  their  callings,  separating  be- 
tween them  and  their  wives,  against  both  their  wills;  the 
rejecting  of  prohibitions  and  threatenings ;  and  the  doing  of 

*  Bacon's  Works,  vol.  ii.,  p.  290.     Apud  Hallam,  vol.  i.,  p.  54. 
t  HaUam,  vol.  i.,  pp.  200,  201.        t  Card  well,  vol.  i.,  pp.  217,  229. 


CHARLES   THE   FIRST.  73 

many  other  outrages,  to  the  utter  infringing  of  the  laws,  the 
subjects'  liberties,  and  ruining  of  them  and  their  families. 
And,  of  later  times,  the  judges  of  the  land  are  so  awed  with 
the  power  and  greatness  of  the  jn-elates,  or  otherwise  per- 
verted, that  neither  prohibitions,  nor  haheccs  corpus,  nor  any- 
other  cai-eful  remedy,  can  be  had  or  take  place  for  the  dis- 
tressed subjects  in  most  cases;  only  Papists,  Jesuits,  priests, 
and  such  others  as  propagate  Popery  or  Arminianism,  are 
countenanced,  spared,  and  have  much  liberty."*  Such  was 
tlie  tremendous  power  now  in  the  hands  of  Laud.  He  used 
it  well.  Nothing  could  escape  the  eagle  eye  of  the  "little 
Doctor."  Page  after  page  might  be  tilled  with  examples  of 
the  sleepless  vigilance  of  his  Grace.  For  the  most  trifling  mat- 
ters, the  vengeance  of  these  inquisitors  fell  upon  the  people. 
Not  for  crime — not  for  immorality — but  for  the  violation  of 
some  senseless  form,  which,  in  the  primate's  judgment,  made 
a  part  (perhaps  an  essential  part)  of  the  beauty  of  holiness. 
An  example  or  two  may  be  given.  We  select  them  from  a 
mass  lying  before  us. 

Mr.  Chancey,  minister  of  Ware,  was  called  before  the  Court 
for  such  expressions  as  the  following: — "That  idolatry  was 
admitted  into  the  church ;  that  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel 
would  be  suppressed;  that  there  is  much  Atheism,  Popery, 
Arminianism,  and  heresy,  crept  into  the  church."t  Others, 
for  using  expi-essious  against  Arminianism,  were  banished 
the  University  of  Oxford.  Ptushworth  abounds  with  many 
like  examples  of  the  ci'uel  spirit  which  animated  Laud  at 
this  time. 

"  The  last  week,  one  Bowyer  was  sentenced  to  the  pillory, 
and  perpetual  imjjrisonment  in  Bridewell,  for  uttering  at 
Reading  (where  my  Lord  Grace  of  Canterbury  was  born) 
divers  scandalous  reports  of  his  Grace;  as  that  he  was  an 
Arminian;  that  he  had  written  to  the  Pope,  promising  his 


*  Proceedings  m  Kent,  p.  37.     Camden  Society. 
t  Paish worth,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  34,  110,  111,  283. 


74  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

assistance  for  the  propagation  of  the  Romish  faith  here,"  &c." 
"I  have  had  very  ungrateful  dealings  from  the  Lambeth 
patriarch,  by  whom  I  have  been  deprived  of  my  ministry 
and  all  the  profits  of  my  living  three  years  and  seven  months, 
having  myself,  my  wife,  and  seven  children  to  provide  for; 
such  is  the  prelates'  will,  for  not  consenting  to  morris- 
dancing  on  the  Lord's  day."t  "  Complaints  were  actually 
lodged  against  individuals  who  did  not  stand  up  at  the 
creed,  did  not  bow  to  the  altar,  nor  at  the  name  of  Jesus, 
nor  receive  the  sacrament  on  their  knees.":!: 

Sir  A.  Haslerig  thus  states  the  effect  of  these  proceedings : — ■ 
*'  The  Council  table  bit  like  a  serpent,  the  Star  Chamber  like 
a  scorpion.  Our  souls,  our  consciences,  were  put  on  a  rack 
by  the  archbishop.  We  might  not  speake  of  Scripture,  or 
repeate  a  sermon  at  our  table."  Even  Clarendon  is  compelled 
to  utter  strong  things.  "  When  I  cast  my  eyes  upon  the  High 
Commission,  and  other  ecclesiastical  courts,  my  soul  hath 
bled  for  the  wrongs  and  pressure  which  I  have  observed  to 
have  been  done  and  committed  in  these  courts  against  the 
king's  good  people."  The  maledictions  of  these  infamous 
courts  fell  daily  on  the  learned  and  the  holy.  Their  victims 
were  the  men  of  zeal,  of  lofty  principle,  and  holy  lives.  The 
drunkard,  the  sycophant,  the  men  of  no  principle,  lived  and 
rejoiced  in  their  debaucheries,  untouched  by  them.  In  the 
country,  the  bishops  modelled  these  courts  after  the  fashion 
of  their  metropolitans.     The  genius  of  Laud  pervaded  the 


*  Fairfax's  Correspondence,  vol.  i.,  pp.  77,  78.  "Amongst  his  liuman 
frailties,  clioler  and  passion  most  discord  itself.  In  the  Stai-  Chamber 
(where,  if  the  crime  be  not  extraordinaiy,  it  was  fine  enough  for  one  to  be 
sued  in  so  chargeable  a  coui-t),  he  was  observed  always  to  concur  with  the 
Jesuit  side,  and  to  infuse  moi-e  vinegar  than  oil  into  all  his  censures ;  and 
idso  was  much  blamed  for  his  severity  to  his  predecessor,  easing  him 
against  liis  wiU,  and  before  his  time  of  his  jurisdiction." — Fuller,  C.  H., 
p.  217. 

t  Letter  from  Richard  Culmer  to  Sir  E.  Daring,  Jan.  8,  1640.  Pro- 
ceedings in  Kent,  p.  120. 

X  Life  of  "Whitelocke,  p.  115. 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  75 

nation.  The  mainspring  of  all  ecclesiastical  machinery  was 
touched  by  him.  He  thiis  reached  all  classes.  The  lowest 
tradesman,  the  humblest  artificer,  as  well  those  of  the  higher 
circles  of  life,  were  touched  by  these  agencies.  The  wealth  of 
thousands  was  absorbed  by  them.*  The  measures  adopted  by 
him  for  extending  the  power  of  the  ecclesiastical  courts  at  the 
expense  of  all  other  courts,  had  called  forth  the  hostility  of 
the  bar  to  the  church.  Men  of  influence  in  the  profession 
"took  all  opportunities,"  Clax-endon  informs  us,  "uncharit- 
ably to  impute  mistakes  unto  crime,  and  unreasonably  to 
transfer  and  impute  the  follies  and  faults  of  particular  men 
to  the  malignity  of  their  own  functions ;  and  so  to  whet  and 
sharpen  the  edge  of  the  law  to  vound  the  church  in  its 
jurisdiction,  and  at  last  to  cut  it  iip  by  the  roots,  and 
demolish  its  foundations,  "t  On  the  conduct  of  this  British 
Inquisitor-General,  we  shall  afterwards  remark.  In  the 
meanwhile,  another  topic,  though  anticipating  a  little, 
demands  attention. 

Hitherto  only  occasional  glimpses  of  Baptist  movements, 
and  scattered  fragments  of  their  history,  have  passed  under 
review;  we  have  now  reached  a  period  when  light  and  cer- 
tainty will  guide  us.  Kespecting  one  section  of  the  body  we 
have  supplied  much  important  matter;  and  in  relation  to 
the  other,  the  material  will  now  increase  with  rapidity. 
Up  to  this  period  we  have  no  clear  and  decisive  proof  of 
the  existence  of  a  Particular  Baptist  Church.  Certainly 
under  our  notice  the  evidence  has  not  come.  Crosby's  con- 
jecture, that  many  Baptists  were  mingled  with  other 
churches,  is  highly  probable.     With  him,  it  was  apparently 


*  "It  took  under  its  care  the  consideration  due  to  the  nobility.  A 
want  of  respect,  an  inadvertency,  a  joke,  the  least  action  which  seemed 
not  to  keep  in  just  recognition  the  superiority  of  their  rank  and  of  theii- 
rights,  was  piinished  with  extreme  rigom-,  and  alwaj's  hy  enormous  fines 
for  the  benefit  of  the  king  and  the  offended  party." — Fide  Note.  Guizot. 
B.  I.,  p.  48. 

t  F(c?eHist.,vol.  i.,p.  400. 


76  E.UtLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

only  conjecture;  but  many  incidental  allusions  in  works  of 
this  period  would  justify  xis  in  aifirming  it  as  fact.  But 
waiving  this,  a.s  a  matter  in  which  our  readers  can  have  but 
little  interest,  we  shall  narrate  the  origin  of  the  English 
Particular  Baptist  body. 

One  never  gazes  on  the  small  bubbling  spring,  hidden 
in  its  mossy  bed  in  some  secluded  dell,  then  to  trace  its 
onward  flow  till  it  sweeps  past  the  marts  of  commerce, 
and  bears  on  its  bosom  the  navy  of  a  mighty  empire  or 
the  riches  of  a  nation,  but  with  intense  delight.  So  with 
the  histoiy  of  a  nation.  The  early  struggle  of  the  first 
Pilgi-im  Fathers ;  the  conflict  of  barbarism  with  civilizing 
influences  which  are  surrounding  them ;  their  gradual  rise 
in  the  arts  of  social  and  commercial  importance;  their 
constant  subordination  of  the  untoward  and  the  favoui'able 
to  the  development  of  those  resources  which  constitute 
the  greatness  and  moral  worth  of  a  community,  till  they 
stand  before  you  on  a  pedestal  as  commanding  as  any  of 
the  past.  The  power  of  thought  can  never  be  fully  esti- 
mated. The  results  of  some  new  aspects  of  Christian  truth, 
or  an  organization  for  its  diff"usion,  can  never  be  told.  The 
thought,  that  it  Avas  the  duty  of  Christians  to  seek  the  con- 
version of  the  heathen,  which  had  been  growing  up  in  the 
mind  of  Carey  for  years,  when  embodied  in  practice  changed 
the  moral  aspect  of  the  whole  chui'ch.  The  origin  of  the  Par- 
ticular Baptists  was  small,  but  its  influence  has  told,  and  will 
yet  tell  with  augmented  power,  on  the  church  and  the  world. 

From  the  pen  of  one  of  the  actoi's  in  this  movement,  we 
have  the  following  sketch  :  — "  There  was  a  congregation  of 
Protestant  dissenters  of  the  Independent  i>ersuasion  in 
London,  gathered  in  the  year  1616,  of  which  Mr.  Henry 
Jacob  was  the  first  pastor;  and  after  him  succeeded  Mr. 
John  Lathorp,  who  was  their  minister  in  1633.  In  this 
society  several  persons,  finding  that  the  society  kept  not  to 
its  first  principles  of  separation,  and  being  also  convinced 
that  baptism  was  not  to  be  administered  to  infants,  but  to 


CIIAKLES    THE    FIRST.  77 

such  as  professed  faith  in  Christ,  desired  that  they  might  be 
dismissed  from  that  communion,  and  allowed  to  form  a  dis- 
tinct congregation  in  such  order  as  was  most  agreeable  to 
their  own  sentiments.  The  church,  considering  that  they 
were  now  grown  very  numerous,  and  so  more  than  in  those 
times  of  pei-secution  could  conveniently  meet  togethei",  and 
believing  also  that  those  persons  acted  from  a  principle  of 
conscience,  and  not  from  obstinacy,  agreed  to  allow  them  the 
liberty  they  desired,  and  that  they  should  be  constituted  a 
distinct  church;  which  was  performed  Sept.  13,  1G.33.  And 
as  they  believed  that  baptism  was  not  rightly  administered 
to  infants,  so  they  looked  upon  the  baptism  they  had 
received  at  that  age  as  invalid,  whereupon  most  of  them 
received  a  new  baptism.  Their  minister  was  Mr.  John 
Spilsbury.  What  number  they  were  is  uncertain,  because 
in  the  mentioning  of  about  twenty  men  and  women,  it  is 
added,  divers  others.  In  the  year  1638,  Mr.  William  Kiffiu, 
Mr.  Thos.  Wilson,  and  others,  being  of  the  same  judgment, 
were  upon  their  request  dismissed  to  the  said  Mr.  Spilsbury's 
congregation.  In  the  year  1639,  another  congregation  of 
Baptists  was  formed,  whose  place  of  woi'ship  was  Crutched 
Friai-s ;  the  chief  promoters  of  which  were  Mr.  Grew,  Mr. 
Paul  Hobson,  and  Captain  Spencer."'" 

It  ipay  interest  our  readers  to  know  the  grounds  on  which 
this  eminent  man  (Mr.  Kiffin)  separated  from  bi'ethren  with 
whom  he  had  long  associated.  He  had  become  a  Noncon- 
formist after  much  prayer  and  inquiry ;  and  the  same  course 
led  to  his  adoption  of  those  views  which  he  held  through  life. 
"  I  used  all  endeavours,"  be  says,  "by  converse  with  all  such 
as  were  able,  and  also  by  diligently  searching  the  Scriptures, 
with  earnest  desires  to  God  that  I  might  be  directed  in  a 
right  way  of  worship;  and  after  some  time  concluded  that 
the  safest  way  was  to  follow  the  footsteps  of  the  flock, 
namely,  that  order  laid  down  by  Christ  and  his  apostles, 

*  Crosby,  vol.  i.,  pp.  148,  140. 


78  EARLY   E>-GLISH    BAPTISTS. 

4 

and  practised  by  the  primitive  Christians  in  their  time; 
which  I  found  to  be,  that  after  conversion  they  were  bap- 
tized, added  to  the  church,  and  continued  in  the  apostles' 
doctrine  and  fellowship,  and  breaking  of  bread  and  prayers, 
according  to  which  I  bound  myself  to  be  conformable."* 
Upon  these  high  and  scriptural  principles,  Mr.  Kiffin 
acted.  They  moulded  his  character,  and  regulated  his  future 
life. 

A  difficulty  presented  itself  to  the  minds  of  these  men, 
and,  whilst  it  shows  the  strength  of  their  conscientiousness, 
makes  it  manifest  that  they  were  yet  not  fully  enlightened  in 
the  nature  of  Christ's  kingdom.  Beyond  their  fellows  in  the 
clearness  of  their  views  of  the  absolute  spirituality  of  it,  they 
had  not  yet  attained  to  the  full  liberty  of  the  children  of  God. 
But  we  wiU  present  the  matter  in  the  words  of  one  intimate 
with  some  of  this  class.  "  That  they  often  met  together  to 
pray  "and  confer  about  this  matter,  and  consult  what  methods 
they  should  take  to  enjoy  tliis  ordinance  in  its  primitive 
purity.  That  they  could  not  be  satisfied  about  any  adminis- 
tration in  England  to  begin  this  practice;  because  though 
some  in  this  nation  rejected  tlte  baptism  of  infants,  yet  they 
had  not,  as  they  kntio  of,  revived  the  ancient  custom  of  im- 
mersion. But  hearing  that  some  in  the  Netherlands  prac- 
tised it,  they  agreed  to  send  one  Mr.  Richard  Bloun^  who 
understood  the  Dutcljk  language,  cariying  letters  of  recom- 
mendation with  him,  and  was  kindly  received  both  by  the 
church  there,  and  Mr.  John  Butte,  their  teacher;  that  on 
his  return  he  baptized  Mr.  Samuel  Blacklock,  a  minister, 
and  these  two  baptized  the  rest  of  this  company,  whose 
names  are  in  the  MS.  to  the  number  of  fifty-three."  This 
statement  is  vague.  We  have  no  date,  and  cannot  tell 
whether  the  fact  refers  to  the  Separatists  under  Mr.  Spilsbury, 
or  to  others.  Edwards  mentions  two  other  ministers  with 
Blount,  and  calls  the  church  "one  of  the  first  and  prime 

*  Ivimey's  Life  of  KiflBn,  p.  17. 


CHARLES    TUE    FIRST,  79 

churches  of  the  Anabaptists  now  in  these  latter  times." 
Upon  the  cause  of  the  deputation  to  Holland  we  have  com- 
mented already.  Most  will  now  see  that  the  practice  of  the 
Mennonite  brethren  was  common  in  this  countxy.  These 
"new  men"  soon  cast  them  into  the  shade,  and  their  practice 
speedily  become  obsolete.  Immersion,  as  the  mode  of  bap- 
tism, became  the  rule  with  both  sections  of  the  Baptist  com- 
munity. Indeed  from  this  time,  beyond  the  fact  already 
given,  we  know  not  a  solitary  exception. 

The  long  connexion,  and  the  vast  and  varied  influence  of 
Ml'.  Kiffiu  on  the  infant  cause,  will  hereafter  be  detailed. 
His  social  position  became  high — his  commercial  influence 
very  great — whilst  his  devotedness  to  the  church  of  Christ, 
in  connexion  with  our  body,  places  him  in  the  first  rank  of 
those  who  should  be  held  by  us  in  everlasting  remembrance. 

The  retirement  of  these  men  excited  no  ordinaiy  amount 
of  attention.  It  could  not  be  otherwise.  Their  integi'ity, 
their  consistency  and  earnest  piety,  were  not  hidden.  The 
grounds  of  their  separation  had  been  distinctly  stated,  and 
their  appeal  to  the  law  and  the  testimony  was  not  in  vain. 
It  is  probable  that  for  some  time  others  continued  to  secede 
on  the  same  ground,  as  "an  ancient  member  of  that  long- 
ago-gathered  congregation,  whereof  Mr.  Hemy  Jacob  was  an 
insti-ument  of  gathering  in,  and  the  pastor  worthy  of  double 
honour,  Mr.  John  Lathroppe,"  sought  to  stay  the  evil 
by  issuing  ^'  Sion's  Virgins;  or,  a  Short  Form  of  Catechism 
of  the  Doctrine  of  Baj^tism.'"^'  Other  members  followed. 
Their  influence  was  not  injurious.  They  excited  thought, 
prompted  inquiry,  and  speedily  augmented  the  number  of 
our  brethren. 

As  in  times  long  anterior  to  these,  "a  pool,  a  river,  a 
lake,"  were  selected  as  places  for  the  administration  of  the 
ordinance ;  so  now,  the  brethren  about  London  had  no  bap- 
tistery, and  the  flowing  stream  was  chosen  for  this  purpose. 

*  London,  1644. 


80  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Incidentally,  tliis  fact  is  stated  by  one  of  the  journalists  of 
the  time.  "  And  the  river  Lee,  which  runs  by  Bow,  wherein 
the  new  elect  rebaptize  themselves,  and  call  it  by  the  name 
of  Jordan."* 

To  other  events  the  attention  of  the  reader  must  now  be 
called.  We  have  anticipated  a  little  in  our  narrative.  The 
death  of  Buckingham  increased  the  power  of  Laud.  To  the 
councils  of  the  Sovereign  a  man  of  commanding  and  subtle 
genius  had  been  called.  Wentworth  had  been  a  leading 
patriot  for  years.  His  voice  had  been  one  of  the  loudest  in 
condemnation  of  the  extravagance  and  tyranny  of  the  court. 
The  cause  of  Charles  now  absorbed  him.f  Into  it  he  threw 
the  whole  of  his  great  and  restless  mind,  and,  finally,  by  his 
tmprincipled  support  of  it,  brought  himself  to  the  block. :J;  To 
trace  the  career  of  the  primate  and  the  civilian  in  detail  is  im- 
possible.   Only  a  very  brief  outline  can  be  given  of  the  former. 

Sustained  by  the  king,  and  all-powerful  at  the  Council 
Board,  nothing  appeared  to  check  his  course.  Ojiposition 
to  his  wish  was  powerless.  Higher  and  higher  rose  his  love 
of  form  and  ceremony,  whilst  every  step  led  to  a  closer  con- 
formity to  Rome.  The  want  of  power,  not  will,  on  his 
part,  prevented  a  closer  union.  1| 

To  show  liLS  contempt  for  the  strictness  of  the  Pui'itans, 
and  probably  to  gain  favour  with  the  multitude,  he  induced 
Charles  to  republish  the  Booh  of  Sjiorts.    Complaints  against 

*  Mercurius  Aiiliciis.    March,  1643,  is  the  date. 

'Y  "But  there  were  two  above  all  the  rest  who  led  the  van  of  tlie 
king's  councils :  and  these  were  Laud,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  a 
fellow  of  mean  extraction  and  arrogant  pride,  and  the  Earl  of  Strafford, 
who  as  much  outstripped  all  the  rest  in  favour  as  he  did  in  abilities — 
being  a  man  of  deep  policy,  stern  resolution,  and  ambitious  zeal,  to  keej) 
up  the  glory  of  his  own  greatness,"  &c. — Mrs.  Hutchinson,  p.  29. 

X  Wentworth  (Stratford),  after  joining  the  Royal  party,  appears  to 
have  lost  all  self-respect.  The  abject  flattery  with  which  he  addressed 
the  favourite  Buckingham,  when  soliciting  the  Presidency  of  the  North, 
awakens  but  one  feeling  in  the  weU-rcgulated  mind.— Ftc^c  Mrs.  Thsmson's 
Buckingham,  p.  83. 

II  A  cardinal's  hat  had  been  offered  to  Laud. — Vkk  Diary, 


CHARLES   THE   FIRST.  81 

the  various  Sunday  revels,  in  the  form  of  wakes,  church  ales, 
clerk  ales,  had  been  made  to  some  of  the  judicial  bench,  and 
eflforts  had  been  made  to  suppress  them.  Laud  reproved  the 
judges,  and  threw  the  whole  weight  of  his  influence  around 
these  holy  scenes.*  The  enjoyment  of  this  practice  of  piety 
was  confined  exclusively  to  the  church-going  people.  "We 
lack  from  the  benefit  and  liberty,"  said  the  spiritually-minded 
head  of  the  church,  "all  such  known  recusants,  either  men  or 
women,  as  will  abstain  from  coming  to  church  or  divine  ser- 
vice, being  therefore  unworthy  of  any  lawful  recreation  after 
the  said  service,  that  will  not  first  come  to  church  and  serve 
God."t  The  moral  sense  of  the  community  was  shocked,  and  it 
operated  subsequently  with  great  power  against  the  primate. 
The  Star  Chamber,  or  the  High  Commission  Court,  was 
ever  at  command  to  silence  hostility,  or   to  crush  a  foe. 

*  Elizabeth  had  set  an  example  of  this  kind  of  Sunday  devotion.  In  April, 
1569,  she  issued  the  following  licence  : — "Whereas,  we  are  informed  that 
one  John  Seconton  Poulter,  dwelling  within  the  parish  of  St.  Clement 
Danes,  being  a  poor  man,  having  four  small  children,  and  fallen  into  decay, 
is  licensed  to  have  and  to  use  some  plays  and  games  at  or  upon  nine  several 
Sundays,  for  his  better  relief,  comfort,  sustcntation,  within  the  county  of 
^Middlesex,  to  commence  and  begin  at  and  from  the  22nd  day  of  May 
next  coming  after  the  date  hereof,  and  not  to  remain  in  one  place  above 
three  several  Sundays ;  and  in  considering  that  great  crowds  of  people  is 
like  to  come  thereunto,  we  wQl  and  require  you,  as  well  for  good  order  af? 
also  for  the  jn-eservation  of  the  Queen  Majesty's  peace,  that  you  take  with 
you  four  or  five  of  the  discrete  and  substantial  men  within  your  office  and 
liberties,  when  the  game  shall  be  j^ut  in  practice,  there  and  then  to 
foresee  and  do  your  endeavour  to  your  best  in  that  behalf  dui'ing  the 
continuance  of  the  games  or  plays,  which  games  are  severally  mentioned 
Jvereafter;  that  is  to  say,  the  shooting  with  the  standard,  the  shooting 
with  the  broad  arrow,  the  shooting  at  the  twelve  score  prick,  the  shooting 
at  the  Turk,  the  leaping  for  men,  the  running  for  men,  the  wrestling,  the 
throwing  of  the  sledge,  and  the  pitching  of  the  bar,  with  all  such  other 
games  as  have  at  any  time  heretofore,  or  now  be  licensed,  used,  or 
played.  Given  the  26th  day  of  April,  in  the  11th  year  of  the  Queen 
Majcstj^'s  reign."— CardweU,  vol.  i.,  pp.  311,  312. 

t  "  This  measure  excited  more  prejudice  against  the  king  and  the  arch- 
bishop than  almost  any  other  action  of  the  period ;  indeed,  any  act  of  the 
court  seemed  calcidated  to  hasten  on  that  ruin  which  eventually  fol- 
lowed."— Lathbury's  E.  Episcopacy,  p.  87. 


»3  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Hundreds,  of  whose  names  there  is  no  recox'd,  felt  the  power 
of  tliis  English  Inquisition.*  The  case  of  Dr.  Leighton  has 
been  noticed,  t  Another  now  demands  a  passing  remark. 
Prynne,  a  barrister,  Burtou,  a  minister  of  holy  life,  and 
Bastwick,  a  doctor  of  mediciue,  had,  in  various  ways,  given 
offence  to  the  "little  Doctor"  at  Lambeth.  The  incidents  of 
their  trials  we  cannot  narrate.  Theii-  punishment  only  claims 
our  attention.  The  sentence  was,  "That  Mr.  Burton  be 
depx'ived  of  his  living,  and  degraded  from  his  ministry,  as 
Prynne  and  Bastwick  had  been  from  their  pi-ofessions  of  law 
and  physic;  that  each  of  them  be  fined  £5,000;  that  they 
stand  in  the  pillory  at  Westminster,  and  have  their  ears  cut 
off;  and  because  Mr.  Prynne  had  already  lost  his  ears  by 
sentence  of  the  court,  1633,  it  was  ordered  that  the  remainder 
of  his  stumps  should  be  cut  off,  and  that  he  should  be  stig- 
matized on  both  cheeks  with  the  letters  S.  L. ;  J  and  then  all 
three  were  to  suffer  perpetual  imprisonment  in  the  remotest 
jn-isons  of  the  kingdom."  |1     These  are  only  samples  of  the 


*  "  The  oppressions  then  of  the  bishops,  on  men's  souls,  bodies,  and 
goods,  is  so  pitiful,  that  it  is  marvelled  if  God  come  not  down  to  plead 
the  cause  of  the  poor  innoccnt3."^Baillie,  vol.  i.,  p.  67. 

+  "Laud,  who  as  a  bishop  should  have  known  liimself  precluded  by 
the  canons  of  the  church  from  being  a  judge  in  any  cause  Avhich  could 
lead  to  penalties  involving  death  or  mutilations,  took  off  his  cap  in  the 
court  and  retiu-ned  thanks  to  God  when'  the  sentence  was  pronounced." 
— Kemble,  note,  p.  Ixxviii.  Leighton  was  afterwards  made  blaster  of 
Lambeth  House. 

X  Wliitelocke  positively  affirms  that  Laud  procured  a  sharp  sentence 
to  be  passed  on  Prynne. — Vol.  i.,  p.  62. 

II  Neal.  On  the  first  trial  of  Prj-nne,  the  liench  was  degraded  by 
Lord  Dorset,  who  displayed  both  his  low  wit  and  his  inhumanity,  in  pro- 
nouncing sentence.  Take  the  following  as  confirmatory  of  this: — "Mr. 
Prynne  I  do  declare  to  be  a  schism  maker  in  the  church,  a  seditious 
source  to  the  commonwealth,  a  woK  in  sheep's  clothing, — in  a  word, 
omnium  malorum  neqidssimns.  I  shall  fine  him  £5,000,  which  is  more 
than  he  is  worth,  yet  less  than  he  deserveth.  I  will  not  set  him  at 
liberty,  no  more  than  a  plagued  man,  or  mad  dog,  who  though  he  cannot 
bite,  he  will  foam ;  he  is  so  far  from  being  a  soci.ible  soul,  that  he  is  not 
a  rational  soul ;  he  is  fit  to  live  in  dens  vnih.  such  beasts  of  prey  as  wolves 
and  tigers  like  himself.     Therefore,  I  do  condemn  him  to  perpetual 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST,  83 

ci'uelty  of  this  infamoxis  court.  The  sufferers  triumphed 
over  the  prelate  in  the  execution  of  the  sentence.  Their 
moral  heroism  won  the  admiration  of  the  multitude,  whilst 
the  indignation  against  this  ruthless  persecution  deepened  in 
intensity.* 

Closer  and  closer  the  influence  of  Laud  and  his  satellites 
was  drawing  around  the  Separatists.  Their  home  was  hope- 
less of  comfort  or  peace.  To  other  lands  they  began  to 
look.  The  wild  and  boundless  prairies  of  the  new  world  had 
sheltered  the  Pilgrim  Fathers.  There  was  still  room  for 
others  of  the  persecuted.  Liberty  there  could  be  enjoyed, 
and  conscience  would  be  unfettered.  Thousands  sought  the 
shelter  which  the  New  England  colonies  then  offered.  The 
emigrants  were  men  of  piety,  influence,  energy,  and  moral 
worth.  They  carried  with  them  the  elements  of  new  and 
pi'osperous  empires,  and  greatly  aided  in  developing  the 
resources  of  the  then  infant  colonies.  Others  fled  to  Hol- 
land, and  sought  freedom  under  the  Republican  Govern- 
ments, t  Wrong  is  never  powerless.  Violators  of  rights 
ultimately  sufter.  The  unprincii)led  monarch,  and  his 
ecclesiastical  adviser,  inflicted  on  the  country  immense 
damages.     Not  less  than  half-a-million  of  capital — a  very 

imprisonment,  as  those  monsters  that  are  no  longer  fit  to  live  amongst 
men,  nor  to  see  the  light.  I  should  burn  him  in  the  forehead,  and  slit 
him  in  the  nose,  for  I  find  that  it  is  confessed  of  all,  that  Dr.  Leightun's 
offence  was  less  than  Mr.  PrjTine's ;  then  why  should  Mr.  Prynne  suffer 
less?"  &c.  The  sentence  was  inhuman  in  the  extreme,  and  was  executed 
with  i-uthless  harbarity.  He  was  expelled  from  Oxford  and  the  bar;  a 
fine  of  £5,000  was  inflicted,  his  ears  were  cut  off,  and  his  work  was  burnt 
before  his  face  by  the  common  hangman. 

^  ""Whilst  punishing  Bastwick  for  ^\^iting  against  the  Papacy,  he  tole- 
rated a  fierce  priest  of  the  name  of  Choroney,  who  had  Avritten  in  favour 
of  the  Pope,  and  dedicated  his  work  to  Laud." — Life  of  Whitelocke,  p.  112. 
London,  18G0. 

f  "The  Anabaptists  have  three  meeting-places  which  are  connived 
at;  these  resembling  bams,  so  they  term  them.  Amongst  these  Ana- 
baptists, some  Arians,  some  Socinians.  Of  these  Anabaptists  'tis  said 
there  are  thirty- three  sorts." — Brereton's  Travels,  p.  (J8.  Cheetham 
Society. 


84  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

large  sum  at  that  time — was  abstracted  from  the  resources 
of  the  nation;  and  had  not  the  popular  power  paralyzed 
this  ci-uel  policy,  it  is  supposed  that  a  fourth  part  of  the 
movable  property  of  England  would  have  been  carried  to 
America.  Cromwell,  Hampden,  Haslerig,  and  others,  were 
ready  to  transfer  their  persons  and  their  wealth  to  the 
same  country;  but  the  monarch,  as  though  smitten  with 
judicial  blindness,  forbade  their  departure.  It  was  well.* 
This  country  could  not  spare  them.  Providence,  in  its 
hidden  but  effectual  workings,  was  preparing  them  for  the 
consummation  of  those  plans  which  their  splendid  genius, 
their  lofty  principles,  and  their  sleepless  vigilance  finally 
achieved. 

The  country  was  covered,  as  it  were,  with  a  network  of 
spies.  In  the  smallest  hamlet,  as  well  as  in  the  marts  of 
commerce,  these  moral  pests  were  found.  With  full  power 
they  were  armed.  Wren  and  others  of  the  Episcopate,  with 
the  fidl  concurrence  of  the  primate,  had  issued  the  most 
stringent  orders  to  their  miserable  dependents.  We  give,  as 
a  sample,  the  following  articles  of  inquiry  issued  by  the 
former.  They  are  selected  from  a  copy  in  the  British 
Museum : — 

"3.  Is  there  in  your  parish  any  that  have  been,  or  is  vehemently 
suspected  to  have  been  present  at  any  unlawful  assemblies,  conven- 
ticles, or  meetings,  under  colour  or  pretence  of  any  exercise  of 
religion?  or  do  any  affirm  and  maintain  such  meetings  to  be  lawful? 

"4.  Be  there  any  abiding  m,  or  resorting  to,  youi-  parish,  .  .  . 
factious  Separatists,  refusing  to  repair  to  the  chtirch  to  hear  divine 
service,  &c.  ?  Or  that  have,  or  do  publish,  sell,  or  dispense  any 
superstitious,   seditious,    or  schismatical  books,  &c.,  touching  the 

*  "An  Order  in  Council  was  passed,  that  the  Lord  Treasurer  of  Eng- 
land should  take  speedy  and  effectual  course  for  the  stay  of  eight  ships, 
now  in  the  river  of  Thames,  prepared  to  go  for  New  England ;  and  should 
likewise  give  orders  for  the  putting  on  land  all  the  passengers  and  pro- 
visions therein  intended  for  the  voyage.  In  these  sliips  were  Sir  W. 
Boynton,  Sir  "W.  Constable,  Sir  A.  Haslerig,  John  Hampden,  and  O. 
Cromwell." — Neal.  Vide  Robertson's  America,  lib.  x.  Burton's  Diary, 
vol.  ii.,  p.  325.    D'Ewes,  vol.  ii.,  p.  117. 


CHARLES   THE   FIRST.  85 

religion,  state,  or  ecclesiastical  government  of  this  kingdom?  Present 
their  names,  qualities,  and  conditions,  if  you  know  or  have  heard  of 
any." 

These  were  renewed  two  years  after,  on  Wren's  removal 
to  Ely. 

To  another  event  the  reader's  attention  must  now  be 
called,  because  it  was  disastrous  to  the  monarch  and  perilous 
to  his  throne.  The  bald  Presbyterianism  of  the  North  had 
long  been  distasteful  to  Laud.  It  stood  in  the  boldest  con- 
trast to  the  imposing  splendour  of  his  own  church.  Already 
to  some  extent  he  had  forced  an  Episcopate  on  the  Northern 
kingdom.  Upon  the  church  he  again  operated.  A  liturgy 
more  conformed  to  the  English  one  was  designed.  The 
infatuated  monarch  ordered  one  to  be  pi-epared,  as  well  as 
to  enforce  with  more  rigour  the  new  order  of  bishops  on  the 
unwilling  people.  Others  prepared  it,  but  it  was  pervaded 
by  the  spirit  of  Laud.  Its  tendency  was  undisguised.  Some 
of  the  unmistakable  dogmas  of  Popery  were  in  it.*  The 
friends  of  the  court  saw  the  danger  of  enforcing  it,  and 
urged  delay.  Remonstrance  was  in  vain.  The  proud  pre- 
late stormed  and  threatened  to  remove  the  bishops  from 
their  sees,  if  they  hesitated.  No  means  were  neglected 
in  securing  the  establishment  of  the  detested  hierarchy. 
Laud  had  no  scruples.  Judges  were  bribed — unprincipled 
men  were  invested  with  power.  Known  individuals  were 
chosen,  already  committed  to  a  certain  course,  to  preside  at 
the  decision  of  certain  matters,  when  the  most  unbiassed 
judgment  should  have  been  exercised.t  "Your  book  of 
canons,  which,  perchance,  at  first,  will  make  more  noise  than 
all  the  cannons  of  Edinburgh  Castle;  but  when  men's  ears 
have  been  used  awhile  to  the  sound  of  them,  they  will  not 
startle  so  much  at  it,  as  now  at  the  first.":|: 

*  Neal.     Baillie,  vol.  1.,  lett.  i.,  pp.  1,  2. 

+  DalrjTnple's  second  volume  presents  abundant  evidence  from  the  let- 
ters of  Laud  of  the  utter  unprincipledness  of  this  worthless  churchman. 

t  Bishop  J\xxon.  Dalrymple,  vol.  ii.,  p.  18.  Letter  to  Maxwell, 
Bishop  of  Ross.    1635. 


eb  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

The  Sunday  after  Easter,  1637,  was  the  day  appointed  for 
the  iiiti'oduction  of  the  new  form.  The  High  Church  in 
Edinburgh  was  selected  for  the  occasion.  Prelates  in  their 
robes  and  mitres,  barons  in  their  robes  of  state,  and  the 
representatives  of  the  court,  crowded  to  the  chm-ch,  to 
support  by  their  presence  the  plans  of  Laud.  But  there  was 
another  element  at  work.  The  people  in  masses  assembled 
also.  The  Bishop  of  Edinburgh  and  the  Dean  were  to  oiEciate. 
For  some  time  the  service  proceeded  with  moderate  calmness, 
when  up  rose  a  sturdy  Scotch  matron,  imbued  alike  with 
the  doctrine  and  spirit  of  Knox,  and  seizing  the  stool 
on  which  she  had  been  sitting,  flung  it  at  the  head  of  the 
minister.  It  was  the  signal  for  an  outbreak.  The  assembly 
was  in  an  uproar.  "  The  serving-maids  began  such  a  tumult 
as  was  never  heard  of  since  the  Reformation."  *'  A 
similar  scene,"  says  Napier,  "  occurred  in  Glasgow.  At  the 
outgoing  of  the  church,  about  thii'ty  or  forty  of  our  honestest 
women,  in  one  voice,  before  the  bishop  and  magisti-ates,  fell 
a  railing,  cursing,  scolding,  with  clamour  on  Mr.  W.  Annan ; 
and  when  this  clergyman  was  proceeding  after  supper  to 
visit  the  Ai'chbishop  of  Glasgovr,  he  is  no  sooner  in  the 
street,  at  nine  o'clock  on  a  dark  night,  with  three  or  four 
ministers  with  him,  but  some  hundreds  of  enraged  women, 
of  all  qualities,  are  about  him  Avith  n eaves,  staves,  and  peats, 
but  no  stones.  They  beat  him  sore;  his  cloak,  ruff,  and 
hat  were  rent ;  however,  upon  his  cries,  and  candles  sent  out 
from  many  windows,  he  escaped  all  bloody  wounds;  yet  he 
was  in  great  danger  even  of  killing."* 

*  Napier's  Montrose,  p.  43.  Baillie,  vol.  i.,  p.  8.  "No  sooner  were  tlie 
books  opened  by  the  Dean  of  Edinburgh,  but  a  number  of  the  vulgar 
(most  of  them  women),  with  clapping  of  their  hands,  cursing,  and  out- 
cries, raised  such  a  barbarous  hubbub  in  the  place  tliat  none  could  hear  or 
be  heard.  The  Bishop  of  Edinburgh,  who  was  to  preach,  stept  into  the 
pulpit,  &c.;  but  then  the  rabble  grew  so  enraged  and  mad,  that  if  a  stool, 
aimed  to  be  thrown  at  him,  had  not  been  providentially  diverted  by  the 
hand  of  one  present,  the  life  of  the  prelate  had  been  endangered,  if  not 
lost." — Heath's  Chronicles,  p.  5.     London,  1676.     "No  man  may  speak 


CHAKLES   THE   FIRST,  O/ 

No  one  familiar  with  the  past  will  wonder  at  this.  The 
younger  bishops,  prompted  by  the  primate,  had  led  their 
party  into  the  most  violent  courses.  Imagining  that  they  had 
subdued  their  opponents,  or  awed  them  to  silence,  no  bounds 
were  set  to  their  pride  and  ambition.  Daily  it  grew,  till  it 
became  imbearable.  Ministers  and  nobles  alike  felt  it,  and 
the  latter  saw  that  there  was  danger  to  their  veiy  estates 
from  the  encroachment  of  these  ecclesiastics." 

The  events  in  Edinburgh  and  Glasgow  were  only  the  begin- 
ning of  the  conflicts.  The  spirit  of  the  Noi-th  was  roused. 
Alarm  and  consternation  prevailed.  "  There  is  nothing 
expected  here,"  said  David  Mitchel,  "but  civil  war.  There 
is  no  meeting  of  Council ;  the  chancellor  may  not  with  any 
safety  attend  it,  nor  any  bishops ;  the  very  name  is  more  odious 
among  old  and  young  than  the  devil' s."t  Preparations  for 
war  followed.  The  nation  entered  into  it  with  spirit.  The 
nobles,  the  burghers,  and  the  ministers  proposed  the  "Solemn 
League  and  Covenant."  Around  it  the  popular  sympathy 
gathered.  Intense  was  the  feeling  it  excited.  "  In  the  west 
country,  they  will  give  no  passenger,"  says  Dalrymple,  "either 
meat,  or  drink,  or  lodging  for  his  money,  until  he  first  give 
them  assurance  that  he  is  a  member  of  this  unchristian 
Covenant. "J     Vainly  did   the  monarch  strive  against  the 


anything  in  public  for  the  king's  party,  except  he  wonld  have  himself 
marked  for  a  sacrifice  to  be  killed  some  day.  I  think  our  people  possessed 
w-ith  a  bloody  devil,  far  above  anything  that  I  could  have  ever  imagined 
though  the  mass  in  Latin  had  been  presented." — Baillie,  vol.  i.,  p.  10. 

*  Wright's  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.,  p.  519.  "The  same  error," 
says  Bishop  B,ussell,  'Svhich  rendered  unpopular  the  introduction  of  the 
canons,  was  committed  in  imposing  the  use  of  the  liturgy.  The  clergy 
was  not  consulted ;  the  nation,  in  general,  was  kept  in  ignorance  till  the 
Koyal  mandate  was  issued ;  and  no  means  were  employed  to  prepare  the 
feelings  of  the  common  people  for  a  change  to  which,  had  it  j^roceeded 
from  their  own  pastors,  they  would,  it  is  probable,  have  readily  sub- 
mitted."—History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.,  p.  129.  Napier. 
Montrose,  p.  34.     Edinburgh,  1840. 

t  Dali-ymple,  vol.  iL,  p.  37. 

J  Ibid,  p.  26.  "  I  hear  some  mutter  at  Bishop  Laud's  carriage  there 
(Scotland),  that  it  was  too  haughty  and  pontifical." — HoweU,  p.  201. 


88  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

rising  tide.  His  armies  failed  liim,  and  his  unwise  course 
laid  the  foundation  of  future  trouble,  whilst  it  had  no  feeble 
influence  on  the  fate  of  Laud  and  Wentworth,  his  leading 
counsellors  in  this  mischievous  affaii*.  Fully  to  appreciate 
the  circumstances  of  our  brethren,  and  the  adverse  influences 
which  surrounded  them,  we  felt  that  these  somewhat 
lengthy  details  were  necessary. 

Mystery,  to  a  considerable  extent,  shrouds  the  movements 
of  our  brethren  at  this  period ;  yet  we  know  from  subsequent 
facts,  not  only  of  their  existence,  but  of  their  progress  in 
various  places.  From  the  grasp  of  the  hierarchy  they  could 
not  escape.  Detested  above  all  other  separatists  by  the 
ecclesiastics,  as  opposed  to  the  State-churchism,  and  hated 
by  the  sects  from  the  hostility  to  the  Genevan  doctrine, 
caution  became  them  in  all  their  movements.  In  houses  in 
secluded  places,  or  in  some  retu-ed  spot  distant  from  the  busy 
haunts  of  men,  they  were  forced  to  worship.  Only  from  the 
utterances  of  their  adversaries,  in  some  cases,  do  we  catch  a 
glimpse  of  their  movements,  or  from  the  reports  of  bishops 
the  reality  of  their  existence. 

About  this  time,  it  is  more  than  probable  that  their  prin- 
ciples in  modern  times  were  first  propagated  ia  the  Prin- 
cipality. Dense  was  the  darkness  which  rested  on  the 
inhabitants.  It  would  be  extremely  diflicult,  if  not  impos- 
sible, for  us  to  realise  it.  Ignorance  and  immorality  marked 
the  conduct  of  the  religious  teacher,  while  vice,  in  almost  every 
form,  grew  luxuriantly  amongst  the  people.  "  It  is  supposed, 
from  circumstances,  that  a  small  Baptist  church  was  formed 
at  Olchon  in  1633.  If  there  ever  were  any  written  accounts 
of  its  regular  constitution,' it  seems  they  are  irrecoverably 
lost,  like  many  more  valuable  papers  of  that  time.  Mr. 
Howell  Yaughan  was  the  minister  there;  it  is  probable  that 
he  preached  mostly  among  his  own  small  congregation,  and 
not  much  abroad."*     This  little  Border  town  was  a  conse- 

*  Thomas's  History  of  the  Baptist  Associations  in  "Wales,  p.  3.     "It  is 


CHARLES    THE    FIRST.  89 

crated  spot.  Around  it  recollections  of  tlie  past  clustered, 
of  no  common  interest.  About  the  middle  o^the  fourteenth 
century,  the  pure  Word  of  the  Lord  sounded  from  it. 
Walter  Brute,  a  disciple  of  Wicklifte,  resided  here.  He  was 
a  gentleman  of  fortune  and  education.  To  proclaim  the 
truth  was  the  sole  object  of  his  life;  for  he  gives  us  an 
interesting  sketch  of  his  labours.  It  is  too  long  for  our 
pages.  He  gathered  separate  congregations,  and  we  are  told 
by  the  author  of  the  History  of  the  Welsh  Baptists,  that  he 
taught  "  that  faith  should  precede  baptism,  and  that  baptism 
w;i3  not  essential  to  salvation;  yet  still  admitted  that  the 
faith  of  godly  parents  was  sufficient  for  their  children." 
Near  to  this  spot,  also,  resided  the  celebrated  Lord  Cobham. 
Oldcastle  is  only  a  short  distance  from  Olchon.  Hunted  by 
his  fierce  persecutors  from  court  on  the  charge  of  heresy,  he 
fled  to  his  paternal  home.  For  four  years  he  eluded  the 
vigilance  of  his  foes,  and  spent  this  time  in  inculcating  the 
"true  evangel"  on  the  minds  of  the  people.  His  efforts 
were  not  in  vain.  The  conjecture  is  not  improbable,  that  the 
flame  kindled  by  Brute  and  his  disciples,  and  then  sustained 
by  the  labours  of  Oldcastle,  though  often  feeble  in  after  ages, 
still  lingered,  till  it  manifested  itself  in  the  first  Separatist 
church  in  the  Principality.*  The  fact  is  one  of  singular 
interest. 

In  the  writings  of  some  leading  men  of  this  period,  there 
are  occasional  allusions  to  the  Anabaptists.  Mostly  they 
are  based  in  error.  No  one  need  wonder  at  this.  It 
answered  an  important  end  to  misrepresent.  Above  all 
others,  they  were  dreaded  as  moral  pests.  Strype  thus 
refers  to  some  in  Essex:  "Woidd  to  God  the  honourable 
Council  saw  the  face  of  Essex  as  we  do  see.     We  have  such 


indeed  uncertain  when  this  church  was  constituted ;  but,  by  circumstances, 
it  is  supposed  to  have  been  about  1633.     It  is  considerably  the  oldest 
society  of  Nonconformists  in  the  Principality,"  &c. — Rippon's  Register, 
from  1794  to  1797,  p.  21. 
*  Fox.     Thomas's  "Welsh  Baptists.     Ivimey,  vol.  i. ,  pp.  73-70. 


90  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

obstinate  heretics,  Anabaptists,  and  otber  unruly  pei'sons 
here,  as  never  were  heard  of."* 

Puller,  in  a  sermon  on  the  Indwelling  of  the  Spirit,  thus 
betrays  his  ignorance  of  the  views  of  the  brethren  at  that 
period: — "And  what  if  some  practical  Anabaptists  by  usur- 
pation have  entitled  their  brain-sick  fancies  to  be  so  many 
illuminations  of  the  Spiiit,  must  we  presently  turn  Sadducees 
in  this  point,  and  deny  that  there  is  any  Spirit  at  alii  God 
forbid. "t 

About  the  same  year,  D'Ewes,  depicting,  with  sincere 
indignation,  the  gi-owth  of  superstition  under  the  influence 
of  Laud,  refers  with  no  appro-sdng  pen  to  our  brethren.  It 
is  only  the  former  portion  of  this  statement  which  can  be 
applied  with  any  truthfulness  to  them.  Their  whole  history 
would  be  an  overwhelming  refutation  of  the  truth  of  the 
latter  statement. 

"At  home,  many  wicked  Anabaptistical  or  Popishly- 
affected  divines  and  scholars,  in  both  universities  and  else- 
where, maintained  in  the  schools  and  pulpits  justification  by 
works,  jfreewill,  Christ's  bodily  presence  in  the  sacrament  of 
the  Lord's  Su])per,  and  a  world  of  other  corrupt  and 
noisome  tenets,  which  made  my  soul  to  fetch  deep  sighs,  and 
my  tongue  to  pray  daily  that  God  would  preserve  his  Gospel 
and  truth  amongst  us.  One  Dr.  Beale  (being  made  master 
of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge)  caused  such  a  general 
adoration  to  and  towards  the  altar  and  sacrament  to  be 
practised,  that  many  godly  fellows  and  scholars  of  the  house 
left  their  places  to  avoid  the  abominations."^ 

To  other  events,  the  attention  of  the  reader  will  be  called 
in  another  chapter. 


*  Strype's  E.  Mem.,  vol.  iii.     David's  E.  Noncon.  in  Essex,  p.  54. 
t  Memorials  of  T.  Fuller,  D.D.,  p.  59. 
t  D'Ewes,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  Ill,  112. 


THE    CIVIL    WAK.  91 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE   CrV'IL  WAR. 


"We  are  now  approaching  a  period  in  our  national  history 
to  which  events  had  long  been  tending,  and  which  shook  the 
political  and  social  state  of  the  people  to  its  very  centre.  Pre- 
judice  or  ignorance  has  so  abused  tlie  leading  actors  in  this 
crisis,  that  we  feel  it  a  duty,  most  solemnly  binding,  to  present 
an  accurate  view  of  their  character  and  motives  to  our  readers. 
The  sketch  cannot  be  full  length — only  in  miniature.  We 
have  our  own  opinions,  but,  for  obvious  reasons,  those  of 
othei's  who  difler  from  us  on  many  ecclesiastical  matters 
may  be  invoked  to  vindicate  the  memory  of  the  great  and 
patriotic  of  that  exciting  era.  Time  is  doing  its  work. 
From  the  mists  which  have  shrouded  them  for  generations, 
they  are  stamUng  out  before  us  with  a  majesty  and  unsur- 
passed dignity,  commanding  our  admiration  and  love. 
Royalty  had  not  more  devoted  admirers,  liberty  not  warmer 
friends,  and  their  interest  in  the  woe  or  weal  of  the  nation 
was  supreme.  They  were  not  Nonconformists,  but  Church- 
men, not  Anabaptists,  but  Episcopalians,  in  the  senate,  who 
led  the  van  against  the  crushing  despotism  of  Whitehall  and 
Lambeth.  All  facts  justify  the  opinion  of  the  author  of  the 
history  of  the  English  Episcopacy  when  he  says: — 

"The  great  majority  of  the  members  were  decided  friends 
to  Episcopacy,  whatever  may  have  been  their  views  of  Laud 
and  some  of  the  bishops.  They  wei'e,  however,  divided  into 
two  parties — rigid  and  moderate  Episcopalians.  The  latter 
venerated  Episcopacy  as  that  form  of  Government  which 
had  prevailed  in  the  church  from  the  apostolic  age;  the 
former  assumed  a  higher  ground,  and  maintained  the  jus 
divimim  of  Episcopacy.     .     .     .     Both  were  decided  friends 


92  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS, 

to  the  Church  of  England,  and,  together,  they  formed  a 
large  majority  in  the  two  Houses."* 

"At  the  opening  of  Parliament,  England  had  neither 
desired  nor  even  thought  of  a  revolution;  the  dissenters 
merely  meditated  one  in  the  church;  the  return  of  legal 
orders,  the  re-establishment  of  ancient  liberties,  the  reform 
of  actual  and  pressing  abuses, — such  had  been,  or  at 
least  so  it  was  thought,  the  sole  wish  and  hopes  of  the 
nation.  The  leaders  themselves,  bolder  and  more  enlightened, 
scarcely  formed  any  more  extended  projects;  the  energy  of 
their  will  surpassed  the  ambition  of  their  thoughts;  and 
they  had  gone  on  from  day  to  day  without  any  ultimate 
aims,  without  system,  carried  forward  simply  by  the  pro- 
gressive developments  of  their  situation,  and  to  satisfy  urgent 
necessities.  When  the  moment  arrived  for  drawing  the 
sword,  all  were  aghast;  not  that  their  hearts  were  timid,  nor 
that  civil  war  in  the  abstract  had  either  in  the  eyes  of 
Parliament  or  the  people  anything  strange  or  criminal  about 
it;  on  the  contrary,  they  read  it  with  pride  in  the  great 
charter,  in  the  history  of  their  countrymen."f 

Probably  the  history  of  Parliaments  would  show  us  no 
period  when  the  feelings  of  the  people  were  higher,  and  their 
discontent  more  strongly  expressed.  The  causes  of  this  were 
many.  No  one  felt  secure.  Their  dearest  rights  were  in 
jeopardy  every  moment.  The  recklessness  of  Laud  and  his 
colleagues  made  them  fear  the  spread  of  Poiiery.  The  conduct 
of  the  civil  courts,  the  business  of  ship-money,  the  ^delation 
of  law,  the  oppressions  of  the  Star  Chamber,  and  other 
matters,  had  filled  the  nation  with  gloom,  and  inspired  the 
public  mind  with  the  very  wor-st  fears.  J     The  conduct  of 

*  Latherby,  E.  Epis.,  p.  110.     Vide  p.  139. 

+  Guizot,  b.  iii.,  p.  146.  Even  Clarendon  says  :  "It  could  never  be 
hoped,  that  more  sober  and  dispassionate  men  would  meet  together  in 
that  place,  or  fewer  who  brought  ill  purposes  with  them :  nor  could  any 
man  imagine  what  offence  they  had  given  to  put  the  king  to  that  resolu- 
tion (viz.,  to  dissolve  it)." — Hist.,  b.  ii.,  p.  56. 

+  Lord  North's  Narrative.    Somer's  Tracts,  vol.  i.,p.  4.     "  Their  very 


THE    CIVIL    WAR.  93 

the  House  was  now  the  only  hope  of  the  people.  In  the 
liands  of  the  members  of  that  celebrated  assembly,  the  future 
liberties  of  the  ])eople  were  placed.  Anxiety  filled  every 
mind;  for  the  struggle  was  one  of  an  unparalleled  character. 
At  the  opening  of  the  session,  there  was  no  mistake  as  to 
the  attitude  the  Commons  would  take.  The  speech  from  the 
throne  was  heard  with  attention,  if  not  with  entire  satisfac- 
tion. Eleven  years  had  passed  away  since  in  auger  they  had 
been  sent  to  their  homes.  Law  and  liberty  had  been  violated ; 
the  word  and  honour  of  the  monarch  had  been  proclaimed 
as  things  of  naught;  whilst  the  most  despotic  power  had  been 
wielded  during  that  period.  The  crisis  was  now  at  hand. 
From  it  the  patriots  shrank  not.  No  heart  quailed,  no 
hand  was  feeble.  We  have  seen  them  already  acting  as  the 
conservators  of  religion.  With  the  Church  as  subordinate  to 
the  State,  they  had  a  right  to  interfere.  It  was  the  creation 
of  the  State,  and  could  be  moulded  according  to  their  will. 
Popery  and  Arminianism  were  dreaded  by  them.  They  were 
twins,  or,  rather,  they  thought  one  was  the  product  of  the 
other.  Episcojialian  tendencies  were  wholly  in  this  direction. 
Laud  favoured  the  latter,  while  the  court  in  every  way 
appeared  to  foster  both.  A  Committee  was  at  once  appointed 
to  guard  the  sacred  ark.  Its  power  was  great.  All  matters 
connected  with  doctrine,  with  ceremonies  and  morals,  were 
placed  under  its  supervision.  Right  heartily  did  it  enter  on 
its  task.  From  no  inquiry  did  it  shrink — no  person  was 
placed  above  its  examinations.  The  urgency  was  imperative. 
"  It  is  well  known,"  said  the  high-minded  Rudyard,  "what 
disturbances  have  been  brought  unto  the  church  for  vain  and 

enemies  of  this  Parliament  confess  that  they  met  in  November,  1640, 
with  almost  unminglecl  zeal  for  the  public  good,  and  with  loyal  attach- 
ment to  the  crown.  Not  the  demagogue  or  adventurer  of  ti-ansient  popu- 
larity, but  men  well-born  and  wealthy,  than  whom  there  could,  perhaps, 
never  be  assembled  500  more  adequate  to  redress  tlie  grievances  or  fix 
the  laws  of  a  great  nation."— Hallam,  vol.  i.,  pp.  521,  522.  Baxter  says 
there  was  only  one  Presbyterian  in  the  House  when  the  war  began. 
—Hist,  of  Councils,  p.  80,  81.     4to.  1682. 


94  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

petty  trifles;  the  whole  church,  the  whole  kingdom,  troubled 
about  where  to  place  a  metaphor  or  an  altar.  We  have  seen 
ministers,  their  Avives,  children,  and  families,  undone  against 
law,  against  conscience,  against  all  compassions,  about 
dancing  on  Sundays.  These  inventions  were  but  sieves  made 
to  winnow  the  best  men,  and  that  is  the  devil's  occupation. 
I  never  heard  of  any  but  diligent  preachers  that  were  vexed 
with  them  and  the  like  devices."* 

Lord  Andover,  on  the  5th  of  March,  1641,  in  the  House 
of  Lords,  moved  for  the  abolition  of  that  engine  of  regal  and 
Episcopal  tyranny,  the  Star  Chamber.  The  High  Commis- 
sion Court  soon  followed.  John  Catton  thus  alludes  to  the 
mighty  oppressions  of  the  former,  and  the  latter  was  not 
behind  its  twin  brother  in  the  magnitude  of  its  crime  against 
the  liberties  of  the  nation: — "The  ecclesiastical  courts  are 
like  the  courts  of  the  High  Priests  and  Pharisees,  which 
Solomon,  by  a  spirit  of  prophecy,  styleth  dens  of  lions,  and 
mountains  of  leopards.  Those  only  who  have  had  to  do  with 
them  have  found  them  to  be  markets  of  the  sins  of  the 
people,  the  cages  of  uncleanness,  the  forgers  of  extortions, 
the  tabernacles  of  bribery,  and  contrary  to  the  ends  of  civil 
government,"  (fec.+  Laud,  Wren,  and  their  aids,  could 
tolerate  anything  but  true  godliness.  Indolence,  ignorance, 
drunkenness,  and  adultery,  could  pass  unrebuked;  but  the 
absence  of  the  cross  in  baptism,  refusing  to  bow  at  the  name 
of  Jesus,  the  refusal  to  read  the  Book  of  Sports,  or  objections 
to  white  and  black  linen  in  the  performance  of  divine  wor- 

*  "What  is,  or  who  are,  the  cause  of  most  schisms  amongst  us?  The 
Bishop's  mad  outrage  in  all  the  three  kingdoms  of  late,  hath  so  incensed 
the  common  people,  that  in  all  men's  eyes  they  are  become  more  vile ; 
and  while  all  men  reflect  on  their  constant  trade  of  mischievous  prac- 
tices, the  ^^dsest  begin  to  'conclude  the  veiy  calling  hurts  the  men  as 
much  as  these  disgrace  the  calling !'  Thus  we  have  by  too,  too  long,  great, 
and  sad  experience,  found  it  true,  that  our  prelates  have  been  so  far  from 
preventing  divisions,  that  they  have  been  the  parents  and  patrons  of  most 
errors,  heresies,  sects,  and  schisms  that  now  disturb  this  Church  and 
State." — Lord  Brook  on  Episcopacy.     Hanbury,  vol.  ii.,  p.  129. 

t  Brook,  vol.  iii. ,  p.  155. 


THE   CIVIL   WAR.  95 

ship,  excited  the  Episcopal  wrath  to  the  utmost,  and 
subjected  the  offenders  to  pains  and  penalties  of  no  ordinary 
kind.  There  was  no  escape  from  these  infernal  powers.  An 
hasty  sentence,  an  objection,  however  conscientious,  some- 
times a  word,  reported  by  the  sj^ies  of  the  prelates,  would 
bring  the  victim  to  a  cruel  fate.*  It  will  be  obvious  that 
Puritan  tendencies,  or,  still  woi-se,  nonconformity  to  the 
orders  of  the  proud  prelates,  would  be  unpardonable  crimes. 
"  Had  he  been  guilty  of  drunkenness,  or  uncleanness,"  said 
the  Earl  Dorset,  to  an  applicant  threatened  by  these  men  of 
blood,  "  or  any  such  lesser  crime,  he  coiild  obtain  his  pardon; 
but  as  he  was  guilty  of  nonconformity  and  Puritanism,  his 
crime  was  unpardonable."t  The  abolition  of  these  dens  of 
iniquity  was  hailed  with  unmixed  joy. 

The  representatives  <]f  the  people  did  not  allow  religion 
only  to  absorb  them.  Matters  affecting  the  civil  liberties 
of  an  oppx-essed  nation  demanded  their  attention.  Their 
task  was  onerous  and  delicate.  To  pursue  it  without  hin- 
di-ance,  they  proclainied  their  right  to  sit  till  their  work  was 
done.  Many  oppressive  laws  were  repealed;  many  ci-ying 
evils  were  annihihxted.  J  Steadily  the  patriots  advanced  in 
their  healthy  and  judicious  reforms.     But  many  felt  that 

*  In  the  rigour  -with  which  Laud  urged  conformity,  he  caused  a  minister 
to  be  censured  hy  the  High  Commission  Court  "for  this  expression  in 
H  sermon,  '  That  it  was  suspicious  that  now  the  night  did  approach, 
liecause  the  shadows  were  so  much  longer  than  the  body,  and  ceremonies 
more  in  force  than  the  power  of  godliness.'" — FidJer's  C.  H.,  p.  150. 

t  Mather's  History,  b.  iii.,  p.  19.  "  Not  tlie  meddling  of  the  Commons 
with  Episcopacy,  but  the  idolatry  and  Popish  ceremonies  introduced  into 
the  church,  by  command  of  the  bishops  themselves,  were  the  causes  why 
sectaries  and  conventicles  abounded  in  England,  and  why  Englishmen 
seeking  liberty  of  worsliip  were  driven  into  exile." — Forster,  vol.  i.,  p.  31. 

J  "The  wrath  of  the  House  was  directed  against  evil  councillors,  mono- 
polists, judges,  and  bishops.  It  was  the  time  of  the  Achitophels,  the 
Hamans,  the  Wolseys,  the  Empsons,  the  Dudleys,  Tressilians,  vipers  and 
monsters  of  all  sorts."  That  the  judges  had  violated  and  overthrown  all 
law,  and  the  bishops  destroyed  the  Gospel,  was  the  common  talk  in  the 
city  and  the  country.  Defence  was  useless.  The  enormity  of  the  criminals 
was  patent  to  ixU.  —  Vidc  M'Intosh's  Hist.,  vol.  v.,  chap.  \-i. 


96  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

there  was  no  safety  without  higher  results.  Laws  had 
been  violated  before;  they  had  no  security  for  the  future. 
The  word  of  the  monarch  had  been  pledged  before;  the  past 
had  proved  it  of  no  value.  To  the  councillors  of  Charles, 
many  of  the  unconstitutional  acts  which  have  disgraced  his 
reign  might  be  traced.  Bewitched  by  their  influence,  there 
was  no  safety  whilst  they  surrounded  him.  Laud  and 
Strafford  were,  in  point  of  fact,  the  rulers  of  the  kingdom. 
Upon  these  great  ci'iminals  the  Commons  now  fixed  their 
eyes.  With  closed  doors  their  conduct  was  discussed.  At  the 
close  of  the  debate,  Pym,  followed  by  a  large  number  of  the 
members,  proceeded  to  the  Lords,  and  there,  in  the  name  of 
the  Commons  of  England,  accused  Thomas  Earl  of  Strafford 
of  high  treason.  To  the  Tower  the  great  apostate  was  at 
once  committed.  His  crimes  WGfe  enormous.  English 
liberty  would  have  been  immolated  on  the  altar  of  despotism 
had  his  power  been  equal  to  his  will.  No  effort  on  his  part 
was  wanting  to  raise  the  monarch  to  an  equality  to  con- 
tinental despots,  and  to  base  the  throne  on  the  ruins  of  the 
constitution.*  To  detail  the  progress  of  tliis  trial — one  of 
the  most  sublime  and  imposing,  perhaps,  in  the  annals  of 
our  jurisprudence — is  impossible  in  a  work  like  the  present. 
It  is  enough  to  say,  that  the  Earl's  career  of  crime  and 
cruelty  was  terminated  on  the  scaffold,  after  his  master  had 
promised,  but  finally  violated  his  promise,  that  he  would 
not  sign  the  warrant  for  his  execution.t  The  nation 
breathed  more  fpeely  when  the  great  apostate  expired. 


*  "  Under  such  auspices  (Laud  and  Strafford),  and  with  such  appli- 
ances, was  pursued  a  system  of  comprehensive  and  nianifokl  oppressions, 
menacing  all  persons,  sapping  all  rights,  breaking  promises  deemed  in- 
violable, a  tyranny  of  spies  and  taxgatherers  carrying  its  vexation  into 
every  household,  and  poisoning  the  daily  comforts  of  the  people,  thwart- 
ing their  occupations,  despoiling  their  property,  meddling  with  their 
trade :  yet  because  this  tyranny  was  not  sanguinary, — because  it  fined, 
maimed,  imprisoned,  but  did  not  kill — we  are  told  to  wonder  that  the 
people  should  rebel !" — Lister's  Life  of  Clarendon,  vol.  i.,  p.  47. 

f  "  Charles  had  bound  himself  by  the  most  solemn  vow  to  do  public 


TUE   CIVIL   AVAR.  Vi 

The  tide  of  popular  feeling  against  Land  had  now  risen 
to  an  alarming  height.  Other  weapons  than  the  spiritual 
were  necessary  for  his  protection.  In  his  Diary  he  says : — 
"Monday,  May  the  11th,  my  house  at  Lambeth  was  beset 
by  five  hundred  of  the  rascal  riotous  multitude.  I  had 
notice,  and  strengthened  my  house  as  well  as  I  could;  and, 
(Jod  be  praised,  I  had  no  harm.  Since,  I  have  got  cannon, 
and  fortified  my  house  as  well  as  I  can,  and  I  hope  all  will 
be  safe;  yet  libels  are  continually  set  up  in  places  of  note  in 
the  city."*  His  committal  to  the  Tower  followed.  It  was 
in  December  he  entered  the  gloomy  fortress.  London  was  in 
raptures,  and  the  country  echoed  back  the  joy.  One  of  his 
partial  biographers  says: — "Every  street  rang  with  ballads, 
every  wall  was  covered  with  lam])oons,  of  which  the  Arch- 
bishop was  the  subject.  Eare  pictures  were  made,  in  which 
lie  was  represented  as  confined  in  a  cage,  or  fastened  to  a 
post,  with  a  chain  round  his  neck.  The  taverns  and  ale- 
houses echoed  with  the  ribald  merriment  of  revellers,  who 
were  as  drixnk  with  malice  as  with  liquor,  and  who  had  been 
taught  to  hate  him  as  a  common  enemy.  But  the  outcry 
was  not  confined  to  the  rabble  of  London.     It  was  taken  up 

penance  for  the  injustice,  of  which  he  supposed  himself  guilty,  in  con- 
senting,' to  the  death  of  Strafford.  Later  still,  at  Oxford,  April  13,  1646, 
he  solemnly  vowed  to  give  back  to  the  church  all  the  improjjriations 
wliich  were  held  by  the  Crown ;  and  what  lands  had  been  taken  from  any 
church  or  religious  houses,  and  in  the  future  to  hold  them  for  the 
church,  and  to  jjay  rent  for  them."  Jesse  gives  the  documents.  Vide 
Memoirs  of  the  Court  of  England  during  the  Reign  of  the  Stuarts, 
vol.  ii.,  pp.  61,  62.  (London,  Bentley.)  Rush  worth  gives  a  full  account  of 
Strafford's  trial. 

*  Fairfax's  Corres.,  chap,  i.,  p.  4.  "On  the  9th  of  May  (1640),  placards 
were  posted  up  inviting  the  people  to  plunder  the  palace  of  the  arch- 
bishop. The  attack  was,  however,  repulsed  :  many  who  had  been  made 
prisoners  were  rescued  by  their  companions,  and  only  one  of  the  ring- 
leaders was  hanged  to  deter  others." — Collier,  p.  722,  &c.  Raumer, 
vol.  ii.,  p.  76,  note  29.  "The  women,  the  apprentices,  and  even  the  very 
porters  of  London,  petitioned  against  the  bishops.  The  latter,  adds  T. 
Fuller,  felt  it  as  a  burden  too  heavy  for  their  shoulders." — Vide 
Lathorp,  p.  132. 


98  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

by  the  townsmen  of  Oxford,"  &c.'"  Before  dismissing  this 
great  criminal  from  our  pages,  we  may  just  add,  that  after 
lingering  about  four  years  in  the  Tower,  insulted  justice  over- 
took him  on  the  scaffold.  We  have  no  tears  to  spare  for  his 
mempi-y.  Nature  had  eminently  fitted  him  for  his  work, 
and  endowed  him  with  all  the  attributes  for  an  inquisitor 
above  all  the  men  of  his  age.  Fierce,  superstitious,  unrelenting, 
void  of  mercy  and  compassion,  he  ahvays  appears  to  giiidge 
those  whom  his  rage  and  despotic  power  had  reduced  to 
very  great  distress,  even  the  tenderness  and  relief  of  their 
firiends.t  He  was  the  embodiment  of  some  of  the  very  worst 
elements  of  our  nature,  combined  with  the  hideous  pretension 
to  great  devotedness  to  the  cause  of  truth  and  righteousness. 
Hated  by  liis  contemporaries,  his  death  was  only  a  miserable 
atonement  for  the  untold  sorrow  he  had  inflicted  upon  thou- 
sands of  individuals  better  and  holier  than  himself;  and 
though  some  modeim  Avriters  have  tried  to  redeem  his 
character,  and  to  excite  sympathy  for  his  fate,  truth  will 
hold  him  up  to  future  times  as  one  of  the  most  cruel  and 
infamous  of  his  class.  The  crimes  of  a  Bonner  are  mild  and 
limited,  compared  with  the  refined  cruelty  of  this  little- 
minded  man.  J  Other  great  criminals  escaped.  Winde- 
banke,  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  one  of  Laud's  chief 
friends,  and  the  ready  instrument  of  Charles  in  dealing 
with  the  Catholics,  and  in  his  oppression  of  the  people, 
fled  to  France.  11     Finch,  the  infamous  Lord-Keeper,  who, 

*  Le  Bass's  Life  of  Laud,  p.  294. 

t  Harris's  Life  of  Charles  I.,  p.  231.  SmectjTiins  supplies  a  fearful 
accusation  against  tMs  prelate.— Pp.  77,  78. 

J  Laud,  when  itrged  to  go  into  Holland,  said: — "I  should  expose 
myself  to  the  insults  of  those  Sectaries  there,  to  whom  my  character  is 
odious ;  and  have  every  Anabaptist  come  and  pluck  me  by  the  beard." — 
Le  Bass,  p.  290. 

II  "  He  tells  everybody  *  *  *  that  he  never  did  anything  for  concerning 
the  Papists,  that  he  had  not  either  the  immediate  order  from  the  king,  or 
has  not  his  hand  to  show  for  it." — Clarendon,  S.  Papers,  vol.  ii.,  p.  134. 
The  reader  may  consult  Prynne's  T/ie  Popish  Royal  Favourite.  The 
influence  of  the  Queen  is  manifest.     Le  Maisters,  a  French  priest,  thus 


THE    CIVIL    WAR.  99 

to  gi^atify  the  monarch,  poUuted  the  very  fountain  of  jus- 
tice, and  descended  to  the  most  abject  means  to  avert  the 
lionalties  to  which  his  notorious  crimes  exposed  liim,  at  last 
lied  to  Holhind. 

The  spirit  of  the  Commons  displayed  itself  in  another 
manner.  The  victims  of  the  hierarchy  were  relieved  from 
their  oppression,  and  others  from  bondage;  ministers  from 
sequestration ;  and  Piynne,  Burton,  and  Bastwick,  were 
recalled  from  theii*  prison-house.  The  progress  of  these  men 
to  their  homes  was  quite  an  ovation.  The  people  in  all 
the  toAvns  through  which  they  passed  greeted  them  with 
the  warmest  demonstratious  of  joy.  London  was  in  raptures. 
An  eye-witness  says — ,"  He  saw  Mr.  Prine  and  Mr.  Bourton 
come  into  Loundoun :  they  weare  meet  by  2,000  hoors 
and  150  schochess;  and  the  men  wore  rosemary  that  meet 
them."''' 

Even  the  Anabaptists  foimd  sympathy.  With  others,  they 
had  suffered  in  common.  The  most  hated  of  all  the  sects, 
it  indicated  the  extraordinaiy  growth  of  liberal  opuaions, 
that  members  of  this  sect,  when  detected  in  their  unlaAvful 
assemblies,  should  find  mercy.     But  so  it  was. 

In  Januaiy,  1640,  "  Edmond  Chilleudon,  Nicholas  Tyne, 
John  "Webb,  Eichard  Sturgess,  Thomas  Gunn,  John  Ellis, 
with  at  least  60  persons  more,  were  all  taken,  on  Sixnday 
last,  in  the  afternoon,  iir  the  time  of  Divine  service,  by  the 
constables  and  churchwardens  of  St.  Saviour,  in  the  house  of 
Bichard  Sturgess,  where  they  said  they  met  to  teach  and 
edify  one  another  in  Christ.  They  being  brought  before  Sir 
John  Lenthal,  he  demanded  why  they  did  not  go  and  resort 
to  their  paiish  church,  according  to  the  law  of  the  35th 
Elizabeth? 

speaks  of  her:  "In  England  the  heart  of  persecution  hath  ceased, 
through  the  dignity  of  a  magnanimous  king  and  most  invincible  prince, 
by  the  Bourbonian  star,  -which  hangs  over  these  countries  in  a  most  dear 
wife;  by  which  stars  the  tempest  of  persecution  will,  iieradventure,  in 
time  be  appeased." — Eushworth,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  15,  25,  26,  28,  20,  24. 
*  Lady  Harley's  Letters,  p.  104.     Camden  Society. 


100  EAKLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

"Tliey  answered:  1.  That  the  law  of  the  35th  of  Queen 
Elizabeth  was  not  a  trae  law,  for  that  it  was  made  by  the 
bishojis,  and  they  would  not  obey  it.  2.  That  they  would 
not  go  unto  their  parish  churches,  for  that  those  churches 
were  not  true  churches ;  that  there  was  no  tnie  church  but 
where  the  faithful  met.  3.  That  the  king  could  not  make  a 
perfect  law,  for  that  he  was  not  a  perfect  man.  4.  That  they 
ought  not  to  obey  him,  but  in  civil  things.  5,  That  some  of 
them  threatened  the  churchwardens  and  constables,  that  they 
had  not  yet  answered  for  this  work. 

"  This  is  subscribed  by  the  knight  and  the  churchwardens. 

"Sir  John  was  ordered  to  take  care  of  them,  and  bring 
them  to  the  House,  with  all  that  could  witness  against 
them. 

"According  to  order,  the  Anabaptists  were  brought  to  the 
House,  and  being  severally  called  in,  all  of  these  faithful  to 
our  church  did,  like  Howard  and  Pool,  deny  the  most 
material  things  which  they  were  charged  with;  whereupon 
Sir  John  Lenthal  and  tlie  other  witnesses  were  sworn,  and 
did  justify  what  they  had  subscribed  on  oath.  Upon  which 
the  House  did  order,  '  That  these  Sectaries  should  receive  for 
this  time  an  admonition  from  this  House,  and  be  enjoyned 
hereafter  to  repair  to  their  several  parish  churches  to  hear 
Divine  service,  and  give  obedience  thereto,  accordinrj  to  the  Act 
of  Parliament  of  this  Realm :  To  that  piirpose,  the  order  was 
read  to  them  of  this  House,  16<A  Jan.'  And  they  were 
told,  '■That  if  hereafter  they  should  not  observe  these  com- 
mands, they  shoidd  he  severely  piunished,  according  to  law ; 
and  so  they  loere  dismissed.'"* 

In  the  Journals  of  the  Lords,  we  find  that  the  Plouse, 

*  Nalson's  Collection,  vol.  i.,  pp.  727,  728.  The  same  fact  is  thus 
noticed  by  fuller :  "  This  day,  January  18, 1640,  happened  the  first-fruits 
of  Anabaptistical  insolence,  when  80  of  that  sect,  meeting  at  a  house  in 
St.  Saviour's,  Southwark,  preached  that  the  statute  in  the  35th  of  Eliza- 
beth, for  the  administration  of  the  Common  Prayer,  was  no  good  law, 
because  made  by  bishops.  That  the  king  cannot  make  a  good  law, 
because  not  perfectly  regenerate.     That  he  was  only  to  be  obeyed  in  civil 


THE   CIVIL   WAR.  101 

on  the  first  appearance  of  tlie  prisoners,  thouglit  fit  and 
ordered  that  this  following  should  he  read  publicly  in 
all  the  parish  chiirches  of  London  and  Westminster,  the 
borough  of  Southwark,  and  the  liberties  and  subjects 
of  them : — "  That  the  Divine  service  be  performed  as 
it  is  appointed  by  the  Acts  of  Parliament  of  this  llealm; 
and  that  all  such  as  shall  disturbe  that  -wholesome  order, 
shall  be  severely  punished,  according  to  law;  and  that  the 
parsons,  vicars,  curates,  in  the  several  parishes,  shall  forbear 
to  introduce  any  rites  or  ceremonies  that  may  give  offence, 
otherwise  than  those  which  are  established  by  the  laws  of 
the  land."  Crosby  says  that  these  men  belonged  to  an  Inde- 
pendent church.  More  probably,  it  was  a  mixed  one.  Bap- 
tist pastors  had  presided  over  it.  Samuel  How  was  one; 
and  Mr.  Stovel  has  shown,  we  think  satisfiictorily,  that  John 
Canne  was  of  the  number.*  The  following,  from  the  same 
source,  will  give  our  readers  a  glimpse  of  the  annoyances  to 
which  our  brethren  at  this  period  were  frequently  exposed. 
"  The  day  following,  a  petition  was  read  in  the  House,  from 
divers  persons  in  the  New  Prison.  It  states,  '  That  they 
were  on  a  Sunday  assembled  together  in  a  peaceable 
manner  in  prayer,  and  were  violently  assailed  by  divers 
deboists  and  rude  persons,  who,  by  the  command  of  Justice 
Gibbs,  in  Whitechapple,  furiously  beat  and  broke  in  pieces 
the  door  upon  them,  contrary  to  the  laws  and  statutes  of  this 
land,  not  showing  them  any  warrant  for  so  doing,  though 
the  petitioners  demanded  it  of  them;  and  with  swords,  hal- 
berts,  and  clubs,  violently  entered  the  house,  encouraging 
thereby  many  scores  of  persons  to  beat  do^vn  the  windows 
with  stones,  to  the  wounding  of  a  young  child,  to  the  effusion 
of  much  blood,  tfec.  Also  one  Reynolds  threatened  one  of 
the  prisoners  to  cut  his  throat,  &c.     Further,  the  piisoners 

matters.  Being  brought  before  the  Lords  they  confessed  the  articles, 
but  no  penalty  was  inflicted  on  them." — Fuller's  C.  Hist.,  p.  172. 

*  Crosby,  vol.  i.    Ivimey,  vol.  i.    Stovel's  lutroduction  to  Canne's  Neces- 
sity of  Separation. 


102  EAKLY   E^'GLISH    BAPTISTS. 

set  forth,  That  hereupon  they  are  imprisoned,  indicted,  and 
proceeded  against,  contrary  to  law  or  justice,  as  they  con- 
ceive; for  redress  whereof,  they  desire  that  the  equity  of 
their  cause  may  be  examined,  and  receive  a  speedy  deliver- 
ance, and  repairs  from  their  wrongful  and  vexatious 
troubles,'  &c.  Hei*eupon  it  was  ordered,  'That  the  said 
Mr.  Justice  Gibbs,  and  the  prisoners  mentioned  in  the 
petition,  shall  appear  here  to-morrow  morning  at  eight  of 
the  clock,  and  the  prisoners  to  be  released  on  bail  to  attend 
their  cause ;  for  which  purpose  they  are  to  attend  the  Lords' 
Committee  this  afternoon,  and  the  Lords  will  consider  what 
bail  is  fit  to  be  taken  therein.'  " 

According  to  an  order  of  the  19th  of  this  month,  Mr. 
Justice  Gibbs  and  the  prisoners  of  the  New  Prison  did 
attend  the  House;  and  the  petition  being  read,  Mr.  Gibbs 
gave  this  answer  to  it: — "That  there  being  a  great  uproar 
in  the  street,  and  a  gi-eat  concourse  of  people  gathered,  who 
set  upon  the  constables  and  officers  with  clubs,  knives,  and 
other  weapons,  to  the  wounding  and  hurting  of  some  people; 
the  constables  and  churchwardens  coming  unto  liim  (being 
the  next  Justice  of  the  Peace),  and  acquainted  him  there- 
with, he  came  in  person,  as  he  conceived  himself  bound  to 
do;  and  upon  view  of  the  multitude  of  people,  he  wished 
them  to  depart ;  and  for  the  preservation  of  the  house 
wherein  they  (the  petitioners)  were,  he  caused  bis  own  men 
(the  constables  and  churchwardens)  to  go  into  the  house; 
and  after  the  concourse  of  peoi)le  were  dispersed,  upon  search, 
in  the  said  house,  he  found  divers  persons  gathered  together; 
and  he  being  informed  they  were  Sectaries,  did  examine 
them  when  they  did  receive  the  communion  in  the  parish 
church.  They  said  they  had  not  a  long  time,  neither  would 
they.  After  this,  for  the  ])resent,  he  committed  them  to 
prison;  and  sessions  immediately  following,  he  acquainted 
the  justices  what  he  had  done,  which  the  justices  approving 
of,  gave  orders  for  their  indictments  according  to  law." 
Hereupon  the  House  ordered,  "  That  the  prisoners  be  left  to 


THE    CIVIL   WAU. 


103 


the  ordinary  proceedings  of  the  justices,  according  to  the 
coiu-se  of  law."  What  that  was,  we  have  not  been  able,  as 
yet,  to  ascertain. 

But  other  subjects  claimed  the  attention  of  the  Senate. 
The  conduct  of  the  bLshops  had  excited  greater  indignation 
than  even  the  tyranny  and  dcceitfulness  of  the  monarch. 
The  conviction  was  growing  in  the  public  mind,  that  their 
existence  was  inimical  to  constitutional  liberty.  The  anger 
of  the  nation  had  been  restrained — at  least  there  was  no 
medium  through  which  it  could  manifest  itself.  Deep  and 
frequent  were  the  murmurs  of  the  pco]ilc.  The  Commons  felt 
that  the  pride  of  the  bishops  must  be  humbled,  and  their 
power  lessened.  The  measure  of  their  crime  was  nov/  pretty 
nigh  full.  In  Convocation,  at  this  crisis,  they  had  passed 
canons  of  the  most  outrageous  kind.  One  affirmed,  "  That 
for  subjects  to  bear  arms  against  their  king,  offensive  or 
defensive,  upon  any  pretence  whatever,  is  at  least  to  resist 
the  powers  which  are  ordained  of  God;  and  though  they  do 
not  invade  but  only  resist,  St.  Paul  tells  them  plainly, 
'■They  shall  receive  to  themselves  damnation^'  Another 
bound  all  officials  in  the  church,  with  all  who  practised 
either  law  or  physic,  by  a  solemn  oath,  not  to  seek  any 
alteration  in  the  constitution  of  the  church  as  it  then 
existed ;  and  another  was  against  all  Sectaries,  Anabaptists, 
Brownists,  &c.,  and  depravers  of  the  Liturgy;  and  against 
their  books,  the  printers  and  publishers  of  them."'"'  "  The 
bishops,"  says  Meade,  "were  fallen  into  much  neglect  and 
scorn  in  the  city,  as  those  who  had  disclaimed  their  Christen- 
dom. I  am  sorry  to  hear  that  they  are  so  habituated  to 
flattery,  that  they  seem  not  to  know  of  any  other  duty  that 
belongs  unto,  or  beseems  them.      But  all  ai'e  not  guilty, 


*  Collier,  vol.  ii.,  p.  793.  Fuller's  Memorials,  p.  73.  Once  a  quarter 
the  clergj'  were  ordered  to  teach  tliis  doctrine.  "Five  hundred  of  the 
mob,"  says  Collier,  "had  lately  made  a  midnight  march  to  Lambeth, 
and  had  attacked  the  archbishop's  palace  for  two  hours." — Vol.  x., 
p.  SO. 


104  EAELY   EKGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

though  the  people  lay  the  imputation  general."*  Petitions 
from  all  parts  were  poured  into  the  House,  asking  for  their 
removal.  Thousands  of  names  were  attached  to  these 
memorials.  One  from  the  city  of  London,  backed  by  15,000 
signatures,  demanded  the  entire  abolition  of  Episcopacy. 
Nearly  at  the  same  moment,  700  ecclesiastics  limited  them- 
selves to  requiring  the  reform  of  the  temporal  powers  of  the 
bishops,  of  their  despotism  in  the  church,  of  the  administra- 
tion of  its  revenues;  and  soon  after,  there  arrived  from 
vai'ious  counties  nineteen  petitiojis,  signed,  it  is  said,  by 
more  than  100,000  persons,  recommending  the  maintenance 
of  the  Episcopal  government,"  tfecf  Sir  E.  Deering,  who 
moved  in  this  matter,  in  presenting  a  petition  from  Kent, 
said,  "  The  same  grievances  under  wliich  the  city  groans  are 
provincial  unto  us,  and  I  much  fear  they  are  national 
amongst  us  all.  The  pride,  the  avarice,  the  ambition,  and 
oppression,  by  the  over  ill-ruling  clergy,  is  epidemical;  it 
hath  affected  us  all."  About  2,000  signed  this  petition.J 
In  both  Houses  the  matter  was  debated.  Many  were  in 
favour  of  a  moderate  Episcopacy.  They  would  keep  the 
name,  but  weaken  if  not  destroy  the  power.  Ultimately  a 
bill  was  passed  relieving  the  prelates  of  their  onerous  duties 
as  spiritual  peers.  The  nation  hailed  it  with  rapture.  "The 
honest-hearted  citizens  of  London  that  same  night  (as  they 
had  a  great  and  good  cause)  manifested  their  heart's  great 
joy  and  thankfulness  by  making  bonfires  and  ringing  of  bells 
all  over  the  city,"  &c.  |1 

Success  is  always  animating.  With  fresh  vigour,  the 
Commons  entered  upon  other  labours.  Con-uption  had 
impressed  its  hideous  image  on  everything.     The  hangers-on 


*  Meade  to  Stutiville.     The  Court  ami  Times  of  Cli.  I.,  vol.  i.,  p.  107. 
.+  Guizot,  b.  10,  p.  95.     Lingarcl  says  IS, 000,  vol.  x.,  p.  114. 

X  Proceedings  in  Kent,  p.  26.     Camden  Society. 

II  Vicar's  Jehovali  Jireli,  p.  150.  "  I  much  rejoice  that  there  is  hope 
of  passing  the  bill  against  the  bisliops  :  the  Lord  say  Amen  to  it :  we  do 
not  deserve  to  see  such  a  mercy." — Lady  Harley's  Letters,  p.  141. 


THE  CIVIL  WAR.  105 

at  court  were  fottening  on  the  miseries  of  the  people.  In 
the  Church  as  well  as  in  the  State,  pride,  avarice,  and  every 
form  of  selfishness  prevailed.  The  evils  which  years  of  mis- 
nile  had  accumulated,  could  not  be  uprooted  in  a  day. 
Patiently  were  the  causes  investigated,  and  the  sores  of  the 
body  politic  jirobed  to  the  very  core.  Calmly  and  dispassion- 
ately the  patriots  prosecuted  their  task.  The  strength  of  Her- 
cules was  needed  to  cleanse  the  Augean  stables.  Committee 
after  committee  sat,  and  the  i-esult  of  their  labours  was 
embodied  in  a  "  Kemonstrance,"  which  they  presented  to 
Charles.  It  is  a  noble  monument  of  profound  thought,  a 
careful  and  accurate  examination  of  the  cause  of  those 
oppressions  under  which  the  commonwealth  groaned,  and  a 
lofty  \-indication  of  the  rights  of  the  nation.  In  words 
which  admit  of  no  mistake,  they  pourtray  the  past.  Under 
the  keen  and  searching  eyes  of  the  reformers,  all  the  acts  of 
the  monarch  during  his  reign  are  made  to  pass.  There  was 
no  shrinking  from  the  task.*  The  aim  of  these  men  was  clear 
and  definite,  and  their  ability  was  equal  to  the  crisis.  By  a 
small  majority  of  159  to  148  this  "Remonstrance"  was  car- 
ried, Nov.  23,  1G41.  Accompanied  by  a  petition  breathing 
the  warmest  professions  of  loyalty,  it  was  laid  at  the  foot  of 
the  throne.  The  king  could  do  no  wrong.  It  was  against  his 
wicked  advisers  the  indignation  of  his  faithful  Commons  was 
directed.  Charles  tried  to  avert  this  course.  Thi'eats,  pro- 
mises, and  every  influence  which  a  corrupt  court  could  em- 
ploy, were  used,  but  without  ejQfect.f   Onward  rolled  the  tide 

*  Forster's  Grand  Kemonstrance.  "Wlioever  wants  to  see  the  cause 
wliich  produced,  tlie  evils  which  led  to,  and  the  motives  which  animated, 
the  lofty  and  stern  indignation  which  marked  the  men  of  the  llevolution, 
let  him  read  the  Grand  Eemonstrance  and  the  debates  upon  it."  "War- 
burton,  somewhere,  calls  the  men  of  this  Parliament  a  band  of  the 
gxeatest  geniuses  for  government  that  the  world  has  ever  seen  leagued 
together  in  one  common  cause.  ' 

f  "Therefore  his  Majesty  forbids  all  his  subjects  the  keeping  of  the 
same  Eemonstrance,  charging  them  immediately  upon  sight  of  it  to  bum 
it ;  othermse  if  it  be  found  with  any,  that  they  expect  his  displeasure 
according  to  the  quality  of  this  fact,"  &c.  —  Eowe,  p.  4. 


106  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

of  popular  freedom,  tlireateuing  to  sweep  away  in  its  course 
the  last  fragments  of  political  and  spiritual  oppression. 

Betrajdng  his  iiTitation  and  weakness  at  the  same  time, 
Charles  made  an  attempt  to  coerce,  if  not  to  crush,  the 
representatives  of  the  people.  It  was  the  crisis  of  the 
nation's  liberties.  Prompted  by  his  wife,  accompanied  by 
an  armed  force  he  entered  the  Commons  House,  by  his  own 
hand  to  arrest  five  of  the  members.*  Excited,  but  calm,  the 
assembly  rose  and  received  the  infatuated  prince  with  pro- 
found silence.  Only  the  sound  of  his  own  footsteps  was 
heai'd  as  he  advanced  towards  the  Speaker's  chair.  Asking 
if  the  accused  were  in  the  House,  the  Sj^eaker,  bending  his 
knees  before  him,  said,  "  I  have  neither  eyes  to  see,  nor 
tongue  to  speak,  in  this  place,  but  as  the  House  is  pleased  to 
direct  me,  whose  servant  I  am."  "/  see  all  tloe  birds  are 
Jlown"  said  Charles,  as,  baffled  and  morti6ed,  he,  amidst  the 
cry  of  "Privilege!  privilege!"  retired  from  the  presence  of 
the  insulted  representatives  of  the  nation.  The  shock  was 
not  limited  to  the  walls  of  St.  Stephen's.  The  city  felt  it. 
The  population  was  moved  to  its  lowest  depths.f  The 
impeached  members,  who  had  been  warned,  and  had  retired, 
on  going  to  the  House  the  next  morning  were  accompanied 
by  the  sheriffs  and  an  immense  number  of  armed  men. 
Every  boat  on  the  Thames  was  full,  the  banks  of  the 
river  were  crowded,  whilst  the  streets  leading  to  West- 
minster were  filled  with  citizens.  Everywhere  vows  of 
adhesion  to  the  Commons  were  uttered,  and  the  tide  of 
loyalty,  which  had  begun  to  flow,  was  rolled  back  with 
accumulated  force.  The  mistake  of  the  court  was  ii-reparable. 
Even  Clarendon  admits  this.  Refei-ring  to  the  opponents  of 
the  court,  he  says:  "All  that  they  had  formerly  said  of 
plots  and  conspiracies  against  the  Parliament,  which  had 
hefore  been  laughed  at,  was  now  thought  true  and  real;  and 


*  These  were  Pym,  HoUis,  Hampden,  Haslerig,  and  Strode. 

t  Vide  Disraeli's  Charles  I.,  vol.  iv.,  p.  145.     Lilly's  Life,  &c.,  p.  234. 


THE   CIVIL   WAR.  107 

all  their  fears  and  jealousies  looked  upon  as  the  effects  of  theii' 
great  Avisdoiu  and  forethought.  All  that  had  been  whispered 
of  Ireland  was  now  talked  aloud  and  printed,  as  all  other 
seditious  pamphlets  and  libels  were.  The  shops  of  the  city 
generally  were  shut  up,  as  if  an  enemy  were  at  their  gates  to 
enter  and  to  plunder  them;  and  the  people  in  all  places  at  a 
gaze,  as  if  they  looked  only  for  directions,  and  were  then 
disposed  for  any  undertaking.  On  the  other  side,  they  who 
had,  with  the  greatest  courage  and  alacrity,  opposed  all  their 
seditious  pi-actices,  between  grief  and  anger  were  confounded 
with  the  consideration  of  what  had  been  done,  and  what  was 
like  to  follow."* 

Reconciliation  was  now  impossible.  Cliarles  and  his  coui-t 
hated  with  intense  hatred  the  popular  leaders,  whilst  they 
had  lost  all  confidence  in  the  king.  Their  own  safety,  that 
of  the  nation,  and  their  hard-won  victories,  prompted  the 
Commons  to  demand  other  securities.  The  monarch  had 
learnt  no  wisdom  by  defeats.  His  thirst  for  arbitrary  power 
was  quenchless,  and  an  appeal  to  arms  was  ine\itable.  On 
both  sides  preparations  were  made  for  this  terrible  calamity; 
and  ultimately  the  monarch,  amidst  signs  which  excited  a 
i-ather  depressing  influence,  unfurled  the  Eoyal  Standard  at 
Xottingham.f 

Whilst  these  conflicts  were  raging,  the  Baptists  were  not  idle. 
From  many  incidental  allusions,  we  find  that  their  churches 
multiplied  and  their  numbers  increased.  To  notice  the  fomaa- 
tion  of  eveiy  individual  church,  or  to  give  prominence  to  indi- 
vidual actions,  will  be  impossible.  Our  range  must  be  confined 
to  a  narrower  circle.  Yet  a  notice  of  one  or  two  here  may 
not  be  out  of  place.  John  Canne,  the  author  of  the  marginal 
references  to  the  Bible,  is  sujiposed  to  have  been  pastor  of  the 
church  in  Deadman's  Place,  before  he  was  compelled  to  flee 

*  History,  vol.  ii.,  p.  159.  Wai'wick's  Mem.,  p.  225.  Vide  Forster's 
masterly  -work  on  "  The  Arrest  of  the  Five  Members."  In  this  admi- 
rable volume  the  subject  is  exhausted. 

t  Clarendon,  vol.  iii.,  p.  172.     Rush  worth,  lull's.  Hutchinson,  &.c. 


108  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

to  Holland,  wliere  be  was  pastor  of  tlie  "Ancient  English 
Church  at  Amsterdcan."'^'  Whilst  there,  he  published  several 
of  liis  works.  For  some  of  them  he  was  called  before  one 
of  the  city  tribunals,  and  heavily  lined.  This  document  has 
never  before  been  published.     It  is  as  follows: — "The  Lord 

Commissary against  John  Canne,  English 

minister.  Appeared.  Answered  as  follows : — He  had  since 
four  years  to  give  no  reply;  that  consequently  from  that 
time  he  had  let  a  work  be  printed  and  edited  (published), 
entitled,  A  jS^ecessit>/  of  Separation  from  the  Church  of  Eng- 
land, etc.  That,  he  said,  appeared  some  time  ago.  He  had 
reprinted  a  work  entitled,  'A  Brief  Eelation  of  Cei'taiu 
Special  and  most  Natural  Passages,  as  it  Respects  the  State 
Chamber  at  the  .  .  .  .'  And  that  he  also  printed  the 
'Covenant  jSTamed,'  .  .  .  'Van  Scotland,'  and  even  a 
part  of  the  book  named,  'A  Dispute  against  the  English 
Popish  Ceremonies  Obtruded  upon  the  Church  of  Scotland.' 
And  that  all  these  works  and  pamphlets  being  condemned 
infamous  and  scandalous,  and  against  all  dignity  or  intent  of 
lus  Royal  Majesty  of  Great  Britain,  and  even  in  opposition 
to  the  prescription  of  the  Right  Honourable  Lords  of  the 
General  Estates  of  the  Netherlands,  dated  16th  of  January, 
1621.  Of  all  this,  it  is  concluded  that  the  said  works  are 
punishable,  as  likely  to  promote  disorder  against  the  Majesty 
of  Great  Britain  and  his  allies;  and  so  the  Commissary  con- 
clude that  the  appearon  (printer)  of  said  seditious  and  scan- 
dalous books  is  condemned  to  the  confiscation  of  all  the 
])rinted  editions  (which  shall  be  burnt),  and  to  pay  the  sum 
of  £300  of  40  groots  to  the  pound;  and  also  to  an     .     .     . 


*  Vide  Stovel's  Introduction  to  Canne's  Necessity  of  Separation.  Hans. 
Knollj's  Society.  "And  the  Anabaptists,  whereof,  it  is  said,  are  above 
thirty  several  sects,  have  theii'  churches;  the  Bro\vnists,  divided,  and 
differing  amongst  themselves,  Mr.  Canne  being  the  pastor  of  one  com- 
pany, and  Mr.  Greenwood,  an  old  man,  a  tradesman,  who  sells  stockings 
in  the  Exchange.  I  saw  him  there;  he  is  the  leader  of  another  com- 
pany."— Brereton's  Travels,  p.  65. 


TUE   CIVIL   WAR.  109 

conviction,"*  This  document  bears  date  1638.  The  cause 
of  Canne's  return  to  his  native  land  may  be  fcjund  here.  HLs 
freedom  of  action,  even  in  business,  was  affected,  and  a  heavy- 
tine  imposed  for  the  liberty  of  printing.  He  hiboured  with 
success  in  the  city.  Availing  himself  of  the  measure  of 
liberty  which  now  prevailed,  he  visited  other  portions  of  the 
kingdom.  In  1G41,  we  find  him  in  Bristol,  sometimes 
preaching  in  the  "  public  places,"  and  at  others  in  the  open 
air;  and  founding  a  church  there.t  "We  know  not  when  he 
became  a  Baptist,  but  know  he  was  "a  hcqjiized  many 
Through  the  stirring  period  which  followed,  he  was  active 
and  laborious.     His  name  will  be  before  us  again. :|: 

The  efforts  and  success  of  our  brethren  awakened  atten- 
tion in  other  circles,  and  called  forth  many  an  outburst  of 
holy  indignation.  Pamphlets  surcharged  with  every  element 
of  fury  came  bounding  from  the  pi*ess.     Caricatures,  not 

*  There  is  another  State  Paper,  of  a  later  date,  and  though  not  bearing 
on  the  case  of  Canne,  it  may  not  be  uninteresting  to  the  reader.  It  refers 
to  the  state  of  the  Englisli  and  other  churches  in  the  Netherlands.  "In 
consequence  of  the  State  Council  of  the  Netherlands  being  informed  of 
many  disorders  arising  in  this  country  amongst  Scottish  and  English 
preachers  :  the  said  disorders  consisting  bothe  in  Divine  worship  and  the 
citations  made  by  them,  and  all  this  being  to  provoke  disorders  and 
trouble  amongst  the  people,  and  prejudicial  to  the  Government ;  the  sai.l 
State  Council  ordered  that  the  instructions  given  in  the  year  1G21  of  the 
27tli  of  December,  be  punctually  observed  by  the  said  ministers ;  conse- 
quently, tliat  the  classic  order  followed  by  the  Walloon  churches  must 
be  kept  in  good  attention,  and  followed  by  the  English  and  Scottish 
preachers ;  and  that  great  attention  must  be  paid  to  the  quality, 
capacity,  education,  instruction,  sentiment,  knowledge,  and  perfect 
understanding  of  those  who  are  accepted  as  preachers.  And  should  it 
occur  that  some  one  should  create  opposition  to  the  aforesaid  orders,  the 
said  preachers  are  to  give  immediate  notice  of  it  to  the  State  Council,  to 
act  in  tliat  case  as  may  be  necessaiy."  This  is  dated  the  20th  of  February, 
1G33.  Signed  by  order  of  the  State  Council. — M.  Huggins.  Both  these 
MSS.  are  in  Dutch.  "\Ve  are  indebted  to  a  friend  for  the  translation. 
Originally  they  belonged  to  IVIr.  Brandt,  the  author  of  the  Reformation. 
They  are  now  in  the  possession  of  the  author. 

+  Broadmead  Records,  vol.  i.     Hans.  KnoUys  Society. 

t  It  is  certain  that  he  was  in  Amsterdam  in  1644.— Firfe  Early  English 
Baptists,  vol.  i.,  p.  4. 


110  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

facts;  slander,  not  truth,  marked  tliem.  Whatever  harm 
they  cHd  then,  they  have  some  value  now,  From  their  pages 
we  can  frequently  gather  information  which  scarcely  any 
other  source  would  supply.  " Xew  Preachers!  New!"  gives 
us  a  brief  touch  in  memory  of  the  fiery  zeal  of  Mr.  Barebones, 
"a  reverend  unlearned  leather-seller,  who  with  Mr.  Green,  the 
feltrmaker,  were  both  taken  preaching,  or  prating,  in  a  con- 
venticle of  100  persons,  on  Sunday,  the  19th  of  December 
last,  1641."  The  folio-wing  extract  will  show  the  spirit  of 
this  godly  teacher,  and  at  the  same  time  the  annoyances  to 
which  our  brethren  were  exposed: — "I  have  made  bold  to 
relate  briefly  your  last  Sunday  afternoon's  work,  lest  in  time 
your  meiitorious  painstaking  should  be  forgotten  (for  the 
which  you  and  your  associate,  Mr.  Green,  do  well  deserve  to 
have  your  heads  in  the  custody  of  young  Gregory,  to  make 
buttons  for  hemp  holes) ;  you  two  ha\'ing  the  spirit  so  full, 
that  you  must  either  vent  or  burst,  did,  on  the  Sabbath 
aforesaid,  at  your  house  near  Fetter  Lane  End,  Fleet  Street, 
at  the  sign  of  the  'Lock  and  Key,'  there  and  then  did  you 
and  youi'  consort  (by  turns)  unlock  most  delicate,  strange 
doctrine,  where  were  about  thousands  of  people,  of  which 
number  the  most  ignorant  applauded  your  preaching,  and 
those  who  knew  anything  derided  your  ignorant  prating. 
But  after  four  hours'  long  and  tedious  tattling,  the  house 
where  you  were  was  beleaguered  with  multitudes,  that 
thought  fit  to  rouse  you  out  of  your  bKnd  devotions,  so  that 
your  walls  were  battered,  your  windows  all  fractions,  torn  into 
rattling  shires;  and  worse  the  hurly-burly  might  have  been, 
but  that  sundry  constables  came  in  with  strong  guards  of 
men,  to  keep  the  peace,  in  which  conflict  your  sign  was 
broken  down  and  unhanged,  to  make  room  for  the  owner  to 
supply  the  place;  all  wliicli  shows  had  never  been,  had  Mr. 
Green  and  Mr.  Barebones  been  content  (as  they  should  have 
done)  to  have  gone  to  their  own  parish  churches,"  &c.  From 
Crosby  we  learn  that  the  church  over  which  Canne  presided  in 
Deadman's  Place,  divided  in  the  spirit  of  fraternal  aflfection. 


THE   CIVIL   WAR.  Ill 

ami  that  a  part  went  with  this  celebrated  man,  who  subse- 
quently gave  his  name  to  one  of  Oliver's  Parliaments,  and  the 
other  united  under  tlie  pastoral  care  of  Mr.  Jeffrey.*  It  is  more 
than  probable  that  this  church  was  one  of  mixed  memljership. 
Another  of  these  fiery  spirits  now  enters  "  The  Brownists' 
synagogue,"  and  makes  a  "discovery  of  their  conventicles, 
assemblies,  and  places  of  meeting;"  where  they  preach,  and 
the  mamier  of  their  praying  and  preaching,  with  a  relation 
of  the  name,  place,  and  doctrine  of  those  which  do  commonly 
preach,  Tlie  chief  of  which  are  these : — "  Green,  the  felt- 
maker;  Maeler,  the  button-maker;  Spence,  the  coachman; 
Rogers,  the  glover;  which  sect  is  much  increased  of  late  in 
the  city."  We  quote  an  extract,  as  it  is  honourable  to  the 
men  on  whom  this  surpliced  libeller  pours  the  vials  of  his 
scorn: — "In  the  house  where  they  meet,  there  is  one 
appointed  to  keep  the  door,  for  the  intent  to  give  notice,  if 
there  should  be  any  insurrection,  warning  should  he  given 
them.  They  do  not  flock  together,  but  come  two  or  three 
in  a  company;  and  all  being  gathered  together,  the  man 
appointed  to  teach  stands  in  the  midst  of  the  i*oom,  and  his 
audience  gather  around  him.  The  man  prayeth  about  the 
space  of  half  an  hour;  and  part  of  his  prayer  is,  that  those 
who  come  there  to  scoff  and  laugh,  God  would  be  pleased 
to  turn  their  hearts :  by  which  means  they  think  to  escape 
undiscovered.  His  sermon  is  about  the  space  of  an  hour, 
and  then  doth  another  stand  up  to  make  the  text  more 
plain;  and  at  the  latter  end  he  entreats  them  all  to  go  home 
severally,  lest  the  next  meeting  they  should  be  interrupted 
by  those  which  are  of  the  opinion  of  the  wicked.  They 
seem  very  steadfast  in  their  opinions,  and  say,  that  rather 
than  turn  they  will  burn."t     Noble  men !     Truth  was  pre- 

*  Crosby,  vol.  iii.,  p.  42. 

t  Ivimey,  vol.  i.,  p.  162.  Bishop  Hall  probably  alludes  to  these  when 
he  says: — "Alas!  my  Lords,  I  beseech  you  to  consider  what  it  is  that 
there  shoiild  be  in  London,  and  the  suburbs  and  liberties,  no  fewer  than 
fourscore  congregations  of  several  sectaries,  as  I  have  been  too  credibly 
informed,  instracted  by  guides  fit  for  them  (cobblers,  taylors,  felt-makers, 


112  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

cious  to  them,  and  life  was  a  trifle  in  comparison  with  its 
unutterable  worth ! 

The  age  was  one  of  excitement  and  conflict.  Mind  was 
liberated  from  its  bondage,  and  inquiry  was  pushed  into 
eveiy  circle.  To  its  veiy  depths  the  nation  was  agitated. 
The  past  had  lost  its  power.  The  compulsory  and  senseless 
ceremonies  of  a  polluted  form  of  religion  were  losing  their 
influence,  and  appeals  were  made,  to  a  great  extent,  to  the 
Divine  Word.  By  some  this  was  recognised  as  the  only 
standard  to  which  conscience  should  bow.  All  this  was 
fovourable  to  our  brethren.  Fearlessly  they  could  appeal  to 
it,  beyond  any  religionist  of  the  day.  Only  for  the  truth, 
for  Christ's  supremacy  in  his  church,  for  man's  individual 
responsibility  to  God  alone,  and  for  the  purity  and 
spii'ituality  of  his  church,  did  they  plead.  Their  distinctive 
principles  involved  all  this,  and  they  shrank  not  from  their 
avowal.  The  power  of  the  press  was  now  employed.  Two 
works  were  issued  about  this  period.  One  by  Mr.  Barber,  the 
minister  of  a  congregation  in  Bishopsgate  Street,  entitled, 
''A  Treatise  on  Bajitism,  or  Dipping,"  &c;  the  other,  "The 
Vanity  of  Childish  Baptism;  wherein  is  proved  that  Baptism 
is  Dipping,  and  Dipping  Baptism.  By  A.  R."  A  reply  was 
speedily  given  to  the  former,  such  as  power  often  gives  to 
the  weak,  and  error  to  tmth,  by  incarcerating  the  author  for 
eleven  months  in  gaol.  With  these  weapons  of  defence,  the 
ruling  power  in  Church  and  State  had  long  been  familiar. 

Early  in  1G41,  Wales  attracts  attention  in  connexion  with 
Baptist  principles.  Its  moral  state  is  thus  descril)ed  by  Vava- 
seur  Powell : — "That  the  professors  of  religion  were  very  few 
in  Wales,  except  in  the  corners  of  two  or  three  counties ;  and 
that  about  that  time  a  petition  was  sent  to  the  king  and 
Parliament;  that  upon  diligent  search  there  was  scarcely  to 
be  found  as  many  conscientious,  diligent  preachers,  as  there 

and  such  like  trash),  which  all  are  taught  to  spit  in  the  face  of  their 
mother,  the  Church  of  England,  and  to  defy  and  revile  her  Government." 
—Bishop  Hall  in  the  House  of  Lords.     Pari.  Hist.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  990. 


THE  CIVIL  WAR.  113 

were  counties  in  Wales;  and  that  the  few  who  were  there 
were  either  silenced  or  much  persecuted." 

This  eminent  man,  in  connexion  with  Mr,  Cradock  and 
others,  was  successful  in  preaching  the  Gos[)el,  Originally  a 
member  of  the  Established  Church,  and  educated  at  Oxford, 
his  conversion  to  the  truth  was  singularly  interesting.  Much 
of  the  deep  and  intense  soul  struggle  which  marked  the  early 
religious  life  of  Bunyan,  will  be  found  in  Powell.  To  the 
evangelising  of  the  Principality  he  devoted  his  wliole 
energies.  Persecution  everywhere  awaited  him.  Bishops 
threatened  and  magistrates  punished;  but  in  vain.  If 
opposed  in  one  town,  he  would  go  to  another.  Our  pages 
might  be  enriched  with  much  from  his  Life  and  Works, 
if  our  space  would  allow.  With  his  companions  in 
labour  and  tribulation,  he  succeeded  in  forming  churches. 
No  doubt  they  were  of  mixed  membersliip.  They  were 
the  first  to  separate  from  the  corrupt  national  cliurch, 
with  the  exception  to  which  we  have  before  referred,  and 
laid  the  foundation  of  JSTonconfoi'mity,  the  power  of  which  is 
now  so  gi-eat  in  the  Principality.  On  another  stage  we  shall 
again  see  him. 

Southwark  witnessed  another  scene.  Dr.  Feately,  a  church- 
man of  some  note,  now  happily  deprived  of  other  means, 
condescended  to  use  his  tongue  against  the  Baptists.  With 
four  of  these  heretics  he  expressed  his  willingness  to  dispute. 
The  challenge  Avas  accepted.  Sir  J.  Lenthal,  and  various 
other  persons  of  note,  attended  the  discussion.  Histoiy  has 
left  no  record  of  the  names  of  the  champions.  A  brewer's 
clerk  is  one;  probably  Mr.  Kiffin.  The  Doctor  published  his 
report  of  the  discussions  some  time  after,  and,  of  course, 
claimed  the  victory.  In  "The  Dipper  Dipt,"  &c.,  the 
reader  may  find  his  version  of  the  wordy  discussions.  A 
single    extract    may   interest   our    readers.*     "Since    the 

*  H.  Denne  wrote  "  Antichrist  Unmasked,"  in  two  treatises.    The  first 
in  answer  to  two  Poedobaptists,  Dr.  Feately  and  S.  Marshall,  B.D.,  "The 
Argument  for  Childish  Baptism  Opened,  and  Answered;"  "The  Man  of 
H 


114  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS, 

unliappy  distraction  wliicli  our  sins  have  brought  upon  us, 
the  temporal  sword  being  otherwise  employed,  and  the 
spiritual  being  locked  up  in  the  scabbard,  this  sect  amongst 
others  liath  so  far  presumed  upon  the  patience  of  the  State, 
that  it  hath  held  weekly  conventicles,  rebaptized  hundreds 
of  men  and  women  in  the  twilight,  in  rivers  and  some  arms 
of  the  Thames,  and  elsewhere,  dipping  them  over  head  and 
ears.  It  hath  printed  divers  pamphlets  in  defence  of  their 
heresy;  yea,  and  challenged  some  of  our  preachers  to  dis- 
putation." ''  This  venomous  serpent  {vere  solifuga),  fl}^ng 
from  and  shunning  the  light  of  God's  Word,  is  the  Anabap- 
tist, who  in  these  latter  times  first  showed  his  shining  head 
and  speckled  skin,  and  thrust  out  his  sting  near  the  place  of 
my  residence,  for  more  than  twenty  years." 

The  statements  of  the  Doctor  as  to  their  increase,  are 
abundantly  sustained  by  other  witnesses.  Charles,  whilst 
admitting  their  influence,  thus  slanders  them: — "How  many 
of  the  gravest  and  most  substantial  citizens  of  London,  by 
whom  the  government  and  discipline  of  that  city  was  pre- 
served, are  disgraced,  robbed,  and  imprisoned,  without  any 
pi'ocess  of  law  or  colour  of  accusation,  but  of  obedience  to  the 
law  and  government  of  the  kingdom;  whilst  Anabaptists 
and  Brownists,  with  the  assistance  of  \dcious  and  debauched 
persons  of  desperate  fortune,  take  upon  them  to  break  up 
and  rifle  houses,  as  public  and  avowed  ministers  of  a  new- 
invented  authority."t  "  These  are  the  men  who,  joining 
with  the  Anabaptists  and  Brownists  of  London,  first  changed 
the  government  and  discipline  of  that  city ;  and  now,  by  the 
pride  and  power  of  that  city,  would  undo  the  kingdom; 
whilst  their  Lord  Mayor  (a  person  accused  and  known  to  be 

Sin  Discovered  in  Doctrine  :  tlie  Root  and  Foundation  of  Antichrist  Laid 
Open.  By  H.  Denne.  Printed  for  the  edification  of  the  Church  and 
information  of  the  world.  1645."  His  "Address  to  the  Reader"  is  dated 
from  Prison  in  Lord  Petre's  House,  February  23,  1G44. 

i"  Charles's  Answer  to  an  Ordinance  of  Parliament.  Pailiamentai-y 
History,  vol.  iii.,  p.  31. 


THE   CIVIL   WAR.  115 

giiilty  of  liigh  treason),  by  a  new  let,dislativc  process  of  Ids 
own,  suppresses  and  reviles  the  'Book  of  Common  Prayer,' 
robs  and  imprisons  whom  he  thinks  fit,  and,  Avith  the  rabble 
of  his  faction,  gives  law  to  both  Houses  of  Parliament."* 
Referring  to  the  Baptists'  hostility  to  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayei',  Charles  says: — "  So  he  desires  that  a  good  bill  may 
be  framed  for  the  better  preserving  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer  from  the  scorn  and  violence  of  Brownists,  Anabap- 
tists, and  other  sectaries,  Avith  such  clauses  for  the  ease  of 
tender  consciences  as  his  Majesty  hath  formerly  afforded." f 

Pym,  in  a  speech  to  the  citizens  of  London,  denies  this. 
"  To  this  I  am  connuanded  to  say,  that  hereof  there  is  no 
proof;  it  doth  not  appear  that  they  give  any  svich  counte- 
nance to  sectaries  of  any  kind  whatsoever;  and  if  it  did, 
his  Majesty  hath  little  reason  to  object  it,  while,  notwith- 
standing the  profession  he  hath  after  made,  that  he  will 
maintain  the  Protestant  reformed  religion,  he  doth,  in  the 
meantime,  raise  an  army  of  Papists,"-  &,c.  &c.  Pym  gives  a 
positive  denial  to  all  the  charges  made  by  the  kiug.:|: 

A  little  later  on,  Charles,  in  a  proclamation  forbidding 
obedience  to  the  Parliament,  thus  refers  to  them : — "  Some 
seditious  persons  assume  to  themselves  (with  the  assistance 
of  those  rebellious  armies,  and  of  divers  mutinous  and 
desperate  Brownists,  Anabaptists,  and  other  ill-affected 
persons  in  our  city  of  Loudon,  by  whose  means  they  awe 
such  members  of  both  Houses  who  yet  continue  amongst 
them)  a  power  to  do  things  absolutely  contrary  to  the  laws 
of  the  land,"  etc.     "  That  the  Common  Council  of  London, 

*  raiiiameutary  History,  vol.  iii. ,  p.  33. 

t  Heply  to  propositions  submitted  to  liim,  Feb.,  1C42.  Parliamentary 
History,  vol.  iii.,  p.  73. 

t  Hid,  vol.  iii.,  p.  59,  In  reply  to  a  Petition  from  the  Aldermen 
and  Commons  of  London,  Charles  asks,  "if  the  discountenancing  and 
imprisoning  godly,  learned,  and  painful  preachers,  and  the  clierisliing  and 
countenancing  of  Bro^vnists,  Anabaptists,  and  aU  manner  of  sectaries,  be 
the  way  to  defend  and  maintain  the  true  Kef ormed  Keligion?" — Parlia- 
mentary History,  vol.  iii. ,  p.  54. 


116  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

many  of  them  being  factiously  chosen  out  of  Brownists, 
Anabaptists,  and  such  who  oppose  the  regular  wholesome 
government  of  the  city,"  &c.* 

Let  us  add  another  extract  from  one  who  appears  to  have 
hated  them  with  intense  hatred.  "  They  have  been,"  says 
Edwards,  "and  are,  polupragmatical,  indefatigably  active, 
striving,  not  less  night  and  day,  in  city,  county,  in  all  places, 
having  their  agents  to  do  their  work  and  promote  theii-  cause ; 
tlieir  eyes  are  ijitent  on  everything  that  may  make  for  them 
or  against  them,  and  they  have  a  hand  in  everything;  they 
are  men  of  a  hundred  eyes  and  hands,  out-acting  and  out- 
Avorkiug  all  the  Presbyterians;  they  deal  with  this  man  to 
take  them  oft',  and  work  with  another  man  to  qualify  him; 
they  have  got  most  of  the  weekly  wiiters  of  news  to  plead 
their  cause,  commend  their  persons,  cry  u])  their  actions; 
they  have  sent  their  emissaries  into  several  counties  to 
preach,  carry  letters,  deal  with  persons  for  choosing  bur- 
gesses in  Parliament  for  their  way,  as  Mr.  Peters  and  others ; 
they  observe  all  men's  tempers,  humours,  and  accordingly 
deal  with  them  all, — some  with  offices  and  places,  some  by 
holding  out  principles  suited  to  their  lusts,  "t 

The  unfurling  of  the  Royal  Standard  was  the  signal  for 
actual  conflict.  Lord  Macaulay  has  given  a  grapliic  view  of 
the  elements  of  which  both  parties  were  composed.  One 
equally  graphic,  and  more  minute,  has  been  given  by  one  who 
lived  in  these  exciting  times.  "  In  this  contest  between  king 
and  Parliament,  the  generality  of  the  nobility  were  on  the 
king's  side.  After  Edgehill  fight,  when  the  king  was  at  Oxford, 
a  great  part  of  the  Lords,  and  many  of  the  Commons,  went 
over  to  him.  A  great  part  of  the  knights  and  gentlemen  of 
England  adhered  to  him,  except  in  Middlesex,  Essex, 
Suffolk,  Norfolk,  and  Cambridgeshire,  where  the  king  never 
came  with  his  army.    Most  of  their  tenants  followed  them, 

*  Proclamation  of  Charles,  June  26,  1643.     Pailiamentary  History, 
vol.  iii.,  pp.  134,  135. 
t  Edwards's  Gangreana,  pp.  69,  70. 


THE   CIVIL   WAR.  117 

and  most  of  the  poorer  sort  of  people  tlirouglioiit  the  nation. 
Ou  the  Parliament's  side  were  the  smaller  part  of  the  gentry 
in  most  counties,  and  the  greatest  part  of  the  tradesmen  and 
freeholders,  and  the  middle  sort  of  men,  especially  in  those 
corporations  and  counties  wliich  depend  on  clothing  and 
such  manufactures.  To  them  also  adhered  the  far  greater 
part  of  those  through  the  nation  who  were  friends  to  a 
religious  strictness,  and  enemies  to  formality  and  profane- 
ness,  superstition  and  immorality.  ■'■  It  w^as  not  indeed  pro- 
perly Belltim  E2nscopale  (the  Bishop's  War),  though  by 
many  so  styled,  t  For  thousands  that  wished  for  good 
bishops  were  on  the  Parliament's  side ;  l)ut  the  generality  of 
those  who  were  called  Puritans  and  Precisians,  and  were  for 
serious  godliness,  both  ministers  and  people,  adhered  to  the 
Pai-liament.  On  the  other  side,  they  who  were  for  loose- 
ness, swearing,  gaming,  and  drinking — the  ministers  and 
people  who  were  against  the  strict  observation  of  the  Lord's 

*  Lord  MacaiUay  thus  refers  to  the  same  classes : — "  In  the  great 
straggle  into  wliich  the  nation  was  now  plunging,  men  arrayed  them- 
selves— some  from  iirinciple,  and  others  from  interest.  Around  the 
monarch,  partly  from  sympathies  with  his  despotic  tendencies,  and 
partly  from  a  chivakous  spirit  of  loyalty,  most  of  the  noble  and  wealthy 
gathered.  The  bishops  and  the  clergy,  and  all  dependent  in  any  way  on, 
or  expectant  from,  the  church  and  its  patrons,  adhered  to  Mm.  Into  his 
position  he  had  been  forced  in  the  main  by  the  hierarchy.  Following  in 
the  wake  of  them  we  must  class  a  larger  class  of  persons,  whose  living 
depended  on  their  ability  and  willingness  to  gratify  the  pride  and  luxuiy, 
or  to  minister  to  the  vices  and  vitiated  tastes,  of  this  class.  To  these 
must  be  added  the  whole  of  the  Komanist  portion  of  the  community. 
But  though  less  imposing,  yet  the  champions  of  liberty  had  more  of  the 
elements  of  the  real  power  of  the  nation.  The  stiuxly  yeomen  of  the 
kingdom,  the  merchants  and  tradesmen — the  whole  of  the  Puritan,  or 
perhaps  we  should  say  Nonconforming,  body  of  the  realm,  headed  by 
some  few  leading  noblemen.  These  were  men.  Men  trained  to  think, 
and  to  act  with  vigour,  when  action  was  required.  Men  to  whom  liberty 
was  proportionably  sweet,  from  the  giinding  oppressions  they  had 
suffered,"  &c. — Vide  Macavday's  Eng.,  vol.  i.,  pp.102,  103. 

+  "  Good  Lord,  what  fiery  clasliings  we  have  had  lately  for  a  cap  and 
a  surplice !  What  oceans  of  human  blood  v/as  spilt  for  ceremonies  only, 
and  outward  fonnalities,  for  the  base  position  of  a  table!" — Howell's 
Lettei's,  p.  4S6.     ""When  they  saw  the  honourable  the  high  Court  of 


lis  EARLY    E^'GLISH    BAPTISTS. 

day,  and  fond  of  dancing  and  recreations  at  those  sacred 
seasons,  that  placed  all  their  religion  in  going  to  church  and 
hearing  Common  Prayer,  that  were  against  serious  preaching, 
and  for  ininning  down  all  those  who  were  stricter  than 
themselves — these  adhered  all  along  to  the  king ;  which  one 
consideration  was  the  thing  that  determined  many  sober  and 
honest  persons  which  side  to  take."* 

As  the  conflicts  progress,  the  diiference  between  the  classes 
becomes  more  apparent.  Fiction  invested,  for  a  time,  the 
cavaliers  with  all  that  was  chivalrous  and  noble ;  but  history 
has  removed  the  mask,  and  exhibited  them  in  their  true 
colours.  That  many  gathered  around  the  misguided  sove- 
reign from  the  purest  motives,  and  wdiose  principles  and  con- 
duct would  have  shed  hxstre  on  any  cause,  it  would  be  worse 
than  ignorance  to  doubt.  But  truth  has  its  obligations.  From 
these  the  pen  of  history  must  not  shrink.  Lord  Goi'ing, 
one  of  Charles's  dashing  generals,  was  "  the  most  infamous 
person  that  ever  disgraced,  whilst  permitted  to  retain,  the 

Parliament  begin  to  look  into  their  enormities  and  abuses,  beholding  how 
they  united  religion  like  a  waxen  nose,  to  the  furtherance  of  their 
ambitious  purposes,  then  Troy  was  taken  in ;  then  they  began  to  despair  of 
holding  any  longer  their  usurped  authority ;  and,  therefore,  as  much  as  in 
them  lay,  both  by  public  declarations  and  private  councils,  they  laboured 
to  foment  the  civil  difference  between  his  Majesty  and  his  Parliament, 
abetting  the  proceedings  of  the  malignants  with  large  supplies  of  men  and 
money,  and  stirring  up  the  people  to  tumults  by  their  seditious  sermons." 
— Declaration  and  Defence  of  J.  Pym.  Rushworth,  vol.  ii. ,  p.  376.  Guizot's 
E.  E,.,  append,  x.,  p.  452.  Clarendon,  vol.  i.,  p.  355.  Burton, vol.  ii.,  p.  328. 
*  "And  truly  I  may  almost  say,  that  that  corrupt  Common  Prayer 
Book  was  the  sole  and  whole  occasior.  of  all  the  miseries  and  wars  that 
since  have  happened  in  both  nations.  Had  his  Majesty  first  endeavoured 
the  inspiration  of  that  lame  book  upon  the  English,  most  men  do  believe 
we  had  swallowed  it,  and  then  the  Scots  must  have  done  it  afterwards ; 
for  the  clergy,  at  that  time,  generally,  were  such  idle,  lazy  lubbers,  and  so 
pampered  with  court  preferments,  and  places  temporal  in  every  shire  in 
England,  and  such  flattering  sycophants,  that  doubtless  the  great  hand  of 
God  was  in  it,  that  those  rude  Scots  fii-st  broke  the  ice,  and  taught  us  the 
way  to  expel  an  insulting  priesthood  and  to  resist  the  king,  he  endea- 
voiiring,  by  unwarrantable  means,  to  intrude  things  contrary  to  the 
Divine  laws  of  Almighty  God  iipon  our  consciences." — W.  Lilly's  Life 
and  Death  of  Charles  I.,  pp.  207,  208. 


TUE   CIVIL   WAR.  119 

name  of  gentleman."*  Of  his  troops,  Baxter  says: — "As 
they  marched  along  the  countiy,  they  were  everywhere 
entertained  with  strange  relations  of  the  horrid  impiety  and 
outrages  of  Lord  Goring's  soldiers.  A  John  Guillam  he 
quartered  with,  at  South  Pedertom,  in  Somersetshire, 
averred  to  him,  '  That  with  him  a  company  of  them  pricked 
their  lingers,  letting  the  blood  run  into  a  cup,  in  which  they 
drank  a  health  to  the  devil."'t  "The  common  soldieiy, 
imitating  the  brutal  indifference  of  their  master  to  human 
suflering,  were  ravaging  the  whole  country  with  ruthless 
pillage,  and  every  sort  of  licentiousness — all  but  the  true, 
the  bi-ave,  the  invincible  soldiers  of  Cromwell."|  No  prin- 
ciple, no  virtue,  restrained  these  men.  Deep  and  intense  was 
their  hatred  to  all  that  was  dignified  and  moral,  and  they 
luxuriated  in  vice,  and  delighted  in  cruelty  and  blood. 

Old  Adam  Martindale  gives  us  a  sample  of  this  in  the  case 
of  his  father: — "  My  poor  father  sped  much  worse,  for  they 
took  the  old  man  prisoner,  and  used  him  most  barbarously, 
forcing  him  to  march  in  his  stockings,  without  shoes,  and 
snapping  his  eai-s  with  their  firelock  pistols.  His  house  they 
plundered  of  everything  they  thought  worth  cariying  away, 
in  carts  which  they  brought  to  his  door  for  that  purpose; 
and  were  soi-e  troubled  (good  men)  that,  the  walls  being 
stone,  and  the  roof  being  well  shot  over  within,  they  could 
fasten  no  fire  upon  the  house,  though  they  several  times 
essayed  so  to  do.  His  stock  of  cattle  they  wholly  drove 
away,  and  he  never  had  an  hoofe  again."  1|     The  officei-s  of 

*  Warburton's  P.  Rupert,  &c.,  vol.  i.,  p.  195. 

t  Baxter's  Life,  p.  91.  Vicar  states  a  similar  fact,—"  That  on  lyiarcli  10, 
1G44,  some  of  them  proposed  to  drink  the  health  of  the  devil,  and  cue 
doubting  his  existence,  wished  he  might  appear,  &c.  The  request  was 
complied  with,"  &c.— Looking-GIass  for  Malignants.    2  Pari.  Parsig.,  p.  17. 

t  Life  of  "VMiitelocke,  p.  209.  "During  the  siege  (of  Brampton  Castle), 
the  cook  was  shot  by  a  poisoned  bullet,  and  a  running  stream  that  fur- 
nished the  -voUage  with  water  was  iioisoned." — Lady  B.  Harley's  Letters. 
Intro.,  p.  six.    Camden  Society. 

jl  Life  of  Adam  Martindale,  p.  39.  Cheetham  Society.  "  In  Shrop- 
shire," says  Baxter,  "where  his  father  dwelt,  both  he  and  all  his  neigh- 


120  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Charles  forced  the  popttlation,  on  pain  of  death,  into  their 
ranks,  "and  armed  them  with  sucli  -weapons  as  they  had,  if 
they  were  but  pitchforks;  the  rear  being  broxight  up  with 
troopers  that  had  commission  to  shoot  such  as  lagged  behind, 
so  as  the  poor  countrymen  seemed  to  be  in  a  dilemma  of 
death,  either  by  the  troopers,  if  they  went  not  on,  or  by  the 
great  and  small  shots  out  of  the  town  (Bolton),  if  they  did."'^ 
Like  the  locusts,  eA^r}i;hing  was  fair  and  lovely  before  them, 
desolation  and  miseiy  behind  them.  History  more  than 
justifies  this  accusation. 

The  soldiers  of  liberty  were  very  different  men.  We 
speak  not  now  of  a  single  jieriod,  but  of  the  whole.  "When 
I  put  my  hand  to  the  Loi'd's  work,  in  1642,  I  did  it  not 
i-ashly,  but  had  many  an  hour  and  night  to  seek  God,  to 
know  my  way;  it  being  a  time  the  nation  was  filled  with 
rumours  and  fears  of  some  bustling  betwixt  the  king  and  his 
great  Council,  the  Parliament,  that  was  called  before  the 
rebellion  in  Ireland,"  &c.t 

Histoiy  fully  warrants  the  follo-\\-ing  sketch  of  these  heroes 
by  the  pen  of  an  Episcopalian.  However  mistaken  their 
motives,  however  diverse  the  opinions  which  men  may  form 
of  their  aims,  none  Avill  venture  to  question  the  accuracy  of 
this  statement: — "  The  army  of  the  Pai'liament  presented  an 
appearance  altogether  unlike  that  of  ai-mies  in  general ;  they 

boui's,  that  were  noted  for  praying  and  liearing  sermons,  were  plundered 
by  the  king's  soldiers,  so  that  some  of  them  had  nothing  almost  but 
lumber  left  in  their  houses ;  though  his  father  meddled  on  neither  side, 
but  followed  his  own  business,  and  held  no  eoiTespondence  at  all  %vith  his 
son." — Life  of  Baxter,  p.  79. 

*  Life  of  Mai-tindale,  p.  32.  Vide  AYhitelocke,  p.  188.  Warburton's 
P.  Rupert,  vol.  ii.,  p.  103  (Note).  Lady  Harley's  Letters,  &c.,  p.  167. 
Memou-s  of  Sir  H.  Slingsby,  p.  58.  Edinbro',  1806.  Prynne  gives 
accoTints  we  could  not  print.     Power  of  Parliament,  part  i. ,  p.  112, 

t  Autobiography  of  Capt.  J.  Hodgson,  p.  80.  "These  men  were  ani- 
mated with  an  enthusiasm  of  which,  at  the  present  day,  we  can  form  no 
adequate  conception.  They  divided  their  time  between  military  duties 
and  prayer;  they  sung  psalms  as  they  advanced  to  the  charges;  they 
called  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  wliile  they  were  slaying  their  enemies." 
— Lingard,  vol.  x.,  p.  305. 


THE    CIVIL    WAR.  121 

■were  orderly  and  sober;  the  singing  of  psalms  occupied  the 
place  of  songs;  instead  of  spending  their  leisure  hours  in 
frivolous  conversation  or  amusements,  they  occupied  them- 
selves in  praying,  reading  the  Scriptures,  and  discussing  the 
most  abstruse  pt)ints  of  divinity.  In  the  camp,  they  were 
tractable;  in  the  field,  terrible;  and  at  the  sight  of  what  were 
deemed  ol)jects  of  superstition,  their  fury  was  ungovern- 
able."* It  was  so  with  the  privates,  the  officers,  and  the 
generals.  Religion  gave  a  character  to  everything  they  did. 
At  the  Council  Board,  God  was  acknowledged  ;  and  fre- 
quently in  the  battle-field  the  war  cry  was,  "  The  Lord  is 
with  us,"  or,  "  The  sword  of  the  Lord  and  Gideon." 

Whitelocke,  conversing  with  the  Queen  of  Sweden,  thus 
describes  the  Parliamentary  forces : — "When  their  enemies 
are  swearing,  or  debauching,  or  pillaging,  the  officers  and 
soldiei-s  of  the  Parliamentary  army  use  to  be  encouraging 
and  exhorting  one  another  out  of  the  Word  of  God,  and 
pi-aying  together  to  the  Lord  of  Hosts  for  his  blessing,  who 
has  shown  his  approbation  of  this  military  preaching  by  the 
success  he  has  given  them."  The  Queen:  "Do  your  generals 
and  other  gi-eat  officers  do  sol"  Whitelocke :  "Yes,  Madam, 
very  often,  and  very  well.  Nevertheless,  they  maintain  chap- 
lains and  ministers  in  their  houses  and  regiments.  Such  as 
are  godly  and  worthy  ministers  have  as  much  respect,  and  as 
good  provision  in  England,  as  in  any  place  in  christendom."f 

How  far  the  General  Baptists  had  modified,  or  renounced, 
the  opinions  which  had  been  held  by  the  earlier  members  of 

*  Lathorp's  E.  Episcopacy,  p.  201.  Illustrations  of  the  same  disci- 
pline could  be  multiplied.  The  following  are  selected  as  examples 
of  Cromwell:— "The  General  cashiered  Colonel  Wren,  and  several 
of  his  officers  in  the  head  of  the  army,  for  plundering  with  their 
soldiers.  It  gave  a  great  deal  of  encouragement  to  the  honest  part  of  the 
army,  to  cashier  such  time-serving  fellows." — Autobiography  of  Captain 
Hodgson,  p.  123.  Paishworth  has  given  Cromwell's  Proclamation,  vol. 
vii.,  p.  1274.  "Two  troopers  were  hanged  in  the  view  of  our  army 
for  plundering"  at  Perth.— /6k?,  pp.  151,  152.  Vide  Eelation  of  the 
Fight  at  Perth.     Original  Memorials  of  the  Civil  War,  pp.  209,  253. 

+  Life  of  AYliitelocke,  pp.  339,  340. 


122  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

that  body  on  oaths,  war,  &c.,  we  are  not  prepared  to  say. 
It  may  be  affirmed,  we  think,  with  confidence,  that  to  some 
extent  they  did  retain  them,  and  that  few  of  them  mingled 
in  the  bloody  conflict.*  Not  so  the  other  section  of  the  body. 
Into  the  struggle  they  threw  themselves  with  ardour,  which 
sprung  not  merely  from  their  intense  love  of  liberty,  l)ut 
from  one  of  mightier  power.  "With  them  it  was  a  holy  war 
— a  struggle  for  Christ  and  his  church.  Soul  freedom  was 
the  end;  liberty  for  truth  and  righteousness — not  for  them- 
selves, but  for  all  men.  Theirs  was  not  an  uprising  against 
Laud  and  the  hierarchy,  but  against  every  yoke  forged 
at  Lambeth  or  in  the  Westminster  Assembly.  We  only 
indicate  the  facts.  We  know  no  plea  for  war,  much  less  a 
religious  one.  But  they  felt  intensely,  conscientiously  felt, 
that  the  means  and  the  end  were  both  right.  W.  Dell,  in  a 
noble  passage,  thus  writes : — "  To  conclude,  honourable  and 
worthy,  we  will  be  willingly  contented  to  do  and  suffer  all 
things  with  you :  we  will  cheerfully  run  thi'ough  honour  and 
dishonour  with  you :  fame  and  infamacy,  gain  and  loss,  trouble 
and  quietness,  war  and  peace,  life  and  death  :  and  do  desire 
to  reserve  nothing  to  ourselves,  Nisi  unicum  verbum  Domini, 
'  but  only  the  Woi'd  of  God,'  in  its  own  purity,  and  liberty 
to  preach  it,  and  to  profess  it,  and  to  practise  it,  for  the 
glory  of  God  and  his  only  begotten  Son,  and  for  the  good  of 
his  kingdom,  and  this  kingdom."t  Others  might  be,  and 
doubtless  were,  animated  by  this  spirit,  but  only  from  the 
lips  of  Dell  did  the  representatives  of  the  people  hear  these 
noble  and  truthful  utterances.  Keligious  freedom  was 
unknown.  It  was  freedom  for  a  sect,  not  for  man — for 
certain  dogmas,  not  for  free  thought  and  the  fearless  utter- 
ance of  individual  conA'ictions.  Our  subsequent  narrative 
will  place  this  beyond  all  doubt. 

*  Prynne  says,  "It  is  confessed  by  all  men,  yea  by  those  who  are  most 
intoxicated  witli  an  Anabaptistical  spirit,  condemning  all  kinds  of  war, 
refusing  to  carry  arms  against  any  enemies,  thieves,  pirates,  &c."-- 
Sovereign  Power,  &c.,  part  iii.,  pp.  56,  103. 

t  Right  Reformation,  p.  61. 


THE    CIVIL   WAR.  123 

The  historian  of  the  General  Baptist  brethren  gives  us  but 
little  information  about  the  proceedings  of  that  body.  Nor 
have  we  gathered  much  beyond  what  appeai-s  in  the  eai'lier 
part  of  this  vohime.  Into  more  prominency  they  now  rise. 
Mr.  Taylor  tells  us,  that,  "  previous  to  the  commencement  of 
the  civil  war,  a  Bai)tist  church  had  been  formed  under  the 
care  of  Mr.  Thomas  Lamb,  which  usually  met  in  Bell  Alley, 
Coleman  Street,  and  joined  the  Particular  Baptists,  and 
zealously  exerted  himself  in  promoting  the  spread  of  their 
doctrine  when  Archbishop  Laud  presided  over  the  affairs  of 
tlie  church.  At  the  instigation  of  this  tyrannical  prelate, 
he.  was  seized  at  Colchester,  his  native  city,  and  dragged  in 
chains  to  London,  for  dissenting  from  the  national  church, 
and  preaching  to  a  separate  congregation.  He  was  arraigned 
before  the  Star  Chambei-,  and  required  to  confess  that  he 
had  administered  the  Lord's  Supper,  the  penalty  for  which  was 
banishment.  Mr.  Lamb,  however,  pleading  the  rights  of  an 
Englishman,  refused  to  criminate  himself,  and  was  remanded 
to  prison.  His  wife  solicited  the  Archbishop  to  take  pity  on 
a  mother  and  eight  children,  and  to  release  the  husband  and 
father;  but  the  unfeeling  priest  was  untouched  by  her 
affliction,  and  roughly  ordered  the  servants  to  take  away 
that  troublesome  woman.  After  some  time  he  obtained  his 
liberty,  and  resumed  his  favourite  employment  of  preaching 
the  Gospel.  This  brought  him  into  new  troubles ;  from 
which  he  was  no  sooner  delivered  than  he  entered  to  his 
sacred  work.  Thus  he  pursued  the  path  of  duty,  till  he  had 
been  confined  in  almost  every  prison  in  London  and  its 
vicinity.  He  frequently  observed,  that  that  man  was  not  fit 
to  preach,  who  would  not  preach  for  God's  sake,  though  he 
was  sure  to  die  for  it  as  soon  as  he  had  done."*     Mr.  Lamb 

*  Taylor's  History,  vol.  i.,  p.  99.  Crosby,  vol.  iii.,  p.  54  ;  from  whom 
Mr.  T.  takes  the  account.  A  singular  note  is  given  by  Warbm-ton  : — "To 
reckon  up  the  slain  (at  Chalgrove)  by  the  number  of  Christian  burials,  is 
no  sure  way  of  coming  at  the  truth,  for  divers  Anabaptists  and  Brownists 
refuse  to  bury  their  soldiers  otherwise  than  they  do  their  horses.  A 
beating  up,"  &c.  &c. — Rupert,  &c.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  210  (Note). 


124  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

•was  very  useful,  and  liad  gatliered  at  this  time  a  large  and 
zealous  cliurcli.  By  this  spirit  our  brethren  were  animated. 
To  buy  the  truth,  to  make  it  known,  and  if  needs  be  to  die 
for  it,  was  the  absorbing  end  of  their  life. 

The  period  over  which  our  narrative  extends  was  fruitful 
in  sects.  Most  of  the  leading  ecclesiastical  bodies  of  the 
present  began  to  multiply  and  make  themselves  a  power  in 
the  commonwealth.  Laud,  with  all  his  vast  power  and 
multiplied  appliances,  could  not  crush  them.  Freedom  from 
his  hateful  yoke  liberated  their  energies  and  kindled  their 
zeal.  The  spii-it  of  inquiry  had  been  excited.  The  genius 
of  Milton  had  spoken  in  strains  which  had  already  thrilled 
the  nation.  The  attitude  of  the  patriots,  and  the  power  of 
the  press;  above  all,  the  Book  of  God  was  free,  and  under 
its  influence  authority  gave  place  to  conviction.  Religious 
men  and  religious  teachers  had  much  to  leai'n ;  and  what  is 
often  harder,  much  to  unlearn.  Guizot  has  said : — "  Not- 
withstanding the  active  inquisition  of  Laud,  sects  of  all 
descriptions  assembled,  in  to\\T.is,  in  some  cellars;  in  the 
country,  under  the  roof  of  a  barn,  or  in  the  midst  of  a  wood. 
The  dismal  character  of  the  locality,  their  perils  and  difficul- 
ties in  meeting,  all  excited  the  imagination  of  preachers  and 
hearers ;  they  passed  together  long  hours,  often  whole  nights, 
praying,  singing  hymns,  seeking  the  Lord,  and  cursing  their 
enemies,"  &c.*  The  former  part  of  this  statement  is  true; 
the  last  sentence  is  not  so.  Guizot  could  group  facts  and 
master  principles;  but  he  had  no  sympathy  with,  for  he  did 
not  understand,  the  pure  and  lofty  motives  of  the  men  who 
asked  for  no  State  patronage,  and  had  no  worldly  honour  to 
gain  by  the  triumph  of  their  principles. 

In  wealth,  in  numbers,  in  social  and  political  influence, 
the  Presbyterians  stood  high.  Causes  too  numerous  for  us  to 
detail,  had  contributed  to  this.  Hobbes  says,  that  "  in  the 
beginning  of  the  late  war,  the  power  of  the  Presbyterians  was 

•-'  English  Eev.,  h.  ii.,  p.  Gl. 


THE   CIVIL   WAR.  125 

SO  very  great,  that  not  only  the  citizens  of  London  were, 
almost  all  of  them,  at  theii-  devotions,  but  also  all  the  great- 
est part  of  all  other  cities  and  market  towns  of  England."* 
Scotland  aided  this.  Hostility  to  Episcopacy  was  favourable 
to  the  views  of  the  pati'iots.  Without  their  sympathy, 
despotism  would  probably  triumph.  So  early  as  1639,  their 
commissioners  who  visited  the  king  won  over  many  of  the 
leading  actors  in  the  great  drama.  "  Not  one  Presbyterian," 
says  Baxter,  "was  to  be  seen  in  the  House,  when  it  met. 
Now,  these  men  had  great  resort  to  them,  and  many  secret 
councils  were  held  with  them  by  the  discontented  English — 
cliiefly  those  who  favour  Presbyteries,  and  wei'e  no  friends  to 
bishojis,  or  had  suffered  in  the  late  censure  in  the  Stai* 
Chamber,  Exchequer,  High  Commission,  and  other  judi- 
cators.  Those  who  inclined  to  a  i-epublic  had  much  cor- 
respondence with  them ;  and  they  courted  all,  fomented 
every  discontent,  and  made  large  and  religious  promises  of 
future  happy  times.  The  Earls  of  Essex,  Bedford,  Holland, 
the  Lord  Say,  Hampden,  Pym,  and  divers  other  lords  and 
gentlemen  of  great  interest  and  quality,  were  deep  in  with 
them."f  This  overthrow  of  Episcojiacy,  moreover,  had  aug- 
mented their  power,  and  many  now  filled  places  wliich  had 
been  declared  vacant  by  the  various  committees  on  religion. 
Many  of  the  clergy  had  been  ejected  from  the  churches — not 
for  attachment,  so  much,  to  Episcopacy,  as  for  immorality 
and  ciying  unfitness  for  the  work.  With  every  allowance 
for  exaggeration  and  improper  motives,  the  reports  sub- 
mitted to  the  House  reveal  an  affecting,  not  to  say  appalling, 
picture  of  the  state  of  the  church  under  Laud  and  his  Popish 
colleagues."  J 


*  Behemoth,  Maserea  Tracts,  vol.  ii.,  p.  477. 

+  Peck's  Life  of  MUton,  p.  400.    "Whitelocke,  p.  32. 

H;  Referring  to  this,  Vicar  says :— "  O  what  a  most  rare,  blessed,  and 
strange  change  is  already  wrought  in  the  city  of  London  !  O  what  a  com- 
pany of  stinking  snuffs  are  put  out,  and  what  rare  and  radiant  tapers,  and 
jjurely  huniing  and  shining  lamps,  are  set  up  in  (almost)  all  our  city  con- 


126  EAELY   EXGLISH   BAPTISTS, 

To  remedy  existing  evils,  the  Senate  decided  to  call  an 
assembly  of  learned  men,  to  whom  all  questions  relating  to 
religion  should  be  referred.  The  design  of  the  Assembly  is 
thus  defined  in  the  ordinance  which  convoked  it  on  the  14th 
of  June,  1G43: — "Whereas  no  blessing  is  more  dear  than 
the  purity  of  religion,  and  many  things  remain  in  the 
liturgy  and  discipline  of  the  church  requii-ing  a  further 
reformation;  and  the  present  Parliament  has  resolved  that 
the  present  government  by  archbishops,  &c.,  is  evil  and 
burdensome,  an  impediment  to  reformation,  and  to  be 
taken  away;  that  such  a  church  government  be  settled  as 
is  most  agreeable  to  God's  Word,  and  apt  to  preserve  the 
peace  of  the  church  at  home,  and  a  nearer  agreement  with 
the  Church  of  Scotland,  and  other  reformed  churches 
abroad;  for  the  better  effecting  hereof,  and  vindicating  the 
Church  of  England  from  all  calumnies  and  aspersions,  it  is 
thought  necessary  to  call  an  assembly  of  leai'ned  and 
judicious  divines  liereupon,  as  shall  be  proposed  by  either, 
or  both.  Houses  of  Parliament."  "  The  said  persons,  more- 
over, are  authorised  to  confer  of  such  matters  concerning  the 
liturgy  and  discipline  of  the  church,  or  the  vindicating  its 
doctrine  from  false  construction,  as  shall  be  proposed  by 
both,  or  either,  Houses  of  Parliament,  and  no  others.""  No 
ecclesiastical  jurisdiction  was  given  to  them.  Beyond  the 
objects  thus  defined,  they  had  no  power  to  go.  The  Assembly 
was  to  be  composed  of  repi'esentatives  of  various  bodies, 
Episcopalians,  Presbyteiians,  and  Independents.  No  Bap- 
tist was  admitted.  To  keep  their  fiery  spirits  in  check, 
certain  members  of  Parliament  were  nominated.f     After 

gregations ;  and  liow  piously  and  preciously  does  the  work  begin  now  to 
go  on,  and  increase  in  the  county  also,  where,  with  what  safety  to  their 
persons,  godly  ministers  may  comfortably  reside  with  the  people,  to  the 
glory  of  God  and  inexpressible  joy  of  the  souls  of  the  saints,"  &c. — 
Vicar's  Jehovah  Jii-eh,  p.  326.     David's  Congregationalism  in  Essex. 

*  Collier,  vol.  ii.     Lathorp's  E.  Epis. ,  p.  150. 

t  ■\Miitelocke  gives  an  amusing  example  of  their  influence : — "  Divers 
members  of  both  Houses  were  members  of  the  Assembly  of  Divines,  and 


THE   CIVIL   WAR.  127 

the  usual  formalities,  the  Westminster  Assembly  was  inau- 
gurated, Avith  all  the  imposing  ceremony  which  could  well 
be  thrown  around  such  an  august  gathering  of  the  learniug 
and  religion  of  the  State.  To  other  sources  we  must  refer 
our  readers  for  details  of  its  proceedings.  Only  upon  one  or 
two  matters  can  we  touch.  After  long  and  conflicting 
debates,  the  Council  produced,  in  the  place  of  the  Common 
Prayer,  a  Dii-ectory  for  public  worship,  and  sought  to  im^iose 
on  the  country  the  Solemn  League  and  Covenant,  as  the 
badge  of  its  subjection  to  the  Presbyterian  power.*  "With 
great  solemnity  and  display  this  latter  test  was  taken  by  the 
members  of  the  Legislature  in  1643.  Mr.  White,  one  of  the 
Assembly,  "  prayed  an  hour,  to  prepare  tlieni  for  the  taking 
of  the  Covenant;  then  Mr.  Nye,  in  the  pulpit,  made  some 
observations  touching  the  Covenant,  shewing  the  warrant 
from  Scripture,  the  example  of  it  since  the  creation,  and  the 
benefit  to  the  church.  Mr.  Henderson,  one  of  the  Scots 
Commissioners,  concluded  in  a  declaration  of  what  the  Scots 
had  done,  and  the  good  they  had  received  by  such  covenants; 
and  then  he  shewed  the  prevalency  of  evil  councils  about 
the  king,  and  the  resolution  of  the  States  of  Scotland  to 
assist  the  Parliament  of  England.  Next  Mi'.  Nye,  in  the 
pulpit,  read  the  Covenant,  and  all  present  held  up  their 

had  the  same  liberty  with  the  Divines  to  sit  and  debate,  and  give  their 
votes  in  any  matters  which  was  in  consideration  amongst  them  ;  in  which 
debates  Mr.  Selden  spoke  admirably,  and  confuted  divers  of  them  in  theii' 
own  learning.  And  sometimes,  when  they  had  cited  a  text  of  Scripture 
to  prove  their  assertion,  he  would  tell  them,  'Perhaps  iu  your  little 
pocket  Bibles  with  gilt  leaves  (which  they  would  often  pull  out  and  read), 
the  translation  may  be  thus,  but  the  Greek  or  the  Hebrew  signifies 
thus  and  thus;'  and  so  would  totally  silence  them." — Vol.  i.,  p.  209. 

*  The  year  before,  the  General  Assembly,  untaught  by  their  own  and 
the  nation's  sufferings  by  the  policy  of  Laud,  had  requested  '  that  in  all 
his  Majesty's  dominions  there  might  be  one  Confession  of  Faith,  one 
directory  of  worship,  one  public  catechism,  and  one  form  of  church 
government.  That  the  name  of  heresies,  and  sects,  Puritans  and  Con- 
formists, Separatists,  Anabaptists,  kc,  which  do  rend  the  bowels  both  of 
kirk  and  kingdom,  might  be  suppressed,'"  &c.— Rush  worth,  vol.  iv., 
p.  387.    Price,  vol.  L,  p.  239. 


128  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

hands  in  testimony  of  tlieir  assent  to  it.  The  divines  of 
the  Assembly  and  the  Scots  Commissioners  subscribed  it; 
and  then  Dr.  Yonge,  in  the  puljiit,  prayed  for  a  blessing 
upon  it.  Afterwards  the  members  of  Parliament,  in  their 
respective  Houses,  subscribed  their  names  in  a  parchment 
roll  when  the  Covenant  was  written."* 

The  influence  of  these  proceedings  on  our  brethren  must 
not  be  overlooked.  In  many  ways  it  contributed  to  their 
prosperity.  Their  discussion  on  various  dogmas,  the  pride 
and  insolence  of  the  Presbyterians,  and  theii*  attempts  to  put 
down  free  thought  and  to  fetter  religious  freedom,  their  fre- 
quent appeals  to  the  civil  power,  their  dogmas  on  other 
minds,  only  awakened  attention  to  the  claims  of  our 
brethren,  "Presbyterian  zeal,"  says  Guizot,  "sometimes 
obtained  from  the  Houses  menacing  declarations  against 
the  new  sectaries;  sometimes  the  fears  and  hatred  of  the 
political  reformers,  coinciding  with  those  of  their  devout 
allies,  they  employed  in  concerting  measures  of  rigour  against 
their  adversaries.  An  ordinance,  destined,  according  to  the 
preamble,  '  to  put  down  the  slanderous  papers,  books,  and 
pamplilets,  by  which  religion  and  government  had  for  some 
time  been  defamed,'  abolished  the  liberty  of  the  press, 
hitherto  tolerated,  and  subjected  to  a  strict  censoi'ship  all 
publications  whatever"  (Jime  11,  1643).t 

Though  the  liberty  of  unlicensed  printing  Avas  not  enjoyed, 
yet  the  press  was  comparatively  free.:}:     A  stream  of  deep, 

*  Pai'liamentaiy  Hist.,  vol.  iii.,  p.  173.  Whitelocke  and  Clarendon 
supply  ample  details.  "The  next  day,  Scottish  Commissioners  set  out 
for  London,  wliere  both  Houses,  after  having  consulted  the  Assembly  of 
Divines,  also  sanctioned  the  Covenant  (Sept.  14) ;  and  a  week  after 
(Sept.  25),  in  the  church  of  St.  ]\Iargai-et,  Westminster,  all  the  members 
of  Parliament,  standing  uncovered,  -ndith  hands  raised  to  heaven,  took  the 
oaths  of  adhesion  to  it  verbally,  and  then  in  writing,"  &c. — Guizot,  b.  iv., 
p.  205.     Neal,  vol.  iii.,  p.  62,  &c. 

t  Guizot,  b.  v.,  p.  214. 

X  Though  far  from  free,  yet  the  press  poured  forth  a  succession  of 
pamphlets.  In  every  form  they  appeared,  from  the  grave  and  erudite 
production  of  the  divine,  to  the  light  and  sarcastic  pasquinade  of  the  poet. 


THE    CIVIL    WAR.  129 

bitter,  malignant  calumny  flowed  from  this  source.  Nothing 
was  spared,  no  means  were  neglected,  which  could  blacken 
the  character  or  caricature  the  principles  of  our  brethren. 
Samples  of  these  abuses  have  already  passed  under  notice. 
Edwards  had  published  his  work,  in  which  the  spirit  of 
Bonner  and  Laud  were  incarnate,  without  any  of  the 
redeeming  qualities  which  distinguished  the  lattei-.  He  had 
distilled  his  own  gall,  and  stained  every  page  with  its  pol- 
lution. Persuaded  of  the  strength  of  his  own  cause,  and  his 
ability  to  defend  it,  he  says,  "  I  could  wish  with  all  my  heart 
there  were  a  public  disputation,  even  on  the  point  of'Ptedo- 
baptism  and  dipping,  between  some  of  the  Anabaptists  and 
our  ministers.  But  if,  upon  disputation  and  debate,  the  Ana- 
baptists should  be  found  in  error  (as  I  am  confident  they 
would),  that  then  the  Parliament  should  forbid  all  dipping, 
and  take  some  sure  course  with  all  dippers,  as  the  Senate 
of  Zurich  did."*  How  would  the  shrivelled  heart  of  this 
religious  teacher  have  bounded  at  the  sight  of  the  fires  of 
Smithfield,  or  at  witnessing  female  Anabaptists  sewn  up  in 
sacks  and  thrown  into  the  Thames !  This  is  only  a  sample 
of  a  class.  Most  of  the  rigid  Presbyterians  entertained 
similar  notions,  though  they  clothed  their  xitterance  in  a 
milder  form.f 

Nothing  was  spared.  Examples  might  be  multiplied.  "We  only  select  one  :^ 
"Where  be  our  proud  prelates  that  straddle  so  wide, 
As  if  they  did  meane  the  worlde  to  bestride  ; 
To  tread  on  the  nobles,  to  trample  them  down, 
To  set  up  the  mitre  above  the  king's  crown  ? 

That  ere  he  was  clerke  the  priest  hath  forgot. 
But  pride  will  come  down,  God  a'  mercy,  good  Scot. 
"With  Scripture  divines  doe  play  fast  and  loose, 
And  turn  Holy  Writ  to  capons  and  goose ; 
Their  gut  is  their  god,  religion  they  mocke. 
To  pamper  their  flesh  they  famish  their  flocke. 
To  preach  and  to  pray  they  all  have  forgot, 
And  now  they'll  be  taught,  God  a'  mercy,  good  Scot." 
— Rouse,  p.  3.     Others  occur  in  the  same  volume. 

*  Gangreana,  p.  177.     Our   readers  will  find  the  proceedings  of  the 
Senate  in  the  "  MartjTology,"  published  by  the  Hans.  Knollys  Society. 
+  Examples  of  these  may  be  seen  in  Price,  Crosby,  and  Ivimey. 


130  EAKLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

But  the  tone  of  others  was  very  different.  Light  had 
been  dawning  on  Episcopal  minds,  notwithstanding  the 
efforts  of  Laud.  The  "Ecclesiastical  Polity"  of  Hooker  all 
but  ignores  the  grounds  of  Jewel.  Chilliugworth,  in  1639, 
advanced  still  fiu-ther.  The  great  principles  for  which  our 
forefathers  have  ever  contended  was  fully  recognised  by 
him.  "The  Bible,  and  the  Bible  only,  is  the  religion  of 
Protestants."  Not  as  explained  by  fathers,  or  aflii'med  by 
councils,  but  as  the  right  of  every  man  to  investigate  for 
himself  "In  his  great  work,  all  authority  in  matters  of 
religioi*  is  openly  set  at  defiance."  "He  would  admit  of  no 
reservation  which  tended  to  limit  the  sacred  rights  of  private 
judgment."*  Later  still,  Lord  Brook  had  ])ublished  his 
work  on  Episcopacy,  in  which  he  expresses  doubts  as  to  the 
stability  of  the  gTound  on  which  infant  baptism  rested,  and 
throws  the  shield  of  his  protection  over  our  brethren.t  But 
as  indicative  of  the  change  of  feeling  in  the  Episcopal  mind. 
Bishop  Taylor's  work  on  the  "Liberty  of  Prophesying,"  is 
the  most  important.  It  was  issued  about  this  time.  One 
section  of  this  work  was  devoted  to  the  case  of  the  Anabap- 
tists. It  is  i^ut  with  iincommon  fairness,  and  with  great 
force.  The  sensation  it  produced  was  dee^  and  extensive. 
One  of  his  opponents  says,  "It  is  the  most  diligent  collec- 
tion, and  the  most  exact  scheme  of  the  arguments  against 
infant  baptism,  that  he  had  ever  met  with;  and  that  he  has 
therein  in  such  manner  represented  the  arguments  for  and 
against  it,  that  the  latter  have  seemed  to  many  to  be  suc- 
cessful and  victorious.":}:  The  woi'k  was  felt  by  the  Presby- 
teiians  as  an  aggression,  and  severely  animadverted  upon  by 

*  Buckle,  vol.  i.,  pp.  320,  323. 

"h  Episcopacy,  p.  96.     Crosby,  vol.  i.,  pp.  105,  167. 

J  Dr.  Hammond's  Six  Queries  on  Infant  Baptism,  sect.  49.  Wall's 
Hist.  Inf.  Bap.,  p.  271.  "Some  Avi-iters  ascribe  great  merit  to  J.  Taylor 
for  Ms  advocacy  of  toleration  (Heylin's  Life,  p.  27,  and  Parr's  Works, 
vol.  iv.,  p.  417);  1)ut  the  truth  is,  that  when  he  wrote  the  then  famous 
'Liberty  of  Prophesying,'  his  enemies  were  in  power;  so  that  he  was 
pleading  for  his  own  interest.    When,  however,  the  Church  of  Eng- 


THE   CIVIL   WAR.  131 

the  Rev.  S.  Rutherford,  Professor  of  Divinity  in  St.  Andrew's, 
in  liis  "  Free  Disputations  concerning  Pretended  Liberty  of 
Conscience.""  Dr>  Hammond  was  the  bishop's  principal 
antagonist;  and  so  high  did  tlie  feeling  run  in  his  own  circle, 
that  Dr.  Taylor  was  actually  obliged  to  reply  to  his  own 
work.t  In  some  cii'cles,  men's  views  of  right  and  wrong 
depend  very  much  on  the  circumstances  in  which  they  are 
placed.  J  For  the  influence  of  Milton's  magic  pen,  the  reader 
is  referred  to  another  section. 

Then  there  was  another  element  of  power  which  must  not 
be  overlooked.  Men  of  standing  and  high  nioi'al  character 
in  the  church  openly  espoused  the  cause  of  the  Anabaptists. 
Cornwall,  Blackwood,  Denne,  KnoUys,  and  others,  gave  up 
their  preferments,  and  united  with  their  churches.  All  of 
them  had  not  only  received  Episcopal  ordination,  but  passed 
through  the  Universities.  They  were  men  of  culture  and 
erudition.  Knollys,  some  years  before,  had  fled  from  the 
fierce  anger  of  the  hierarchy  to  the  wilds  of  the  new  world, 
but  had  now  retui'ned.  If  not  distingiiished  by  the  highest 
scholarship,  yet  his  attainments  in  sacred  literature  were 
considerable,  whilst  his  piety  and  preaching  invested  him 
with  an  influence  which  was  ever  used  for  Christ  and  his 
cause.     The  conversions  of  the  others  were  singularly  inte- 


land  again  obtained  the  upper  hand,  Taylor  withdi'ew  the  concession 
which  he  had  made  in  his  adversity." — Buckle,  vol.  i.,  pp.  330,  331. 

*  Warwick's  Mem.,  p.  337. 

f  Wall  more  than  warrants  Coleridge's  very  severe  remarks  on  the 
Bishop. — Lit.  Rem.,  vol.  iii.,  p.  250. 

+  Baxter  says  that  many  were  influenced  by  the  bishop's  work.  "  But 
it  would  appear,  that  after  Taylor's  position  towards  the  Government 
was  altered,  and  ecclesiastical  honours  had  begun  to  flow  upon  him,  his 
opinions  on  the  subject  of  toleration  must  have  become  very  materially 
modified,  or  he  coidd  never  have  consented  to  sit  as  a  member  of  that 
Privy  Council  from  wliich  those  most  intolerant  edicts  emanated,  by 
which  2,000  of  the  best  men  the  Church  of  England  ever  contained 
were  ejected  from  their  pastoral  cures,  and  in  many  cases  imprisoned 
and  treated  with  harshness  that  embittered  and  shortened  the  remainder 
of  their  days." — Cunningham's  Lives  of  Illustrious  Englishmen,  vol.  iii. , 
pt.  i.,  p.  145, 


132  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

resting.  A  brief  detail  of  the  two  first  may  gratify  the 
reader,  Mr.  Cornwall  was  minister  of  Marden,  in  Kent, 
and  being  dissatisfied  with  many  things  in  the  church,  was 
imprisoned  in  Maidstone  gaol.  In  this  part  of  the  coxmty 
Baptist  principles  were  rather  prevalent,  and  their  pro- 
l^agation  excited  doubt  and  much  inquiry  in  the  minds  of 
many.  A  woman,  in  some  perplexity  about  this  matter, 
applied  to  Mr.  Cornwall  for  relief  in  her  difficulties. 
His  efforts  failed.  His  own  attention  was  now  awakened, 
he  thoroughly  investigated  the  subject,  and  the  result  was 
natural :  infant  baptism  was  renounced  by  him.  Liberated 
afterwards  from  prison,  and  called  upon  to  preach  at  the 
visitation  held  at  Crausbroke,  in  1G44,  in  the  presence 
of  the  Assembly  he  openly  denounced  infant  baptism. 
His  text  was,  '■'In  vain  do  they  worship  vie,  teaching  for 
doctrine  the  commandments  of  men"  Unexpected  by  the 
audience,  the  shock  was  very  great ;  and  more  than  one  of 
the  ministers  was  anxious  to  dispute  the  matter  with  him. 
To  a  General  Baptist  minister  present,  Mr.  Jeflfrey,  he  referred 
them,  as  an  antagonist  worthy  of  their  power.  After  some 
discussion,  Mr.  Blackwood,  who  had  taken  note  of  the 
sermon,  promised  that  at  their  next  meeting  he  would  reply 
to  Mr.  Cornwall.  Upon  the  inquiry  he  entered.  In  all 
its  relationships  he  examined  it,  and  found,  as  the  result  of 
his  prayerful  investigation,  that  his  defence  was  hojieless. 
At  the  next  meeting  he  produced,  not  a  refutation,  but  a 
vindication,  of  Mr.  Cornwall's  doctrine.*     These  men  gave 


*  His  paper  was  published  under  the  title  of  "The  Storming  of  Anti- 
christ." Vide  Taylor,  Crosby,  Ivimey,  &c.  Thomas  Blake  replied  tcfit 
in  "Infant  Baptism  Freed  from  Antichristianism,"  &c.  London,  1(345. 
"We  humbly  make  bold  to  mention  Mr.  Francis  Cornwall,  a  painful 
preacher  of  good  report,"  &c. — Petition  from  the  Parish  of  Yalding, 
Jan.  28,  1G40.  Proceedings  in  Kent,  p.  148.  Deune  was  curate  of 
Pyrton,  in  Herts,  in  1641.  He  printed  a  sermon  in  that  year  preached 
at  a  visitation  at  Baldoc.  Thomas  Rotherham,  rector  of  St.  John 
Zacharies,  London,  replied  to  it,  under  the  title  of  "A  Den  of  Thieves 
Discovered."    There  is  a  singular  aUusiou  to  Denne,  in  "The  Axe  Laid 


THE   CIVIL   WAR.  133 

tlieruselves  to  the  work  with  right-lieartediiess,  and  widely 
enlarged  the  circle  of  Baptist  influence.  Denno,  who  had 
been  minister  of  Pyrton,  in  1643,  now  united  with  Mr. 
Lamb's  chnrch  in  Coleman  Street.  Over  a  wide  extent  of 
country  he  travelled.  Bedford,  Cambridge,  and  the  adjoining 
counties,  were  the  spheres  in  which  he  laboured.  Success 
marked  his  efforts,  but  his  career  of  usefulness  was  impeded 
by  a  committee  at  Cambridge,  and  by  their  orders  he  was 
cast  into  prison ;  but,  by  an  appeal  to  Parliament,  he  was 
removed  to  London.  It  was  whilst  there  confined  he  met 
with  the  redoubted  Dr.  Feately  and  his  book,  and  wrote  his 
rei)ly  to  it.  Nor  niiist  we  overlook  another  cause.  The 
progress  of  Congregational  principles  contributed  in  no  small 
measure  to  this.  The  Independents  repudiated  all  external 
authority  in  the  worship  of  God.  ISTotliing  should  be  received 
but  what  had  the  signet  of  the  Lord  upon  it.  Logically,  their 
ixtterance  justified  the  teaching  and  practice  of  our  brethren. 
Many  felt  this.  "We  have  seen  how  this  operated  with  many 
already.  How  it  struck  others,  may  be  gathered  from  the 
following: — "  Bro-wn's  church  at  Middleboro',  abundance 
turned  Anabaptists,  which  discontented  him.  Smith  him- 
self, the  gi-eat  leader  in  this  way,  turned  Anabaptist;  so  did 
Canne  at  last,  as  I  have  heard  say.  Johnson  and  Ainsworth's 
church  at  Amsterdam,  abundance  of  them  turned  Anabap- 
tists, and  were  therefore  excommunicated.  So  also  hath  it 
fallen  out  in  England;  the  churches  that  came  from  Hol- 
land, many  of  the  members  fell  to  Anabaptism,  both  of 
Sydrack  Sympson  and  Thomas  Goodwin,  and  some  separated 
upon  it  into  distinct  congregations.  The  same  may  be  said 
of  the  churches  that  began  in  Independency  among  ourselves 
here  in  England,  as  Mr.  Jeftreys,  Mr.  J.  Simpson,  and  others. 
The  reason  is  plain,  for  no  man  can  be  tnie  to  the  principles 

to  the  Root  of  the  Tree ;  or  the  Anabaptist  Mission  and  Ministry,"  &;c. 
"  This  is  Mr.  H.  Denne,  the  Anabaptist,  chaplain  and  apothecary,  farmer 
and  minister,  and  an  apologist  for  the  Society  of  Jesus,"  p.  51.  Other 
allusions,  pp.  49,  50,  52. 


134  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

of  tlie  Independents  and  Brownists,  }3iit  tliey  must  tui'n  Ana- 
baptists, for  the  reasons  aforesaid."  "Tliis  is  tlie  reasoning  of 
divers  eminent  men,"  the  same  winter  says  in  anothei-  place, 
"that  began  at  Independency,  and  upon  this  groimd,  amongst 
others,  slipt  into  Anabaptism;  as  Mr.  Lam-ance,  Mr.  Black- 
wood, Mr.  Allen,  and  many  others."*  A  little  before  the 
fight  at  Edge  Hill,  Mr.  Baxter  tells  us  that  he  came  in  con- 
tact, for  the  first  time,  with  the  Anabaj)tists.  It  was  at 
Gloucester,  to  which  city  he  had  gone  for  retirement. 
"  About  a  dozen  young  men,  or  more,  of  considerable  pai'ts, 
had  I'eceived  the  opinion  against  infant  baptism,  and  had 
been  i-ebaptized,  and  laboured  to  draw  others  after  them,  not 
far  from  Gloucester.  The  minister  of  the  place,  Mr.  "Winnel, 
being  hot  and  impatient  with  them,  it  was  thought  hardened 
them  the  more.  He  wrote  a  considerable  book  at  that  time 
agaiast  them;  but  the  nation  then  liaAong  no  great  experi- 
ence of  the  tendency  of  their  principles,  the  people  who  were 
not  of  their  opinions  did  but  pity  them,  and  think  it  was  a 
conceit  that  had  no  great  harm  in  it,  and  blamed  Mr. 
Winnel  for  his  asperity  towards  them,"  &c.t 

The  time  was  now  come  when  on  matters  of  belief  they 
shoiild  speak  for  themselves.  Patiently  they  had  waited. 
All  kinds  of  obloquy  had  been  mercilessly  poured  out  upon 
them.  The  atrocities  of  Munster,  heresies  of  every  kind,  had 
been  laid  to  their  charge.  The  ci\T.l  power  had  been  invoked 
to  crush  them,  and  the  Government  was  blamed  for  not 
framing  new  laws,  or  enforcmg  old  ones,  for  their  banish- 
ment from  the  kingdom.  Of  these  tilings  our  bretlu-en  were 
not  ignorant.  They  issued,  therefore,  in  1644,  a  Confession 
of  Faith.  The  title  of  this  document  runs  thus: — "The 
Confession  of  Faith  of  those  Churches  which  are  commonly 
(though  falsely)  called  Anabaptist.  Presented  to  the  view 
of  all  that  fear  God,  to  examine  by  the  touchstone  of  the 
Word  of  Truth;  as  likewise  for  the  taking  off  those  asper- 

*  Fresh  Suit  against  Independency,  pp., 36-7. 
t  Calamy's  Life  of  Baxter,  vol.  i.,  p.  76. 


rHE   CIVIL   WAR. 


135 


sions  which  are  frequently,  both  in  the  pulpit  and  print 
(although  unjustly),  cast  upon  them."  The  following  Scrip- 
tures, in  full,  follow  :—"«!lcts  iv.  20;  Isa.  viii.  20;  2  Corin. 
L  9,  10."  "  London:  printed  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1G44," 
This  document  is  signed  by  representatives  of  seven  churches 
in  London.  Their  adversaries  had  represented  them  as 
holding  free  will;  falling  from  grace;  denying  original  sin; 
disclaiming  of  magistracy, — denying  to  assist  them,  either  in 
person  or  purse,  in  any  of  their  lawful  commands;  doing 
acts  unseemly  in  the  dispensing  the  ordinance  of  baptism, 
not  to  be  named  amongst  Christians.  "  AU  of  which  charges 
we  disclaim  as  notoriously  untrue,  though  by  reason  t)f  these 
calumnies  cast  upon  us,  many  that  fear  God  are  discouraged 
and  forestalled  in  harbouring  a  good  thought,  either  of  us  or 
of  what  we  profess ;  and  many  that  know  not  God  [are] 
encouraged,  if  they  can  find  the  place  of  our  meeting,  "to 
gather  together  in  clusters  to  stone  us,  looking  upon  us  as 
a  people  holding  such  things  as  that  we  arc  not  worthy  to 
live."*  The  Confession  is  calm,  clear,  and  evangelical, 
embodying  those  views  of  Christian  doctrine  which  are 
termed  Calvinistic;  yet  it  excited  the  virulence  of  Di\ 
Feately,  and  that  perfect  development  of  Presbyterian 
bitterness  and  arrogance,  Principal  Baillie.f 

The  seizure  of  Sir  J.  Hotham  at  Hull,  in  1643,  was 
mainly,  as  we  gather  from  various  allusions,  the  work  of 
our  brethren.  In  one  of  the  journals  of  that  year,  it  is 
thus  noticed: — "Por  being  they  would  trust  neither  of 
them,  it  did  concerne  them  very  highly  to  make  sure  of 

*  Preface,  p.  16.  Confessions  of  Faith.  Hans.  Knollys  Society.  "The 
Anabaptists  would  have  no  government  at  all  in  the  chui-ch,  neither  would 
they  have  any  baptized  but  such  as  are  of  age ;  and  they  pray  more  for  such 
a  church  than  for  grace  or  faith. " — Religious  Lotteries.  London,  Printed 
by  T.  F.,  July  20,  1642.  "A  Declaration  against  the  Anabaptists"  was 
published  in  London,  1644.— Feately's  Description  of  the  Several  Sorts  of 
Anabaptists,  p.  71. 

t  Dipper  Dipt,  pp.  177-186.  Baillie's  Anabaptism  the  True  Fountain 
of  Error. 


136  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

both :  and  to  that  end  tliey  sent  down  a  commission  to  Sir 
Matthew  Boynton,  a  declared  Anabaptist  (and,  therefore, 
more  serviceable  to  their  ends),  i!b  seize  on  Hotham,  and 
take  possession  of  the  town ;  who  coming  thither  unsus- 
pected, as  being  Hotham's  brother-in-law,  and  one  in  whom 
he  much  confided,  made  himself  master  of  the  magazine,  and 
brought  over  all  the  soldiers  to  him  before  Hotham  had  any 
notice  of  the  practice.  But  finding  his  danger,  though  too 
late,  he  made  haste  to  Beverley,  where  he  was  set  upon  by  his 
own  soldiers,  whom  Boynton  had  before  corrupted,  by  Avhom 
he  was  pursued  back  again  to  Hull ;  and  at  the  gate  called 
Beverley  Gate  (being  the  very  gate  at  which  he  had  most 
impudently  denied  his  Majesty  entrance  into  the  town),  was 
beaten  off  his  horse."  To  the  same  fact  the  prisoner  refers 
in  a  letter  to  the  Speaker : — "  Lieutenant-General  Hotham 
is*  seized  upon  by  thirty  or  forty  rogues  aud  Anabaptists. 
If  by  your  orders,  I  require  reparation,"  &c.* 

The  activity  and  increase  of  the  body  are  indicated  by 
various  allusions  in  the  writings  of  their  opponents.  Spel- 
man,  commenting  on  the  Kentish  petitions  on  tithes,  about 
this  time,  says : — "  If  there  were  no  purpose  to  put  down 
tithes  by  such  as  are  in  authority,  how  cometh  it  to  pass 
that  the  Anabaptists  are  more  bold  in  London  to  take  up  a 
public  contestation  against  them,  than  the  Presbyterians  to 
make  apology  for  themi  For  did  not  one  Mr.  B.  C,  an 
Anabaptist,  manage  a  dispute  against  Mr.  W.  J.,  of  Chr., 
and  after  that  undertake  another  u];)on  the  same  arguments 
against  Mr.  J.  Cr.,  and  offered  to  proceede  in  it  against  all 
opposition,  which  Mr.  C.  durst  not  do,  upon  pretence  of  a 
prohibition  from  authority?"  "Although  they  may  have 
cause  to  suspect  that  some  parts  of  Kent,  for  the  present,  are 
not  so  reformed  as  they  should  be ;  Anabaptists  and  other 

*  Hotham  to  the  Speaker,  July  10,  1643.  Dalrymple,  vol.  ii. ,  p.  413. 
"  Sir  J.  Hotham,  or  his  son,  complains,  in  his  letter  to  the  Parliament, 
that  he  had  been  apprehended  by  a  company  of  Brownists,  Anabaptist 
factions,"  &c. — Vicar's  Jehovah  Jii-eh,  p.  3G7. 


THE   CIVIL   WAR.  137 

sectaries  having  misled  many  into  advei-se  principles,  not 
only  on  tithes,  but  to  other  matters,"  cfcc."'  "  John  Stalham, 
a  man  of  strict  Congregational  principles,  in  the  year  1643 
hold  a  public  disputation  with  Timothy  Butt,  {ihysician,  and 
Thomas  Lambe,  soap-boiler,  at  Tiiting,  on  the  subject  of 
infant  baptism;  on  which  occasion  he  was  assisted  by  his 
neighbour,  John  Newton,  of  Little  Badden,  and  Enoch  Gray, 
of  Wickham."+ 

Attempts  were  made  by  our  brethren  to  secure  a  larger 
measure  of  religious  freedom.  For  unlimited  toleration 
they  pleaded,  but  in  vain.  "  Some  of  the  Anabaptists,"  says 
Baillie,  "came  to  the  Assembly's  scribe  with  a  letter, 
inveighing  against  our  Covenant,  and  carrying  with  them  a 
printed  sheet  of  admonition  to  the  Assembly  from  an  old 
English  Anabaptist  at  Amsterdam,  to  give  full  liberty  of 
conscience  to  all  sects,  and  to  beware  of  keeping  any  Sab- 
bath, and  such  like.  The  scribe  offered  to  read  all  in  the 
Assembly.  Here  rose  a  quick  debate  enough.  Goodwin, 
Nye,  and  their  party,  pressing  the  neglect,  contempt,  and 
suppressing  all  such  fontastic  papers;  others  were  as  vehe- 
ment for  the  taking  notice  of  them,  that  the  Parliament 
might  be  acquainted  therewith,  to  see  the  remedy  of  their 
dangerous  sects.  ":J:  Episcopalians  as  well  as  sectaries  felt 
the  Presbyterian  yoke  to  be  insupportable.  ||  No  means 
were  neglected  which  Avere  likely  to  secure  their  supremacy. 

*  English  Works,  pp.  150,  167. 

+  Davids'  Congre.  in  Essex,  p.  487. 

+  VoL  i.,  p.  412.  "The  college  lands  (Manchester)  had  been  sold,  and 
the  college  itself,  to  ]Mr.  "Wigan,  who  now  being  turned  Anti-Padobaptist, 
and  I  know  not  what  more,  made  a  barn  there  into  a  cliapel,  where  he 
and  many  of  his  persuasion  preach  doctrine  diametrically  opposite  to  the 
minister's  persuasion  under  their  very  nose." — Life  of  Martindale,  p.  75. 
Cheetliam  Society. 

!|  "Ogle,  for  the  king,  vri-ote  to  Mr.  Thomas  Good%vin  and  Mr.  Nye,  of 
the  Independent  judgment,  to  make  great  promises  to  them,  if  they  would 
oppose  tlie  Presbyterian  Government  intended  by  the  Scots  to  be  imposed 
on  England;  and  much  to  that  pui-pose." — Whitelocke,  vol,  i.,  p.  236. 


138  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Guizot  gives  a  rapid  and  lucid  sketch  of  their  policy  from 
this  year  to  1645.  Multiplied  proof  could  be  brought  to 
place  beyond  all  doubt  the  perfect  accuracy  of  hi.s  statement. 
"  Every  day  it  was  obliged  to  tread  in  diiferent  paths,  to 
attempt  incongruous  efforts.  What  it  sought  in  the  Church 
it  rejected  in  the  State;  it  was  fain,  constantly  shifting  its 
ground  and  its  language,  to  invoke  in  turn  democratic  prin- 
ciples and  passions  against  the  bishops,  monarchical  and 
aristocratical  maxims  and  influences  against  rising  repub- 
licanism. It  was  a  strange  sight  to  see  the  same  men 
demolishing  with  one  hand  and  destroying  with  the  other — 
now  i^reachmg  up  innovations,  now  cursing  the  innovations ; 
alternately  daring  and  timid,  at  once  rebels  and  despots; 
persecuting  the  bishops  in  the  name  of  libeiiy,  the  Inde- 
pendents in  the  name  of  power;  arrogating  to  themselves, 
in  a  word,  the  privileges  of  insurrection  and  of  tyranny, 
while  daily  declaiming  against  tyranny  and  insurrection."'"' 

"VVhitelocke  tells  us  that  "the  plan  had  been  formed  by 
■some  of  the  leading  Presbyterians  to  carry  their  plans  in  a 
very  thin  House,  Their  scheme  was  securely  planned.  A 
deputation  from  the  "Westminster  Divines  appeared,  as  soon 
as  the  Commons  had  assembled,  and  presented  them  with 
the  Assembly's  advice  and  opinion  for  the  Presbyterian 
Government  to  be  settled,"  «fec.  "Glyne  and  I  were  in  the 
House,"  he  says,  "and  few  others  but  who  concurred  in 
judgment  with  the  Assembly,  and  had  notice  to  be  there 
early,  thinking  to  pass  this  business  before  the  House  should 

*  Guizot's  Eng.  Eev.,  b.  v.,  p.  211.  "  On  its  first  appearance,  the  prin- 
ciple of  liberty  of  conscience,  then  proclaimed  by  obscure  sectaries  amidst 
the  errors  of  a  blind  enthusiasm,  was  treated  as  a  crime  or  as  madness. 
....  Episcopalians  and  Presbyterians,  preachers  and  magistrates, 
aU  alike  persecuted  it ;  the  question  how  and  by  whom  the  church  of  Christ 
was  to  be  governed,  continued  to  be  almost  the  only  point  discussed ;  all 
thought  thej'  had  simply  to  '  choose  between  the  aljsolute  power  of  the 
Pope,  the  aristocracy  of  the  bishops,  and  the  democracy  of  the  Presby- 
terian clergy ;  it  was  not  asked  whether  these  governments  were  legitimate 
in  theii"  origin,  whatever  their  form  or  appellation.'  " — Guizot,  b.  v., 
p.  213. 


THE    CIVIL    WAR.  139 

be  fulL     Botli  of  them  spoke  against  time,  till  their  friends 
arrived,  and  finally  defeated  the  attempt.""' 

Under  these  oppressions  our  brethren  suftered  not  a  little. 
With  a  bitter  hatred  they  pursued  them,  and  it  was  only 
want  of  power  that  saved  them  from  exile  or  death.  Every- 
body, in  reading  the  letters  of  Baillie,  must  smile  at  the 
almost  frantic  eaniestncss  with  which  he  invokes,  iiay 
implores,  in  the  most  piteous  accents,  the  aid  of  his  learned 
correspondents  on  the  continent  to  wield  their  mighty  pens 
against  them.  If  the  existence  of  his  idol  depended  on  their 
extinction,  his  earnestness  could  not  have  been  more  intense. 
Logically  he  was  right.  Grant  the  truth  of  the  cardinal 
verities  held  by  the  Baptists,  and  Presbytery  must  perish. 
He  acknowledges  that  if  conversion  was  made  a  requisite  to 
church-fellowship,  forty  for  one  would  be  excluded  from  the 
lists  of  the  Refornied  clnirches.f  It  may  amuse  the 
reader  to  have  a  specimen  or  two  of  this  class: — "If  Span- 
heim's  book  were  come  out,  I  wish  he  were  entreated  to  go 
on  with  his  Anabaptists.  Vossius  said  to  me  he  had  a  lai'ge 
treatise  against  them,  and  would  push  it  out.  It  is  the  pre- 
vailing sect  here.  I  have  written  to  D.  Stewart,  to  put 
Spanheim  and  Vossius  on  the  Anabaptists.":}:  "  You  will  do 
well  to  set  Dr.  Forbes  on  a  supplement,  wherein  he  may 
handle  Anabaptism,  Antinoniianism,  &c.  Will  you  entreat 
him  to  press  his  friend  Vossius  to  print  that  he  told  me  he 
had  ready  against  the  Anabaptists, — the  greatest  and  most 
prevalent  sect  here?  In  tumultuous  ways  they  provoke  our 
ministers  to  public  disputations  on  Predobaptism."||  Again 
he  says — "I  wish  you  might  put  Forbes  to  go  on  with  his 
History,  especially  of  the  Anabaptists,  Libertines,  and  such 
as  personally  vex  us.  I  wrote  to  you  to  cause  some  press 
(Vossius')  to  print  what  he  told  me  he  had  beside  him  against 
the  Anabaptists.  When  Spanheim  is  free  of  Amivant,  I 
wish  he  went  on  with  his  Collegium  Anabaptlsticiim.     These 

*  Vol.  i.,  p.  327.  t  Oime's  Life  of  Owen,  pp.  80,  97. 

t  Letters,  vol.  ii.,  p.  154.  |1  Hid,  p.  170. 


140  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

are  the  sectaries  who  most  increase  amongst  us.  Tombes, 
a  minister  of  London,  has  printed  a  large  book  for  them, 
wherein  he  dares  us  all."'"'  We  coukl  fill  a  page  with  these 
invocations.     To  some  we  have  refei-red  below. 

The  sturdy  Principal  was  not  alone.  Following  in  his 
wake  came  another  mighty  hunter  of  heretics.  The  doughty 
old  divinity  professor,  Rutherford,  presents  his  athletic  form 
with  the  keys  dangling  at  his  girdle,  and  grasping  in  his 
hands  the  sword  of  Church  power,  accompanied  by  a  host  of 
Greek  and  Latin  Fathers,  and  frowning  defiance  on  Cotton, 
Robiuson,  and  others,  and  threatening  the  Anabaptists  as 
beyond  the  pale  of  his  compassion,  t  He  often  seeks  to  alarm 
his  adversary,  by  declaring  that  his  opinions  are  Anabaptis- 
tical,  and  is  satisfied  to  refute  an  argument,  or  to  show  the 
danger  of  a  position,  by  statmg  that  it  necessarily  leads  to 
Anabaptism.  The  wrath  of  this  devout,  bvit  singularly 
prejudiced  man,  was  poured  out  upon  the  Baptists  for  their 
teaching  that  conversion  was  necessary  to  union  with  the 
church,  and  that  its  purity  should  be  maintained  by  disci- 
pluie.  "  Pastors  are  to  be  blamed,"  said  Mr.  Cotton,  "  that 
there  be  scandalous  persons  in  the  visible  church."  "  This 
doth  but  strengthen  Anabaptists  who  objected  the  same.'' 
"All  which  is  very  Anabaptism,  that  there  is  no  visible  church 
on  earth,  but  a  company  of  truly,  and  (in/oroBei)  regenerated 
and  converted  jiersons,  and  the  only  redeemed  of  God."^ 
With  arg\;ments  of  this  kind  he  would  terrify  his  opponents. 

Both  Crosby  and  Taylor  give  an  account  of  the   early 


*  Letters,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  170,  171,  201.  "  He  testifies  everywhere  to  their 
rapid  increase." — Vol  i.,  p.  402.  "  The  Independent  party  gi-ows ;  hut  the 
Anahaptists  more ;  and  the  Antinomians  most." — Vol.  i.,  pp.  402,  408,  431, 
437;  vol.  ii.,  pp.  3,  4,  14,  24.  In  these  pages  the  reader  will  find  notices 
of  our  hretliren.  In  one  passage  he  says : — "  In  the  greatest  parish  in 
London,  scarce  one  child  in  a  year  was  brought  to  the  church  for  baptism." 
—Ibid,  pp.  37,  43,  46,  49,  59. 

t  The  Due  Right  of  Presbj'terians,  &c. ;  by  Sam.  Rutherford,  Professor 
of  Divinity  at  St.  Andrew's.     London,  1644. 

J  Ibid,  pp.  262,  203,  245.  See  also  pp.  253,  2G1.  The  work  is  full  of 
similar  allusions. 


THE    CIVIL    WAR.  141 

planting  of  a  church  in  Coventry.  The  former  says,  "  That 
Mr.  Cox,  the  son  of  a  bishop,  was  imprisoned  in  the  gaol  in 
that  city,  for  preaching  against  the  baptism  of  infants.  By 
some  means,  various  pei-sons  had  embraced  Baptist  prin- 
ciples ;  and  wishing  to  form  themselves  into  a  church, 
invited  Mr.  Cox,  from  Bedford,  to  undertake  that  work. 
Baxter,  with  other  Presbyterian  ministers,  were  in  the  city 
as  refugees.  Alarm  seized  them.  Against  the  intiiiders  the 
pulpits  thundered,  and  the  erroi's  of  Cox  and  his  brethren 
were  denounced.  More  than  this:  Baxter  challenged  him 
to  a  public  dispute  on  the  points  of  difference.  The  meeting 
was  held,  and  the  issue  was  an  order  from  the  committee 
commanding  the  Baptists  to  depart  the  city,  and  to  promise 
not  to  enter  it  again.  Refusal  on  the  part  of  Cox  was  fol- 
lowed by  his  immediate  loss  of  liberty."*  Baxter's  own 
account  is  fuller: — "The  garrison  and  city  of  Coventry 
(where  I  lived  next)  was  almost  free  from  them  when  I  first 
came  thither,  and  a  good  while  after.  But  while  we  slept, 
the  envious  man  sowed  these  tares;  and  our  tenderness  of 
them,  as  godly  people,  caused  us  at  first  the  more  remissly  to 
gainsay  them,  and  so  their  number  to  increase:  till  at  last 
they  got  a  sepai-ated  society,  and  despised  the  ministers,  and 
got  themselves  a  troop  of  teachers,  some  of  which  we  before 
esteemed  godly  men,  but  knew  to  be  silly  men  to  become 
teachei-s.  All  this  while  I  had  no  contest  with  them,  much 
less  any  fallmg  out:  for  few  of  the  soldiers  had  taken  the 
infection,  they  being  many  of  them  the  most  sober  staid 
men  that  I  ever  met  with  in  any  gari-ison,  and  had  a 
reverend  esteem  of  the  counsel  of  their  teachers  (which  being 
returned  home,  they  do  yet  continue).  But  it  was  some 
yoimger  people  of  the  city  that  Avex-e  then  infected  most.  At 
last  one  Mr.  Coxe  (an  ancient  minister,  of  competent  learning 
and  parts)  was  sent  from  London  to  confirm  them,  which 
when  he  had  done  awhile,  he  was  desired  to  depart.     After 

*  Crosby,  vol.  i.,  p.  220.     Taylor,  vol.  i. 


142  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

that  he  came  down  a  second  time,  and  because  he  would  not 
promise  to  leave  the  city  and  come  no  more,  the  committee 
did  imprison  him,  which  some  of  his  jiarty  gave  out  to  be 
prociu-ed  by  me :  when  I  can  truly  say  that  I  never  spoke 
word  to  put  liim  in  prison,  but  (at  the  motion  of  Mr. 
Pinson)  did  sjieak  to  get  liim  out.  In  this  time  I  desired 
that  Mr.  Coxe  would  entertain  some  dispute  about  our  dif- 
ferences, which  was  consented  to,  and  begun  by  words,  and 
afterwards  we  agreed  to  follow  it  by  writing ;  but  to  my  first 
paper  I  could  never  have  answer  (save  to  the  extemporate 
writing  before  at  our  meeting),  and  so  that  labour  ended. 
In  wliich  dispiite  my  zeal  for  unity  and  peace  was  so  much 
greater  than  my  zeal  for  rebaptizing,  that  I  i-esolved  to  dis- 
pute the  case  of  separation  fii*st,  and  baptism  next;  pro- 
fessing that  if  they  did  not  hinder  the  Gospel,  and  sin  against 
the  Divine  Word  by  divisions,  I  should  easily  bear  with  any 
that  differed  from  me  in  the  point  of  baptism.  For  Mr.  Coxe 
taught  them  (and  it  was  presently  swallowed)  that  our 
ministei's,  being  unbaptized,  were  indeed  no  ministers  of 
Christ,  and  it  was  unlawful  to  hear  them,  or  to  joyn  with 
our  people  (though  never  so  godly),  because  they  were  all 
unbaptized  persons:  which  doctrine  began  to  make  men  to 
look  at  others  as  Pag-ans,  and  to  break  all  to  2:>ieces;  so  that 
the  rebaptized  husband  would  not  pray  with  his  (supposedly) 
unbaptized  wife."*  For  the  same  offence,  Mr.  Hobson  was 
imprisoned  by  the  Governor  of  Newjiort  Pagnal.  Hanserd 
Knollys  also  was  taken  up  for  preaching  against  infant 
baptism  in  Bow  Church.  This  eminent  individual  suffered 
much  from  the  malignant  interference  of  little  men  in  power. 
Forbidden  to  pi'each  in  the  churches,  Mr.  Knollys  estab- 
lished a  church  in  Great  St.  Helen's,  in  the  city.  Multi- 
tudes, it  is  said,  flocked  to  hear  him.  This  gave  gi-eat 
offence.  Before  the  committee  he  was  called  as  a  trans- 
gressor of  the  ordinances.     To  their  command,  forbidding 

*  Infant  Church  Membership. 


THE    CIVIL    WAR.  143 

him  to  preach  again,  he  replied,  that  he  Avould  make  known 
the  Gospel  from  house  to  house. 

The  prevalence  and  strength  of  our  brethren  at  this 
period  may  be  gathered  from  various  sources.  Some  we 
have  already  indicated;  another  must  not  be  overlooked. 
The  hostility  of  the  RoyaKsts  was  bitter  and  undisguised. 
Charles  himself  breathed  it  on  every  occasion.  In  every 
form  in  which  it  could  be  uttei-ed  we  find  it.  In  addresses 
to  the  Parliament,  his  ai-my,  or  when  lie  sought  to  win  bis 
Scottish  subjects  to  his  standard,  tbey  are  held  up  as  tbe 
worst  of  men.  There  is  nothing  to  excite  surprise  in  this. 
As  some  of  them  said  at  a  later  period,  "They  did  not  look 
on  themselves  as  a  band  of  Janizaries,  hired  and  entertained 
only  to  fight  their  battles,  but  that  they  had  voluntarily 
taken  up  arms  for  the  liberty  and  defence  of  the  nation,"  &c. 
Their  hatred  of  despotism  was  inferior  in  intenseness  only 
to  their  love  of  truth.  We  may  group  in  this  place  a  few 
utterances  of  tlie  monarch.  In  reply  to  a  petition,  be 
says : — "  And  his  Majesty  would  know  whether  the  peti- 
tioners believe  that  the  resisting  and  suppressing  of  the 
'  Book  of  Common  Prayer,'  .  .  .  and  the  cherishing 
and  countenance  of  Brownists,  Anabaptists,  and  all  manner 
of  sectaries,"  &c.'"""  In  his  address  to  the  Scots,  he  describes 
the  army  as  abounding  in  Brownists,  Anabaptists,  and  other 
sectaries.t  "  Yon  shall  meet  with  no  enemies  but  traitors," 
he  said,  when  appealing  to  his  army,  "most  of  them 
Bro-ftTiists,  Anabaptists,  and  Atheists;  such  who  desire  to 
betray  both  the  Church  and  the  State,  and  who  have  already 
condemned  you  to  ruin  for  being  loyal  to  me."+ 

*  Clarendon,  vol.  iii.,  p.  112.  f  Ibid,  p.  187.     Voh  iv.,  p.  747. 

J  Clarendon,  p.  7.  On  the  otlier  side,  we  select  the  following  of  the 
same  date  :— "I  first  observed  that  there  is  no  such  hating  nor  traducing 
of  the  king,  as  I  was  told  before ;  they  pray  for  hiin  in  their  pulpits  for 
the  turning  of  his  heart,  and  the  retuin  of  his  Royal  power;  only  their 
pamphlets  do  justly  whip  their  court  vices,  the  supreme  sins,  whilst  oui's 
do  call  them  virtues.  I  observe  their  religion  is  to  pray,  preach,  and 
practise  only  the  Word  of  God,  and  to  have  no  dealings  with  Popery,  or 


Hi  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

During  the  close  of  1645,  some  of  our  brethren  had  agreed 
to  hold  a  disputation  with  Mr.  Calamy,  and  others  in  the 
city.  The  interposition  of  the  mayor  prevented  this.  The 
document  is  singular,  and  may  intei-est  our  readers.  It  is  as 
follows : — 

"  Whereas,  at  the  entreaty  of  Mr.  Calamy,  and  other  ministers,  as 
it  was  represented  to  me  by  certain  citizens,  I  did  lately  give  an 
allowance  to  them  to  meet  and  dispute  with  certain  Anabaptists: 
and  whereas,  I  understand  that  in  pursuance  of  that  allowance,  thei'c 
is  a  public  disputation  intended  on  Wednesday  next,  December  3,  in 
the  church  at  Aldermanbury,  and  that  there  is  likely  to  be  an  extra- 
ordinary concourse  of  people  from  all  parts  of  the  city,  and  from 
other  places ;  and  that  in  these  times  of  distraction  there  may  be 
liazard  of  the  disturbance  of  the  public  peace ;  I  have  therefore 
thought  lit,  upon  serious  consideration,  for  preventing  the  inconveni- 
ences that  may  happen  therefrom,  to  forbid  the  said  meeting  on 
Wednesday  next,  or  at  any  other  time,  in  a  public  way,  before  I 
shall  receive  the  pleasure  of  the  Honourable  House  of  Parhament 
touching  the  same,  which  with  all  conveniency  I  shall  endeavour  to 
know. 

"Thomas  Adam,  Mayor. 
"This  first  of  Deer.,  1645."» 

Though  increasing  in  numbers,  the  progress  of  our  brethren 
was  marked  by  much  suffering.  The  old  leaven  of  persecu- 
tion still  existed  in  the  Senate.  Guardians  of  the  truth,  as 
they  imagined,  they  were  anxious  for  a  uniformity  in  faith 
and  practice ;  whilst  the  Presbyterian  faction,  now  very 
strong,  inflamed  that  sjiirit,  and  excited  it  to  vengeance  on 
all  opposed  to  them.  The  Baptists  felt  it.  Everywhere  they 
were  in  danger.  Only  on  two  examples  can  we  touch  at 
present.     Liberated  from  prison,  Henry  Denne  was  untiring 

anything  like  it;  and  if  we  call  them  Independents,  Anabaptists,  and 
Brownists  for  this,  let  be  all  those,  and  call  me  worse  if  you  can." — Testi- 
mony of  a  Royalist.  Mercurius  Britannicus,  No.  xlix.,  Sept.,  1644. 
"For  though  all  Sir  W.  Waller's  Anabaptists  and  Brownists,  horses  and 
foot,  were  there  (near  Oxford),  and  not  so  many  absent  as  to  make  up  one 
conventicle,  yet  durst  they  not  adventure  on  500  of  his  Majesty's  forces." 
—Mercurius  Aulicus,  August,  1644,  pp.  1112,  1116.  Mercurius  Britan- 
nicus,  Sept.,  1644,  p.  387. 

*  Vide  Perfect  Passages,  &c. ,  p.  464. 


THE    CIVIL    WAR. 


145 


in  his  efforts  to  diffuse  the  truth.  Over  various  parts  of 
Lincolnshire  and  Huntingdon  lie  travelled,  preaching  the 
Gospel  and  planting  churches.  His  success  was  considerable. 
To  the  records  of  the  churches  at  Warboys  and  Fenstanton, 
the  reader  is  referred  for  ample  details  of  his  successful  mis- 
sion."' In  164G  he  visited  Spalding,  and  finding  his  ministry- 
blessed,  several  persons  expressed  a  desii-e  to  profess  Christ 
by  baptism.  Fearing  the  multitude,  night  was  chosen  as 
the  safest  time  for  the  baptism.  Two  men  and  two  women 
then  followed  their  Lord  about  midnight.  The  feet  was 
noised  abroad  in  a  day  or  two.  Denne  was  called  before 
the  magistrate.  It  was  on  Sunday  when  the  warrant  was 
executed,  and  Mr.  Denne  was  dragged  to  prLson  and  pre- 
vented preaching.  Before  this  "unpaid  one"  he  was  strictly 
examined.  He  confessed  that  he  had  often  preached,  but 
declined  admitting  anything  about  baptism.  Before  the 
same  awful  tribunal  a  young  woman  was  called,  the  com- 
paiiion  or  rather  an  attendant  on  the  females  on  the  occasion 
of  their  baptism.  Threatening  to  commit  him  to  Lincoln, 
Mr.  Denne  boldly  replied  that  he  cared  not  for  himself,  he 
only  dx'eaded  the  hindrance  it  would  be  to  his  great  work. 
Mr.  Samuel  Gates,  in  connexion  with  Mr.  Lambe,  had  car- 
ried on  evangelistic  efforts  in  many  parts  of  Essex,  Kent,  &c. 
Many  were  converted  and  baptized  bj'  them.  The  popu- 
larity of  Gates  was  great.  If  we  are  to  believe  Edwards, 
*'no  magistrates  in  the  county  do  meddle  with  him."+  A 
young  woman,  baptized  by  this  minister,  died  some  weeks 
after.  His  enemies  raised  the  cry  that  her  death  was  the 
result  of  the  baptism.  By  order  of  the  magistrates,  he  was 
thrown  into  prison,  heavily  ironed,  and  treated  as  a  murderer. 
The  trial  was  conducted  at  Chelmsford.  Every  effort  was 
made  by  his  enemies  to  secure  his  conviction,  but  failure 
marked  them.     The  mother  of  the  girl  gave  evidence  that 

*  Records  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  &c.     Hans.  Kiiollys  Society. 
'I"  Gangreana,  p.  2. 

K 


146  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

her  daughter  was  in  better  health  after  her  baptism  than 
before.  The  case  broke  down  in  court,  and  the  jury,  to  the 
moi-tification  of  his  enemies,  acquitted  Mr.  Gates. 

The  profoundest  reverence  for  the  Divine  AVord  does  not 
secure  us  at  all  times  from  danger.  Under  it  the  spirit  of 
truth  may  be  violated,  whilst  the  letter  may  have  the  fullest 
adherence.  Instances  of  this  might  be  miiltiplied  from  the 
teaching  of  this  period.  Our  brethren  were  not  exceptions. 
Holding  and  teaching  with  a  clearness  and  power  the  great 
verities  of  the  Gospel  above  many,  yet  some  were  led  by 
name  and  form  to  adopt  practices  which  modern  times  have 
repudiated,  and  which  only  few  then  adopted.  The  laying 
on  of  the  hands  of  the  elder  or  pastor  of  the  church  on  the 
baptized,  was  now  introduced.  It  appears  to  have  been  first 
practised  amongst  the  English  Baptists,  in  the  General  Baptist 
church  over  which  Mr.  Barber  presided.  Mr.  Danvers  gives 
us  the  following  account  of  its  rise : — "  About  the  year  1G46, 
some  twenty-seven  years  ago,  one  Mr.  Cornwall,  heretofore  a 
public  preacher,  then  a  member  and  minister  of  a  baptized 
congregation  in  Kent,  was  a  great  assister  of  this  princijjle 
and  practice;  who  coming  about  that  time  into  that  baptized 
congregation  then  meeting  in  Bishopsgate  Street,  London,  did, 
from  Hebrews  v.  12,  13,  and  vi.  1,  2,  preach  the  necessity 
of  laying  on  of  hands,  inferring  from  thence  that  those  that 
were  not  under  laying  on  of  hands  were  not  babes  in  Christ 
Jesus,  had  not  God,  nor  communion  with  God.  "Whereupon 
several  of  that  congi-egation  were  persuaded  to  come  under 
that  practice;  and  which,  notwithstanding,  the  church  in 
tenderness  indulged  to  them,  upon  their  promise  of  a  peace- 
able demeanour  in  the  church.  Notwithstanding  which  pro- 
mise, they  did  afterwards  not  only  press  their  said  persuasions 
uncharitably,  as  they  had  been  taught  by  their  aforesaid 
teacher,  viz.,  that  none  were  babes  in  Christ,  nor  had  com- 
munion with  God  without  it,  therefore  not  to  be  communi- 
cated with  in  church  ordinances  (and  as  after  was  published 
in  print,  by  a  leading  brother  amongst  them,  in  a  book 


THE   CIVIL   WAR,  147 

called  'God's  Oracles  and  Christ's  Doctrine'),  but  made  a 
rent  and  a  sejiaration  for  the  same,  and  from  that  very 
schism  propagated  the  same  principles  and  practices  amongst 
many  others  in  the  nation  ever  since,  who  have  ke})t  that 
distance  from  their  brethren  (not  owning  the  same),  as  not 
esteeming  or  communicating  with  them  as  the  true  church 
of  God,  because  defective  in  one  of  the  requiring  principles 
or  foundations  of  the  Christian  religion."* 

Probably  these  proceedings,  and  others  which  our  space 
does  not  allow  us  to  detail,  may  be  traced  to  Presbyterian 
influence.  "About  this  time  (1646),  the  '  Directory'  became 
the  established  form  of  public  worship,  instead  of  the 
*  Conimon  Prayer,'  &c.  As  the  hierarchy  of  bisho2:is  was 
abolished,  the  Presbyterian  government  in  every  congrega- 
tion suboixlinate  to  classical,  provn^ncial,  and  national  assem- 
blies and  elders,  chosen  according  to  certain  regulations, 
became  the  ecclesiastical  order  of  the  country,  to  the  exclu- 
sion of  other  religious  distinctions.  Thus  the  Presbyterian 
party  in  the  Commons  restored,  in  effect,  the  Act  of  Uni- 
formity, but  to  their  own  advantage.  This  was  substituting 
one  t}Tanny  for  another,  and  it  must  have  appeared  a  very 
strange  proceeding  on  the  parts  of  those  wlio,  under  the 
Episcopalian  rule,  had  cried  out  so  much  for  liberty."! 
During  this  year,  Whitelocke  tells  us  that  "  a  remonstrance 
from  the  Lord  Mayor,  Aldermen,  and  Common  Council  of 
London  was  presented  to  both  Houses,  desiring  a  strict 
course  for  suppressing  all  private  and  separate  congregations. 
That  all  Anabaptists,  heretics,  ifec,  as  conformed  not  to  the 
public  discipline,  may  be  declared  and  proceeded  against," 

&C.+ 

Not  only  did  some  of  their  ministers  fill  very  high  places 


*  Laying  on  of  Hands,  &c. ;  by  H.  Danvers,  p.  58. 

t  D'Aubigne's  Protectorate,  p.  63. 

^  Memorials,  vol.  ii.,  p.  25.  About  the  same  time,  the  Parliament  of 
Scotland  asked  "  that  all  Anabaptists,  Independents,  and  Separatists  may 
be  suppressed,  and  no  toleration  of  any  of  them."  ■  Ibid,  vol.  iL,  p.  307. 


148  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

in  tlie  army,  as  commanding  troops,  filling  chaplaincies, 
and  the  like,  but  men  of  eminence  and  rank  xinited  with 
them.  Selection  only  can  be  adopted.*  John  Tombes  was 
a  man  of  profound  scholarship;  not  only  familiar  witli 
theology  in  the  widest  sense,  but,  as  all  conversant  with  his 
works  will  admit,  not  less  so  \nth.  classical  literature. 
Wood's  testimony  is  that  of  one  detesting  his  principles,  and 
may  be,  therefore,  accepted  without  any  discount : — "  He 
showed  himself  a  most  excellent  disputant,  a  person  of 
incomparable  parts,  well  versed  in  the  Hebrew  and  Greek 
languages."  Referring  to  Baxter,  he  says : — "  They  preached 
against  one  another's  doctrines,  Tombes  being  then  a 
preacher  at  Bewdley,  which  he  kept  '^^ith  Lemster,"  &c. 
"  Tombes  was  the  Coryphfeus  of  the  Anabaptists,  and  Baxter 
of  the  Presbyterians.  Both  had  a  veiy  great  company  of 
auditors,  who  came  many  miles  on  foot  round  about  to 
admire  them.  Once,  I  think  oftener,  they  disputed  face 
to  face,  and  their  followers  were  like  two  armies;  and  at 
last  it  came  so  to  pass  that  they  fell  together  by  the  ears, 
whereby  hurt  was  done,  and  the  civil  magistrate  had  much 
to  do  to  quiet  them.  All  scholars  there  and  then  present, 
who  knew  the  way  of  disputing  and  managing  arguments, 
did  conclude  that  Tombes  got  the  better  of  Baxter  by  far. 
His  body  was  little  and  neatly  limbed,  he  had  a  quick  and 
searching  eye,  and  was  so  exceedingly  apprehensive  that  he 
would  find  out  the  end  upon  the  first  entry  of  the  dispute."t 
Doubts  appear  to  have  been  excited  in  his  mind,  from  some 
cause,  as  to  the  truth  of  infant  baptism.  These  doubts  he 
first  laid  before  the  London  ministers,  but  without  satisfac- 
tion. To  the  chairman  of  the  committee  of  the  West- 
minster Assembly,  in  1643  and  1044,  he  presented  certain 
papers  on  this  subject.     Referring  to  it  in  his  "  Uxainen,"  he 

*  "Dell  and  others  were  chaplains.  Mr.  DeU,  the  General's  chaplain, 
brought  letters  and  the  articles  from  Oxford  to  the  Parliament,  1646." — 
AVliitelocke,  vol.  ii.,  p.  42. 

t  Wood's  Athe.  Oxford,  vol.  ii. ,  p.  558. 


THE    CIVIL    WAR.  149 

says: — "It  is  now  full  niue  months  since,  that  being 
informed  by  one  of  the  members  of  tlie  Assembly,  of  which 
yon  are  one,  that  there  was  a  committee  chosen  out  of  the 
members  of  the  Assembly  to  give  satisfaction  in  the  point  of 
Paedobaptism ;  and  advised  by  the  same  person,  out  of  his 
tender  love  to  me,*  to  present  the  reason  of  my  doubts  about 
Psedobaptism  to  that  cpmmittee,  I  drew  them  up  in  Latin 
in  niue  arguments,  in  a  scholastic  way,  and  they  were 
delivered  unto  Mr.  Whitaker,  the  chairman  of  the  com- 
mittee, about  nine  months  since;  to  which  I  added  after  an 
addition  of  three  more  reasons  of  doubting,  with  a  supple- 
ment of  some  other  things  wanting,  which  was  delivered  to 
Mr.  Tuckney,  and  joined  by  him  to  the  former  papers.  My 
aim  therein  was,  either  to  find  better  ground  than  I  had 
then  found  to  pi-actise  the  baptizing  of  infants,  from  that 
Assembly  of  learned  and  holy  men,  whom  I  supposed  able 
and  ^villing  to  resolve  their  brother  in  the  ministry.  .  .  . 
The  success  was  such  as  I  little  expected;  to  this  day  I  have 
heard  nothing  from  the  committee  by  way  of  answer  to  these 
doubts,  but  I  have  met  with  many  sermons  tending  to  make 
the  questioning  of  that  point  odious  to  the  people  and  the 
magistracy."f  These  "learned  and  holy  men"  not  only 
refused  to  solve  his  doubts,  but  rested  not  till  they  had 
removed  him  as  preacher  at  the  Temple.  + 

Another,  if  less  learned  than  Tombes,  was  on  other  grounds 
of  equal  eminence, — we  mean  Henry  Jessey.  He  had  been 
pastor  of  a  church,  according  to  Ivimey,  of  mixed  member- 
ship, since  1637.  By  various  members  of  known  piety  and 
intelligence  embracing  Baptist  views,  doubts  were  excited  in 
his  mind.  For  some  time  he  prosecuted  his  investigations, 
and  then  renounced  the  former  mode  of  baptism  as  a  modern 

*  Probably  his  father-in-law,  the  author  of  the  "  Christian  in  Complete 
Aimour." 

+  Anti-Psedobaptism,  part  iii. ,  p.  8.     Examen,  pp.  1,  2. 

J  We  have  mislaid  the  reference,  but  allusion  to  it  will  be  found  in  his 
Anti-Predobaptism,  as  well  as  to  other  annoyances  to  which  he  was 
exposed  as  a  Baptist.— Part  iii.,  pp.  8,  9.     Ivimey,  vol.  i.,  pp.  181,  182. 


150  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

iiinoviition ;  and  told  the  church,  iu  1642,  that  henceforth 
immersion  would  be  the  mode  in  which  he  would  administer 
it.  For  two  or  three  years  his  practice  was  to  baptize 
children  by  dipping  them  in  -water.*  The  growiih  of  Baptist 
principles,  and  the  discussion  to  which  it  led,  told  on  the 
mind  of  Mr.  Jessey.  The  consequences  were  natural. 
Doubts  about  infants  presented  themselves.  Dissatisfied, 
after  his  own  investigations,  he  submitted  his  case  to  some 
of  the  most  eminent  of  his  brethren.  The  opinions  of 
Goodwin,  Nye,  Borroughs,  and  others,  failed  to  give  him  the 
satisfaction  he  desired,  and  in  1645  he  was  baptized  by  Mr. 
Knollys.t  The  efiects  of  this  on  the  church  under  his  care 
we  know  not;  but  one  thing  is  certain,  that  the  spirit  of 
controversy  now  rose  in  all  its  p?)wer.  Rapid  and  fearful 
were  the  assaults  on  the  Baptists, — less  from  Independents 
than  from  Presbyterians.  The  latter  ajipear  to  have  hated 
them  with  perfect  hatred.  Clarendon  tells  us,  that  they 
entered  into  a  covenant  with  Charles,  iu  which  he  agrees  to 
put  down  Anabaptism,  &c.J  Black  prelacy  was  not  more 
hideous  to  these  men  than  the  Anabaptists.  Pre-eminent 
amongst  these  was  the  author  of  "  The  Saint's  Rest."  The 
spirit  of  Christ  was  largely  participated  by  Baxter,  and  the 
spii-it  of  anger,  wrath,  and  malice.  Singular  elements  are 
mixed  up  in  his  chai'acter.  Extremes  meet  in  him.  Ana- 
baptism  would  rouse  his  ire,  even  if  wrapt  in  meditation  on 
"The  Saint's  Everlasting  Rest."  Nothing  can  justify  his 
language.  By  what  law  can  we  palHate  the  following? — 
"  That  which  is  a  plain  breach  of  the  Sixth  Commandment, 
Thou  shalt  not  kill,  is  no  ordinance  of  God,  but  a  most 


*  "The  mode  of  baiitism  underwent  a  great  change  at  this  time. 
Sprinkling  was  only  allowed  iu  certain  cases.  When  discussed  in  the 
Assembly,  the  opposition  was  so  strong  against  sprinkling,  that  it  was 
only  carried  by  a  majority  of  one;  and  he  an  Erastian." — Robinson's 
Hist,  of  Baptism,  p.  450. 

+  Bunyan  calls  him  "honest  and  holy  Mr.  Jessey." — Works,  vol.  ii., 
p.  654. 

J  History,  vol.  v.,  pp.  104,  145,  215. 


THE    CIVIL    WAR.  151 

heiiious  sin.  Bat  the  oi'dinaiy  practice  of  baptizing  over 
head  in  cold  water,  as  necessary,  is  a  plain  breach  of  the 
Sixth  Commandment;  therefore  it  is  no  ordinance  of  God, 
but  a  heinous  sin.  That  this  is  flat  murder,  and  no  better, 
being  ordinarily  and  generally  used,  is  undeniable  to  any 
understanding  man ;  and  I  know  not  what  trick  a  covetous 
landlord  can  tind  out  to  get  his  tenants  to  die  apace,  that  ho 
may  have  now  fines  and  heriots;  likewise  to  encourage  such 
preachers,  that  he  may  get  them  all  to  turn  Anabaptists." 
We  cannot  find  space  for  his  filthy  allusions,  in  attributing 
to  immersion  all  the  diseases  which  may  afflict  humanity,  at 
the  close  of  which  list  he  says — "  In  a  word,  it  is  good  for 
nothing  but  to  despatch  men  out  of  this  world  that  are 
burdensome,  and  to  ranken  churchyards,"  "  I  conclude,  if 
murder  be  a  sin,  then  dipping  ordinarily  over  head  in  Eng- 
land is  a  sin ;  and  if  those  who  would  make  it  more  religion 
to  murder  themselves,  and  urge  it  upon  their  consciences  as 
their  duty,  are  not  to  be  suffered  in  a  commonwealth  any 
more  than  highway  robbers,  then  judge  how  these  Anabap- 
tists tliat  teach  the  necessity  of  such  dipping  are  to  be  suf- 
fered.""'    Pretty  well  this,  for  the  saintly  Baxter  ! 

We  have  a  glimpse  of  this  spirit,  and  of  some  of  the  diffi- 
culties encountered  by  others  in  the  adoption  of  Baptist  jjrLu- 
ciples  at  this  time,  in  Mrs.  Hutchinson's  memoirs.  She  says : 
"  When  formerly  the  Presbyterian  ministers  had  forced  him 
(Col.  H.),  for  quietness'  sake,  to  go  and  break  up  a  private 
meeting  in  the  Commoners'  Chamber,  there  were  found  some 
notes  concerning  Psedobaptism,  which,  being  brought  into 
the  governor's  lodgings,  his  wife,  having  then  more  leisure  to 
read  than  he,  having  penised  them  and  compared  them  with 
the  Scriptures,  found  not  what  to  say  against  the  truths 
they  asserted  concerning  the  misapplication  of  that  ordinance 
to  infants;  but  being  then  young  and  modest,  she  thought  it 


*  Infant  Ch.  Memb.,  pp.  134, 135.    Mucli  more  of  tliis  sort  will  be  found 
in  Plain  Scripture  Proofs,  &c.,  pp.  134-137. 


152  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

a  kind  of  virtue  to  submit  to  the  judgment  and  practice  of 
most  cliurches,  rather  than  to  defend  a  singular  opinion  of 
her  own,  she  not  being  then  enlightened  ia  that  great  mis- 
take of  the  national  chiuxhes :  but  in  this  year,  she  hap- 
pening to  be  with  child,  communicated  her  doubts  to  her 
husband,  and  desired  him  to  endeavour  her  satisfaction, 
which,  while  he  did,  he  became  himself  as  unsatisfied,  or 
rather  satisfied,  against  it.  First,  therefore,  he  diligently 
seai'ched  the  Scriptures  alone,  and  could  find  in  them  no 
ground  alone  for  such  practice ;  then  he  bought  and  read  all 
the  eminent  treatises  on  both  sides,  which  at  that  time  came 
thick  from  the  presses,  and  still  was  cleared  in  the  error  of 
the  Paidobaptists.  After  this,  his  wife  being  brought  to  bed, 
that  he  might,  if  possible,  give  the  religious  party  no  otfence, 
he  invited  all  the  ministers  to  dinner,  and  propounded  his 
doubt  and  the  ground  thereof  to  them.  None  of  them  could 
defend  theii-  practice  with  any  satisfactory  reason,  but  the 
tradition  of  the  church  from  the  primitive  times,  and  their 
main  buckler  of  panal  holiness,  which  Tombes  and  Denne 
had  excellently  overthrown.  He  and  liis  wife,  then,  pro- 
fessing themselves  unsatisfied  in  the  practice,  desii'ed  their 
opinions  what  they  ought  to  do.  Most  answered,  to  conform 
to  the  general  practice  of  other  Christians,  how  dark  soever 
it  were  to  themselves;  but  Mr.  Foxci'aft,  one  of  the  As- 
sembly, said  that  except  they  were  con-sinced  of  the  warrant 
of  that  practice  from  the  W^prd,  they  sinned  in  doing  it : 
whereupon  that  infixnt  was  not  baptized.  And  now  the 
governor  and  his  wife,  notwithstanding  that  they  forsook 
not  their  assemblies,  nor  retracted  their  benevolences  and 
civilities  from  them,  yet  were  they  reviled  by  them,  called 
fanatics  and  Anabaptists,  and  often  glanced  at  in  their 
public  sermons.  And  not  only  the  ministers,  but  all  their 
zealous  sectaries,  conceived  implacable  malice  against  them 
upon  this  account;  which  was  carried  on  with  a  spirit  of 
envy  and  persecution  to  the  last;  though  he,  on  his  side, 
might  well  have  said  to  them,  as  his  Master  to  the  old 


THE    CIVIL   WAR.  153 

Pharisees,  *  Many  good  works  have  I  done  among  you,  for 
which  of  these  do  you  hate  me?'"* 

To  check  the  progi-ess  of  sects,  no  doubt,  the  Legislature, 
as  the  gi-eat  conservators  of  i-eligion,  issued  an  ordinance  ou 
the  2Gth  of  April,  16i5,  forbidding  any  2)erson  to  preach 
"who  is  not  ordained  a  minister  either  in  this  or  some  other 
Reformed  church,  except  such  as,  intending  the  ministry, 
shall  1)0  allowed  for  the  trial  of  their  gifts,  by  those  who 
shall  be  appointed  thereunto  by  both  Houses  of  Parliament." 
This  precious  document  was  ordered  to  be  sent  to  Fairfax, 
with  strict  orders  to  enforce  it,  and  to  report  all  delinquents. 
This  exercise  of  ecclesiastical  despotism  failing,  another, 
more  stringent  still,  was  issued  December  2G,  IGiG.  This 
threatened  with  the  high  displeasiu-e  of  the  Commons  of 
England,  any  unordained  person  who  should  preach,  or  even 
expound  the  Scriptures,  in  any  church  or  chapel,  or  any 
other  public  place.  Wider  still  the  authority  was  stretched 
against  all  such  ministers  or  others  as  "shall  publish  or  main- 
tain by  preaching,  writing,  printing,  or  in  any  other  way, 
anything  against,  or  in  degradation  of.  Church  government, 
•which  is  now  established  by  authority  of  both  Houses  of 
Parliament;  and  all  Justices  of  the  Peace,  Sheriffs,  Mayors, 
&c.,  &c.,  and  all  officers  of  the  army,  are  commanded  to 
enforce  this,  and  report  the  offenders."  But  those  dupes  of 
Presbyterian  power  had  to  deal  with  men,  not  slaves; — men 
of  mould  quite  as  strong  as  theirs,  with  higher  principles  of 
action,  with  a  deeper  sense  of  the  value  and  grandeur  of 
religious  truth,  and  with  more  enlarged  and  intelligent  con- 
ceptions of  the  will  of  God.  Men  who  had  struggled  and 
suffered,  who  had  dared  the  monarch  and  his  hosts,  who  had 
snapt  asunder  the  prelate's  yoke,  who  had  looked  with  calm- 
ness on  the  pillory,  and  never  shrank  from  the  prison,  were 
not  to  be  driven  from  their  steadfastness  by  these  threats. 
Such  men  formed  the  ranks  of  our  brethren.    The  vanguard 

*  Memoirs,  p.  89. 


154  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

of  libei-ty,  the  -v-indictive  threats  of  Presbyterian  power  awed 
them  not. 

But  if  they  could  not  arrest  the  flowing  tide  of  thouglit 
and  liberty,  they  could  punish.  Instruments  were  always 
at  command  for  this  woi-k.  The  spirit  of  Moses  was  more 
rife  than  that  of  Christ.  Upon  the  Baptists  their  indigna- 
tion fell  with  no  light  pressure.  Instances  of  suffering  have 
already  been  given.     Others  demand  attention. 

Onward  the  tide  of  war  bad  been  rolling  during  the  period 
over  which  this  narrative  has  extended.  From  evei-y  battle- 
field the  infatuated  monarch  had  been  driven.  London  and 
other  great  towns  had  placed  their  wealth  at  the  command 
of  the  Parliament.*  Effort  after  effort  had  been  made  by 
the  patriotic  leaders  to  heal  the  breach,  which  Charles's 
duplicity  defeated.t  The  chivalrous  spirit  of  his  first 
ministers  had  vanished.  His  army  had  undergone  as  great 
changes.    The  leaders,  as  Goring  and  Greenville,  were  men 


*  The  wealth  of  London  was  immense.  The  household  plate  and  valu- 
able tiinkets  were  dedicated  voluntarily  to  their  suppoi-t.  "And  I  think 
I  may  truly  say  that  there  were  few  good  cobblers  in  London  but  had  a 
silver  beaker,— so  rife  were  silver  vessels  among  all  conditions."— Sir  P. 
Warwick,  p.  63. 

t  "AVith  anything  like  sincerity  on  the  part  of  the  king,  means  would 
easily  have  been  discovered  of  settling  such  disputes  as  these.  But  he  had 
no  desire  that  the  points  in  dispute  should  be  settled  except  on  terms  of 
submission  to  himself.  He  believed  that  the  machine  of  Government 
could  not  act  without  him ;  that  if  he  could  only  keep  public  affairs  long 
enough  in  the  condition  of  dead  lock  to  which  they  were  now  reduced, 
his  enemies  would  be  ruined,  or  would  be  forced  by  the  people  into 
yielding  to  his  terms.  His  mind  was  as  full  as  ever  of  the  most  exalted 
notions  of  the  sacred  and  indefeasible  character  of  his  Eoyal  authority. 
All  who  opposed  him  were,  in  his  estimation,  wicked  rebels  whom  God 
would  judge.  It  was  his  place  to  govern,  and  that  of  his  people  to  sub- 
mit. His  sins  of  misgovernmeut  never  occurred  to  him.  Kegret  that  for 
many  years  his  course  of  action  had  been  totally  wanting  in  the  kingly 
viiiues  of  justice  and  fair  dealing,  never  entered  his  mind.  It  never 
troubled  him  that  he  sought  to  govern  in  defiance  of  hia  own  concession, 
in  opposition  to  the  even  then  acknowledged  principles  of  the  Constitu- 
tion, and  in  breach  of  his  coronation  oath,"  &c. — Charles  I.  in  164G. 
Camden  Society.     Intro.,  pjj.  viii.,  ix. 


TUE    CIVIL    WAR.  155 

of  another  stamp  to  the  early  leaders.  The  former  was  a 
debauched,  reckless  villain ;  the  other,  the  most  rapacious  of 
his  crew.  Affection  to  the  Royal  cause  never  swayed  them ; 
their  governing  principle  was  the  gratification  of  passion 
and  the  love  of  plunder.  Under  their  guidance  the  inferior 
officers  and  men  were  moulded.  The  chivalry  of  the  past 
was  gone.  "  It  was  a  rabble  of  vagabonds,  utterly  indif- 
ferent to  the  cause,  committing  day  and  night  the  most 
intolerable  excesses,  and  disgixsting  by  their  vices  a  country 
ruined  by  their  extortions."  "  Fellows,"  says  Clarendon, 
*'  whom  only  their  friends  feared  and  their  enemies  laughed 
at,  being  only  terrible  in  plunder  and  resolute  in  running 
away."* 

With  every  sect  he  had  tried,  excei)t  the  Baptists.  His 
stratagems  had  all  failed.  The  leading  sects  had  not  been 
blinded  by  his  duplicity.  Foreign  aid  was  hopeless,  though 
he  had  im])lored  it  from  France.  Ireland  had  failed;  his 
Holiness  had  foiled ;  and  now  his  last  retreat  was  encircled 
by  men  whose  name  was  a  terror  to  the  monarch  as  well  as 
his  troops.  What  should  he  do?  It  was  the  alternative  of 
captivity,  or  liberty  in  another  land.  The  pathway  was 
narrow;  the  danger  was  gathering.  "  I  intend  to  get  peace- 
ably to  Lynn,  when  I  will  try  if  it  be  possible  to  make 
such  strength  as  to  procure  honourable  and  safer  conditions 
from  the  rebels ;  if  not,  then  I  resolve  to  go  by  sea  to  Scot- 
land, in  case  I  shall  understand  that  Montrose  be  in  a  con- 
dition fit  to  receive  me;  otherwise  I  mean  to  make  for  Ire- 
land, France,  or  Denmark."  Leaving  Oxford,  he  wandered 
about  for  eight  days,  and  finally  joined  the  camp  of  the  Scots 
under  Lesly,  &c. 

We  must  pass  over  the  subsequent  events  which  marked 
the  infatuated  monarch's  life.     His  attempted  escape — ^liis 

*  Guizot,  b.  vi.,  p.  279.  Clarendon,  vol.  ii.,  p.  1089.  "  Gtood  men  are 
80  scandalized  at  the  horrid  impiety  of  our  armies,  that  they  will  not 
believe  that  God  can  bless  any  such  cause  in  such  hands."— Culpepper  to 
Lord  Digby.     Clarendon,  State  Papers,  vol.  ii.,  p.  189. 


156  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

vinmeaning  negotiations  —  liLs  deceitful  attempts  on  the 
popular  leaders — his  trial  and  subsequent  execution,  would 
lead  us  too  far  from  the  objects  of  this  volume.  Inde- 
pendents are  charged  with  the  murder  of  the  Ptoyal  martyr, 
as  he  is  called.  We  are  not  careful  to  defend  them  from 
this  charge.  History  will  do  its  work  in  time.  People  are 
not  for  kings,  but,  if  at  all,  kings  for  the  people.  So-called 
royalty  has  no  more  right  to  trample  on  the  majesty  of  law 
than  the  lowKest  peasant.  "  If  a  king,"  says  Walpole, 
"deserve  to  be  opposed  by  force  of  arms,  he  deserves  death. 
If  he  reduces  his  servants  to  that  extremity,  the  blood  spilt 
in  the  quarrel  lies  on  him;  the  executing  him  afterwards  is 
a  mere  formality.""' 

The  character  of  thLs  monarch  has  called  forth  opinions 
of  the  most  opposite  nature.  On  the  one  hand,  the  senseless 
and  absurd  eulogies  of  his  advisers  have  approached  to  blas- 
phemy. Flattery  has  exliausted  herself,  and  fancy  has  put 
forth  her  loftiest  power,  in  clothing  him  with  all  but  super- 
human vii'tues.  In  the  pages  of  something  called  history, 
he  is  pourtrayed  as  faultless.  In  the  wildness  of  their 
delii'ium,  the  Cavaliers,  after  the  Restoration,  proclaimed  him 
as  a  martyr,  and  the  folly  of  the  Legislature  was  seen  in  the 
setting  apart  of  a  day  for  bewailing  the  crime.  Upon  his 
opponents  the  vials  of  holy  indignation  were  poured.  No 
terms  were  too  severe  to  designate  the  murderers  of  the 


*  Noble  Authors,  vol.  ii.,  p.  69.  Bui-ton's  Diary,  vol.  ii.,  p.  320.  "I 
have  heard  it  from  the  mouths  of  many  worthy  gentlemen,  whose  hap  it 
was  to  serve  him  in  the  late  wars,  that  they  did  beUeve  had  he,  viz.,  the 
king,  by  armies  conquered  the  Parliament,  he  would  have  proved  the 
gi'eatest  tyrant  the  English  nation  ever  had  to  nile  over  them ;  and,  there- 
fore, they  did  still  pray  for  a  reconciliation  betwixt  Parliament  and  them, 
but  could  never  endure  to  hear  he  should  conquer  their  armies,  &c.  And 
so  much,  in  a  manner,  ckopt  out  from  the  mouth  of  Rupert,  who  giving 
command  for  executing  something  contrary  to  the  laws,  and  being 
acquainted  with  his  mistake,  '  Tush,'  quoth  he,  '  we  wiil  have  no  more 
law  in  England  henceforward,  but  the  sword.'  "—Lilly's  Life  and  Death  of 
Charles  I.,  p.  141.  Hyde  utters  the  same  opinion. — Letter  to  Culpepper. 
Clarendon,  vol.  ii.,  p.  411. 


THE    CIVIL    WAR.       ,  157 

Lord's  anointed.  The  measure  of  loyalty  was  often  estimated 
by  the  intense  hatred  with  which  these  men,  and  those  who 
sympathised  mth  them,  were  hated.  The  day  of  the  "  Royal 
Martyr's"  death  was  hailed  as  the  appropriate  occasion,  when 
the  wailing  of  the  iin  principled,  and  the  roar  of  the 
sycophant,  against  the  Nonconformist,  was  heard  the 
loudest  and  the  longest.  From  the  Episcopal  tlu'one  to  the 
humblest  rural  church,  the  glories  of  the  martyred  sovereign 
were  the  anniial  theme  upon  which  genius  displayed  its 
invective  jiower,  enidition  its  stores  of  literary  lore,  and 
impassioned  hatred  its  distilled  violence.  It  was  the  time  of 
the  nation's  sorrow ;  the  period  of  her  profound  humiliation 
for  the  enormous  guilt  which  had  been  contracted.  We  could 
multiply  pages  of  this  nonsense.  A  sample  or  two  must 
suffice.  These  bishops  and  dignitaries  speak : — "  "When  the 
crown  of  our  head  was  fallen,  then  also  the  joy  of  our  heart 
was  ceased,  and  our  dance  was  turned  into  mourning:  for 
this  our  heart  was  faint,  for  these  things  our  eyes  were  dim, 
as  the  prophet  Jeremiah  complains  "  (Lam.  v.  8).  "  Wlien  the 
breath  of  our  nosti'ils  was  expired,  all  faces  wei'e  turned  into 
paleness,  as  the  same  prophet  complains :  when  the  Father 
of  our  country,  the  anointed  of  the  Lord,  was  taken  in 
their  pits,  we  were  as  orphans,  and  fatherless  "  (Lam.  v.  3). 
**  The  beauty  of  Israel  is  slain !  How  are  the  mighty  fallen !  "''^ 
Thus  Bancroft  raved: — "Those  papers,  I  mean  that  related 
the  martyrdom  of  the  best  Protestant  in  these  kingdoms, 
and  incompai-ably  the  best  king  upon  earth,  Charles  the 
pious  and  the  glorious,  with  whom  fell  the  Church  and  the 
kingdom,  religion  and  learning,  and  the  rewards  of  both,  and 
all  the  piety  and  honesty  Avliich  the  nation  could  hope  for  in 
this  world.  And  now  the  breath  of  our  nostrils  being  taken 
away,  we  only  draw  in  so  much  as  we  render  again  in  sighs, 
and  wish  apace  for  the  time  when  God  shall  call  for  it  all."t 
But  enough  of  this  rant. 

*  Worthington's  Diary,  vol.  i.,  p.  31.     Camden  Society, 
t  Life,  vol.  i.,  p.  44. 


158  E^RLT    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

From  some  men  of  his  time — men  who  had  felt  the  iron 
hand  of  oppression,  whose  liberties  had  been  invaded,  and 
who  had  struggled  with  him  in  the  Senate  and  in  the  tented 
held — the  estimate  is  widely  diiferent.  They  paint  him  as 
a  tyrant  whom  no  law  could  bind,  in  whose  promise  no  con- 
fidence could  be  placed,  and  as  a  monarch  destitute  of  all 
those  principles  which  are  demanded  by  a  constitutional 
Government.  His  death,  they  declare,  was  necessary  to  the 
liberties  of  the  nation,  and  to  the  life  of  the  noblest  and  the 
most  patriotic  of  her  sons.  The  contrast  is  striking,  and 
the  portraits  are  veiy  unlike.  Which  is  the  accurate  one] 
History  should  know  no  party.  Her  aim  should  be  truth, 
and  only  truth.  Happily,  in  our  day,  she  is  aiming  at  this. 
Steadily  and  increasingly  she  is  throwing  her  purest  light  on 
the  past.  The  mists  of  ignorance  and  prejudice  are  retiring, 
and  things  are  appearing  as  they  are,  unveiled,  before  us. 
Our  readers  will  bear  with  us,  if  before  closing  this  chapter 
we  offer  a  remark  or  two  on  the  character  of  this  misguided 
and  unfortunate  man. 

National  degradation — the  overthrow  of  dynasties,  the 
prostration  of  the  illustrious,  are  not  sudden.  They  are 
generally  the  effects  of  causes  which  have  long  been  ope- 
rating; the  crisis  of  some  steady  but  certain  revolution.  It 
was  so  with  Charles.  His  fether's  detestable  policy  laid  the 
foundation  of  his  ruin,  Nurtured  from  infancy  in  the 
loftiest  notions  of  kingly  prerogative,  it  gi-ew  with  his 
growth  and  augmented  with  his  years.  He  was  full  of 
haiighty  pretensions,  and  regarded  every  opposition  to  his 
will  as  fraught  with  the  seeds  of  rebellion.  These  notions 
were  sustained  by  his  favourite  and  unprincipled  ministers, 
whilst  many  of  the  clergy  laboured  with  sleepless  zeal  to 
uphold  the  Divine  right  of  kings.*     It  was  the  evil  star  of 

*  "Wlien  one  talented,  but  as  a  common  person,  yet  by  the  favour  of 
his  prince  hath  gotten  that  interest,  that,  in  a  sort,  all  the  keys  of  Eng- 
land hang  at  his  girdle.  The  Duke  of  Buckingham  had  the  managing  of 
these  things,  as  it  were  generally  conceived;  for  what  was  he  not  fit  to 


THE   CIVIL    WAR.  151) 

his  reign.  la  his  deepest  distress  it  ruled  him ;  in  his  inter- 
course with  his  opponents  it  defeated  every  offer  of  peace. 
Tlie  nation  lived  for  him,  and  not  he  for  the  nation.  "  The 
anointed  of  the  Lord,"  the  representative  of  the  Deity,  he 
was  above  all  law,  and  could  rule  the  nation  according  to 
his  own  will.* 

Charles's  marriage  with  the  daughter  of  France  was  pro- 
ductive of  untold  misery.  Not  only  did  it  involve  him  with 
Philip  of  Spain,  hut  her  influence  over  him  ^vi^s  extreme. 
To  her  he  yielded  when  he  should  have  been  firm,  and 
allowed  aflfection  for  her  to  o^jcrate  when  his  own  judgment 
should  have  been  exercised.  His  love  for  her  was  pure  and 
ardent.  To  the  last  it  was  so.  Judging  from  the  state- 
ments of  men  of  her  time,  she  had  much  in  her  appearance 
to  charm  and  hold  captive  a  man  of  Charles's  character. 
"  We  have  now  a  most  noble  new  Queen  of  England,  who  in 
true  beauty  is  beyond  the  long-wooed  Infanta;  for  she  was 
of  a  fiiding  flaxen  hair,  big  lipped,  and  somewhat  heavy  eyed ; 
but  this  daughter  of  France,  this  youngest  branch  of  Bourljon 
(being  but  in  her  cradle  when  the  great  Henry,  her  father, 
was  put  out  of  the  world),  is  of  a  more  lovely  and  lasting 
complexion — a  dark  brown.  She  hath  eyes  that  sparkle  like 
stars ;  and  for  her  physiognomy,  she  may  be  said  to  be  a 
miiTor  of  perfection,"  ttc.f 

Intensely  Romanist,  she  was  ever  surrounded  by  indi- 
viduals of  that  faith,  who  too  frequently  used  her  influence 
over  Charles  to  their  advantage,  t     Self-willed,  impulsive, 


determine  in  Church  or  commonwealth — in  coui-t  or  Council  -in  peace  or 
war — at  land  or  at  sea — at  home  or  abroad?" — Archbishop  Abbott's  Nar- 
rative.    Rushworth,  p.  457. 

*  "Fifteen  years  had  he  reigned  when  this  Parliament  was  called 
(1040).  So  long  had  the  laws  been  violated  (more  than  any  king),  the 
liberties  of  the  people  invaded,  and  the  authority  of  Parliament,  by  which 
laws  and  liberties  are  supported,  trodden  under  foot,"  &c.— May's  Re- 
view of  the  History  of  the  Parliament  of  England,  &c. ,  p.  3.  Maseres 
Tracts,  vol.  i,  f  Howell's  Letters,  p.  190. 

X  Her  confessor  not  only  made  her  walk  from  St,  James's  to  Tyburn, 


160  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

and  full  of  passion,  the  domestic  circle  was  at  times  not  of 
the  calmest  order.  "  The  queen,"  says  Meade,  "  howsoever 
little  of  stature,  is  of  spiiit  and  vigour,  and  seems  of  a  moi"e 
than  ordinary  resohition.  With  one  frown,  tlivers  of  us 
being  at  Whitehall  to  see  her  being  at  dinner,  and  the  room 
somewhat  heated  with  the  fire  and  company,  she  drove  us  all 
out  of  the  chamber.  I  siipjiose  none  but  a  queen  could 
have  cast  such  a  scowl."""  "  When  compelled  to  dismiss  some 
of  her  French  attendants,  her  anger  was  imperial.  She 
stamjied  with  her  foot,  tore  her  hair,  and  with  her  delicate 
hands  broke  the  glass  in  the  windows,  and  various  articles 
around  her.  The  king's  affection  for  her,  we  are  told,  was  a 
composition  of  conscience  and  love,  and  generosity  and  grati- 
tude; insomuch  that  he  saw  Avith  her  eyes  and  determined 
■with  her  judgment;  she  was  admitted  to  the  knowledge  and 
participation  of  the  most  secret  affairs,  and  thought  that  she 
could  dispose  of  all  favours  as  Buckingham  had  done.  And 
she  did  not  more  desire  to  be  possessed  of  this  power,  than 
that  all  mankind  should  take  notice  that  she  was  possessed 
of  it,"  &c.t 

"but  had  made  her  to  dabble  in  the  dirt,  in  a  foul  morning,  from  Somer- 
set House  to  St.  James's,  her  luciferious  confessor  riding  along  by  her  in 
his  coach.  Ye  have  made  her  to  go  barefoot,  to  spin,  to  cut  her  meat  out 
of  dishes,  to  -wait  at  the  tables,  to  sei-ve  her  servants,"  &c. — Pory  to 
Meade,  1626.     Court  and  Times  of  Charles  I.,  vol.  i.,  p.  110. 

*  Letter  to  Sir  M.  Stuteville.  The  Times  and  Court  of  Charles  I. 
(London,  Colbum.)  In  the  same  volume  we  have  a  curious  domestic 
scene: — "The  king  and  queen  dining  together  in  the  presence,  Hacket 
being  there  to  say  grace,  the  confessor  would  have  prevented  him,  but 
that  Hacket  shoved  him  away.  "NYliereupon  the  confessor  went  to  the 
queen's  side,  and  was  about  to  say  grace  again,  but  that  the  king,  pulling 
the  dishes  unto  him,  and  the  carvers  falling  to  their  business,  lundered. 
AVhen  the  dinner  was  done,  he  thought,  standing  by  the  queen,  to  have 
been  before  Mr.  Hacket,  but  Mr.  Hacket  got  the  start  again.  The  con- 
fessor, nevertheless,  began  his  grace  as  loud  as  Mr.  Hacket,  with  such 
confusion  that  the  king,  in  a  great  passion,  instantly  rose  from  the  table, 
and  taking  the  queen  by  the  hand,  retired  into  the  bedchamber."— The 
Court  and  Times  of  Charles  I.,  vol.  i.,  p.  52. 

t  Life  of  Clarendon,  vol.  i.,  p.  155.  Waiburton's  Rupert  and  the 
Cavaliers,  p.  139  (Note). 


THE    CIVIL    WAR.  •  IGl 

To  her  influence  may  be  traced  tlie  flood  tide  of  evil 
■which  finally  engiilphed  Charles.  The  attempt  to  seize  the 
five  members  in  tlie  Commons  House,  so  degrading  to  his 
own  dignity,  so  insulting  to  the  majesty  of  the  law,  and  so 
destructive  of  all  confidence  in  him,  was  no  doubt  her 
prompting.*  As  the  difliculties  of  the  monarch  augmented, 
her  interferences  multiplied.  In  matters  of  the  highest 
moment  she  must  be  consulted.  She  extorted  from  him  the 
promise  to  receive  no  person  into  favour  who  had  discarded 
liim,  and  not  to  make  peace  without  her  mediation.  +  As  one 
has  said,  with  justice,  "Born  to  be  his  ruin,  she  decidedly 
objected  to  his  concessions.  Although  she  had  herself  urged 
his  absolute  submission  to  the  Presbyterian  government,  she 
disliked  his  partial  surrender.  She  taunted  him  with  having 
yielded  his  ground  of  conscience,  and  abandoned  his  prin- 
ciples of  divine  right,  by  his  concession  of  three  years — an 
argumeiit  which  touched  the  king  to  the  quick."  His  letters 
exemplify  the  fatal  influence  she  exerted  over  him,  and  pro- 
bably no  one  individual  contributed  more  largely  to  his  ruin 
than  this  imperious  woman.  Un-English  in  her  tastes  and 
notions,  separated  from  the  people  by  her  religion,  and  nevev 
able  to  form  the  slightest  idea  of  the  dejith  and  fervour  of 
their  opinions,  it  is  clear,  from  the  letters  before  us,  that  the 
future  of  England  was  laid  at  the  feet  of  this  unprincipled 
lady.i 

Finally,  her  influence,  instead  of  healing,  widened  the 
breach  between  her  husband  and  the  Parliament.  At  all 
times  jealous  of  her  power,  she  laid  claim  to  unbounded 
authority  on  her  arrival  from  the  continent  with  supplies 
to  the  distressed  monarch.     Around  her  she  gathered  her 

*  Forster's  Arrest  of  the  Five  Members. 

+  Life  of  Clarendon,  vol.  i.,  pp.  179,  18G. 

:;:  CLarles  I.  in  1646.  Intro.,  p.  26.  "The  fatal  destiny  of  the  kiujj 
raised  up  an  enemy  in  his  own  consort.  His  escape  to  France  was 
denounced  by  her,  to  whom  alone  he  was  sincere ;  her  word  had  ever  been 
his  law  ;  she  was  now,  as  she  had  ever  been,  the  instniment  of  hia  ruin." 
— "VVarburton's  Prince  Rupert,  vol.  iii.,  p.  395. 
L 


162  •  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

creatures,  and  tlireatened  tlie  councils  of  the  few  wise  and 
principled  men  who  adhered  to  Charles.* 

Nor  must  we  overlook  another  featiire  in  the  character  of 
the  man  whom  bishops  and  dignitaries  have  proclaimed  to  the 
world  as  the  model  of  Clmstian  piety,  and  as  a  martyr  to  the 
faith.  None  could  trust  him.  On  his  word  no  reliance  could 
be  placed.  From  liis  youth  he  manifested  this  dissimulation. 
No  man  living  was  a  greater  master  ui  this  art,  says  Lilly. t 
The  weight  of  his  father's  example  had  created  and  sustained 
it.  It  marked  all  his  intercourse  at  home,  and  not  less  his 
dealings  with  other  nations.  May  gives  us  an  example. 
"  He  openly  protested  before  God,  with  horrid  imprecations, 
that  he  endeavoured  nothing  so  much  as  the  preservation  of 
the  Protestant  religion  and  rooting  out  of  Popery.  Yet,  in 
the  meantime,  underhand,  he  promised  to  the  Irish  rebels 
an  abrogation  of  the  laws  against  them,  which  was  contrary 
to  his  late  expressed  promises,  in  these  words :  /  loill  never 
abrogate  the  laws  against  the  Papists.  And  again  he  said, 
/  ahhor  to  think  of  bringing  foreign  soldiers  into  the  king- 
dom; and  yet  he  solicited  the  Duke  of  Lorraine,  the  French, 
.the  Danes,  and  the  very  Irish,  for  assistance.''^ 

This  vice  was  incurable;  for  he  held  himself  bound  by  no 
engagement  with  rebellious  subjects,  and  he  meditated  their 
ruin  whilst  he  implored  their  aid.  ||  Event  after  event, 
during  the  progress  of  the  civil  war-,  augmented  the  distrust 

*  Warburton,  vol.  ii.,  p.  300.  "I  give  thee  power  to  promise  in  my 
name  (to  whom  thou  thinkest  most  fit),  that  I  will  take  away  all  the 
penal  laws  against  the  Romau  Catholics  in  England,  as  soon  as  God  shall 
enable  me  to  do  it ;  so  as  by  their  means,  or  in  their  favours,  I  may  have 
so  powerful  assistance  as  may  deserve  so  gi-eat  favour,  and  enable  me  to 
do  it.  ■' — Charles  to  his  "Wife,  March,  1645.  Ludlow,  p.  487.  Similar  to 
Ormond  in  relation  to  the  Irish. — Ibid,  p.  497.     December  15, 1644. 

f  Life  of  Charles.     Maseres  Tracts,  vol.  i. 

+  May,  p.  78.     Maseres  Tracts,  vol.  i. 

II  Guizot,  vol.  ii.,  p.  97.  Macaulay's  Essays,  vol,  i.,  pp.  35,  43,  177. 
D'Aubigne's  Protectorate,  pp.  160, 161.  The  most  noble-minded  had  diffi- 
culties in  joining  him.  "If  they  fled  to  Oxford,"  says  Kemble,  "they 
were  terrified  with  the  systematic  falsehood  that  characterised  every  word 


THE    CIVIL   AVAK,  163 

of  the  patriots.  The  letters  of  the  king  seized  on  the  battle- 
field revealed  the  hypocrisy  which  governed  him.  Guizot 
is  truthful  when  he  says :  "  It  was  clear  that  he  had  never 
desired  peace;  that  in  his  eyes  no  concession  was  definitive, 
no  promise  obligatory;  that,  in  reality,  he  relied  only  on 
force,  and  still  aimed  at  absolute  power:  finally,  that, 
despite  protestations  a  thousand  times  repeated,  he  was 
negociating  with  the  King  of  France,  the  Duke  of  Lorraine, 
with  all  the  princes  of  the  continent,  to  have  foi-eign  soldiers 
sent  into  England  for  his  purposes.  Even  the  name  of 
Parliament,  which  jiist  before,  to  obtain  the  conference  at 
Uxbridge,  he  had  seemed  to  give  the  houses  at  Westminster, 
was  but  a  deception  on  his  part,  for  in  giving  it  he  had  pri- 
vately protested  against  his  ofiicial  proceeding,  and  caused 
his  protest  to  be  inscribed  on  the  minutes  of  the  council  at 
Oxford."* 

Upon  all  parties  he  tried  this  unmanly,  not  to  say  unkingly 
•course.  "  I  am  not  without  hope  that  I  shall  be  able  to 
draw  either  the  Presbyterians  or  Independents  to  side  with 
me  for  extirpating  the  one  or  the  other;  that  I  shall  really 
be  king  again."t  Even  his  commissioners,  employed  to 
treat  with  the  agents  of  the  Parliament,  he  commanded  to 
insinuate,  in  their  private  intercourse,  that  the  actors  in  the 
great  conflict  were  "arrant  rebels,  and  that  their  end  must 

of  their  faithless  master,  aud  oppressed  with  the  miserable  convictiou  that 
the  triumph  of  the  cause  in  which  they  fought  would  be  the  downfall  of 
the  liberties  of  their  country." — Ibid,  pp.  xxi.,  xsii. 

■*  English  Rev.,  b.  vi.,  p.  277.  Evelyn's  Mem.,  app.  ii.,  j).  90.  "  There 
were  9,000  foreigners,  men  of  all  nations,  levied  by  the  Duke  of  Lorraine 
and  the  Prince  of  Orange,  and  put  into  the  Isle  of  Bui'combe,  to  be  thence 
transported  for  the  service  of  the  King  of  England.  The  first  design 
was,  that  these  men,  mth  some  additional  numbers,  under  the  conduct 
of  Lord  Goring,  should  endeavour  the  surprisal  of  the  Isle  of  Wight,  and 
thereby  release  the  king."— Hyde  to  Lord  Jermyn.  Clarendon,  vol.  ii., 
pp.  455,  456. 

f  Cartes  Ormond,  vol.  iii.,  p.  452.  Lingard,  vol.  x.,  p.  327.  "I  hope 
I  need  not. remember  you  to  cajole  well  the  Independents  and  the 
Scots," — Charles  to  the  Duke  of  Richmond.     Ludlow,  p.  501. 


164  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

be  damnation,  miin,  and  infamy,  except  tbey  repent,  and 
found  some  way  to  free  themselves  from  the  damnable  way 
they  were  in."" 

Whilst  he  was  negotiating  with  Cromwell  and  his  com- 
panions in  arms  for  his  restoration  to  supreme  power,  an 
intercepted  letter  to  the  queen  disclosed  to  them  the 
hypocrisy  of  the  monarch,  and  the  precipice  on  which  they 
stood.  Checking  her  for  her  finding  fault  with  his  promise 
to  them,  he  says :  '•'  She  might  be  easy,  for  he  should  know 
in  due  time  how  to  deal  with  the  rogues,  who,  instead  of  a 
silken  garter,  should  be  fitted  with  a  hempen  cord."  From 
that  moment  hope  was  gone.  Their  own  safety  was  not 
comi)atible  Avith  the  life  of  the  truthless  monarch. t 

Infamous  as  this  vice  was, — for  no  social  or  political  eleva- 
tion can  render  the  individual  who  practises  it  free  from 
the  profoundest  contempt  and  scorn  of  upriglit  minds, — 
against  the  nation  and  its  highest  social  and  political  i*igbts 
he  had  perpetrated  a  crime  which  showed  him  guilty  of 
treason  against  the  Commonwealth.  Before  the  standard 
of  civil  strife  had  been  unfurled,  he  sought  to  sustain  his 
rule,  and  to  crush  the  rising  liberties  of  the  people,  by  armed 
troops  from  the  continent.  The  majesty  of  law  was  to  give 
way  to  the  glittering  spear,  and  the  liberty  to  oppress  was 
to  be  maintained  by  the  hired  rufiians  of  some  continental 
despot.  Deeper  and  deeper  he  plunged  into  this  crime,  as 
the  prowess  of  Fairfax  and  Cromwell  showed  the  hopeless- 
ness of  his  reckless  enterprise.  The  damning  facts  are  mul- 
titudinous. One  or  two  will  suffice  for  our  present  purpose. 
So  early  as  1G38  he  sought  "to  draw  an  army  of  10,000 

*  Charles  I.  in  1G16  (Note).     Evelj-n's  Diary,  vol.  iv.,  p.  137. 

+  Memoirs  of  Sir  J.  Berkeley.  Maseres  Tracts,  vol.  i. ,  pp.  386,  387.  In 
a  letter  addi-essed  to  the  queen,  which  Cromwell  and  Ireton  intercejited 
at  the  Blue  Boar,  in  Holborn,  Charles  said  :  "  For  the  rest,  I  alone  under- 
stand my  position.  Be  quite  easy  as  to  the  concessions  which  I  may 
grant.  When  the  time  comes  I  shall  very  well  know  how  to  treat  these 
rogues,  and  instead  of  a  silken  garter,  I  vidll  fit  them  ^vith  a  hempen 
cord." — Vide  Guizot's  English  Rev.,  b.  vi.,  p.  354. 


THE    CIVIL    WAK, 


1G5 


men  from  Flanders,  with  sucli  cantionary  conditions  as  his 
Majesty  need  not  feai*,  and  yet  his  ill-affected  subjects  should 
not  dare  to  budge.  Nor  would  a  far  greater  army  of  our 
own  men  awe  the  subjects  half  so  much  as  a  few  foreign 
forces.  And  one  main  caution  to  his  Majesty  was  to  have 
some  subjects  of  his  own  in  joint  commission  with  the  liead 
commander  of  these  foreign  forces,"  &c. 

"  Three  weeks  since  I  sent  you  word  of  my  resolution  to 
taste  (.^('c')  the  Spaniards  about  their  siding  with  his  Majesty, 
if  the  Scotch  and  English  Puritans  should  attempt  at  home, 
and  then*  brother  Hollanders  and  French  foment  their 
attempts,"  tfcc* 

On  the  same  mission  Colonel  Gage  was  sent  to  the  Car- 
dinal Governor  of  the  Netherlands.  His  instructions  were 
definite.  So  they  run  :  "  You  shall  represent  to  him  that 
the  number  which  we  desire  for  the  present  service  is  6,000 
foot  and  400  horse.  Take  special  care  that  the  men  be  able, 
and  their  arms  complete  and  serviceable,  and  the  like  for 
the  horse.  You  must  use  great  secresy,  dexterity,  and 
expedition  in  this  business;  and  take  care  that  it  be  not 
divulged,  seeing,  if  the  party  in  Scotland  should  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  it,  it  would  be  utterly  overthrown. "t 

Later  on,  in  a  letter  to  his  wife,  Charles  says :  "  I  must 
again  tell  thee  that  most  assuredly  Fi-ance  will  be  the  best 
way  for  transportation  of  the  Duke  of  Lorraine's  army,  there 
being  divers  fit  and  safe  places  of  landing  there,  upon  the 
wx'stern  coast,  besides  the  ports  under  my  obedience,"  &c.X 
In  another  letter  to  his  wife,  he  wishes  her  to  invite  the 


*  Clarendon,  State  Papers,  vol.  ii. ,  pp.  19,  21. 

t  IliJ,  vol.  ii.,  i\  24.     Other  instances,  pp.  31,  50,  51. 

J  Dated  March  30th,  1641.  Ludlow,  p.  482,  App.  The  queen  says  in 
reply  that  the  duke  had  promised  to  bring  10,000  men.— Ibid,  p.  507. 
"Whilst  thus  seeking  the  overthrow  of  his  adversaries  by  a  foreign  power, 
Charles,  in  a  declaration  from  Newark,  March  9th,  1G41,  said  to  the  Par- 
liament :  "Whatever  you  are  advertised  from  Rome,  Venice,  Paris,  of  the 
Pope's  nuncio,  soliciting  France,  Spain,  &c.,  for  foreign  aid,  we  are  confi- 
dent no  sober  honest  man  in  our  kingdom  can  believe  that  we  are  so 


166  EARLY    E^XLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Pope,  and  the  Roman  Catliolics  of  England,  to  help  him 
in  the  restoration  of  Episcopacy  in  England,  on  condition 
of  his  giving  them  full  liberty  of  conscience.*  The  history 
of  this  period  is  full  of  proof  of  the  treason  of  the  monarch 
against  the  State. 

We  have  only  to  add,  that  in  forming  a  true  estimate  of 
the  character  of  Charles,  the  religious  element  of  the  time 
should  not  be  overlooked.  His  devotion  to  the  hierarchy 
was  intense.  That  he  was  swayed  by  the  narrow  and 
superstitious-minded  Laud  admits  of  no  doubt.  The  semi- 
Papist  had  all  power.  Against  the  sternest  principle  which 
ever  swayed  the  mind  of  man,  Charles  was  precipitated  by 
his  spiritual  guide.  The  attempt  was  disastrous.  The 
Puritan  principle  was  interwoven  with  the  religious  life  of 
England.  The  Laudian  school  violated  its  most  deeply 
cherished  sympathies.  The  leaders  of  the  nation  were 
devout  religious  men,  who  claimed  free  exercise  for  their 
religion ;  but,  inseparable  from  the  Protestant  Reformation 
and  its  overthrow  of  Roman  Catholic  bondage,  to  whose 
immediate  inspiration  they  owed  their  greatness,  was  the 
passion  for  civil  freedom  not  less  than  for  religious  free- 
dom.t  The  violence  of  Laiid  only  facilitated  the  destruction 
of  the  throne  and  the  church.  Charles  was  professedly 
intensely  attached  to  the  Episcopal  platform,  though  of  the 
full  extent  of  this  there  is  reason  to  suspect.  J  In  a  letter 
to  the  queen  he  says,  referring  to  his  willingness  in  1646  to 
give  up  the  militia,  ''  The  retaining  of  it  is  not  of  so  much 
consequence  (I  am  far  from  sapng  none)  as  is  thought,  with- 

clesperate  or  so  senseless  to  entertain  such  designs  as  would  not  only 
bring  this  our  kingdom  in  certain  destruction  and  ruin,  but  our  name 
and  posterity  in  perpetual  scorn  and  infamy." — Ludlow.  Collections  of 
Letters,  p.  518.     Letter  to  Lord  Digby  from  Lord  Jemayn,  pp.  543,  545. 

*  Letters  of  Charles.     Camden  Society.    Forstei-'s  Essays,  vol.  i.,  p.  76. 

+  Forster,  vol.  i.,  p.  174. 

+  "Though  he  (Charles)  should  swear  it,  no  man  will  believe  it,  that 
he  sticks  upon  E2)iscopacy  for  any  conscience."— Baillie  to  Henderson. 
1646.     Dalrymple,  vol.  ii.,  p.  165. 


THK   CIVIL   WAU.  1G7 

out  tho  concurrence  of  other  things.  If  the  pulpit  teacli 
not  obedience  (which  will  never  be  if  Presbyterian  govern- 
ment is  absolutely  settled)  the  Ci'own  will  have  little  comfort 
in  the  militia,"*  Pepys  gives  us  the  following,  on  the  autho- 
rity of  Mr.  Blackburne:  "  He  told  me  that  to  his  knowledges 
(being  present  at  every  meeting  at  the  treaty  in  the  Isle  of 
Wight)  that  the  old  king  did  confess  himself  overruled  and 
convinced  in  his  judgment  against  the  bishops,  and  would 
have  suffered,  and  did  agree  to  exclude  the  service  out  of 
the  chiu'ches,  nay,  his  ovm.  chapel.  He  did  always  say,  that 
this  he  did,  not  by  force,  for  he  would  not  abate  one  inch  by 
any  violence,  but  what  ho  did  was  out  of  his  reason  and 
judgment."! 

Nor  was  this  all.  The  majority  of  the  Legislature,  and 
probably  of  the  nation,  were  intense  haters  of  Popery.  The 
manifest  tendency  of  Laud  and  many  of  the  bishops  in  tliis 
direction,  sharpened  their  hostility  to  Episcopacy.  Again 
and  again  it  was  denounced  in  the  Senate.  Law  after  law 
was  passed  for  its  repression.  Its  existence  and  growth 
stood  in  the  front  of  every  list  of  grievances.  The  recollec- 
tion of  the  past  aixgmented  this.  It  hauiated  these  men  of 
principle  at  all  times.  The  sympathy  of  the  court  with  it 
was  unmistakable.  The  queen  and  her  household  were  only 
tools  in  the  hands  of  the  priesthood.  +  Through  her  the 
monarch  was  influenced.  We  have  seen  the  effects  of  this 
already  in  the  household  of  Charles.  Later  on,  he  looked  to 
the  Catholics  as  the  mainstay  of  his  power  against  the  Parlia- 
ment.   Hordes  of  savage  Irish  were  imported  to  desolate  the 

*  Clarendon,  State  Papers,  vol.  ii.,  i>.  296. 

+  Diary,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  117,  118. 

+  The  niimbers  and  the  influence  of  the  Catholics  in  the  early  part  of 
the  reign  were  considerable.  "  It  was  a  less  crime,"  says  one,  "  to  violate 
a  maid  iipon  an  altar,  than  to  settle  amongst  us  the  heUef  of  the  Pope's 
infallibility."  In  the  course  of  his  reign,  it  is  said  Charles  liberated  11,000 
priests. — Disraeli's  Com.  Charles  I.,  pp.  36,  172,  175,  178.  W.  Prynne, 
with  his  usual  industry,  has  gathered  a  mass  of  information  on  this  sub- 
ject.    He  states  them  at  4000. -Fuller,  p.  101. 


168  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

country,  whilst  from  foreign  nations  their  presence  was 
invoked  to  secure  his  triumph.  Everything  deepened  the 
conviction  upon  the  minds  of  the  leaders  of  the  nation,  that 
Popery  would  not  only  be  tolerated,  but  invested  with  power. 
A  calamity  more  awful  and  disastrous  to  the  highest  inte- 
rests of  the  nation  could  not  be  felt;  a  severer  proof  of  the 
Divine  displeasure  against  a  people  could  not  be  seen:  so 
they  felt,  and  under  its  impulse  they  acted  for  the  liberty 
of  body  and  mind. 

No  one  can  rightly  estimate  the  conduct  of  these  men, 
without  taking  them,  and  other  matters  our  space  does  not 
even  suffer  us  to  indicate,  into  full  consideration.  Their 
circumstances  admitted  of  no  alternative.  One  party  must 
suffer.  Either  they  were  traitors,  and  would  suffer  the 
aimiliilating  weight  of  Royal  vengeance, — and  they  well 
knew  that  it  would  be  so,  if  victory  crowned  the  efforts  of 
the  rebel  kiug,* — or,  as  a  traitor  against  the  constitution  he 
had  sworn  to  protect,  he  must  bear  the  punishment  which 
the  violated  majesty  of  the  law  would  inflict.  We  repeat 
that  there  was  no  alternative.  Self  interest,  the  liberty  of 
the  nation,  the  power  of  law, — all  that  was  dear  to  men,  all 
that  was  elevating  to  the  nation,  demanded  as  with  one 
voice  the  death  of  the  tyrant.  Posterity  has  at  last  justified 
their  decision.f 


*  "Never  had  the  people  of  England,  in  so  advanced  a  state  of  civili- 
zation, been  subject  to  an  oppression  so  general,  so  odious,  so  little 
redeemed  by  aught  that  could  either  flatter  the  nation,  or  even  conciliate 
a  particular  class." — Life  of  Claiendon,  vol.  i.,  pp.  44-5.  Charles 
"bullied  his  Parliament,  as  a  tyi-aut  his  refractory  slave."  He  granted 
nothing  wliich  he  did  not  hope  secretly  to  regain.  --Forster,  vol.  i.,  p.  10. 
"It  has  been  his  (Charles's)  constant  unhappiiiess  to  give  nothing  in  time ; 
all  things  have  been  given  at  last,  but  he  has  even  lost  the  thanks,  and 
liis  gifts  have  been  coveted,  constrained,  and  extorted." — Baillie  to  Hen- 
derson.    Dalrymple,  vol.  ii.,  p.  167. 

t  "  To  speak  my  own  thoughts,  I  could  never  see  any  jilace  of  the  New 
Testament  (which  is  most  insisted  on)  did,  to  my  understanding,  neces- 
sarily infer  defensive  arms  in  subjects  to  be  always,  upon  all  occasions, 
absolutely  unlawfid ;  and,  indeed,  when  I  consider  it,  I  cannot  apprehend 


TUE    COMMONWEALTH.  169 


CHAPTER  III. 

THE  COMMONWEALTH   AND  PROTECTOllATE. 

Republican  principles  had  rapidly  increased  during  the 
war.  Many  of  the  leaders  in  the  Parliamentary  army  had 
imbibed  them,  aiid,  in  the  mixed  hosts  which  followed, 
these  democratic  views  prevailed.  Cromwell,  Lambert,  Fleet- 
wood, Harrison,  Ireton,  and  other  men  of  rank,  were  all 
avowedly  in  fevour  of  a  Commonwealth.  They  declared  that 
all  power  was  in  the  people,  and  that  Government  existed 
only  for  their  benefit.  Probably  their  position  invested  this 
form  of  government  with  commanding  interest,  not  only  as 
aftbrding  security  to  themselves,  but  as  best  adapted,  in  the 
circumstances  in  which  they  were  placed,  to  secure  the  peace 
and  prosperity  of  the  nation.  The  restoration  of  the 
monarchy  in  the  family  of  the  Stuarts  would  appear  to  them 
impossible.  The  t[uestion  of  investing  the  Royal  authority  in 
the  person  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  had  been  discussed 
before  the  death  of  his  father,  but  for  various  reasons  had 
been  rejected.  Now  the  difficulties  were  augmented.  The 
men  in  power,  who  had  been  the  chief  actors  in  the  fearful 
tragedy,  though  confessedly  a  minority,  would  feel  that  in 
calling  the  first-born  to  the  throne,  their  own  heads  would 
be  demanded  as  a  sacrifice  for  the  past. 


how  it  can  be  otherwise ;  for  if  the  manner  of  government,  the  qualifica- 
tions of,  be  human  (as  I  think  all  affirm),  how  shall  we  draw  necessary 
consequences  out  of  divinity  for  that  structure,  whose  foundation  is  not 
otherwise  divine  than  as  it  is  settled  by  man  ?  I  do  confess,  therefore, 
there  are  other  arguments  do  with  mc  more  dissuade  the  taking  of  arms 
in  a  well  settled  Commonwealth,  be  it  regal  or  popular,  than  anything  in 
Holy  Writ,"  &c. — Sir  R.  Twisden  on  the  Government  of  England, 
pp.  98-9.     Camden  Society. 


170  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

But  tliougli  no  alternative  conld  present  itself,  the  estab- 
lishment of  a  Commonwealth  was  a  work  which  would  task 
the  extraordinary  powers  with  which  these  men  were 
endowed.  The  Royalists,  though  defeated,  and  many  of 
their  leaders  in  exile,  were  not  insignificant  either  in 
numbers  or  wealth.  Their  loyalty — though  in  many  cases, 
as  we  have  seen,  springing  less  from  attachment  to  the 
person  of  Charles — :was  intense  to  "the  Lord's  anointed." 
Monarchy  was  an  integi-al  part  of  the  constitution.  For  six 
hundred  years  kings  had  governed.  Under  it,  England  had 
reached  an  extraordinary  degree  of  power.  All  that  con- 
feiTed  true  dignity  on  a  nation  it  had  realised.  In  com- 
merce, in  literature,  in  art,  and  war,  it  could  compete  with 
any  other.  Many  even  of  the  Royalists  might  admit  that 
the  former  part  of  Charles's  reign  had  violated  all  law,  and 
trampled  out  the  nation's  liberty;  yet  these  evils  might  be 
checked.  They  were  less  the  effect  of  the  constitution  than 
of  the  evil  counsels  to  which  the  king  had  listened.  The  one 
might  be  so  fenced  as  that  its  working  might  justly  and  at 
all  times  contribute  to  the  prosperity  of  the  people.  Their 
activity  in  availing  themselves  of  every  incident  to  deepen 
the  pojiular  sympathies  with  the  cause,  is  manifest  from 
another  fact.  "  On  the  day  of  the  king's  execution,  and 
even  below  the  scaffold,  had  been  sold  the  earliest  copies  of 
a  work  admirably  fitted  to  shake  the  new  Government. 
Fifty  thousand  copies,  it  is  asserted,  were  sold  within  one 
year;  and  posthumous  power  was  thus  given  to  the  king's 
name  by  one  little  book,  which  exceeds  in  alarm  to  his 
enemies  all  that  his  ai-mies  could  accomplish  in  his  life- 
time."* We  will  only  add,  that  the  Episcopal  party,  smarting 
tinder  their  deep  humiliation,  lauded  the  monarch,  and 
elevated  him  to  the  rank  of  the  martyrs. 

*  De  Quincey's  AVorks,  vol.  x. ,  p.  89.  The  reader  who  wishes  to  inves- 
tigate the  authorslup  of  "Eikou  Basilike,"  may  consult  the  worka  of 
"Wordsworth  and  Todd.  The  latter  writer,  we  think,  has  shown,  beyond 
all  doubt,  that  the  work  was  from  the  pen  of  Dr.  Gauden. 


THE    COMMONWEALTH. 


171 


Greater  in  power  and  influence,  if  not  in  numbers,  than 
the  Episcopalians,  Avere  tlie  Presbyterians.  In  England  they 
had  ruled  with  an  iron  hand,  and  the  forces  of  Scotland  had 
sustained  them.  They  had  moulded  the  ecclesiastical  plat- 
form of  the  nation.  They  had  secured  the  vacant  churches 
and  the  revenues  of  the  ejected  clergy.  Their  hatred  to  Epis- 
copacy was  intense."'  They  had  used  every  means  to  crush 
the  various  sects,  and  the  Solemn  League  and  Covenant  they 
had  forced  upon  the  nation.  Though  the  leaders,  at  first, 
if  not  the  chief  instigators  of  the  war,  they  had  opposed  the 
execution  of  Charles.t  Love  to  Charles  had  only  a  modi- 
cum of  influence  in  their  councils.  They  had  liigher  aims. 
Ci-ushed  politically  by  men  of  opposite  religious  views,  they 
would  have  gained  tlieir  lost  supremacy  by  making  tenns 
with  the  sovereign.  Again  and  again  they  tried  the  experi- 
ment. Their  projects  were  defeated.  Under  a  Common- 
wealth their  power  would  never  recover,  and  their  hatred 
and  hostility  to  it  was  soon  manifested  in  their  proclamation 
of  the  second  Chai-les,  who  subscribed  "  the  Solemn  League 
and  Covenant  without  a  scruple." 

*  "  It  appears  to  me,  aud  to  many  wiser  than  I  am,  that  the  heat  of  the 
people  is  not  cooled  by  all  the  pain  and  charges  for  so  long  a  time ;  and  at 
this  hour  they  are  more  animated  against  the  sei-vice  book,  and  against 
the  prelates  and  their  adherents,  than  at  the  first  hour  and  time  since. 
If  the  king's  Majesty  -vvill  land  bishops  here,  he  must  either  root  out  all 
the  generations  of  people,  which  will  be  a  hard  task,  since  now  they  be 
resolved  and  so  armed,  and  are  assured  that  the  English  will  not  trouble 
them  for  the  point  of  religion,  or  kirk  government  by  bishops,"  &c. — 

Letter  from  a  supposed  minister  in  S .     June,  1639.    Dalrymple, 

vol.  ii.,  p.  08. 

t  Baxter  and  others  protested  against  the  execiition  of  Charles.  "The 
London  Presbyterian  ministers  would  not  oiBciate  neither  at  their  fasts 
nor  thanksgiving  (the  new  Lords),  for  Avhich  contempt  several  of  them 
were  brought  before  their  committees,  and  after  some  reprehension  and 
warning  dismissed,  as  namely,  Master  Love,  Master  Jenkins,  and  Master 
Ashe."— Heath,  p.  255.  "How  the  angry  Presbyterians  spit  fire  out  of 
their  pidpits,  and  endeavoured  to  blow  up  the  people  against  the  Parlia- 
ment ;  how  they  entered  into  a  treasonable  conspiracy  with  Scotland,  who 
had  now  received  and  cro^^led  the  son  of  the  late  kingdom,  who  led  them 
in  hither  in  a  great  army,  which  the  Lord  of  Hosts  discomfited." — 
Hutchinson,  p.  99. 


172  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Difficult  as  the  path  of  the  people  was,  no  retreat  was  open 
for  them.  The  leaders  met  and  consulted.  Kingly  power  was 
abolished,  and  to  proclaim  a  monarch  without  authority  of 
Parliament  was  declared  to  be  treason.  The  abolition  of  the 
House  of  Lords  follov/ed,  though  the  members  of  that  augixst 
assembly  were  allowed  to  retain  their  titles.  On  the  1 7th  of 
February,  1649,  a  Council  of  State,  consisting  of  forty-one 
members,  was  inaugurated,  as  the  executors  of  the  Common- 
wealth of  England.  From  principle,  as  well  as  from  the  well- 
grounded  expectation  of  greater  liberty  to  make  known  their 
own  religious  convictions,  the  leading  Baptists  gave  in  at  first 
their  adhesion  to  the  new  Government. 

Severity  marked  the  very  early  proceedings  of  the  Cox;ncil. 
Orders  were  issued  to  the  proper  officers  to  try  some  of  the 
leading  agents  of  the  late  monarch.  The  Duke  of  Hamilton, 
the  Earls  of  Holland  and  Norwich,  and  others,  had  subjected 
themselves  to  the  charge  of  high  treason  against  the  State. 
Their  guilt  was  unquestioned,  and  their  doom  soon  followed. 
Irregular  in  the  form  of  proceeding,  still,  necessity  ap- 
parently justified  the  punishment.  Vigour  in  the  adminis- 
tration of  the  law  was  demanded,  for  the  spirit  of  rebellion 
was  now  rife. 

Ireland  had  for  some  time  fixed  the  attention  of  the  Par- 
liament. From  the  Emerald  Isle,  troops  of  semi-barbarians 
had  flocked  to  the  aid  of  Charles.  Ignorant,  imbued  with  the 
fiercest  spirit  of  religious  fanaticism,  and  marking  their  pro- 
gress in  England  by  the  most  savage  cruelty,  these  unhappy 
men  had  exposed  themselves  to  the  vengeance  of  the  Govern- 
ment. The  recollection  of  the  Irish  massacre,  that  monu- 
ment of  Popish  cruelty,  was  still  fresh  in  the  memory  of  the 
people.  Unsettled,  restless,  and  some  of  its  chief  cities  and 
towns  held  for  the  second  Charles,  to  carry  the  war  into  that 
unhappy  country  became  a  matter  of  necessity.*     To  the 

*  This  outbreak  of  the  Romanists  in  Ireland  has  perhaps  no  parallel  in 
the  history  of  civilised  nations  for  the  intenseness  of  the  cruelty  which 
marked  it.  Heath  in  his  "Chronicles"  gives  the  number  butchered  at 
150,000.     Vicar  states  it  at  200,000. 


THE   COMMONWEALTH.  173 

genius  of  Cromwell  the  command  was  entrusted.  He  had 
just,  in  connexion  with  Fairfax,  his  nominal  cliief,  arrested 
the  disoi'ders  of  the  army,  and  punished  the  levellers  and 
agitators  in  its  ranks.*  His  pi'eparations  for  his  entei-j^rise 
were  speedily  accomplished.  We  cannot  trace  his  progress,  or 
mark  the  terrible  jiroofs  of  his  vengeance.  His  success  was 
complete.  He  might  have  said,  in  the  language  of  Ciesar, 
"  I  came,  I  saw,  I  conquered."  In  Wexford,  in  Drogheda, 
in  Waterford,  and  other  places,  his  name  is  still  detested. 

To  another  land  the  conqueror  was  sjjeedily  called.  The 
Scots,  in  the  madness  of  their  disappointment,  had  pro- 
claimed the  eldest  sou  of  Charles  as  king.  The  solemn  farce 
was  enacted  in  the  ancient  palace  of  their  monarchs.  The 
traditions  of  centuries  were  gathered  there;  and  all  the 
pomp  which  the  Kirk  and  the  State  could  command  was 
throAvn  ai'ound  it.  The  hypocrisy  of  the  father  was  unfolded 
in  the  son.    The  Covenant  was  taken  by  him  without  scruple, 

*  "Mrs.  Hutchinson  speaks  of  them,  in  1647,  as  declaring  against  the 
factions  of  the  Presbj-terians  and  Independents,  and  the  ambitious  views 
of  tlieir  leaders.  She  says  that  they  were  men  of  just  and  sober  prin- 
ciples, of  honest  and  religious  ends,  and  were,  therefore,  hated  by  all  the 
designing  self-interested  men  of  both  factions.  Colonel  H.  had  great 
intimacy  with  many  of  them."  So  earlj'  as  1647,  a  "  Remonstrance  from 
the  Armj-  to  the  Parliament"  was  presented.  The  warriors  say  : — "So this 
generation  of  men,  in  the  application  of  the  Parliament's  powers 
(succeediug  the  former  in  the  exercises  of  the  king's),  have  made  use  of 
the  odious  names  of  Brownists,  Anabaptists,  Independents,  &c.,  to  blast 
such  men  in  whom  the  truth  and  power  of  religion,  or  a  just  sense  of  the 
common  interests  of  the  kingdom,  hath  appeared,"  &c. — Remonstrance  of 
the  Army  to  the  Parliament.  Hist.,  vol.  iii.,  p.  759.  Of  the  West- 
minster Di\ines,  a  member  of  the  Commons  said : — "  More  shame  it  is  for 
the  Synod,  that  they  being  the  men  which  condemned  and  cried  out 
against  the  plui-alities  of  the  Episcopal  clergy,  they  should  enjoy  far  more 
than  the  corruptest  of  the  bishops  and  their  chaplains  did  ever  allow  of ; 
divers  of  them  at  this  time  possessing  two,  three,  yea,  and  four  livings 
apiece,  which  they  come  not  at  once  in  a  twelvemonth;  besides  them 
which  are  not  visible,  wherein  they  have  placed  their  deputies,  and  share 
with  them  the  profits,"  &;c. — Speech  of  a  Member  in  the  Commons. 
Pari.  History,  vol.  iii.,  p.  1039.  Bastwick,  in  his  Utter  Routing  of  the 
Independents,  says: — "You  shall  find  them  the  only  gallants  in  the 
world,  so  that  one  who  should  meet  them  would  take  them  for  roarers 


17-1-  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

though  it  was  in  his  heai-t  detested;  the  sins  of  his  father 
and  the  weakness  of  his  power  he  was  forced  to  acknow- 
ledge, and  to  the  care  of  the  nation  whose  religion  he  hated, 
and  whose  forms  of  godliness  he  ridiculed,  he  committed  hLs 
fortunes.  TJn^villingly  Cromwell  entered  on  this  enterprise. 
By  every  motive  which  can  sway  the  soldier  he  urged  liis 
chief  to  conduct  the  campaign,  avowing  that  it  would  be  to 
him  a  source  of  delight  if  permitted  to  sei've  under  him.  The 
wife  of  Fail-fax  was  a  Presbyterian.  She  was  imbued  with 
the  essence  of  theii-  bitterness,  and  was  under  the  control  of 
her  chaplain.  To  her  imperious  spirit  the  general  submitted, 
and  retired  from  the  theatre  on  which  he  had  performed  for 
years  so  distinguished  a  part.'"'  Cromwell  had  now  no  alter- 
native. To  the  North  he  advanced,  and  by  a  rapid  succession 
of  victories  the  power  of  the  Scotch  was  soon  broken,  and 
the  authority  of  the  Commonwealth  was  acknowledged 
throughout  the  empire. 

Not  only  was  ^dctory  fomid  amidst  the  mountains  of 
Caledonia,  but  Cromwell  rested  not  till  the  power  of 
Charles  was  annihilated.  Into  England,  where  Charles  had 
gone  with  considerable  force,  the  general  now  advanced. 
From  post  to  post  the  young  monarch  was  driven.  Be- 
fore the  invincible  arms  of  the  militaiy  chief  the  Scots 
army  was  forced.  At  Worcester  their  forces  were  concen- 
trated. It  was  their  last  refuge.  Hope  hovered  here  for  a 
moment  or  two.  Despair  prompted  the  Northern  army  to 
prodigies  of  valour.     Vain  were  their  efforts.    The  veteran 

and  ruffians  rather  than  saints.  You  shall  find  them  with  cuffs  (and 
those  gi-eat  ones)  at  their  heels,  and  more  silver  and  gold  on  their  clothes 
than  many  great  persons  have  in  their  purses." — Vide  also  British  Quar- 
terly, April,  1862,  pp.  306-7.  Hollis,  and  Walker  also,  in  his  "  Secrets  of 
Presbyterians  and  Independents,"  charges  the  leading  men  -with  large 
appropriations  of  public  money. 

*  "But  this  great  man  was  then  as  unmovable  by  his  friends  as  per- 
tinacious in  obeying  his  wife,  whereby  he  then  died  to  all  liis  former 
glory,  and  became  the  monument  of  his  own  name,  which  every  day  wore 
out."— Hutchinson,  p.  101.  Many  instances  of  the  fanaticism  of  this  lady 
occur  in  tliis  volume. 


THE   COJIliONWEALTU.  17 O 

troops  of  the  great  general  never  quailed.  Defence  after 
defence  was  beaten  down.  Over  the  bodies  of  their  fallen 
comrades  tlicy  marched.  The  issues  were  not  doubtful. 
Charles  fled  from  the  lost  battle-field,  and  ultimately,  aftia' 
the  most  wondrous  escapes,  reached  the  continent  in  safety.'^' 
In  these  conflicts  many  of  the  leading  Baptists  were  engaged, 
and  Ireland  and  Scotland  witnessed  the  zeal  with  which 
their  opinions  were  propagated.  In  a  subsequent  page  wo 
may  more  particularly  refer  to  them. 

Five  days  after  the  inauguration  of  the  Commonwealth, 
the  Parliament,  in  its  character  as  the  conservator  of  religion, 
passed  an  ordinance  for  the  better  propagation  of  religion  in 
Wales,  and  for  the  ejection  of  scandalous  ministers  and  school- 
masters. To  carry  this  oixt,  commissioners  were  appointed. 
One  of  these  was  Vavaseur  Powell.  On  the  moral  state  of 
Wales  about  this  time  we  have  already  remarked.  The  highest 
testimony  is  borne  to  the  success  of  this  experiment.  Powell 
loved  his  country.  His  whole  energies  were  absorbed  in 
efibrts  for  her  welfare.  "  The  Pai'liament  ordered  him  <£100 
per  cxnnum  out  of  a  sine  cura,  whereof  he  received  about 
.£60  for  seven  or  eight  years.  Many  considerable  gifts  he 
refused.  And  never  did  he  get  anything  by  the  act  for  the 
propagation  of  the  Gospel  in  Wales,  as  was  slanderously  laid 
to  his  charge,  for  which  his  vindications  in  print,  to  this  day 
unansweredjt  may  stop  the  mouth  of  envy  itself."J     The 

*  The  reader  may  consult  the  Boscobel  Tracts  for  a  narrative  of  his 
adventures.  We  have  graphic  sketches  of  the  ravages  of  the  Scots  in 
1(548,  in  Lancasliire : — "  lu  divers  places,  some  whole  families  have  not  left 
them  where^v-ith  to  subsist  a  day,  but  are  glad  to  come  here  for  mere  sub- 
sistence. They  have  taken  forth  of  divers  families  aU, — the  very  racken- 
crocks  and  pot-hooks ;  they  have  driven  away  all  the  beasts,  sheep,  and 
horses,  in  divers  townships,  all  without  redemption  save  some  poor  milch 
kine.  They  tell  the  people  they  must  have  their  houses  too.  Duke 
Hamilton  hath  told  them  it  should  be  so.  Their  usage  of  some  women  is 
extremely  abominable,  and  of  men  very  barbarous,"  &c. — Cheetham 
Society,  vol.  ii.,  p.  254.     Lancashire  Valley  of  Action. 

f  Vide  Examen  et  Purgament  Vavasaries.    Life  of  Powell,  p.  132. 

t  Life  of  Powell,  p.  112.  "In  the  interim,  believe  not  their  libels,  for  I 
know  them  to  be  false :  primary  things,  particularly  in  the  accusations 


176  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

life  of  this  zealous  man,  frequently  designated  the  Apostle 
of  Wales,  is  full  of  the  most  wondei-fiil  incidents  and  inter- 
positions of  Providence. 

In  the  same  year  we  find  a  ''  humble  petition  and  repre- 
sentation of  several  churches  of  God  in  London,  commonly, 
though  falsely,  called  Anabaptists."  The  petitionei-s  acknow- 
ledge the  goodness  of  God  to  the  Parliament  and  kingdom; 
disown  in  manly  terms  their  knowledge  or  consent  to  the 
writing  of  the  book  called  "  The  Second  Part  of  England's 
New  Chaia  Discovered;"  justify  theu'  own  principles  and 
obedience  to  authority ;  and  pray  the  Parliament  to  make 
good  laws  for  the  punishment  of  wickedness.  "  The 
House,"  we  are  told,  "  was  satisfied  with  the  disoviTiing  of 
the  book,  and  their  expression  to  live  peaceably  and  in 
submission  to  the  civil  magistrate,  which  the  Speaker  told 
them  by  the  direction  of  the  House."  The  book  had  been 
denounced  in  very  severe  terms  by  the  Parliament,  and 
the  authors  proclaimed  giiilty  of  high  ti-eason  against  the 
State.* 

Many  cii-cumstances,  under  the  new  Government,  were 
favourable  to  the  Baptists.  CromweU,  though  far  fi*om 
having  perfect  views  of  religious  libeity,  yet  was  an  avowed 
enemy  to  persecution.  He  had  no  sympathy  with  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Presbyterians  on  this  subject.  Either,  therefore, 
from  policy  or  conviction,  on  his  departure  for  Ireland,  he 
addressed  letters  to  the  Parliament,  ad\-ising  the  removal  of 
the  penal  laws  relating  to  religion.  Eaiifax  and  his  council 
of  officers  sustained  this  in  a  petition  which  they  presented 
to  the  House.  The  army  was  full  of  sectaries.  Upon  these 
the  hopes  of  the  general  rested.  Without  their  aid  defeat 
awaited  him.     The  appeal  to  the  House  was  successful,    A 

and  aspersions  cast  upon  those  good  and  painful  instruments,  Mr.  Cradock, 
Mr.  V.  Powell,  Mr.  Jones,  and  several  others,  whose  doctrines  and  lives 
thousands  know  so  well,"  &c. — Perfect  Diurnal,  No.  144,  Sept.  13th,  1652, 
p.  2156. 

*  Whitelocke,  vol.  iii.,  pp.  3,  7. 


THE    COMMONWEALTU.  177 

oommittee  was  appointed,  and  a  Bill  was  ordered  to  be 
brought  in,  by  wliicli  commissions  were  to  be  appointed  for 
every  county  for  the  approbation  of  able  and  well-qualified 
men  to  be  made  ministei's,  who  cannot  comply  with  the 
present  ordinance  for  the  ordination  of  ministers.*  This  mea- 
sure removed  many  impediments  from  the  path  of  those  who 
had  refused  ordination  from  men  who  had  persecuted  them. 

Nor  was  this  all.  The  abolition  of  kingly  power,  and 
the  establishment  of  a  Commonwealth,  involved  the  abo- 
lition of  the  oaths  of  allegiance  and  supremacy;  and  in 
their  jjlace  a  new  fonn  was  appointed,  called  the  Engage- 
ment, which  simply  requii'ed  the  individual  to  be  faithful 
to  the  Government  in  its  new  form.  The  Baptists  had 
no  difficulty  in  this.  Their  political  leaders  had  no 
small  share  in  the  establishment  of  the  constitution,  and 
there  was  nothing  in  it  to  encroach  in  any  way  on  their 
religious  jw-inciples.  Exceptions,  doubtless,  there  were. 
Opposition  to  all  oaths  and  the  use  of  arms  was  still 
cherished    by  some,  but   there  was   none    to   magistracy,  t 

*  Neal,  vol.  ii.,  p.  319. 

+  "But  either  to  procure  or  maintain  our  own  or  other  liberties  by 
force  of  ai-ms,  or  the  least  violence,  we  can  find  no  warrant  from  the 
Scriptures  of  truth,  in  the  least,  which  is  that  only  and  above  rule  that 
we  walk  by,"  &c. — Declarations,  &c.,  p.  54.  "And  we  further  declare, 
that  as  we  are  a  peaceable  people  upon  the  accounts  of  action,  so  we  look 
upon  it  to  be  our  duty  to  keep  ourselves  from  oaths,  engagements,  and 
covenants,  either  for  or  against  this  or  that  jjerson  whatsoever.  'For 
because  of  swearing  the  land  mourneth.'  .  .  .  And  we  further 
declare,  as  in  the  presence  of  God,  who  is  the  searcher  of  all  hearts,  that 
as  it  hath  been  a  source  of  our  great  trouble  for  a  long  time  to  see  some 
of  those  that  are  of  the  same  faith  and  order  with  us  so  acting :  so  it  is 
now  become  an  overwhelming  burden  upon  om-  souls,  to  see  them  gene- 
rally r\mning  such  a  precipitant  coiu-se  :  by  which  actings  of  theii-s,  the 
mouths  of  all  men  are  opened  against  them,  and  the  tnith  they  pro- 
fess most  ignominiously  branded  and  reproached." — Declaration  of  a  Small 
Society  of  Baptized  Believers,  undergoing  the  name  of  Freewillers, 
pp.  57,  58.  "  His  zeal  is  to  be  limited  (for  matters  of  God's  worship  and 
spiritual  service)  unto  the  rule  of  the  Gospel  as  well  as  other  men ;  for  he 
ia  a  fellow-subject  unto  Christ's  kingdom,  and  hath  but  his  measure  of 
grace  as  other  brethren ;  and  is  as  subject  to  seducement,  and  as  prepos- 
M 


178  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

The  Engagement  was  now  enforced.  All  ministers,  all  mem- 
bers of  the  universities  and  the  great  schools,  with  all  civil 
and  militaiy  servants  of  the  Government,  on  pain  of  leaving 
their  situations,  Avere  ordered  to  take  it.  No  minister  was 
to  be  admitted  to  a  living,  or  sit  in  the  assembly,  or  be 
capable  of  retaining  any  emoluments  in  the  Church,  unless 
withm  six  months  he  qualitied  liimself  by  taking  the  Engage- 
ment in  tlie  presence  of  the  congregation.  The  test  was  a 
heavy^  trial  to  most  of  the  Presbyterian  body.  Many  of 
them  refused  it.  Baxter  preached  and  wrote  against  it.  In 
many  of  the  large  towns  the  excitement  was  great.  They 
declined  the  fasts,  and  some  of  them  closed  their  churches 
on  the  day  of  the  national  thanksgivmg  for  the  Irish 
victories.*  But  their  hostility  was  in  vain.  The  vacant 
churches  were  soon  filled,  if  not  by  men  their  equals  in 
learning,  yet  then-  superiors  in  correct  and  enlarged  views 
of  Christian  doctrine  and  policy,  and  with  more  of  the 
loving  spirit  of  their  common  Lord.  The  Presbyterian 
policy  was  still  recognised  as  the  national  form.  Obvious 
reasons  would,  probably,  justify  the  Pai-liament  in  this 
course. 

The  two  universities  demanded  now  a  vigorous  reform. 
During  the  civil  conflict  Cambridge  had  undoi-gone  a  great 
change.  Episcopacy,  to  a  great  extent,  had  given  place  to 
Presbjiierian  teaching.  Many  of  the  leading  divines  of  this 
sect  had  seats  in  the  halls  of  leai'ning.  Oxford  had  been 
the  stronghold  of  Charles  fur  nearly  four  years.  "  The 
principal  officers  and  heads  of  houses,  together  Avith  the  herd 
of  dissipated  scholars  who  formed  their  bodyguard,  were  not 
only  devoted  to  the  hierarchy,  with  all  its  magnificence  of 
revenue  and  amplitude  of  power,  but  also,  as  an  inseparable 


tei-ous  in  his  zeal  as  others  are ;  and  must  give  his  account  before,  and 
unto  the  Lord  Jesus,  of  all  his  doings  in  the  flesh,  whether  good  or  evil ; 
before  an  impartial  judge,  who  is  no  respecter  of  persons." — Tuthill's 
Mysterious  Kingdom,  p.  48. 
*  Neal,  vol.  ii.,  p.  320. 


THE    COMMONWEALTH.  179 

member  of  tlic  same  establishment,  to  tlic  prei-ogatives  of 
tlie  king  in  their  hxrgest  sense,  and  to  the  doctrine  of  passive 
obedience."*  Their  loyalty  was  most  exuberant.  Theii'  plate 
had  been  melted  down  for  the  use  of  Charles.  Their  halls 
had  echoed  A\-ith  the  tread  of  the  warriors,  and  rung  with 
the  boisterous  mii-th  of  the  troops;  and  their  schools  had 
Iteen  converted  into  granaries  and  depots  for  the  material  of 
war.t  This  stronghold  of  despotic  teaching,  as  well  as  that 
seated  on  the  Cam,  was  now  to  be  visited.  The  spirit  of 
I'eform  which  entered  them  was  lasting  and  firm.  Other 
minds  must  pour  instruction  into  the  rising  manhood  of 
England,  and  other  doctrines  must  be  taught  within  their 
classic  walls.  Liberty  must  flourish  where  despotism  had 
reigned,  and  I'eligion  be  taught  where  form  and  empty  cere- 
mony had  prevailed.  Cromwell  had,  during  liis  expedition 
to  Scotland,  been  made  Chancellor  of  the  Univei-sity  of 
Oxford. 

Both  these  celebi-ated  schools  now  underwent  some  change. 
Presbyterians  gave  place  to  others.  Owen,  who  had  accepted 
the  deanery  of  Christ  Church,  was  now  made  Vice-Chan- 
cellor.  Dr.  Goodwin  Avas  raised  to  the  Presidency  of  Mag- 
dalen, whilst  Charnock,  Gale,  Howe,  and  others,  filled 
subordinate  situations.  Only  one  Baptist  do  we  find  raised 
to  distinction.  Dell,  the  chaplain  of  Fairfax,  was  made 
]\Iastcr   of   Caius  College,   Cambridge.:}:     The   influence  of 


*  Goodwin's  Comniomvealth,  vol.  iii.,  p.  85. 

+  Ibid,  vol.  iii. ,  p.  84. 

t  Dell  thus  justifies  lus  coDnexion  with  the  university,  though  he  had 
spoken  in  very  strong  language  against  many  of  its  practices:  "But  as 
by  the  providence  of  God  alone,  I  have  Leen  brought  to  that  relation  in 
which  I  now  stand,  and  continue  in  it,  against  the  wiles  and  workings  of 
man}-,  so,  through  his  good  pleasure,  I  }\'ill  remain  till  he  shall  otherwise 
dispose  of  me ;  and  during  my  sojourn  with  them  I  will  not  fail  to  testify 
against  their  evil,  and  endeavour  to  win  all  those  whom  God  shall  per- 
suaxle  to  receive  his  truth,  from  heathenism  to  the  Gospel,  and  from 
Antichrist  to  Christ."— Works,  vol.  ii.,  p.  11.5.  It  is  difficult  to  know 
wth  what  class  of  theologians  to  associate  Dell.  Rutherford  treats  him 
as  an  Antinomian,  Familist,  &c.,  &c.      "H.  Denne,  an  high-altar  man, 


180  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

these  appointments  was  felt.  Presbyterians  viewed  the 
change  with  gi'eat  dislike.  The  morality  and  chai-acter  of 
these  institutions  rose  with  rapidity.  Science  and  the  arts, 
literature  and  religion,  found  within  their  walls  a  safe  and 
genial  retreat.  Men  of  the  higliest  rank  shed  the  splendour 
of  then-  genius  around  these  time-honoured  schools,  whilst 
they  sent  forth  to  the  world  a  race  of  men  of  the  very 
highest  eminence.  No  one  can  impartially  trace  the  history 
of  these  establishments  during  tlie  period  over  which  this 
sketch  extends,  without  admitting  all  this.'"' 

This  altered  policy  of  the  Government  soon  told  on  the 
Baptists.  Wales  now  felt  their  influence.  Powell,  Cradock, 
and  theii*  brethren,  had  succeeded  in  establishing  many 
churches,  but  of  a  mixed  character,  f  Under  tlie  operations 
of  the  commissions  referred  to  above,  many  a  wide  and 
effectual  door  had  been  opened  for  the  preaching  of  the 

a  bower  at  the  syllables  of  the  name  Jesus,  and  conformed  to  all  the 
abominable  late  narrations  introduced  by  Canterbury,  who  also  opposed 
the  Remonstrance  and  Petition  of  the  well-affected,  pleading  for  a 
riddance  from  Episcopacy,  ceremonies,  and  other  con-uptions,  and  is  now 
a  rigid  Arrainian,  and  an  enemy  to  free  grace,  an  Anabaptist,  an  Anti- 
nomiau.  To  these  join  Paul  Hobson,  who  speaks  more  warily  than  the 
sects.  ...  To  these  add  Mr.  Dell,  in  his  sermon  before  the  House  of 
Commons,  whose  noble  ancestors  coidd  not  have  endured  Familism, 
Socinianism,  or  the  like  preached  in  their  ears." — Rutherford's  Survey  of 
the  Spiritual  Antichrist,  p.  193.  "Denne  and  Moore,  who  were  both 
Arminians  and  Antinomians." — Rutherford's  Survey,  part  ii.,  p.  16. 
Many  of  his  notions  approximate  closely  to  the  religious  dogmas  of  the 
Friends. 

*  Clarendon's  testimony  may  be  accepted  on  this  matter.  Referring  to 
Oxford,  he  says  :  "It  yielded  a  harvest  of  extraordinary  good  and  sound 
knowledge,  in  all  parts  of  learning :  and  many  who  were  wickedly  intro- 
duced applied  themselves  to  the  study  of  learning  and  the  practices  of 
virtue.  So  that  when  it  pleased  God  to  bring  King  Charles  back  to  his 
throne,  he  found  that  universil^  abounding  in  excellent  learning,  and 
little  inferior  to  what  it  was  before  the  desolation." — History  of  Reb., 
vol.  iii. 

f  Powell's  views  on  baptism  are  thus  expressed:  "Water  baptism  is  a 
solemn  significant  dipping  into,  or  washing  with  water  the  body  in  (or 
into)  the  name  of  the  Father,  &c.  (Matt,  xxviii.  19).  It  signifies  the 
death,  the  burial,  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  also  the  spiritual  cleansing 


THE    COMMONWEALTH.  181 

Gospel.*  Baptist  cliurches,  separate  from  these,  were  now 
foiTQed.  Ilston,  near  Swansea,  appears  to  claim  the  honour 
of  the  fii'st-born  of  a  class  which  have  multiplied  with 
almost  unparalleled  rapidity  since  that  time.  It  was  foxxnded 
about  1649.  This  is  the  earliest  notice  of  it.  Mr.  Myles, 
the  pastor,  was  a  person  of  gi-eat  zeal  and  success  in  the 
ministry.  Other  churches  were  soon  gathered.  Persecution 
compelled  tliis  excellent  man  to  flee  to  the  American  conti- 
nent. Brancli  cliurches  were  formed  at  A-arious  out-stations. 
From  a  fragment  of  the  Church-book  of  tliis  mother  church 
we  And  "  that  members  of  the  two  churches  of  the  Hay  and 
Llanafran  assembled  at  Ilston,  the  6th  and  7th  days  of  the 
9th  month,  1650,  who  were  sent  there  by  the  said  churches 
to  the  brethren  at  Ilston,  to  consult  concerning  such  busi- 
ness as  was  then,  by  God's  assistance,  determined,  and 
expressed  as  follows :  The  brethren,  previously  weigldng  the 
great  scarcity  of  ministers  that  will  soundly  hold  forth  the 
word  of  tinith  in  Cannai-thenshire,  and  the  seasonable  oppor- 

and  washing  of  justification  and  regeneration  (or  sanctification),  together 
with  the  baptism  or  pouring  forth  of  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
(Rom.  vi.  3,  4,  5;  Col.  ii.  12;  Heb.  x.  22).  Tliough  baptism  be  not  abso- 
lutely necessary  to  salvation,  yet,  being  commanded  by  Christ,  it  is  the 
duty  of  all  professing  and  visible  believers  and  penitent  persons,  men  and 
women,  to  be  baptized  once,  and  that  upon  their  fir.st  believing  and  con- 
version, and  liefore  they  enter  into  a  visible  church  or  partake  of  the 
Lord's  Supper  (Acts  ii.  41,  42).  Yet  it  is  not  baptism,  but  an  interest  in 
Christ,  that  gives  a  man  a  right  to  either.  Neither  is  it  the  proper  work 
of  baptism  to  confer  or  work  gi-ace,  but  to  seal,  confirm,  and  increase  it 
(1  Pet.  iii.  21).  Much  less  are  all  those  that  are  baptized  true  believers, 
and  saved  (John  iii.  3,  7 ;  Acts  viii.  13,  23).  But  in  this  of  baptism,  as  in 
many  other  cases,  difference  of  persuasion  and  practice  may  well  consist 
with  brotherly  love  and  Christian  communion  (Phil.  iii.  15;  Rom.  xiv,, 
&c.)."  Mr.  Powell  also  held  the  laying  on  of  hands  on  the  baptized,  and 
the  anointing  the  sick  with  oil,  as  ordinances  of  the  Gospel  (Jas.  v.  14, 15. 
Life,  pp.  35,  36,  41). 

*  "The  scandalous  and  ignorant  ministers  were  ejected.  Instead  of 
these,  150  good  preachers  were  planted  in  Wales,  most  of  whom  preached 
three  or  four  times  a  week.  Six  preachers  were  appointed  to  intinerate 
in  each  of  the  six  Welsh  counties.  These  men  laboured  with  great  zeal 
in  their  work,  and  great  changes  marked  the  character  of  the  population." 
— Orme's  Life  of  Owen,  p.  124. 


182  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

tunity  now  afforded  Ijy  tlie  providence  of  God  for  tlie  propa- 
gation of  the  truth  in  those  parts,  do  judge  that  brother 
David  Davis  shall  henceforth  endeavour  to  preach  two 
first  days  of  every  month  in  Cannaii;hen  town,  or  there- 
about; and  that  brother  Myles  shall  preach  that  way  one 
fii'st  day  in  every  two  months ;  and  that  brother  Prosser 
shall  preach  there  one  first  day  in  every  two  months;  and 
these  brethren  are  desired  to  consult  and  agi-ee  among  them- 
selves when  it  may  be  most  convenient  for  eveiy  one  of 
them  to  be  there.  And  upon  the  like  serious  considerations 
of  tlie  present  condition  of  our  brethren  at  Llanafran,  it  is, 
by  the  brethren  here,  judged  convenient  that  a  constant 
meeting  be  there  kept  by  the  churches  until  the  Lord  shall 
raise  up  more  able  men  among  themselves,  and  that  brother 
David  Davis  be  desired,  to  be  there  present  as  often  as  he 
possibly  can;  but  wlien  he  is  necessitated  to  be  at  Carmarthen, 
that  our  brethren  of  the  Hay  are  desu'ed  to  take  care  to  send 
either  brother  Prosser  or  brother  Thomas  "Watkins,  or  some 
other  whom  they  shall  judge  convenient."  More  than  this. 
These  brethren  agreed,  "  That  these  ministers  should  be 
assisted  by  the  churches,  and  contributions  made  for  that 
purpose."  For  that  year,  it  was  settled  that  each  of  the 
three  churches  should  collect  £10  among  themselves,  in  the 
whole,  £30,  and  a  brother  in  each  church  was  then  named 
to  take  care  of  the  contributions.  "  The  first  collection  to  be 
made  as  soon  as  convenient  after  that  agreement,  without 
burdening  any  of  the  brethren."  Such  were  the  decisions 
of  the  first  Baptist  Convention  in  the  Principality.  They 
were  worthy  of  the  purest  age  of  Christianity.  David  Davis 
had  been  a  minister  of  a  church,  on  the  election  of  the 
parishioners,  in  1645.  He  appears  to  have  united  with  the 
church  at  Ilston  about  the  close  of  1649  or  1650. 

About  the  same  time  we  may  date  the  origin  of  the 
Associations  in  the  Principality,  which  form  so  distinguished 
a  feature  in  the  ecclesiastical  polity  of  our  Welsh  brethren. 
Nothing  of  the  kind  as  yet  existed  amongst  the  English 


THE   COMMONWEALTH.  183 

Baptists.  In  this  dawn  of  fraternal  intercourse  between 
separate  chui-ches,  we  not  only  ascertain  the  fact,  but  the 
useful  objects  they  were  intended  to  accomplish.  The  doc- 
trine of  laying  on  of  hands  and  singing  had  already  reached 
these  bi-ethren.  Powell  taught  both.  The  record  from  which 
we  draw  our  information  tells  us  that  "the  four  churches  of 
Ilston,  Hay,  Llanafran,  and  Carmarthen,  met  at  Carmarthen 
the  19th  of  lir.st  month,  1651,  and  appointed  some  meetings 
to  be  at  Galligan.  Questions  concerning  singing  of  psalms 
and  layiug  on  of  hands  were  propo.sed  to  be  considered  by  the 
churches."  During  this  year,  a  friendly  intercourse  was 
opened  with  some  of  the  London  brethren.  In  a  letter  to 
the  church  in  Broad  Street,  they  give  information  of  their 
present  state,  and  ask  the  advice  of  the  bretlu-en  on  various 
points  relating  to  their  future  movements.  The  brethren  say 
Lu  reply  : — "  Eeganling  the  distance  of  your  habitations,  we 
advise,  if  God  hath  endowed  you  with  gifts  whereby  you 
may  edify  one  another,  and  keep  up  the  order  and  ministry 
of  the  church  of  Christ,  you  may  divide  into  more  particular 
congregations,  but  with  mutual  consent ;  and  if  there  be 
among  you  those  who  can,  in  some  measure,  take  the  over- 
sight of  you  in  the  Lord,  but  not  else."'"'  Following  this 
ad^dce,  the  churches  multiplied,  and  throughout  the  Princi- 
pality Baptist  principles  have  spread  much  more  rapidly 
than  in  any  other  part  of  the  empire. 

From  the  magnificent  mountain  scenery  of  the  Principality, 
and  the  apostolic  simplicity  of  these  brethren,  the  reader 
must  now  turn  to  a  border  county.  Not  far  from  the  northern 
portions  of  the  county  were  the  towns  of  Bewdley  and  Kid- 
derminster. At  this  time  the  pulpits  were  occupied, — the 
former  by  J.  Tombes,t  the  latter  by  R.  Baxtei-.  Their  inter- 
course  was   frequent   and    fraternal.     They  expressed   the 

*  Thomas's  History  of  the  Baptist  Associations  in  Wales,  pp.  6-8. 

t  Tombes  was  a  pluralist.  "To  be  parson  of  Ross,  and  vicar  of 
Lemster,  and  preacher  of  Bewdley,  and  master  of  the  hospital  at  Led- 
bury," kc—  Baxter's  Infant  Church  Membership,  p.  203.    London,  1656. 


184  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

warmest  affection  for  each  other,  not  only  as  men,  but  as 
ministers  of  Christ.  "  For  my  reverend  and  much-honoured 
brother,  Mr.  Eichard  Baxter,"  was  the  address  of  Mr. 
Tombes ;  whilst  the  great  Pi'esbyterian  responded  to  his 
"reverend  and  much-honoured  brother,  Mr.  Tombes,  preacher 
of  the  Gospel  at  Bewdley."  The  convictions  of  the  former  on 
the  subject  of  baptism  were  strong.  He  had  suffered  for  them. 
Those  of  the  latter  were  very  loose  and  undefined.  The 
former  felt  it  his  duty  to  urge  obedience  to  Christ's  com- 
mand on  the  attention  of  liis  hearers;  the  latter  had  hesi- 
tated to  sprinkle  an  infant.*  Mr.  Tombes  had  preached  on 
the  subject  in  a  series  of  sermons.  Some  of  the  Mends  of 
Mr.  Baxter  travelled  to  Bewdley  to  take  notes  of  the  sermons, 
and  report  them  to  him.  Lettei'S  between  the  chiefs  followed, 
but  they  only  augmented  the  difiiculty.  The  magistrates  of 
the  town,  and  some  of  the  ministers  there  and  in  the  locality, 
urged  their  chief  to  encounter  the  Baptist.  The  challenge 
was  given.  On  the  1st  of  January,  1650,  the  wordy  con- 
flict was  to  begin.  Tombes  was  strong  and  vigorous.  His 
mind  was  replenished  with  all  the  learning  of  the  schools, 
and  he  was  not  unused  to  controvei-sy.  Baxter  was  the  Don 
Quixote  of  his  age.  "A  lover  of  peace  and  concord,"  yet 
always  in  strife.  "A  friend  of  unity  in  the  Church,"  yet  full 
of  domination  and  bitterness  in  the  extreme.  Modest  almost 
to  excess,  yet  always  disputing  with  his  brethren.  Upon 
the  verge  of  the  grave,  he  was  meditating  on  and  composing 
the  "  Saint's  Everlasting  Rest."  His  own  pen  shall  present 
him  to  our  readers  at  the  present  time:  "I  had  importuned 
God  in  my  prayers,  as  I  was  able,  long  before,  that  if  I 
were  mistaken  he  would  show  me  my  error;  and  if  Mr. 
Tombes  had  the  truth  on  his  side,  that  he  would  not  sirffer 
me  to  resist  it,  or  speake  a  word  against  it.  And  the  more 
I  prayed,  the  more  I  was  animated  to  the  work.     I  had 

*  "For  my  part,  I  may  say  with  Mr.  Blake,  that  I  never  saw  a  child 
sprinkled ;  but  all  that  I  have  seen  baptised  had  water  poured  on  them. 
and  80  were  washed."— Infant  Church  Membership,  p.  134. 


THE    COMMONWEALTH.  185 

been  so  weak  and  pained  long  before,  that  I  was  scarce  able 
to  rise  and  walk  about  the  very  day  before,  yet  did  I  resolve 
to  go,  if  I  were  able  to  ride  and  speake ;  and  when  the  time 
came  I  was  eased  mucli  of  all  my  pains ;  and  whereas  I  can 
hardly  on  any  Lord's  day  speake  above  an  hour  without  the 
prostration  of  my  strength  and  extreme  languishing  of  my 
body,  nor  could  scarcely  take  the  air  without  taking  a 
dangerous  cold,  it  pleased  God  then,  in  the  midst  of  winter, 
to  enable  me  to  continue  tlie  dispute  in  the  open  church,  and 
that  fasting,  from  before  ten  of  the  clock  in  the  morning  till 
between  four  and  five,  without  any  of  my  usual  infirmities, 
and  had  more  ease  from  them  a  fortnight  after  than  of  many 
months :  wliich  those  that  know  me  do  confidently  believe 
was  from  the  direct  encouraging  hand  of  God."  In  the 
midst  of  some  excitement  and  interruption,  the  discussion 
continued  seven  or  eight  hours.  As  most  verbal  disputes 
terminate,  each  party  claimed  the  victory.  Mr.  Baxter 
pi-inted  the  substance  of  his  arguments,  at  the  request  of 
many.  His  book  now  lies  before  lis.  It  is  a  fair  specimen  of 
his  power.  His  ingenuity  was  almost  unparalleled.  A  few 
sentences  will  show  the  spiiit  of  the  man,  and  the  mode  of 
his  proceeding.  His  arguments  are  as  singular  as  his  slan- 
ders are  unmerited.  "Argt.  1.  All  that  are  Christ's  disciples 
ordinarily  ought  to  be  baptized ;  but  some  infants  are  Christ's 
disciples:  therefore  some  infants  ordinarily  ought  to  be 
baptized."  "Argt.  21.  That  doctrine  which  maketh  all 
infants  to  be  members  of  the  visible  kingdom  of  the  devil 
is  false  doctrine  :  but  that  doctrine  which  denieth  any 
infant  to  be  a  member  of  the  visible  church  doth  make  them 
all  members  of  the  visible  kingdom  of  the  devH :  therefore 
it  is  false."  Only  one  other.  "Argt.  23.  If  an  infant 
wei-e  head  of  the  visible  church,  then  infants  may  be  mem- 
bers; but  Christ,  an  infant,  was  head  of  the  church  :  therefore 
infants  may  be  members."  But  from  his  arguments  let  us  look 
at  his  slanders.  Mr.  Baxter  not  only  throws  the  Mimster 
fanatics  at  his  adversary,  but  reiterates,  what  the  largest 


186  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

cliarity  can  scarcely  suppose  him  ignorant  of,  the  calumny  of 
candidates  being  baptized  naked.  "  My  seventh  argument 
is  also  against  another  wickedness  in  their  manner  of  bapti- 
zing, which  is,  their  dipping  persons  naked,  as  is  very  xisual 
with  many  of  them ;  or  next  to  naked,  as  is  usual  with  the 
modestest  of  them,  as  I  have  heard.  Against  which  I  argue 
thus :  If  it  be  a  breach  of  the  Seventh  Commandment,  Tho^i 
shalt  not  commit  adultery,  ordinarily  to  baptize  the  naked, 
then  it  is  intolerable  wickedness,  and  not  God's  command- 
ment ;  but  it  is  a  breach  of  the  Seventh  Commandment  ordi- 
narily to  baptize  naked:  therefore  it  is  intolerable  wicked- 
ness, and  not  God's  commandment."  This  saintly  man  thus 
dwells  on  it.  He  was  meditating  on  the  "  Saint's  Rest" 
about  this  time.  "  If  Mx\  Tombes  could  baptize  naked  all 
the  maids  in  Bewdley,  and  think  it  no  immodesty,  he  hath 
lost  his  common  ingenuity  and  modesty  with  the  truth." 
"  Would  it  be  no  snare  or  temptation  to  Mr.  Tombes  to  be 
frequently  employed  in  baptizing  maids  naked]  Let  him 
search  and  judge."  "Would  not  vain  young  men  come  to 
a  baptizing  to  see  the  nakedness  of  maids,  and  make  a  mere 
jest  and  sport  of  iti"  In  another  part  he  says:  "If  you 
would  be  i-uled  by  me,  you  should  not  endeavour  to  intro- 
duce into  the  church  a  custom  for  any  young  minister  or 
neighbour  so  much  as  to  look  on  a  bathing  Bathsheba  or 
Susannah,  Ijut  to  those  Tvdthout  the  name  of  a  church  and  a 
stew,  and  Presbyter  and  Panderer,  a  Christian  and  a  forni- 
cator, to  pure  Simonians."'"' 

Mr,  Tombes  had  urged  that  the  water  need  not  be  cold. 
Baxter  replied  :  "  But  then,  he  forsaketh  the  generality  of 
his  partners  in  this  opinion,  who,  so  far  as  we  can  leai'n, 
usually  baptize  in  rivers  and  ponds.  And  if  they  can  no 
better  agree  among  themselves,  we  have  no  reason  to  be 
hasty  in  believing  them."  Kicher  still  is  the  following : 
"And  his  warm  bath  would  be  dangerous  to  many  persons. 
And  where  shall  this  bath  be  prepared?     If  in  private,  it 

*  Infant  Church  Membership,  pp.  136, 137, 245. 


THE   COMMONWEALTH.  187 

will  scarcely  be  a  solemn  engaging  act.  If  in  the  meeting 
place  of  the  church,  then  it  will  take  up  no  small  room,  and 
require  no  small  stir  to  have  a  bathing  place  and  water 
wherein  to  dip  people  overhead.  2.  If  they  do  not  run 
home  quickly,  before  they  are  well  engaged,  the  hot  bath 
will  be  turned  into  a  cold  one  to  them,  and  make  them 
repent  this  badge  of  repentance,  except  they  will  have  all 
things  ready,  and  be  brought  to  bed  also  in  the  church 
before  the  peojile.""' 

This  is  a  fair  sample  of  the  way  in  which  the  doctrine  and 
practices  of  our  brethren  were  treated.  God's  judgment  had 
fallen  on  them.  Hated  of  men,  the  indignation  of  heaven 
was  not  less  clear,  says  Baxter,  t 

In  1652,  various  parties  in  Leicestershire  presented  a 
petition  to  the  House,  asking  for  liberty  of  conscience :  and 
on  the  2nd  of  April  following  a  similar  one  was  presented, 
entitled,  "  The  humble  petition  and  representation  of  several 
churches  of  God  in  London,  commonly,  though  falsely, 
called  Anabaptists,"  which  was  gracioiisly  accepted.  J 

CromAvell  always  entered  on  his  engagements  in  the  spirit 
of  enlightened  piety.  Every  enterprise  was  sanctified  by  devo- 
tion. His  dependence  on  God  was  always  recognised.  Before 
entering  on  his  arduous  woi'k  in  Ireland,  such  a  scene  was 
witnessed  as  seldom  sanctifies  the  palace  of  the  great  or  the 
council  chamber  of  the  warrior.  Before  embarking  at  Mil- 
ford,  a  day  of  fasting  and  prayer  was  observed.  These 
solemn  occasions  were  now  frequent.  Their  influence  was 
benignant  and  elevating.  The  form  of  dependence  on  God, 
if  not  its  vital  power,  met  you  everywhere  in  the  camp  and 
in  the  field.  1|     On  this  occasion  three  ministers  led  the  devo- 

*  Infant  Church  Membership,  p.  135. 

+  The  reader  will  find  Baxter's  proofs  of  this,  as  he  thinks,  on  p.  147. 

X  Vide  Christian  Moderator ;  or,  Persecution  for  Religion  Condemned. 
By  William  Birckley.     Part  ii. ,  p.  4.     1652. 

II  "No  man  swears  but  he  pays  his  12d.  If  he  be  drunk,  he  is  set  in 
the  stocks,  or  worse.  If  one  calls  the  other  Roundhead,  he  is  cashiered, 
insomuch  that  the  counties  whence  they  come  leap  for  joy  of  them,  and 


188  EAKLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

tions  of  the  assembly.  Then  the  mighty  chief  expounded 
some  portions  of  the  Divine  Word  suitable  to  the  occasion, 
and  then  Colonels  Gough  and  Harrison  followed  in  the  same 
strain.*  Interested  in  the  spii'itual  welfare  of  the  troops, 
and  aiming  at  the  diifusion  of  right  views  of  religion, 
wherever  he  went  his  chaplain  always  attended  him,  and 
sometimes  he  selected  as  his  companions  men  of  the  highest 
moral  worth  and  distinguished  talents.  The  policy  of  this 
Avill  be  evident  to  every  thoughtful  reader.  Dr.  Owen  was 
honoured,  by  command  of  the  Parliament,  to  attend  the 
general.  In  the  same  train,  probably  as  chaplain  to  one  of 
the  colonels  or  regiments,  was  Thomas  Patient,  the  co-pastor 
of  William  Kiffin.  It  is  probable  that,  in  that  fiercely 
Romish  country,  the  doctrines  held  by  Patient  and  his 
brethren  were  unknown.  He  was  a  man  of  zeal  and  great 
moral  worth.  Fixing  on  Dublin  as  the  seat  of  his  opera- 
tions, he  soon  gathered  a  church  in  that  city,  and  by  the  aid 
of  other  brethren,  in  a  comparatively  short  time  other  cities 
were  blessed  with  churches  of  our  faith.  C.  Blackwood  was 
in  Ireland  about  this  period,  and  laboured  with  some  success 
at  Wexford.  In  1653,  churches  existed  in  Dublin,  Water- 
ford,  Clonmel,  Kilkenny,  Cork,  Limerick,  Wexford,  Carrick- 


come  in  and  join  with  them.  How  happy  were  it  if  all  the  forces  were 
thus  disciplined ! "— D' Aubigne's  Protectorate,  p.  65. 

"'  Penalties  for  Public  Swearing. — A  lord  of  any  degree  to  be  fined  30s.; 
a  baronet  or  knight,  20^. ;  an  esquire,  10s. ;  a  gentleman,  6s.  8d. ;  and  all 
inferiors,  3s.  id.  Double  for  the  second,  and  so  on  to  the  ninth,  and  for 
the  tenth,  to  be  bound  for  their  good  behaviour.  On  women  the  like 
penalties.  A  wife  or  widow,  to  pay  according  to  the  quality  of  her  hus- 
band; a  maiden,  that  of  her  father.  Penalties  recoverable  by  distress 
and  sale  of  goods,  and  in  default  thereof,  the  party,  if  above  twelve  years 
of  age,  to  be  set  in  the  stocks;  if  under,  to  be  publicly  whipt." — 1650. 
Parliamentary  Histoiy,  vol.  iii. ,  p.  1351. 

*  We  have  given  evidence  already  of  the  devout  spirit  of  these  hardy 
warriors,  but  we  cannot  forbear  adding  the  testimony  of  the  great  Chilling- 
worth  here:  "I  observe,"  he  says,  "a  great  deal  of  piety  in  the  com- 
manders and  soldiers  of  the  Parliament  army.  I  confess  their  discourse 
and  behaviour  do  speak  them  Christians.  But  I  can  see  little  of  God  or 
godliness  in  our  men." — Life,  p.  331, 


THE   COMMONWEALTH.  189 

fergus,  and  Kerry.  Mo.st  of  these  })laces  were  strongholds 
of  Rome,  and  the  members  composing  these  congregations 
■were  probably  drawn  from  the  troops  of  the  Commonwealth. 
Ivimey  has  given  some  corresj)ondence  from  these  churches 
to  the  churches  in  London.*  Patient  and  his  brethren  will 
come  under  our  notice  in  a  subsequent  page. 

There  are  allusions  in  this  correspondence  to  churches  in 
Scotland  as  well  :is  Wales.  The  origin  of  the  former  cannot, 
in  modem  times,  be  traced  to  an  earlier  period  than  Crom- 
well's campaign  in  these  northern  regions.  Tnie  it  is,  there 
were  churches  already  existing  in  the  north  of  England. 
Broughton,  Hexham,  if  not  Newcastle,  had  congregations 
of  Baptists.  But  of  their  influence  beyond  their  own  circle 
we  know  nothing.f  "The  principal  officers,"  says  a  writer 
of  this  time,  "  in  different  regiments  of  horse  and  foot, 
became  Baptists,  pax-ticularly  in  Oliver  Cromwell's  own 
regiment,  when  he  was  General  of  all  the  Parliament  forces, 
and  in  the  Duke  of  Albemarle's  (Geo.  Monk),  when  he  was 
General  of  all  the  English  forces  in  Scotland."  Religion  in 
Scotland  at  this  time  was  very  low.  The  form  existed,  but 
the  life  was  going.  There  were  splendid  sepulchres  in  which 
truth  was  entombed.  From  a  multitiide  of  proofs  lying 
before  us,  our  space  allows  us  only  to  select  one.  It  shall 
be  that  of  H.  Binning,  a  man  of  saintly  character :  "  Set 
aside  your  public  sei-vices,"  says  he,  ''and  professions;  and  is 
there  anything  behind,  in  your  conversations,  but  drunken- 
ness, lying,  swearing,  contention,  envy,  -wrath,  covetousness, 
and  such  like?  Have  not  the  multittide  been  as  evil,  and 
carried  themselves  as  blamelessly,  as  the  tlu-ong  of  our  visible 
church?  Wliat  have  ye  more  than  they?  What,  then,  are 
the  most  part  of  you?  Ye  neither  bow  the  knee  in  secret 
nor  in  your  families.''^     The  condition  of  such  a  people 

*  History,  vol.  i.,  pp.  240,  252. 

+  Douglas's  History  of  the  Baptist  Churches  in  the  North  of  England, 
chap.  L,  p.  3,  &:c.,  &c. 

X  Works,  p.  546.    Vide  Rutherford's  Testimony.     Kiiion's  Hist,  of  the 


190  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

would  excite  the  sympathy  jind  call  forth  the  efforts  of  our 
brethren.  Upon  them  the  spirit  of  the  great  ]\Iaster  rested. 
Both  the  officers  and  men  in  the  humbler  ranks  felt  for  them, 
and,  as  opportunity  presented  itself,  when  free  from  their 
warlike  duties,  they  preached  the  Gospel  to  them,  and  sought 
to  give  their  Presbyterian  countrymen  clearer  notions  of 
the  nature  of  Christ's  kingdom,  and  the  individuality  of 
religion.  Cromwell's  dealings  with  the  Scotch  place  this 
beyond  all  doubt.  There  is  a  singularly  interesting  testi- 
mony by  Burnet  to  tlie  conduct  of  our  brethren :  "  I 
remember  well  of  three  regiments  coming  to  Aberdeen. 
There  was  an  order  and  discipline,  and  a  face  of  gravity 
and  piety  among  them,  that  amazed  all  people.  Most  of 
them  were  Independents  and  Anabaptists.  They  were  all 
gifted  men,  and  preached  as  they  were  moved."*  The 
efforts  of  these  bi-ethren  were  successful.  Converts  were 
won  to  the  faith,  and  at  an  early  period  of  the  war  a 
church  was  formed  at  Leith,  which  had  fraternal  intercourse 
with  the  one  at  Hexham.  In  other  parts  of  the  country, 
as  it  was  brought  under  the  authority  of  the  Commonwealth, 
they  acted  with  the  same  zeal.  An  example  is  before  us 
which  we  quote  from  one  of  the  News  Letters  of  that 
period:  "There  was  a  dispute  begun  at  Cupar  in  Fife,  on 
Tuesday  last,  between  one  Mr.  Brown,  chaplain  to  Colonel 
Fail-fax's  regiment,  and  one  James  Wood,  a  Scotch  ministei'. 
Many  people  were  present,  but  the  discourse  referred  till 
Thursday  following,  upon  these  three  heads,  viz. :  1  st.  Whether 
Adam,  by  his  sin,  contracted  in  mankind  a  temporal  death 
only  or  a  spiritual  and  eternal  death.  2nd.  Whether  infant 
baptism  be  groimded  on  the  Word  of  God  or  no.    3rd.  Con- 


Clmrcli  of  Scotland,  p.  54.  A  short  time  before,  "the  clergy  of  Scotland 
had  procured  strict  orders  from  the  Commissioners  of  the  State  for  the 
persecuting  of  the  sectaiies,  and  have  a  great  arbitrary  power  against 
them ;  and  they  are  purged  out  of  the  army  as  well  as  the  malignants." 
— AVhitelocke.  Apud,  1G50. 
*  Own  Times,  vol.  i.,  p.  58. 


THE    COilMONWEALTU.  191 

cernlng  the  redemption,"  &e*  "Their  zeal,"  says  Mr. 
Douglas,  "  was  increased  when  Monk  left  the  army  to 
command  the  fleet  against  the  Dutch,  in  the  beginning  of 
1G53,  leaving  IMajor-General  Robert  Lilburne  in  command 
of  the  troops  in  Scotland.  General  Lilburne  himself  was  a 
Baptist,  and  gave  to  the  Baptists  eveiy  facility  to  promote 
their  peculiar  views  of  Divine  truth,  and  any  Baptist  muiis- 
ter  from  England  who  A-isited  Scotland  met  with  his  warm 
regard  and  especial  protection."  Mr.  Douglas  gives  examples 
of  tliis.  Lilburne  was  anxious  to  employ  gifted  brethren  as 
chaplains.  For  his  own  family  he  wanted  one,  whilst  "there 
were  divers  honest  Scotch  people  that  longed  to  be  gathered 
into  the  same  Gospel  order  as  with  themselves,  but  Ahey 
wanted  a  faithful  pastor,  "f  These  movements  we  must 
leave  for  the  present.  In  a  subsequent  page  we  shall  have 
more  to  say  about  them. 

The  Constitution  had  undergone  various  changes  during 
this  period.  Circumstances  demanded,  and,  perhaps,  fully 
justified  them.  The  Long  Parliament  had  been  dismissed.  In 
1G53  another  Parliament  wixs  called.  The  summons  was  by 
order  of  the  Lord  General.  Only  150  persons  were  requested 
to  attend  the  Council  Chamber  at  Whitehall.  Amongst  the 
individuals  was  Mr.  Praise  God  Barebones,  by  whose  name 
this  Parliament  has  been  designated.  He  was  pastor,  as  we 
have  seen,  of  one  of  the  London  churches.  The  Assembly, 
though  only  short-lived,  passed  some  important  measures, 
alike  tending  to  the  social  and  religious  improvement  of  the 
nation.  We  can  only  indicate  one  or  two  as  bearing  some- 
what on  the  design  of  this  work.  An  Act  was  passed, 
August  24th,  1653,  and  which  continued  in  force  till  the 
Restoration.     It  recognised  marriage  as  a  mere  civil  con- 


*  A  Perfect  Diurnal,  No.  150,  October  25,  1652. 

t  Douglas,  pp.  :-53,  34.  "The  fact  was,  the  army  in  Scotland  had  been 
already  filled  with  these  people  by  Lilburne,  a  fanatic  Anabaptist,  who 
had  been  left  in  command  there."— Life  of  Monk,  by  Guizot,  p.  76.  Note 
by  the  translator,  J.  S.  "Wortley. 


192  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

tract,  and  provided  tliat  the  "  age  for  a  man  to  consent  unto 
marriage  shall  be  sixteen  years,  and  the  age  of  a  woman 
fourteen  years,  and  not  before."  It  required  proof  of  the 
consent  of  the  parents  or  guardians  if  either  party  were  under 
the  age  of  twenty-one.  The  follomng  is  the  form,  without 
a  ring :  "  The  man  to  be  married,  taking  the  woman  to  be 
mai-ried  by  the  hand,  shall  plainly  and  distinctly  pronovince 
these  words:  I,  A  B,  do  here,  in  the  presence  of  God,  the 
Searcher  of  all  hearts,  take  thee,  C  D,  to  be  my  wedded 
wife;  and  do  also,  in  the  presence  of  God,  and  before  these 
witnesses,  promise  to  be  unto  thee  a  loving  and  faithfid  hus- 
band." The  same  form  is  used  by  the  woman,  except  her 
promise  to  be  an  obedient  wife.  No  other  marriage,  from  the 
29th  day  of  September,  1653,  was  to  be  held  as  a  legal  one.* 
Measures  were  also  taken  for  improving  the  Chancery  Courts. 
Tithes  were  discussed;  and  the  right  of  presentation  to 
Church  livings  was  taken  away.  But  the  intelligence  and 
clearsightedness  of  the  House  was  manifested  especially  in 
its  attempts  to  form  the  vast  and  varied  acts  of  the  Legisla- 
tui'e  into  a  simple  and  consistent  code.  The  project  was  a 
noble  one.  To  a  committee  the  whole  question  was  refen-ed. 
Upon  their  task  the  members  entered,  and  had  proceeded 
with  zeal  and  success  in  their  great  enterprise,  when  their 
labours  and  existence  were  closed  by  the  hand  which  had 
called  them  into  being.  The  little  Parliament  was  dissolved. 
There  was  much  of  public  \irtue  in  this  Assembly.  They 
possessed  no  common  portion  of  that  wisdom  and  penetra- 

*  Burton's  Diary,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  38,  39.  The  cliairman  of  the  committee 
on  this  bill,  Mi-.  Nichols,  was  a  Baptist.  "  Three  several  Lord's  days  then 
next  following,  at  the  close  of  the  morning  servdce  in  the  public  meeting 
place,  commonly  called  the  chui'cli  or  chapel,  or  (if  the  parties  to  be 
married  shall  desire  it)  in  the  market-place,  on  three  market  days 
next  following."— Burton,  vol.  ii.,  p.  44.  "They  went  tlirough  the  old 
ceremony  of  hand-fasting  or  espousing.  This  was  done  ia  Mr.  Angier's 
study  a  month  before  the  day  appointed  for  their  marriage.  The  entire 
day  was  spent  in  prayer,  except  that  there  was  a  sermon  preached  by  Mr. 
Nathaniel  Ruthband.  At  the  close  of  it,  the  parties  were  contracted." — 
Notice  of  Heywood's  Marriage.     Hunter's  Life  of  O.  Heywood,  p.  91. 


THE    COMMONWEALTK.  193 

tion  into  the  spirit  and  consequence  of  social  institutions 
which  might  seem  to  qualify  them  to  secure  essential  benefits 
to  that  age,  and  to  ages  which  should  succeed.  But  they 
had  no  solid  foundation  to  repose  upon.  Their  courage  was 
too  great  for  their  strength.*  The  fact  is,  the  will  of  the 
General  was  their  law :  beyond  that  they  had  no  power. 

Cromwell  had  for  some  time  wielded  the  supreme  power 
of  the  State.  It  now  suited  his  policy,  and  probably  the 
best  interests  of  the  nation,  that  he  should  more  for- 
mally assume  it.  With  a  magnificence  scarcely  inferior  to 
royal  coronations,  he  was,  on  the  16th  of  December,  1G53, 
in  the  presence  of  the  Council,  the  mayor  and  aldermen 
of  tlie  city,  and  the  judicial  and  civil  ofiicers  of  the 
State,  installed  into  his  high  office,  as  "  Lord  Protector 
of  the  Commonwealth  of  England,  Scotland,  and  Irelaml, 
and  of  the  dominions  thereunto  belonging."  The  city, 
at  least,  if  not  the  nation  at  lai'ge,  had  been  prepared 
for  this  by  a  document  issued  by  the  Council  some  time 
before.  This  State  paper  contains  some  forty-two  articles. 
It  is  too  long  for  insertion  in  these  pages.  Only  two  can 
we  give  as  bearing  on  the  subject  of  our  narrative.  The 
36  th  declares,  "  That  none  be  compelled  to  conform  to  tlie 
public  religion,  by  penalties  or  otherwise ;  but  that  endeavoui-s 
be  used  to  win  them  by  sound  doctrine  and  the  example  of  a 
good  conversation."  The  37th,  "  That  such  as  profess  faith 
in  God  by  Jesus  Christ,  though  diflFering  in  judgment  from 
the  doctrine,  worship,  or  discipline  publicly  held  forth,  shall 
not  be  restrained  from,  but  shall  be  protected  in,  the  profes- 
sion of  their  faith  and  exercise  of  their  religion,  so  as  they 
abuse  not  this  liberty  to  the  civil  injury  of  others,  and  to  the 
actual  disturbance  of  the  public  peace  on  their  part;  pi"o- 
vided  this  liberty  be  not  extended  to  Popery  or  Prelacy, 
or  to  such,  under  a  profession  of  Christ,  as  hold  forth  and 
practise  licentiousness."  Another  article  provides  that  all  the 

*  Goodwin's  Commonwealth,  vol.  iiL,  chapters  30  and  34. 

N 


194  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

penal  laws  contrary  to  this  liberty  shall  be  null  and  void. 
Greatly  as  these  concessions  were  in  advance  of  former 
governments,  they  fall  far  short  of  the  full  liberty  of  con- 
science for  which  the  Baptists  had  long  pleaded.  Romanists 
and  Episcopalians  were  still  under  the  ban  of  the  State, 
while  the  Pi-esbj'terian  platform  was  fully  recognLsed  as  the 
religion  of  the  nation."' 

The  difficulties  of  the  Loi'd  Protector  were  rather  increased 
by  his  assumption  of  this  high  office.  It  not  only  did  not 
weaken  the  hatred  which  in  many  quarters  had  long 
rankled  in  the  breasts  of  many,  but  it  greatly  diminished 
the  number  of  his  warmest  friends.  The  Royalists  and 
EpiscojDalians  saw  their  sanguine  hopes  for  a  restoration  of  the 
Stuarts  and  their  return  to  spiritual  power,  dispelled,  with 
little  or  no  prospect  of  their  speedy  return.     The  Presby- 

*  Look  at  these.  Tlie  former  is  from  Nye,  the  assumed  assertor  of 
religious  liberty  in  the  assembly  of  diviues ;  the  latter  is  from  the  pen  of 
a  persecuted  Anabaptist.  "  For  persons  and  causes,  spu-itual  or  ecclesias- 
tical, that  are  properly  and  indeed  such,  as  fii-st-table  duties,  which  con- 
tain matters  of  faith  and  holiness,  and  what  conduceth  to  the  eternal 
welfare  of  men's  souls,  an  interest  and  duty  there  is  in  the  civil  magis- 
trate, more  sua,  to  give  commands,  and  exercise  baneful  jurisdiction  about 
things  of  that  nature.  And  for  persons,  there  is  no  man  for  his  grace  so 
spiritual,  or,  in  respect  of  his  gifts  and  office,  so  eminent,  but  he  is  under 
the  government  of  the  civil  powers  in  the  place  where  he  lives,  as  much, 
in  all  respects,  as  any  other  subject." — Quoted  by  Tombcs,  Theodulia, 
p.  181.  "But  I  demand  why  sects  should  not  be  tolerated?  Thou  wilt, 
haply,  answer.  Because  they  hold  and  teach  errors,  v/hereby  people  are 
seduced.  Well,  and  can  we  think  tliat  there  is  any  church  in  the  world 
(at  this  day)  that  doth  not  so  in  some  measiu-e  ?  Else  what  need  were 
there  of  further  reformation,  which  yet  all  churches  almost  confess  they 
stand  in  need  of  ?  .  .  .  Yea,  I  desire  you  to  consider  this,  that  there 
are  not  two  men  to  be  found  in  the  world,  how  learned  or  godly  soever, 
that  in  all  things  concerning  God's  word  and  worship  are  of  one  and  the 
same  judgment,  b\it  vary  in  their  opinions  more  or  less,  as  may  easily  be 
proved  upon  occasion."  —  Tuthill,  pp.  10,  11.  "I  judge  it  his  duty  to 
suffer  no  man  (that  otherwise  liveth  an  honest  sober  life)  to  be  molested, 
much  less  persecuted,  for  his  conscience  sake ;  but  to  be  a  nursing  father 
unto  all  Christians  and  Jews,  causing  that,  under  him,  they  may  live  in 
peace,  in  godliness,  and  honesty,  according  to  their  own  consciences,  and 
that  he  be  found  a  terror  only  to  those  that  do  evil,  and  that  he  subject. 


THE    COMMONWEALTH.  195 

terians  detested  the  toleration'  of  the  sects,  and  denounced, 
from  the  pulpit  and  the  press,  the  liberty  conceded  by  the 
Articles  above-mentioned.  But 'the  most  formidable  of  all 
were  the  Republicans.  They  were  numerous  in  the  array 
and  in  the  nation,  and  they  beheld,  with  unmiugled  anger, 
the  destruction  of  theii*  long-cherished  political  oi-ganization 
by  the  man  whom  they  had  aided  in  his  extraordinary 
advance  to  power*.  Amongst  them  we  shall  find  many  of 
our  brethren  taking  an  active  part.  But  the  genius  of  the 
Protector  triumphed.  By  his  skill  and  management  he  not 
only  defeated  every  plot  against  him,  and  they  were  many, 
but  raised  the  nation  to  an  vmparalloled  degree  of  glory. 
Nothing  in  the  past  can  compare  with  the  prowess  of  his 
fleets  and  the  skill  of  his  diplomacy.  In  all  his  undertakings 
success  awaited  him.  The  continent  feared  him ;  the  perse- 
cuted found  in  him  a  shield  from  their  adversaries;  the 
commerce  of  England  found,  under  his  guidance,  new  fields 
for  enterprise  and  gain;  whilst  religion,  literature,  and 
science  at  home  floiuished  under  his  patronage.  To  other 
sources  our  readers  must  turn  for  the  history  of  his  reign. 

The  right  of  the  Government  to  interfere  in  matters  of 
religion  was  always  admitted  by  the  mass  of  the  nation. 
All  sects  conceded  this,  with  the  exception  of  our  brethren. 
The  evidence  is  overwhelming.  The  most  enlightened  of  Non- 
conformists pleaded  for  toleration  for  themselves,  but  not  for 
all.  Hence  the  legislatoi's  had  been  allowed  to  deal  wdth  purely 
religious  questions; — to  settle  disputes  between  conflicting 

(in  his  dominions),  tlie  foresaid  Mysterious  Kingdom,  and  reduce  the 
Cliurch  ministry  unto  the  simplicity  of  the  Gospel,  allowing  them  onlj' 
God's  allowance,  viz.,  the  authority  of  pastors  in  their  own  congregations 
imto  which  they  minister,  hut  no  other,  either  in  Church  or  Common- 
wealth, more  than  other  common  men  have.  If  it  should  he  put  to  all 
of  them  (learned  Christians)  hy  the  poll,  to  resolve  this  question,  AVill  you 
he  content  that  the  magistrates  should  leave  religion  free,  so  as  any  one 
might  freely  exercise  the  worship  of  God  according  to  the  light  lit  up  in 
his  own  conscience,  as  they  have  in  Holland?  I  fear  greatly  that  there 
would  scarce  he  found  one  in  a  thousand  afiiiinative  votes  to  this  ques- 
tion. " — Tuthill's  Mysterious  Kingdom,  p.  9. 


196  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

creeds,  and  to  sequester  ministers  of  immoral  and  doubtful 
character,  and  to  fill  up  tlie  vacancies  by  tlioroughly  oi-tho- 
dox  men.  One  of  the  early  acts  of  the  Protector  and  his 
Council  was  to  transfer  this  power,  in  part,  if  not  entirely,  to 
a  number  of  leading  divines  of  various  sections  of  the  church. 
Their  business  was  to  investigate  the  claims  of  candidates 
for  the  ministry, — not  only  their  mental,  but  theii-  moral 
fitness  for  the  work, — to  inquire  "  into  the  grace  of  God  in 
the  candidate,  his  holy  and  unblameable  conversation;  also 
into  his  knowledge,  and  utterance,  and  fitness  to  preach  the 
Gospel."  This  Board  of  Examiners,  "  Tryers,"  as  they  wei*e 
called,  consisted  of  thirty-eight  men,  selected  from  the  Pres- 
byterian, Independent,  and  Baptist  bodies.  Of  the  latter 
there  were  thi'ee — John  Tombes,  D.  Dyke,  and  H.  Jessey. 
Acceptance  of  such  an  office  would  excite  surprise  in  the 
present  day.  It  appears  to  us  to  violate  many  of  our 
cherished  principles.  Still  reasons  might  be  urged,  of  no 
small  weight,  to  justify  their  conduct.  The  mere  examina- 
tion of  men,  as  to  their  religious  character,  might  not  have 
appeai-ed  to  them  inconsistent  with  their  own  teaching.  The 
labours  of  these  men  were  most  onerous.  Into  the  vacant 
churches  they  introduced  men  of  piety  and  zeal,  and  perhaps 
at  no  period — certainly  not  during  the  time  of  the  church's 
unchecked  magnificence  and  power — was  tlie  moral  state  of 
the  nation  so  elevated.  It  is  useless  to  talk  of  the  formality 
and  hypocrisy  of  the  people,  of  the  cropped  hair  and  nasal 
twang  of  tlie  men.  The  days  of  Heylin  and  Hudibras  are  past. 
Under  the  outward  form  there  was  a  substratum  of  earnest 
piety  which  dignified  human  nature,  and  which  stands  in 
the  boldest  contrast  to  the  awful  impiety  of  the  succeeding 
reign.*  Baxter  had  not  much  sympathy  with  the  men. 
The    presence    of   Anabaptists    w^ould    give    him    an    im- 

*  "It  is  related  of  "Wilson,  the  Puritan  reformer  of  Maidstone,  a 
member  of  the  Assembly  of  DiA-ines,  that  he  brought  the  parish  to  that 
state,  that  not  a  rose  or  flower  was  suffered  to  be  gathered  on  the  Lord's 
day."— Life  of  O.  Heywood  by  Hunter,  p.  11. 


THE    COMMON  WEALTH.  197 

mixed  dislike  to  the  board.  Still  he  says* : — "  They  saved 
many  a  congregation  from  ignorant,  ungodly,  drunken 
teachers — that  sort  of  men  who  intend  no  more  in  the 
ministiy  than  to  say  a  sermon  as  readers  say  their  Common 
Prayers  on  Sundays,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  -week  go  -with 
the  people  to  the  alehoiise,  and  harden  them  in  sin;  and 
that  sort  of  niinistei's  who  either  preached  against  a  holy 
life,  or  preached  as  men  who  were  never  acquainted  with  it. 
These  they  usually  rejected,  and  in  their  stead  admitted  of 
any  that  were  able,  serious  preachers,  and  lived  a  godly  life, 
of  what  tolerable  opinions  soever  they  were ;  so  that  though 
many  of  them  were  a  little  partial  for  the  Independents, 
Separatists,  fifth  monarchy  men,  and  Anabaptists,  and 
against  the  Prelatists  and  Arminians,  yet  so  great  was  the 
benefit  above  the  hurt  which  they  brought  to  the  church, 
that  many  thousands  of  souls  blessed  God  for  the  faithful 
ministers  whom  they  let  in,  and  grieved  when  the  Prelatists 
afterwards  cast  out."t 

Another  ordinance  followed,  appointing  a  lay  commission 
for  every  county,  with  ten  or  more  of  the  gi-avest  and  most 
noted  ministers  as  their  assistants,  for  rejecting  scandalous, 
ignorant,  and  inefficient  ministers.  Any  five  of  these  had 
power  to  call  before  them  any  minister  or  schoolmaster  who 
"  is,  or  shall  be,  reported  of  this  character."  Their  labours 
were  arduous,  and  were  discharged  with  much  fidelity.  "They 

*  "Yet,  as  the  world  goes,  it  is  not  safe  to  speak  all  or  half  the 
wickedness  of  the  Anabaptists  now  living,  which  the  history  of  the  age 
will  speak  to  posterity." — Baxter's  Infant  Church  Membership,  p.  201. 

+  The  candidate  "was  called  to  expound  before  the  Presbytery  some 
given  text.  If  the  Presbytery  were  satisfied,  an  intimation  was  forwarded 
to  the  parish  to  which  the  candidate  was  appointed,  and  a  notice  affixed 
to  tlie  cliurch  doors,  to  the  effect  that  a  certain  number  of  the  parishioners 
should  appear  before  the  Presbytery  to  signify  their  consent,  or  other- 
■ivise  to  forward  their  exception.  If  no  exception  was  taken,  the  candi- 
date was  ordained  in  the  church  in  which  he  was  to  serve.  The  ceremony 
consisted  of  preaching,  prayer,  a  declaration  of  faith  on  the  part  of  the 
candidate,  and  the  imposition  of  hands,"  &c.  — Lathorp's  English  Epis- 
copacy, p.  204. 


198  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

were  a  greater  terror,"  says  Neal,  "to  the  fanatics  and 
visionaries  of  those  times,  than  to  the  regular  clergy  of  any 
denomination."  Many  hard  drinkers  and  scandalous  hypo- 
crites were  removed  from  the  church,  in  many  districts  of 
the  country,  by  the  laboui-s  of  these  men.  The  commission 
was  continued  till  some  time  after  the  Protector's  death. 
Wales  was  blest  with  one  also,  the  influence  of  which  was 
soon  seen  in  the  improved  morals  and  religious  state  of 
the  then  wildish  mountaineers.  To  other  topics  we  must 
now  turn. 

The  Baptists,  as  a  body,  appear  to  have  had  no  sympathy 
with  the  Tryers.  Against  their  appointment  and  their 
work,  many  of  them  from  various  parts  of  the  country  pro- 
tested. In  the  metropolis  a  very  large  assembly  met,  and 
protested  against  their  proceedings.  Their  sentiments  were 
made  known  in  a  publication  issvied  in  1654,  in  which  they 
condemn  the  Tryers,  and  say,  "  Is  not  the  new  Court  of 
Tryers  at  Whitehall  for  ministers  of  like  make  with  the 
High  Commission  Court?  The  grave  image  of  the  worldly 
powers  creating  a  worldly  clergy  for  worldly  ends;  highly 
scandalous;  against  the  rule  of  the  Gospel  and  the  faith  of 
Christ;  and  as  much  to  be  exploded  as  the  Pope  and  the 
prelates."*  This  protest  was  signed  by  the  following, 
selected  from  a  mass  of  names  in  the  city  and  country,  and 
especially  Kent: — "Ten  from  the  church  that  walks  with 
Mr.  Feake,  now  a  close  prisoner  for  the  cause  of  Christ  in 
Windsor  Castle;  seven  in  the  name  of  the  church  that  walks 
with  Dr.  Chamberlin;  twenty-five  in  the  name  of  the  whole 
body  that  walks  with  Mr.  Rogers,  now  a  prisoner  for  this 
cause  in  Lambeth ;  thirteen  of  the  church  that  walks  with 
Mr.  Raworth ;  fourteen  with  Mr.  Knollys ;  nine  of  the 
church  that  walks  with  Mr.  Simpson ;  twelve  of  the  church 
that  walks  with  Mr.  Jessey;  twenty-two  of  the  church  that 

*  A  Declaration  of  certain  Churches  of  Christ  and  Godly  People  in  and 
about  the  City  of  London,  concerning  the  Kingly  Interest  of  Christ,  and 
the  Patient  Suffeiings  of  His  Cause  and  Saints  in  England. 


THE   COMMONWEALTH. 


199 


walks  with  Mr.  Barebones ;  eighteen  (if  the  church  that  walks 
with  Lieutenant-Colouel  Fenton;  and  thii-teeii  of  the  church 
that  walks  with  Justice  Highland."* 

That  Cromwell  was  favourahle  to  the  Baptists  admits  of 
no  doubt.  Their  aid  he  had  received,  and  on  them  he  could 
generally  rely.  In  his  own  family  circle  they  wore  found  ;t 
in  his  most  secret  councils  they  liad  participated ;  and  some 
of  his  most  trusted  generals  belonged  to  this  body.j.  Against 
them  his  anger  was  now  excited,  and  vigorous  cttbi-ts  were 
made  to  crash  their  growing  power.  Both  these  facts  are 
clearly  stated  by  Baxter : — "  The  Sectarian  party  in  his 
army,  and  elsewhere,  he  chiefly  trusted  to,  and  pleased,  till 
by  the  pcojile's  submission  and  quietness  he  thought  himself 
well  settled  :  and  then  he  began  to  undermine  them,  and  by 
degrees  to  work  them  out.  And  though  he  had  so  often 
spoken  for  the  Ayiabaptists,  he  now  finds  them  so  heady,  and 
so  miich  against  any  settled  Government,  and  so  set  upon 
the  promoting  of  their  way  and  party,  that  he  doth  not  only 
begin  to  blame  their  unndiness,  but  also  designeth  to  settle 
himself  in  the  people's  favour  by  supjiressing  them.     In 


*  A  Declaration  of  certain  Churches  of  Christ  and  Godly  People  in  and 
about  the  City  of  London,  concerning  the  Kingly  Interest  of  Christ,  and 
the  Patient  Sufferings  of  His  Cause  and  Saints  in  England,  p.  21. 

t  Charles  Fleetwood,  Colonel  and  Lord-Deputy  of  Ireland.  "Tliis 
pitifiU  Anabaptist  was  Oliver's  son-in-law,  and,  upon  that  score,  advanced 
to  be  Lieutenant-Genera]  of  the  army;  for  merit  he  never  had  any." 
—Mystery  of  the  good  Old  Cause  briefly  unfolded.  —  Fiit^e  Pari.  Hist., 
vol.  iii.,  p.  1597  (Appendix).  The  Desboroughs  were  also  closely  connected 
with  them. 

:J:  Baxter  attributes  much  to  their  influence.  In  the  Parliament,  in  the 
treatment  6i  the  king,  in  the  Scottish  wars,  in  the  purging  of  the  uni- 
versities, in  the  ejecting  of  improper  ministers,  "the  Anabaptists  were 
the  forwardest  in  this  work."  All  this  occurs  as  an  apology  for  the  alrase 
which  the  good  man  had  heaped  on  them. — Vide  More  Proofs  of  Infant 
Chui-ch  Membership,  p.  216.  "  It  nearly  concerned  him  (Cromwell)  to 
make  much  of  the  Anabaptists  and  Sectaries,  which  now  succeeded  Inde- 
pendency as  the  religion  maintained  and  favoured  above  all  others ;  and 
Kiffin,  a  great  leader  and  teacher,  was  now  in  great  request  at  the  court 
in  Whitehall."— Heath's  Chronicles,  p.  355. 


200  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

Ireland  they  were  grown  so  Iiigli,  that  the  soldiers  were 
many  of  them  re-baptized  as  the  way  to  preferment;  and 
they  who  opposed  them  were  crushed  with  uncharitable 
fierceness.  He  sent  his  son  Henry  Cromwell  into  Ireland, 
who  mightily  supprest  them,  and  carried  it  so  obligingly 
to  all  that  he  was  generally  beloved;  so  that  Major-General 
Ludlow,  who  headed  the  Anabaptists  in  Ireland,  was  forced 
to  submit.  And  though  he  long  connived  at  his  old  friend 
Harrison,  the  head  of  the  Anabaptists  here,  yet  finding  it 
would  be  an  acceptable  thing  to  the  nation  to  suppress  him, 
he  doth  it  in  a  trice,  and  makes  him  contemptible  who  but 
yesterday  thought  himself  not  much  below  him; — as  easily 
also  to  the  full  doth  he  lay  by  Lambert :  w-hich  were  very 
pleasing  actions."* 

Many  of  these  were  dissatisfied  with  the  Government. 
They  wei-e  republican  from  principle.  They  had  risked 
theii-  lives  and  shed  their  blood  for  the  Commonwealth. 
Their  favourite  Constitution  had  crumbled  before  their  eyes. 
The  labours  and  risks  of  years  had  vanished  from  before  them  ; 
and  they  dreaded  the  restoration  of  a  monarchy  in  the  person 
of  the  Lord  Protector,  as  fraught  with  great  evils  to  religion 
and  the  State.  Their  numbers,  their  influence,  their  talents, 
were  not  despicable.  Hence  the  policy  and  the  conduct  of 
the  Protector  towards  them.  In  a  letter  addressed  to  liitj 
Highness  in  1654,  we  have  some  glimpses  of  these  facts. 
The  writer  says : — "  The  way  you  intend  to  take  to  bring 
about  this  design  (the  reform  of  the  church)  is  twofold.  1. 
To  purge  the  army  of  the  Anabaptists.  2.  To  do  it  by 
degrees.  But  oh!  Oliver,  is  this  thy  design?  And  is  this 
the  way  to  be  rid  of  the  Anabaptists?  And  is  this  the 
reason,  because  they  hinder  the  reforming  the  things  amiss  in 
the  church?  I  confess  they  have  been  enemies  to  the  Pres- 
bjrterian  church;  and  so  were  you  when  at  Dunbar,  in 
Scotland,  or  at  least  you  seemed  to  be  so  by  your  words  and 

*  Baxter's  Life,  pp.  G9,  70. 


THE    COMMONWEALTH.  201 

actions;  for  you  speake  as  pure  Independency  as  any  of  us 
all  then,  and  made  this  an  argument  why  we  should  fight 
stoutly,  because  we  had  the  prayers  of  the  Independent  and 
baptized  churches.  So  highly  did  you  seem  to  love  the 
Anabaptists  then,  that  you  did  not  only  invite  them  into 
the  army,  but  entei-tain  them  in  your  families;  but  it 
seems  the  case  is  altered.  But  do  not  deceive  yourself,  nor 
let  the  priests  deceive  you ;  for  the  Anabaptists  are  men  that 
will  not  be  shuffled  out  of  their  birthrights  as  freeborn 
people  of  England.  And  have  they  not  filled  your  towns, 
your  cities,  your  provinces,  your  castles,  your  navies,  your 
tents,  your  armies,  except  that  which  went  to  the  West 
Indies,  which  prosper  so  well]  Your  coux't,  your  very 
Council  is  not  free;  only  we  have  left  your  temples  for 
yourself  to  worship  in.  So  that  I  believe  it  will  be  a  hard 
thing  to  root  them  out,  although  you  tell  the  Scottish  lord 
you  will  do  it  by  degi-ees,  as  he  reports.""'  The  writer  then 
asks: — "  1.  Whether  yoii  had  come  to  that  height  you  are 
now  in,  if  the  Anabaptists  had  been  as  much  your  enemies 
as  they  were  your  friends'?  2.  Whether  the  Anabaptists 
were  ever  unfaithful  either  to  the  Commonwealth,  <fec.,  in 
general,  or  to  your  Highness  in  particular]  And  if  not, 
then  what  is  the  reason  of  your  intended  dismission? 
3.  Whether  the  Anabaptists  are  not  to  be  commended  for 
theii'  integrity,  which  had  rather  keep  faith  and  a  good  con- 
science, although  it  may  lose  them  their  employment,  than 
to  keep  their  employment  with  the  loss  of  both  ?  4.  Whether 
the  Anabaptists  did  not  come  more  justly  by  theii-  employ- 
ment in  the  army,  than  you  came  into  the  seat  of  Govern- 
ment? 5.  Whether,  if  the  Anabaptists  had  the  power  in 
their  hands,  and  were  as  able  to  cast  you  out  as  you  were 
them,  and  they  did  intend  it  to  you,  as  you  do  to  them, 
whether  your  Highness  would  not  say  they  were  all  knaves? 
6.  Whether  an  100  of  the  old  Anabaptists,  such  as  marched 

*  Thurloe,  vol.  iii. ,  p.  150. 


^\)S  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

under  your  command  in  '48-9-50,  &c.,  be  not  as  good  as  200 
of  your  new  courtiers,  if  you  were  in  sucli  a  condition  as 
you  were  at  Dunbar?  7.  Whether  your  Highness's  court  is 
not  a  greater  charge  to  this  nation  than  the  Anabaptists  in 
the  army?  and,  if  so,  whether  tliis  be  the  care  you  promised 
the  people?  8.  Whether  the  moneys  laid  out  in  the  making 
of  new  rivers  and  ponds  at  Hampton  Coui-t,  might  not  have 
been  better  bestowed  in  paying  the  public  faith,  or  the  Ana- 
baptists' arrears  before  their  dismission,  &c."* 

Major-General  Harrison  was  not  only  a  leading  man,  but 
probably  the  chief  in  this  enterprise.  "  As  he  was  the  head 
of  the  Anabaptists,"  says  Noble,  "  it  gave  him  the  greatest 
respect  in  the  world  to  gain  this,  who  wanted  to  pull  down 
the  ministry  and  the  law."  "  Cromwell  and  he  had  been 
the  gi-eat  apostles  of  the  Independents;  he  now  spurned  that 
sect  as  not  sufficiently  spiritualized,  and  went  over  to  the 
Anabaptists,  who  were  then  a  furious  and  ungovernable  sect 
of  men,  and  he  submitted  to  a  submersion  from  them; 
having  then  washed  off  all  his  I'eligious  as  well  as  political 
impurities,  he  became  quite  a  regenerated  creature. "f 

Pi'obably  before  Harrison  had  assumed  the  attitude  indi- 
cated by  Noble,  various  ministers,  animated  by  the  spirit  of 
the  times,  had  loudly  denounced  the  Protectorate.  There 
are  so-called  allusions  to  Feake,  Rogers,  Canne,  Powell,  and 
others,  in  the  State  papers  of  the  time.  We  place  some  of 
them  before  our  readers: — "The  Parliament,"  says  Heath, 
"  was  but  a  sub-committee  that  truckled  under  the  Council 
of  State  and  Oliver  for  their  occasion,  and  Feake's  (a  great 
fifth  monarchy  preacher)  congregation  held  at  Blackfriars 
(this  H of  the  Commonwealth  being  between  Scylla 

*  Thurloe,  vol.  iii.,  pp.  150, 151. 

+  Noble's  Regicides,  vol.  i.,  pp.  319,  320.  "HaiTison,  who  was  the  head 
of  the  Anabaptists,  gave  him  the  greatest  respect  iu  the  world  to  gain  the 
great  countenance  to  liis  party,  by  which  the  proud  fools  grew  high ;  so 
did  his  i^arty." — Intercepted  letter,  without  date.  Burton,  vol.  i.,  p.  754. 
"Cromwell  and  Harrison  had  lived  in  cordial  friendship." — Goodwin, 
vol.  iv.,  p.  58. 


THE    COMMONWEALTH.  203 

and  Charj'bdis),  who  cuts  out  every  day's  work  for  the 
House."*  In  a  letter  to  Dan  Lloyd,  at  Wcxham,  Dec.  22, 
1653,  occurs  the  following: — "Mr.  Powell  and  Mr.  Feake 
having  sjioken  somewhat  largely  their  thoiights  of  this  pre- 
sent change  were  yesterday  taken  into  custody.  Mr.  Powell 
last  night  was  called  before  the  Council,  and  both  he  and 
Mr.  Feake  were  with  them  a  long  time  this  day;  but  have 
received  no  further  judgment  as  yet,  but  do  stand  committed 
to  the  sergeant-at-arms.  To-morrow,  again  they  are  to 
appear.  How  far  they  shall  proceed  is  not  yet  clear  to  us. 
Major-G.  Harrison  being  treated  with,  to  know  if  he  could 
own  and  act  under  the  present  power,  and  declaring  that  he 
could  not,  had  his  commission  taken  from  him."t  From  the 
same  volume  we  gather  additional  information.  "  I  know 
not  whether  yoii  have  formerly  heard  of  the  Monday's 
Lectures  at  Blackfriars,  where  thi-ee  or  four  Anabaptistical 
ministers  preach  constantly  with  very  great  bitterness 
against  the  present  Government,  but  especially  against  hLs 
Excellency,  calling  him  the  man  of  sin,  the  old  dragon,  and 
many  other   scriptural   names;   the   chief  of  them  is  one 


*  Chron.,  p.  353. 

t  Tliurloe's  State  Papers,  vol.  i.,  p.  461.  There  is  a  notice  of  this  in  a 
lettei-  from  the  Dutch  Ambassador  which  refers  to  this  matter :— "  I  am 
informed  by  a  very  good  hand,  that  the  Lord  Protector  doth  take  a  great 
deal  of  pains,  and  hath  spent  much  time,  about  the  affairs  of  the  Cliui-ch 
of  England,  to  bring  the  same,  by  'some  toleration  and  connivance,  into  a 
considerable  and  peaceable  condition,  to  the  content  of  all  differing  par- 
ties ;  and  the  business  is  already  so  far  advanced,  that  a  meeting  is  upon 
certain  conditions  agreed  on — not  under  the  name  of  a  Synod,  but  of  a 
loving  and  Christian-like  reception — where  any  one  may  propound  for  a 
mutual  toleration.  It  is  also  finally  agreed  on,  that  to  that  end  the 
bishop  and  Anabaptists  shall  be  admitted  into  it,  as  well  as  the  Inde- 
pendents and  Presbyterians ;  but  yet  with  this  proviso,  that  they  shall 
not  dispute  one  another's  principles,  but  labour  to  agree  in  union :  and 
it  is  believed  that  the  effect  thereof  will  be  seen  in  a  short  time.  His 
Highness  has  caused  Feake  and  Simson  to  be  apprehended  and  impri- 
soned :  two  of  the  chiefest  captains  of  the  Anabaptists,  who  did  preach 
most  scornfully  against  the  present  Government."— Dutch  Ambassador, 
Feb.,  1653.     Thurloe,  vol.  ii.,  p.  67. 


204  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Feake,  a  bold  and  crafty  orator,  and  of  high  reputation 
amongst  them.  It  has  been  wondered  the  general  has  so 
patiently  permitted  them;  but  yesterday  I  heard  the  true 
reason  of  it,  which  is,  that  he  cannot  help  it,  for  they  preach 
by  an  Act  of  the  late  Parliament,  which  the  Council  of 
State  cannot  overrule,  and  this  Parliament  Avill  not  abolish 
it;  but  on  Tuesday  last,  as  I  take  it,  they  were  called  before 
a  private  committee,  when  the  general  was  present,  who  told 
them  that  the  ill  odour  they  had  cast  upon  the  Government 
has  given  confidence  to  ovir  enemies  abroad  and  at  home, 
and  would  bring  the  Parliament  into  contempt;  and  that 
whatsoever  ill  efiects  followed,  they  must  be  accountable  for 
it.  Feake  replied,  that  he  desired  that  what  the  general  said, 
and  M^hat  he  answered,  might  be  registered  in  heaven;  and 
that  it  was  his  tampering  with  the  king,  and  his  assuming 
an  exorbitant  power,  which  made  these  disorders:  and  so 
held  forth  the  fifth  monarchy.  The  general  answered,  that 
Avhen  he  heard  him  begin  with  a  record  in  heaven,  he  did 
not  exjject  that  he  would  have  told  such  a  lie  upon  the 
earth ;  but  assured  him,  that  whensoever  he  should  be  harder 
pressed  by  the  enemy  than  they  yet  had  been,  it  would  be 
necessary  to  begin  first  with  them ;  and  so  dismissed  them. 
I  forgot  to  tell  you  that  the  general  had  brought  Sterry  and 
two  or  three  more  of  his  ministers  to  oppose  spirit  to  spirit, 
and  to  advise  Feake  and  the  rest  to  obedience,  as  the  most 
necessary  way  to  bring  in  the  kingdom.  But  it  is  believed  we 
shall  have  very  much  trouble  from  the  Anabaptists;  yet  it 
is  thought  their  power  is  nothing  so  great  in  the  army  as  in 
the  House,  they  having  none  above  a  captain  of  their  party 
besides  Harrison,  who,  it  is  thought,  will  betray  all  the  rest ; 
but  whether  the  general  will  ease  himself  of  those  in  the 
House  by  the  old  way  of  purging,  or  the  new  one  of  dis- 
solving, rests  in  his  own  and  the  officers'  breasts."*     Some 


*  Thurloe,  State  Papers,  vol.  i.,  p.  621.     "Many  of  the  officers  of  the 
.army  wished  to  nominate  Harrison  as  one  of  the  Council  of  War.     The 


TUE    COMMONWEALTH. 


205 


of  the  facts  are  stated  in  another  of  the  papers : — "  The 
Anabaptists  are  highly  enraged  against  the  Protector,  inso- 
much that  Vavaseiir  Powell,  on  Monday  last,  in  Christ's 
church,  publicly  called  him  the  disseniblingest  perjured  vil- 
lain in  the  world;  and  desired  that  if  any  of  his  friends 
were  there,  they  would  go  and  tell  him  what  they  said;  and 
withal,  that  his  reign  was  but  short,  and  that  he  should  be 
served  worse  than  that  great  tyrant  the  last  Lord  Protector 
was :  he  being  altogether  as  bad,  if  not  worse  than  he." 
From  an  intercepted  letter  to  Paris,  under  date  of  Dec.  14th, 
1653,  from  no  friendly  pen,  we  gather  a  little  more  informa- 
tion.* The  writer  says : — "  Harrison  is  now  out  of  doors, 
having  all  along  joined  with  the  Anabaptists.  The  Ana- 
baptists, though  no  good  could  be  expected  from  them,  or 
from  Harrison,  yet  they  will  be  able  to  do  harm,  and  dis- 
locate us  in  our  councils  and  institutions,  iii  casting  asper- 
sions on  us  in  all  parts  and  on  all  occasions.  They  are 
restless,  although  not  considerable,  yet  they  will  receive 
what  encouragement  there  can  be  in  a  private  way  to  make 
them  in  their  own  judgment  more  considerable  than  they 
are  really;  and  truly  it  were  ill  with  most  men,  if  they  had 
power.  It  is  also  vented  abroad,  to  deceive  the  vulgar,  that 
Ci-omwell  intends  to  call  home  the  Scots  king;  and  that  there 
is  no  hurt  intended  the  honest  party  of  the  Anabaptists,  but 
to  suppress  the  ill-disposed  of  them,  and  who  are  guided  by 
a  Jesuit  pai-ty,  who  had  the  power  over  them.  These  things 
will  satisfy  some,  but  not  all.  I  have  formerly  acquainted 
you  how  the  Royalists,  the  Presbyterians,  the  Papists,  and 

Parliament,  before  its  dissolution,  had  declared  him  incapable  of  any 
emploj'ment  in  the  State." — French  Anab.,  Guizot,  vol.  ii.,  p.  275. 

*  Thiuloe,  State  Papers,  vol.  i.,  p.  633.  In  16.54  a  mandate  was  issiied 
ordering  Harrison  to  return  to  his  native  county  of  Stafford. — Goodwin, 
vol.  iv.,  p.  00.  In  Thurloe,  the  following  occurs  in  relation  to  this :— "  I 
am  just  now  assured,  and  from  that  you  may  believe,  that  Harrison,  V. 
Powell,  and  Mr.  Feake,  have  been  this  day  before  his  Highness  and  the 
Council,  and  that  Powell  and  Feake  are  this  evening  sent  to  prison,  and 
Harrison  hath  his  commission  taken  from  him." — Vol.  i.,  p.  641. 


206  EARLY    ENGLISH    EAt^^TISTS. 

the  Inclependents  have  been  abused;  and  now  the  Anabap- 
tists, with  all  other  sectaries,  are  much  more  abused  than 
those,"  &c. 

In  1654,  Rogers  was  still  imprisoned  with  Feake.  He 
was  brought  before  the  Council,  when  he  and  the  Protector 
debated  various  matters.  The  only  charge  against  the 
former  was  dissatisfaction  with  Oliver's  Government.  After 
this,  Major-Geueral  Harrison,  Col.  Rich,  and  some  others, 
urged  his  Highness  to  release  the  prisoners  and  others  w^ho 
were  deprived  of  therr  liberty,  or  else  to  try  them.  Crom- 
well's reply  was  characteristic.  "  It  was  thi'ough  mercy  this 
was  deferred,  because  if  the  law  had  its  due  course,  their 
lives  would  be  forfeited,"  They  were  removed  to  Windsor 
Castle,  probably  as  a  place  of  greater  safety,  the  next  month.* 
On  other  parts  of  the  country,  the  Government  kept  a 
watchful  eye.  Its  spies  were  everywhere.  Thurloe  was 
indefatigable  in  his  inquiries.  His  volumes  are  full  of  cor- 
respondence on  all  subjects  affecting  the  GoA^ernment.  One 
John  Gunter,  of  Brecon,  Aviites  to  tell  him: — "  I  am  further 
to  acquaint  you,  that  the  Anabaptists  do  daily  rendezvous 
and  list  themselves  in  these  parts,  under  pi'etence  to  act 
for  the  Lord  Protector;  but  the  county  do  not  understand 
of  any  commissions  they  have  from  his  Highness:  and  the 
persons  listed  do  declare  their  design  is  to  release  Harrison, 
&c.    All  wMch  may  be  well  worthy  of  consideration,  "t 

Two  or  three  allusions  to  Mr.  Powell's  complexity  in  this 
design,  whatever  it  may  be,  are  now  before  iis.  Referring 
to  a  meeting,  probably  at  Blackfriars,  the  writer  says: — 
"  Rogers  i-ead  a  letter  openly  to  his  auditors,  which  he  said 
came  from  Mr.  Powell,  from  Wales,  who  did  assu.re  him  of 
20,000  saints  then  ready  to  hazard  their  blood  in  defence  of 
their  cause.""^ 


*  Several  Proceedings  of  State  Affairs,  No.  280,  Feb.,  1654.     Perfect 
Proceedings  of  State  Affairs,  1655. 
t  Thurloe,  vol.  iii.,  p.  291. 
t  Ibid,  p.  137. 


THE   COMMONWEALTH.  207 

of  that  period : — "  The  Major-General  (Berry,  at  Worcester) 
sent  for  Vavaseur  Powell,  and  acquainted  him  that  it  was 
informed  that  they  were  about  some  design  to  put  things  in 
distraction;  who  answered,  it  was  far  from  him. or  any  of  liis 
friends  to  design  any  such  matter;  upon  which  subject  they 
liad  many  words  and  mucli  discourse:  but  at  length  the 
Major-General  dismissed  him  and  sent  him  homo,  upon  pro- 
mise to  come  whensoever  he  should  send  for  him."* 

The  only  allusion  to  Canne,  and  others,  we  find  in  the 
following,  addressed  to  the  Secretary: — "There  hath  been 
an  eye  on  Dr.  Newton  since  your  visit  to  me;  he  hath  gone 
very  little  out  of  the  town  this  winter:  he  accompanies  with 
disaffected  persons,  and  was  an  old  companion  of  Paul 
Hobson.  He  was  one  of  Paul  Hobson's  great  associates, 
and  also  a  companion  of  old  cavaliers.  This  day,  some  of 
the  robaptizcd  judgment  met  at  Newcastle  about  Paul 
Hobson's  eight  diabolical  reasons,  censuring  all  that  signed 
the  address  to  his  Highness,"  &c.t  "  There  are  but  few  that 
are  dissatisfied  with  the  px-esent  Government  in  that  place 
(Hull):  the  chief  is  Mr.  Canne,  Avhose  removal,  I  humbly 
conceive,  and  hinted  as  much  to  yo\ir  Highness,  would  be 
very  necessary ;  he  doth  disputise  amongst  the  soldiery,  his 

*  ilercurius  Politicus,  No.  285.  Nov.,  1655.  "He  had  some  confidence 
placed  in  Mm  by  the  Protector,  iu  being  appointed  Major-General  of  AVales ; 
but  his  conduct  was  such  that  it  greatly  injured  the  Government,  for 
taking  to  liis  bosom  Vavaseur  Powell,  a  most  obnoxious  Anabaptist,  who 
was  so  far  gone  in  fanatical  madness  that  he  threw  all  Wales  in  flames ; 
and  as  Harrison  had  taken  every  method  of  putting  the  gentry  out  of  aU 
commissions,  and  in  their  room  placing  the  converts  of  his  o^^Ti  party,  it 
made  both  him  and  the  Protector  odious ;  but  tliis  was  rectified.  Powell, 
after  various  fniitless  admonitions,  was  sent  to  prison." — Noble,  vol.  i., 
p.  321. 

t  Letter  from  J,  Topping  to  Thurloe.  Tyneniouth,  Feb.  5,  1654. 
State  Papers,  vol.  iii. ,  p.  138.  Hobson  appears  to  have  resided  at  New- 
castle at  this  time.  His  name  appears  as  a  witness  to  a  marriage  certi- 
ficate at  Hexham.  He  is  called  a  major  in  some  existing  documents,  and 
was  cliarged  by  the  Hexham  minister  with  some  acts  inconsistent  with 
Christian  principles,  but  which,  it  was  said,  refeiTcd  only  to  his  uncon- 
verted state.— Douglas,  pp.  53,  60. 


208  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

spirit  not  agreeing  with  the  Government.""'  From  an  autho- 
rity already  quoted — whose  facts  may  be  received,  though  his 
deductions  from  them  may  frequently  be  repudiated  without 
loss — we  learn  that  "Harrison,  with  Messrs.  Pheke  (Feake), 
Canne,  and  Rogers,  met  at  the  House  of  Mr.  Daforma,  in 
Bartholomew  Lane,  over  the  Royal  Exchange,  where  they 
held  their  various  consultations  about  an  insurrection."t 
The  alarm  extended  to  Ireland.  From  that  country  we  have, 
happily,  a  condensed  statement,  which  we  place  before  our 
readers.  On  many  accounts  this  document  is  of  considerable 
interest.  It  throws  light  on  the  condition  of  our  body  at 
this  time  in  the  sister  isle : — 

"J/r.  Thomas  Harrison  to  Secretanj  Thmioc. 

"HoNOUKED  Sir, — I  know  by  experience  that  he  who  adventures 
to  be  faithfull  in  discoveriug  the  miscarriages  even  of  good  men, 
when  dangerous  to  the  imhli^ue,  runs  the  hazard  of  being  suspected 
and  judged  by  men,  and  also  of  being  judged  by  the  Lord,  unlesse 
his  actings  spring  from  a  roote  of  faithfuUnesse,  and  aime  sincerely 
at  the  service  and  safety  both  of  the  pubhque  and  of  the  very  persons 
themselves,  who  are  laid  so  open.  With  the  awe  and  dread  upon  my 
heart  of  that  day  of  Jesus  Christ  wherein  the  secrets  of  all  hearts 
shall  be  revealed,  I  shall  jiroceed  (accordmg  to  your  encouragement)  to 
manifest  the  spirit  of  that  way,  the  principles  and  practices  of  those 
persons,  who  have  soe  farre  prevailed  in  this  poore  country.  Being  at 
Kilkenny  with  my  lord  the  ISth  of  last  month,  Mr.  Brewster,  Mr. 
Wood,  Mr.  Wells,  and  my  selfe,  went  solemnly  to  Mr.  Blackwood 
(the  oracle  of  the  Anabaptists  in  Ireland),  complaining  of  their  totall 
withdrawings  from  us  in  publique  worship. 

"He  alleadged  the  cause  thereof  to  be  our  not  observing  the  order 
of  the  apostles  by  ])aptism.  Nevertheles  they  could  most  of  them 
sometimes  joyne  with  xis,  provided,  1st,  That  in  a  day  of  prayer  they 
may  speake  last,  that  if  any  thing  be  spoken  against  God  or  Christ 
or    the  truth,  they  might   have   an  opportunity  to   bear  witnesse 

*  Letter  from  J.  Topping  to  Thurloe.  Tynemoutli,  February  5,  1654. 
State  Papers,  vol.  iii.,  p.  240. 

t  Noble,  vol.  i.,  p.  322.  Colonel  Overton  was  a  party  to  a  project  for  a 
new  Constitution.  The  outlines  may  be  seen  in  Whitelocke,  vol.  iii., 
p.  26.  Goodwin  discusses  the  whole  question;  vol.  iv.,  oh.  xii.  Noble 
is  seldom  to  be  trusted,  especially  when  a  sectary  is  before  him.  His 
"  Lives  of  the  Regicides  "  is  nothing  less  than  a  succession  of  blunders. 


THE    COMMONWEALTH.  209 

against  it,  ami  the  like  liberty  tliey  desired  at  lectures,  &c.; 
2ndly,  That  singing  of  Psahus  be  wholly  for])orue ;  and  Srdly, 
All  bitternes  and  tenncs  of  reflexion;  4tlily,  That  we  forbear  to 
give  magnifying  titles  even  to  men,  or  to  bo  large  in  commendation 
of  their  graces,  when  (said  he)  we  know  no  such  thing  ))y  them,  but 
rather  hear  the  contrary;  5thly,  That  we  shoidd  not  hinder  godly 
men  from  places  of  authority  and  power,  because  of  their  judge- 
ments, &c. 

"This  man  is  now  fixed  with  the  congregation  at  Duljlin,  and  Mr. 
Patient  appointed  as  an  evangelist  to  preach  up  and  downe  the 
country.  The  last  named  being  at  the  Naes,  with  Col.  Axtell,  when 
newes  of  his  Highncss's  danger  by  the  fall  came  unto  them,  they 
laughed  heartily  at  it,  as  a  minister  maintained  by  the  State  in  those 
jiarts  hath  assured  nic.  At  Dublin,  they  solemnly  by  excommunica- 
tion delivered  up  to  Satan  a  godly  man,  for  falling  off,  as  they  said, 
from  the  truthes  of  Christ  to  anti-christian  errors,  in  joining  with  Mr. 
Winter,  &c. ;  and  for  no  other  cause  in  the  world.  The  man  sat  next 
me  the  last  Lord's  day  in  breaking  of  bread  with  that  society,  who 
forthwith  received  him  upon  due  enquiry  after  their  ejection  of  him. 
And  j^et,  alas !  how  is  this  land  shared  out  amongst  persons  of  his 
persuasion;  governours  of  towns  and  citties,  12  at  least,  colonells  10, 
lieut. -colonels  3  or  4,  majors  10,  captains  19  or  20,  preachers  in 
salary  2,  officers  in  the  civill  list  23 ;  and  many  of  whome  I  never 
heard.  The  enclosed  is  a  true  map  of  Ireland,  drawn  by  the 
pen  of  as  judicious,  as  industrious,  as  precious  a  plain -hearted 
minister  of  the  gospell  as  any  I  know  in  Ireland.  Sir,  I  assure  you 
that  my  lord  never  saw  a  line  that  I  writ  you  or  to  his  highnesse. 
I  am  not  unacquainted  with  the  snares  and  temptations  whereby  my 
lord  hath  been  formerly  indangered,  and  whereof  I  suppose  his 
highnes  may  be  still  fearfuU  and  jealous ;  but,  sir,  I  can  assure  you, 
to  the  praise  of  rich  and  glorious  grace,  the  good  hand  of  the  Lord 
hath  wonderfiUly  broken  them,  to  the  admiration  of  all,  l>oth  friends 
and  enemies,  who  formerly  knew  my  lord.  Sir,  I  dare  adde  no 
fui-ther  to  your  trouble  at  ))resent,  but  begge  you  would  pardon, 
"  Su-,  your  faithfidl  Servant  in  the  Lord, 

"T.  Haekison. 
"Dublin,  8ber  17,  1G55."* 

Tlie  anxiety  of  the  Government,  and  the  extent  and  influ- 
ence of  our  brethren  in  this  country,  may  be  accounted  for  by 
several  facts.     Goodwin  assures  us  that  the  majority  of  new 


*  Vol.  xxxi.,p.  207. 

o 


210  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

settlers  planted  in  Ireland  by  Cromwell  and  his  officers  were 
Baptists,  that  the  leading  officers  of  the  victorious  troops 
belonged  to  that  community,  and  that,  by  the  influence  of 
Fleetv.'ood,  a  Baptist  was  made  Lord  Chancellor  and  a 
Privy  Councillor.  On  the  retirement  of  Fleetwood,  the 
second  son  of  the  Protector  was  made  Lord-Deputy.  From 
his  pen  we  have  an  expression  of  the  hopes  and  fears  of  the 
Government.  We  arrange  them  in  the  oi'der  in  which  they 
occur.  Lord  Henry  thus  writes : — "  Here,  about  the  head- 
quai-ters,  as  also  those  in  other  parts  of  the  nation,  are 
abundantly'  satisfied  and  well  pleased  with  the  present 
Government  in  England;  unless  it  be  some  few  inconsider- 
able persons  of  the  Anabaptist  judgment,  who  are  also  quite, 
though  not  very  well  contented;  but  I  believe  they  will 
I'eceive  much  satisfaction  from  a  letter  lately  come  into  their 
hands  from  Mi\  Kiffin  and  Spilsburj^,  in  which  they  have  dealt 
very  homely  and  plainly  with  those  of  that  judgment  here. 
But  I  must  say  this,  that  if  they  had  been  inclinable  to  have 
made  disturbance,  they  had  sufficient  encouragement  from 
those  in  chief  places  here,  who  have  managed  business  of 
late  with  much  peevishness  and  forwardness,  endeavouring 
to  render  the  Government  as  unacceptable  as  possibly  they 
could,  especially  Ludlow  and  Jones.""  From  another  pen 
Thurloe  is  informed: — "Upon  the  first  knowledge  of  this 
great  alteration,  the  A(nabaptists)  were  much  troubled, 
many  of  their  objections  being  against  the  title  of  '  Highness' 
and  'Protector,'  which  they  conceive  are  to  be  attributed  to 
God  alone.  Some  were  also  grounded  upon  his  reports  of 
my  lord's  sitting  at  table  alone,  and  being  served  on  the 
knees.  But  that  which  I  find  to  lie  at  the  bottom  is  this, 
that  the  late  Parliament  did  countenance  their  way  more 
than  any  others;  and  that  his  Highness  was  privy  to,  if  not 
instrumental  to  their  breaking  up,  and  that  at  a  time  when 


*  H.  Cromwell  to  Thmloe,  8th  March,  1653.     State  Papers,  vol.  ii., 
p.  149. 


THE    COMMONWEALTH.  211 

they  were  parsing  a  glorious  reforming  Act,  tlio  taking  away 
tithes,  the  maintenance  of  the  rotten  clergy.  Their  invec- 
tives and  deri.si^•e  expressions  were  many  and  frequent,  and 
nsed  by  the  chief  of  them."  Allusion  also  to  Kiffin  and 
Spilsbury's  letter  occurs  in  this  letter,  and  to  other  matters.* 
"  Sii-,  as  to  your  grand  affairs  of  Ii-eland,  especially  as  to  the 
Anabaptist  pai-ty,  I  am  con6dent  they  are  much  conceived 
in  England.  Truly,  I  am  apt  to  believe  that  on  the  change 
of  affairs  hei-e  was  discontent  enough,  but  very  little  ani- 
mosity :  for  certainly  never  yet  any  faction,  so  well  fortified 
by  all  the  oflBcers,  civil  and  military,  almost  in  the  whole 
nation,  did  quit  their  interests  with  more  silence.  Some  two 
or  three  were  at  the  first  impiisoned  for  plots  and  libels, 
which  caused  such  a  general  compliance,  that  should  a 
stranger  arrive  here  now,  ho  would  never  believe  that  there 
had  been  any  difference,  unless  upon  the  Sabbath  a  congre- 
gation may  be  discovered  of  which  Mr.  Patient  is  pastor,  from 
whose  church  those  in  profitable  employment  daily  do 
dcclaim."t  "I  hear  of  some  strange  passages  of  your  Ajia- 
baptists  of  Dublin,  to  the  grief  and  offence  of  Lord  Henry 
Cromwell.  I  do  marvel  what  that  people  would  have.  My 
lord's  demeanour  hath  been  such  everywhere  since  his 
coming,  that  godly  people  generally  speak  well  of  him,  and 
are  much  satisfied  with  him.  But  the  Anabaptists,  I  hear 
(especially  those  of  Dublin,  for  I  heard  our  Governor,  Col. 
Leigh,  much  commend  him),  are  not  pleased.  Surely  the 
pride  and  uncharitableness  of  that  people  shall  ere  long  bring 
them  low.  I  hope  Lliat  the  horrid  schism  of  the  Anabaptists, 
the  madness  of  the  Quakers,  &c.  &c.,  should  all  ply  that 
petition  more,  '  Thy  kingdom  come,'  "  &c.+  "  Can  his  High- 
ness  believe   that   the   Anabaptists   were,  especially  those 


"  Letter  of  J.  Lloyd  to  Thurloe.  Dublin,  March  13,  1653.  Vol.  ii., 
pp.  163,  164. 

t  R.  Jennings  to  W.  Howard.     Thurloe,  vol.  ii.,  p.  213. 

J  Edward  Wales  to  Dr.  Harrison.  Dublin,  14th  of  10th  montli,  1G55, 
Thurloe,  vol.  iv.,  p.  314. 


212  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

here,  to  be  his  best  and  most  faithful  friends;  and  that  when 
others  -vvill  desert  him  they  "will  stand  by  him,  as  Colonel 
Harrison  says]  But  let  the  sober,  good  people  throvighout 
Ireland  be  asked  their  knowledge,  they  will  be  able  to  tell 
you,  that  when  they  appeared  for  the  owning  of  his  High- 
ness, these  men  did  openly  deny  him;  and  not  only  so,  but 
reproached  and  reviled  those  who  did  own  him,  and  I  am 
confident  have  marked  him  out  for  revenge,  if  ever  the  scale 
should  turn.  Let  us  not  be  deceived.  You  wrote  me  word 
in  your  last  of  Day's  and  Sympson's  can-iage.  Dare  they  be 
so  bold  if  they  had  not  good  backs?  How  long  have  the 
Anabaptists  and  they  been  at  odds?  From  whence  comes 
John  SjToapson?  We  have  cause  to  bless  the  Lord  that  he 
had  not  left  us  to  such  a  spirit.  It  is  good  to  use  tenderness 
towards  them.  I  have  done  it,  and  shall  still  do  it;  but 
shall  withal  be  careful  to  keep  them  from  power  who,  if 
they  had  power,  would  express  little  tenderness  towards 
those  that  would  not  submit  to  their  way."*  "  I  have  since 
my  return  been  more  courted  by  the  Anabaptists  than 
formerly.  Mr.  Patient  and  some  others,  who  had  not  been 
with  me  of  a  long  time  before,  came  to  -visit  me,  and 
expressed  much  as  to  their  satisfaction  with  my  management 
of  things  here,  and  that  then-  people  had  as  much  liberty  as 
they  could  desire ;  and  much  to  the  same  purpose.  What  this 
means,  I  must  of  a  sudden  imagine.  I  shall,  as  formerly, 
cany  it  with  all  moderation  towards  them."t  The  only 
other  allusions  we  shall  give  for  the  present  are  the  fol- 
lowing:— "I  am  glad  the  ministers  parted  so  well  satisfied; 
only  it  is  said,  that  not  only  those  inclined  to  Anabaptism 
disliked  the  proceedings,  but  that  the  soberest  Independents 
were  and  are  dissenters  to  most  of  the  things  agreed  on,"  &c,  J 

*  H.  Cromwell  to  Tliurloe.  Dublin,  Dec.  22,  1655.  Thurloe,  vol.  iv., 
p.  348. 

t  Letter  from  H.  Cromwell.  Dublin,  22d  Oct.,  1656.  Thurloe,  voL  i., 
p.  731. 

t  Thurloe  to  H.  Cromwell.    Whitehall,  June  4, 1658.    Vol.  viL,  p.  153. 


THE   CO.MMONWEALTU.  213 

"The  Anabaptists  seem,  for  the  major  party  here,  to  be 
neither  j^^'o  nor  con:  they  neither  rejoice  with  those  that 
rejoice,  nor  moiuii  with  those  that  mourn,  as  to  the  present; 
but  they  still  look  like  a  Commonwealth  of  their  own,"  &c.* 
"He  (Fleetwood)  then  began  to  tell  me  of  dissatisfaction 
amongst  the  Anabaptists,  Independents,  and  others  pro- 
fessing godliness ;  offered  his  help  and  assurance  to  write  and 
compose,  and  to  that  end  he  would  bring  the  most  discon- 
tented of  all  parties  to  set  meetings.  You  know  I  have  had 
my  shai-e  of  trouble  by  the  Anabaptists.  And  now  things 
were  reduced  to  that  calm  state  that  I  have  not  since  that 
time  heard  the  least  stir  or  complaint  from  them,  but  at 
that  time  many  professions  of  abundant  satisfaction  from 
the  chief  amongst  them.  The  Independents  were  thus  above 
measui-e  pleased;  and  the  fresh  joy  of  being  delivered  from 
the  reign  of  the  Anabaptists  gave  him  no  time  to  think  of 
setting  up  for  himself't 

Many  of  these  had  embraced  the  doctrine  of  the  personal 
reign  of  Christ.  In  history  they  are  classed  with  the  fifth 
monarchy  men  of  this  j)eriod.  The  doctrine  was  not  confined 
to  our  brethren.  Men  of  distinction  in  other  communities 
held  it.  The  opinion  was  probably  not  more  common  then 
than  now.  They  not  only  taught  this,  but  apparently  regarded 
the  saints  as  the  only  fit  persons  for  rulers.  The  fact  is  not  very 
clear.  Warwick  charges  them  with  this,  but  his  competency 
to  judge,  or  his  honesty  in  describing,  may  often  be  ques- 
tioned:— "  For  by  this  time  the  officers  of  the  army,  especi- 
ally Harrison  and  his  fifth  monarchy  men,  pretended  Christ 
was  only  to  reign  and  his  government  to  be  exercised  by  the 
saints,  new  distinctions  are  raised  betwixt  the  people  of  the 
land  (who  were  not  promiscuously  to  be  trusted  with  the 
choice  of  their  own  representatives)  and  the  people  of  God, 
who  were  both  to  choose  and  fill  up  the  vacant  places;  and 

*  Letter  to  Thurloe.     Leith,  June  22,  1658.     Thurloe,  vol.  vii.,  p.  194. 
t  H.  CromweU  to  Monk.     June  23,  1658.     Thurloe,  vol.  vii.,  p.  199. 


214  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

in  such  persons  it  was  fit  only  to  lodge  the  supreme  autho- 
rity, men  fearing  God  and  of  approved  sincerity."* 

These  attemjits,  like  most  others  against  the  Protector's 
Government,  were  abortive.  His  genius  penetrated  every 
plot,  and  at  the  most  fitting  time  defeated  it.  It  was  so  in 
this  case.  An  order  was  issued  about  Feb.  19,  1655,  by 
which  Major-General  Harrison,  Colonel  Eich,  and  others, 
were  placed  under  arrest,  t  How  soon  after  the  general  was 
liberated  we  know  not,  but  his  zeal  was  not  exhausted. 
We  find  him  at  large  agaiu,  and  with  his  friends  pursuing 
the  same  course.  Two  years  later  tlian  his  fii-st  imprison- 
ment (Feb.,  1G57),  Ci-omwell  issued  his  commands  to  one  of 
his  ofiicers  in  these  words: — "Sii-,  I  desire  you  to  seize 
Major-General  Harrison,  Mr.  Carew,  Portman,  and  such  as 
are  eminent  fifth  monarchy  men,  especially  Fecike  and  Rogers: 
do  it  speedily,  and  you  shall  have  a  warrant  after  you  have 
done.":}:  Eegaining  their  liberty,  they,  with  other  repub- 
licans, made  an  attempt  the  year  after,  but  were  seized,  and 
Harrison,  Lawson,  Rich,  and  Col.  Dan  vers,  with  some  of  their 
accomplices,  were  confined  in  the  Gate  House  tDl  the  death 
of  the  Protector.il  We  have  entered  into  these  details,  as 
tending  to  illustrate  some  important  movements  in  our  body 
during  this  period  of  our  history.  Other  matters  will  now 
claim  the  reader's  attention. 

During  Monk's  absence  from  Scotland,  Colonel  Lilburne 
encouraged  his  brethren  in  their  work  of  faith  and  labour  of 

*  Memoirs  of  Sir  P.  "Warwick,  p.  40o. 

+  Perfect  Diurnal,  1655,  p.  272. 

t  A  True  and  Impartial  Narrative,  kc,  by  Kingsley  Bethel.  Maseres 
Tracts,  vol.  iv.,  ji.  .527. 

II  Public  Intelligence,  April  13,  1657.  A  manifesto  was  issued,  called 
"A  Standard  Set  up,  whereuuto  the  true  Seed  and  Saints  of  the  Most 
High  may  be  gathered  together  for  the  Lamb,  against  the  Beast  and  the 
False  Prophet ;  or  the  principles  and  declarations  of  the  Eemnant  who 
have  waited  for  the  blessed  appearance  and  hope."  Harrison,  Admiral 
Lawson,  Colonel  Oakey,  Portman,  and  others,  had  been  consulted,  but 
there  is  no  proof  that  they  united  in  the  foolish  enterprise.— r/(/'j 
Goodwin,  vol.  iv.,  chap.  24. 


THE    COMMONWEALTH.  215 

love.  His  troops  contained  many  Baptists.  In  all  their  stations 
tlioy  held  their  meetings.  Aid  from  the  churches  in  the 
North  was  sent  at  the  Colonel's  request,  especially  from  the 
church  at  Hcxluun.  Their  succe.ss  was  considerable.  Monlc's 
return  in  lG5i  checked  this.  He  had  no  sympathy  with 
them.  His  deej),  designing  spirit,  must  often  have  been 
crossed  by  their  manly  uprightness  and  Christian  simplicity. 
With  the  Presbyterians  there  was  more  of  harmony.  Their 
hatred  to  our  brethren  was  intense.  The  Parliament  of  the 
nation,  in  1652,  had  issued  a  declai-ation  against  the  new 
Scotch  dippei-s.*  A  memorial  was  presented  to  him  from 
the  Bajitist  churches  in  IGoo,  and  another  in  1G59,  by  the 
Baptists  in  and  around  Edinburgh,  in  which  they  asked  for 
a  toleration  to  all  sects  except  Papists  and  Prelatists.+  The 
reply  of  Monk,  as  he  was  de})arting  on  his  treacherous 
enterprise,  was  worthy  of  the  deep-laid  hypocrisy  of  the 
man.  The  following,  presented  to  Monk  in  16-54,  may  be 
taken  as  a  specimen  of  these  memorials.  It  probably  refers 
to  charges  of  attempts  to  overthrow  the  Government : — 

"Presented  January  24,  1654. 
"To  the  El^ht  Honourable  General  Monk,  Comraander-iu-L'liief  of 

all  the  Forces  in  Scotland. 
"  The  humble  address  of  the  baptized  churches,  consisting  of  officers, 

soldiers,  and  others,  walking  together  in  Gospel  order,  at  St. 

Johnston's,  Leith  and  Edinburgh. 
"  May  it  please  your  honour,  that  good  hand  of  Providence  which 
called  many  of  us  into  the  armies,  from  the  beginning  of  the  late 
intestine  troubles,  hath  also  (to  our  comfort)  kejit  us  hitherto  free 
from  those  works  of  darkness  which  tend  to  division  and  confusion  both 
in  State  and  arm}'.  Therefore  we  desire,  by  this  our  humble  address, 
to  vindicate  om-  integrity  before  men  and  angels  from  those  calumnies 
lately  cast  upon  us,  making  us  the  authors  of  dissention  and  distiu'b- 
ance  to  the  publique ;  when,  on  the  contrary,  our  conscience  bears  us 
witness,  that  our  weak  endeavours  have  been  to  promote  the  publique 


*  Wliitelocke,  vol.  iii.,  p.  480. 

t  The  former  may  be  found  in  the  Perfect  Diurnal,  No.  270,  Feb.,  1G55 ; 
the  latter  fact  in  Douglas's  Hist.,  p.  43.  Johnston's  Ciicular  Letter  of 
the  Baptist  Union  of  Scotland  will  supply  more  details. 


216  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

interest  in  the  greatest  danger  and  hardship ;  for  which  also  we  have 
improved  oivc  portion  in  heaven,  by  prayers  and  tears  to  Him  that 
was  able  to  save.  And  seeing  now  at  length  we  are  so  saved  that 
we  are  brought  (by  a  continued  series  of  providences,  through  all  the 
visible  difficulties  of  twelve  years'  warr)  unto  a  blessed  hope  and 
expectation  of  reaping  a  harvest  of  rest  and  peace,  we  are  grieved, 
and  cannot  but  mourn  to  see  that  raging  spirit  of  enmitj'  lie  in 
the  hearts  of  men  bent  to  destroy  their  brethren ;  some,  like  Core  and 
his  companies,  labouring  to  turn  the  people  from  obedience  to  their 
leaders ;  others  by  false  surmisings  and  open  reproaching,  endea- 
vouring to  exasperate  the  spirit  of  superiors  against  their  people :  so 
that  if  there  be  any  enchantment  against  Jacob  or  divination  against 
Israel,  if  men  woiild  have  cursed  where  C4od  hath  blessed,  they  had, 
ere  this,  involved  the  nation  into  blood  again ;  and  as  no  age  since 
Israel's  coming  out  of  Egypt  can  j'^rallel  the  great  and  weighty 
works  of  God  for  a  poor  despised  people,  with  this  we  live  in,  even 
so  we  are  persuaded  that  there  was  never  more  subtilties  of  Sathan, 
imder  specious  pretences  of  religion  and  conscience,  both  in  ecclesias- 
ticks  and  politicks,  than  this  age  hath  produced. 

"  Therefore  we  have  cause  to  judge,  that  these  late  devices  of  some 
men  are  but  new  tricks  of  the  old  deceiver  to  subvert  the  founda- 
tions of  good  government,  and  hinder  an  established  liberty  to  God's 
people,  that  in  the  midst  of  our  divisions  he  might  more  easily 
strengthen  his  own  kingdom,  and  in  time  bring  a  yoak  again  upon 
tlie  necks  of  saints.  But  that  which  is  our  greatest  tro*ble  in  the 
midst  of  these  stirrs,  is  to  see  that  any  who  have  professed  godhness, 
or  any  member  of  our  body,  should  give  the  least  occasion  to  be  sus- 
j)ected  to  joyn  hands  with  the  workers  of  iniquity.  By  which  mis- 
carriage, the  honor  of  Christ,  religion,  and  ourselves,  lie  obnoxious 
to  the  calumnies  of  such  as  delight  to  render  our  profession  odious, 
and  wait  for  occasion  to  say  of  us,  as  sometimes  it  was  said  of  o\ir 
betters,  *  These  are  they  that  turn  the  world  upside  down ;  charging 
us  with  despising  dominion,  and  speaking  evil  of  dignities,  as  if  our 
designs  were  to  pull  down  others,  that  we  might  set  up  ourselves.' 
Now,  lest  our  silence  in  this  day  of  slander  should  seem  to  plead  lis 
guilty,  we  are  prest  in  our  consciences,  first,  in  the  deep  sense  of  the 
honour  of  Christ  that  lies  at  stake.  Secondly,  out  of  duty  to  his  High- 
ness, your  Honor,  and  all  good  men,  to  present  this  our  humble 
address,  to  clear  our  innocency  from  those  unjust  aspersions  we  are 
charged  with,  through  the  defect  of  one,  we  knowing  none  more 
under  suspicion  of  guilt  in  this  matter  of  our  society. 

"  We  do,  therefore,  as  in  the  presence  of  the  Searcher  of  all  hearts, 
declare, — 


THE    COMMONWEALTH.  217 

"1.  That  we  are  altogether  innocent  and  ignorant  of  any  plotting 
and  contriving  with  any  person  whatsoever  in  this  design  spoken  of, 
or  in  any  other  tending  to  division  in  State  or  army. 

"2.  We  doe  disown  all  such  (though  our  brethren)  that  were  or 
may  be  found  contrivers  or  fomentors  of  any  of  the  aforesaid  wicked 
devices,  and  bear  our  testimonies  against  such  as  great  sinners,  and 
as  enemies  to  the  publique  peace  and  welfair  of  the  nation. 

"3.  We  doe  declare,  hereby,  freedom  in  owning  the  present  raagis- 
tracj'  and  authority,  by  the  providence  of  (iod  set  over  us,  in  the 
hands  of  our  present  govern  ours,  and  goveruour-in-chief,  to  whom  we 
owe  not  only  our  civil  subjection,  for  conscience  sake,  but  also  our 
prayers  and  supplications  for  a  blessing  upon  their  righteous  endea- 
vours; and  that  at  tlie  end  of  their  work  they  may  receive  that 
immortal  crown  of  righteousness,  as  a  reward  for  all  that  hath  or 
shall  be  done  by  them  for  God  and  his  i)Oor  people. 

"4.  Seeing  it  is  the  design  of  our  enemies  to  brand  us,  as  those 
that  woidd  throw  down  others  to  set  up  ourselves  and  interest,  we 
doe  humbly  manifest  as  unto  your  Honor,  so  to  all  the  world,  that  it 
is  neither  our  opinion  or  desire  that  men  of  our  judgment,  or  any 
other  particiUar  interest  or  faction  of  men  so  called,  should  be  set  up 
to  lord  it  over  their  differing  lirethren ;  but  count  it  mercy  that  there 
is  a  curbe  upon  each  interest,  and  yet  all  have  their  liberty.  As  for 
our  parts,  we  lay  no  other  claim  to  State  affairs,  or  great  places,  than 
our  national  birthright,  in  a  peaceable  subjection  to  the  powers  set 
over  us.  Our  greatest  expected  freedom  being  quietly  to  worship 
God :  which  freedom  we  conceive  is  a  fruit  of  the  purchase  of  our  dear 
Redeemer,  an  answer  to  prayers  of  many  generations  and  a  nine 
years'  contest  with  tears  and  blood.  And  in  this  we  are  confident  to 
have  the  favoiu-able  aspect  of  his  Highness  the  Lord  Protector,  your 
Honor,  and  all  unbyassed  Christians ;  and  as  for  those  other  expected 
good  things  for  the  nation,  and  ourselves  as  part,  we  are  taught  by 
the  husbandman  that  laboureth,  to  wait  with  patience  till  the  Lord 
caiise  the  early  and  latter  rain  of  heaven  to  water  the  hearts  of 
governors  and  govem'd,  that  the  fruits  of  righteousness,  love,  and 
meekness,  may  more  abimdantly  appear  in  a  wise  and  holy  conver- 
sation ;  then  will  magistrates  be  more  apt  to  rule,  and  people  more 
ready  to  obey,  and  the  nations  more  fit  to  receive  the  mercies,  which 
we  fear  their  imworthyness  hinders. 

"And  now  having  freely  opened  our  hearts,  as  in  the  presence  of 
the  Almighty,  we  dare  appeal  from  heaven  to  earth,  and  let  our 
enemies  lie  our  judges;  yea,  if  wee  have  done  tliis,  if  iniquity  be  in 
our  hands,  let  the  enemy  tread  down  our  lives  upon  the  earth,  and 
lay  down  our  honor  in  the  dust ;  but  our  defense  is  of  God,  as  con- 


218  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

siderecl  this  oiu*  liiimble  address  (wherein  we  mind  ouely  plainness 
and  truth,  measuring  our  words  with  the  upright  meanings  of  our 
hearts),  we  may  expect  the  continuance  of  your  Honor's  good  affec- 
tions, which  we  shall  always  endeavour  to  answer  in  all  humble  sub- 
mission to  your  just  conmiands,  with  earnest  desire  for  a  portion  of 
that  heavenly  wisdom  to  direct  you  in  going  in  and  out  before  so 
great  a  people.  If  any  thmk  we  plead  too  freely  in  our  own  cause, 
let  them  consider  it's  matter  of  fact  we  are  charged  with,  and  they 
will  say  it's  lawful  for  us  to  plead  not  guilty ;  and  we  desire  the  neces- 
sity of  union  amongst  good  men  in  this  day,  when  division  is  our 
enemies'  greatest  strength,  may  make  our  apology  for  this  trouble, 
there  being  nothing  that  will  more  rejoice  oiu-  hearts  than  to  see  the 
Lord's  people  in  the  nations  and  army  to  joyn  hearts  and  hands 
with  their  leaders,  to  advance  the  great  work  of  God  begun  in  our 
days;  wherefore  we  hope  we  shall  not  cease  night  and  day  beseech- 
ing the  great  Shepherd  of  Israel  to  give  unto  his  people  (scattered 
flock)  one  heart  to  fear  him,  tliat  they  may  stand  fast  with  one  spirit, 
with  one  mind,  striving  together  for  the  faith  of  the  Gospel,  that  the 
beloved  of  his  soul  may  be  but  one  protector,  Parliament ;  and  people, 
one  general,  commander,  superior  and  inferior,  fearing  God ;  to  be  all 
one  in  and  for  Christ,  and  the  i)romotion  of  his  kingdom  in  this 
world.  Then  might  ^se  assnredly  exjiect  that  the  Lord  would  go 
forth  with  our  armies,  that  his  glory  would  dwell  in  our  camps,  and 
that  he  woidd  delight  in  us  to  do  us  good,  and  still  use  us  as  his  poor 
instruments  in  the  rest  of  his  work,  and  at  length  cause  righteous- 
ness, truth,  peace,  meekness,  and  sweetness  to  flow  forth  from  rulers 
to  people,  from  people  to  rulers :  so  shall  all  of  ns  have  occasion  to 
bless  God  for  such  magistrates,  and  they  to  bless  God  for  such  people ; 
and  both  rulers  and  people,  with  joynt  consent,  will  have  abundant 
cause  to  praise  the  Lord  for  his  unspeakable  mercy." 

Heatli  tells  iis,  that  "ou  arri-ving  at  Leith,  October  19th, 
lGo9,  he  turned  all  the  Anabaptistical  officers  out  of  his 
regiments,  and  secured  them  in  Tiniptallan  Castle.  His  own 
lieutenant,  Colonel  Holmes,  was  an  Anabajitist.  They  were 
afterwards  removed  to  the  Basse  (the  Bass  Rock)  Island,  out 
of  the  way  of  all  communication. "J  The  reason  is  obvious, 
from  another  fact  which  we  select  from  the  same  Clironicle. 
Lambert,  who  had  been  ordered  to  check  the  progress  ot 
the    suspected    general,  had   ma;iy  Baptists   in   his   array. 


*  Chron.,  pp.430,  432. 


THE    COMMONWEALTH.  219 

"  Relying  on  the  army  interest,  and  the  Anabaptist  party 
(now  very  numerous,  and  at  this  time  the  uppermost),  for 
that  had  its  turn,  too,  as  well  as  the  Presljyterians  and  Inde- 
pendents, but  swayed  not  so  long  (all  the  other  sects  centre- 
ing here);  for  now  was  the  time  of  the  fulness  and  visible 
power  of  Zion,  sis  it  was  concluded  by  this  people."* 

It  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  ascertain  with  any  de- 
gree of  accuracy  the  total  number  of  Baptist  churches  at  this 
time ;  but  one  thing  is  certain,  the  rapidity  of  their  increase. 
In  the  metropolis,  in  Kent,  in  the  Midland  counties,  and  in 
the  northern  parts  of  the  island,  they  had  multiplied  greatly.t 
Better  still,  their  order  and  discipline  was  assuming  the  form 
and  consistency  which  now  marks  them.  The  facilities  for 
personal  intercourse  with  each  other  were  exceedingly  few. 
Travelling  was  not  only  difficult,  but  dangerous.  Yet  a 
deep  fraternal  interest  in  each  other's  spiritual  welfare 
was  cherished.  They  looked  on  each  (thoiigh  separate  and 
independent  communities)  as  forming  one  common  brother- 
hood. They  were  the  depositories  of  precious  truth,  luiknowii 
and  rejected  by  other  devout  men.  The  purity  of  Christ's 
church — the  individuality  of  religion — the  freedom  of  con- 
science, were  held  by  them  ^vith  a  clearness  found  in  no 
other  community.  To  cherish  and  expand  them,  two  plans 
were   adopted  by  our  brethren.     One  was,  intercoui'se  by 

*  Chron.,p.  431. 

+  One  01-  two  items  of  information  we  have  gleaned  since  tlie  above  was 
written.  In  1653,  H.  Jessey  says :  "That  in  the  church  meeting  in 
Great  All-Hallows,  London,  200  have  been  baptized  within  these  three 
years."  That  a  messenger  from  his  own  church,  and  another  from  the  one 
above,  had  been  sent  to  visit  churches  in  the  counties  of  Essex,  Suffolk, 
and  Norfolk,  and  to  understand  their  way  and  orders,  and  to  further  love 
amongst  them  all  that  love  our  Lord  Christ  in  sincerity  and  communion 
with  theirs.  .  .  They  were  received  in  the  Lord  by  several  churches — • 
about  ten  in  Essex,  as  many  in  Suffolk,  and  as  many  in  Norfolk— sound 
in  the  faith  and  holy  in  life  ;  though  differing  with  some  about  the  subject 
and  manner  of  the  ordinances  of  baptism,  or  some  about  such  as  laying  on 
of  hands,  or  blessing  of  children,  or  singing  psalms  or  hymns  or  spiritual 
songs,  as  they  were  advised  by  those  messengers. — Letter  to  the  Church 
at  Hexham,  from  the  Church  under  H.  Jessey's  care.     Douglas,  p.  51. 


220  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

letter  with  distant  cliui'clies ;  the  other,  the  fraternal  and 
voluntary  union  of  churches  in  a  given  district  for  mutual 
Christian  intercourse  and  prayer.  In  the  former,  the  London 
chui'ches  took  the  lead.  "  It  hath  pleased  the  Lord,  we 
hope,  to  put  into  the  churches  in  London,  that  there  might 
be  more  knowledge  taken  of  all  the  chui'ches  of  Christ  in 
the  nation,  whereby  they  may  the  better  know  how  to  own 
them,  and  demean  themselves  to  each  other  upon  all  occa- 
sions, confirming  their  love  to  each  other,  that  they  may 
sei-ve  one  another  in  love,  as  becometh  saints;  and,  there- 
fore, it  would  much  sadden  our  spirits  if  there  should  be 
any  occasion,  given  or  taken,  amongst  you,  that  you  might 
not  be  upon  the  hearts  of  the  chui'ches,  in  owning  you  as 
other  churches."  These  letters  were  frequently  sent  also  in 
cases  of  difficulty,  arising  from  disputes  on  doctrine  or  dis- 
cipline. At  times  they  were  the  expressions  of  various 
churches,  and  not  unfrequently  conveyed  by  some  brother 
possessing  the  confidence  of  the  brethren,  as  well  fitted  to 
discharge  the  onerqus  duties  of  his  mission.  There  was  no 
authority  assumed.  The  intercourse  was  of  a  purely  frateraal 
kind.  The  following  is  a  sample  of  these  epistles : — 
"To  the  Chiirch  of  Clirist  at  Hexham. — 1653. 

"Dearly-beloved  Bretheen  m  our  Lord  Christ, — We  salute 
you  in  the  Lord,  prajang  for  the  multiplying  of  grace  and  peace  upon 
you,  from  God  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

"The  report  of  the  work  of  God  in  you  and  for  you,  in  persuading 
your  hearts  to  obey  his  will  in  being  baptized  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  whilst  so  many  in  all  places  endeavoiir  to  deter  people 
from  embracing  the  plain  precepts  of  Christ,  and  liy  all  sorts  of  arts 
seem  to  darken  the  truth,  and  to  continue  the  profane  abiise  of  infant 
sprinkling  on  superstitious  and  Judaizing  grounds,  by  which  the  refor- 
mation of  the  churches  is  hindered;  and  not  only  so,  but  that  he 
hath  kept  you  from  those  errors  of  universal  grace — proficient,  but 
becoming  efifectual  by  the  motion  of  man's  will  not  determined  by 
God,  such  other  errors  that  corrupt  other  baptized  people ;  and  that 
he  timely  discovered  that  counterfeit  Jew,  who  was  likely  either  to 
have  corrapted  you,  or  brought  you  into  obloquy ;  and  the  keeping 
you,  as  we  hope,  unspotted  of  the  world ; — hath  filled  our  hearts  with 
joy,  and  enlarged  our  hearts  with  thanksgiving  to  God;  and  so  much 


THE    COMMONWEALTH,  221 

the  rather  because  we  hope  that  from  you  the  trixth  of  God  may 
sound  fartlicr,  and  your  holy  conversation  provoke  those  that  yet  are 
averae  from  tho  right  ways  of  the  Lord  in  \\  hich  you  walk,  to  con- 
sider their  M'ays,  and  inquire  after  the  mind  of  the  Lord  more 
earnestly;  for  all  which  reasons,  and  that  there  might  be  a  holy 
correspondence  held  between  us  and  you,  as  those  that  are  members 
of  one  body,  have  one  spu-it,  ami  called  in  one  hope  of  t)ur  calling — 
have  one  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism,  one  God  and  Father,  who  is 
above  all,  and  through  all,  and  in  you  all — we  have  judged  it  our 
duty  to  "write  unto  you,  that  we  might  congratulate  with  you  for 
tlie  mercy  and  the  grace  of  God  vouchsafed  to  you,  and  assure  you 
of  our  readiness  to  assist  you  in  anything  that  may  tend  to  youi' 
edification  ;  and  to  concur  with  you  in  any  work  of  the  Lord,  where1)y 
the  kingdom  of  Christ  may  be  advanced,  and  the  opposite  dominion, 
of  Mdiat  sort  soever,  depressed.  As  for  yourselves,  though  we  are 
contidout  that  he  who  hath  begun  the  good  work  in  you  will  perfect 
it  to  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ,  yet  beiug  sensible  that  you  have  potent 
adversaries,  who  will  endeavour  with  all  cunning  and  violence  to  cast 
you  down  to  the  earth,  that  you  may  lose  your  crown ;  we  think  it 
safe  for  you  that  you  Ije  exhoi-ted  by  us  to  look  to  your  garments 
that  they  be  kept  clean,  and  that  you  may  be  as  '  the  sous  of  God 
without  rebuke,  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  generation, 
amongst  whom  ye  shine  as  lights  in  the  world  j'  and  because  your 
steadfastness  will  rest  much  upon  your  order  and  imity,  we  beseech 
you  that  ye  mark  them  that  cause  divisions  and  offences  contrary  to 
the  doctrine  you  have  received,  and  avoid  them ;  and  that  you  obey 
them  that  are  over  you  in  the  Lord,  who  watch  for  your  souls  as 
them  that  must  give  account  to  God,  that  they  may  do  it  vrith  joy 
and  not  with  grief.  "Whatever  differences  may  arise,  labour  to  com- 
pose them  among  youi'selvcs,  and  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in 
the  bond  of  peace ;  let  nothing  be  done  through  strife  or  vain  glory, 
but  in  lowliness  of  mind  let  each  esteem  others  before  themselves ; 
love  humility,  it  will  help  nuich  to  unity ;  take  heed  of  lightness  and 
inconstancy.  If  any  have  private  opinions,  let  them  not  be  dividged ; 
each  one  seek  privately  information  of  their  teachers,  or  such  as  are 
onost  able,  and  not  zealously  promote  them  without  regard  to  the 
church's  peace.  Let  every  one  study  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  his  own 
business,  remembering  that  as  in  the  body  all  members  have  not  the 
same  ofhce,  so  it  is  in  the  chm-ch  ;  and,  therefore,  each  member  is  to 
keep  his  own  place,  and  thei-ein  abide  with  God. 

"Brethren,  if  it  had  seemed  good  to  the  Lord,  we  should  have  been 
glad  if  our  dwelling  had  been  nearer,  that  we  might  have  visited  you 
in  person;  but  the  Lord  otherwise  ordering  it,  we  have  contented 


222  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

ourselves  only  at  this  time  to  signif^r  our  miud  to  you  by  writing, 
hoping  to  hear  from  you  of  the  grace  of  God  to  j^ou,  in  preser\T[ng 
and  increasing  you  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  and  the  love  of  God 
unto  eternal  life.  We  farther  signify  to  you  our  longing  to  have  mth 
you,  and  all  the  baptized  churches  that  hold  the  faith  purely,  such 
communion  as  that  we  may,  by  letters  or  messengers,  in  some 
meeting  or  meetings,  communicate  to  each  other  our  knowledge  for 
the  testifying  of  each  other,  and  obtaining  of  consent  of  doctrine 
among  the  churches ;  and  we  further  desire  that  there  may  be  some 
certain  way  of  approving  and  sending  teachers  from  the  cliurches,  and 
of  signifying  to  all  churches  of  our  communion  who  are  approved  or 
disallowed  as  teachers,  or  in  case  of  removal  as  brethren,  that  the 
chiu'ches  of  God  may  not  be  deceived  by  such  impostors  as  the  coun- 
terfeit Jew  with  you,  and  that  Popish  and  other  devilish  practices 
to  divide  or  corrupt  them  may  be  prevented,  though  we  hope  the 
pastors  in  every  church  will  be  very  watchfid  in  this  thing. 

' '  For  the  present  we  have  no  more  to  write  to  you,  but  to  entreat 
your  prayers  for  us  as  we  for  you,  that  you  may  stand  complete  in  all 
the  will  of  God,  to  whose  tuition  we  commend  you,  and  remain  your 
strongly  uuchamed  brethren  in  the  bonds  of  perfectness,  and  the 
unfeigned  love  of  you  in  the  Lord. 

"Signed,  in  the  name  of  the  church  at  Weston,  near  Permaid,  in 
Herefordshire : — John  Skinner,  Teacher;  John  Street,  John  Skinner, 
Thomas  Rudge,  Brethren. 

"Do.,  church  meeting  at  Abergavenny,  Monmouthshire : — William 
Pritchard,  Elder;  Richard  Rogers,  Anthoney  Hare,  Brethren. 

"Do.,  baptized  church  in  the  Forest  of  Dean,  in  the  county  of 
Gloucester : — William  Skinner,  John  Lills,  Elders. 

"Do.,  church  of  Aintile,  in  Herefordshire: — John  Tombcs,  Pastor; 
John  Patshall,  John  Warracklow,  Elders. 

"Do.,  Beaudly,  in  Worcestershire: — Thomas  Bolstonne,  Philip 
Man,  Piobert  Girdler,  Elders. 

"Do.,  the  church  at  Netherton,  in  Gloucestershire: — Richard 
Harrison,  Paul  Frum,  William  Drew,  Elders. 

"Do.,  in  the  city  of  Hereford: — R.  Loudon,  Pastor;  Charles 
Powell,  Steven  Chamberlin. 

"Do.,  the  church  at  Wormbredy :— John  Bell,  Francis  Pobb. 

"Do.,  in  Colman  Street,  Swan  Alley,  London  (it  coming  to  us  the 
2d  of  the  8th  month,  1653) : — Henry  Jessey,  I'eacher ;  George  Bag- 
gett,  George  Wadde,  Brethren."* 

The  formation  of  Associations  is  traced  to  this  period. 


*  New  Evangelical  Magazine,  vol.  x.  (1824). 


THE    COMMONWEALTH.  J^O 

They  have  long  funned  a  source  of  healthful  and  pleasant 
intercourse  to  many.  From  various  parts  of  the  county  or 
district,  brethren  came.  Intercourse  was  not  ea,sy.  Roads 
existed  more  in  name  than  in  fact.  No  means  of  public 
transit  existed,  and  commerce  called  individuals  but  rarely 
from  their  homes,  or  only  to  the  next  market  town.  These 
annual  gatherings  of  the  brethren  were  hailed  as  seasons  of 
holy  festivity.  Men  of  note,  both  for  piety  and  action,  were 
brought  together,  and  by  their  counsel  and  preaching  greatly 
aided  the  church  of  God.  The  records  of  many  of  these 
early  ones  have  been  lost.  From  them,  if  they  were  at 
connuand,  might  be  traced  the  progress  of  opinion  and 
ecclesiastical  polity  which  finally  governed  them.  The 
earliest  notice  we  have  of  these  gatherings  in  England  is 
about  1653,  when  the  Western  Association  was  formed.  The 
Midland  followed  in  1G55,  and  others  in  various  parts  of 
the  country  were  soon  after  established.  To  these  annual 
gatherings  the  churches  frequently  sent  many  queries,  and 
solicited  advice  on  topics  which  might  have  disturbed  their 
unity.  We  select  one  or  two.  On  the  doctrine  of  laying  on 
of  hands,  one  church  had  asked  the  opinion  of  the  assembled 
brethren.  The  fullow-ing  was  the  reply: — "  The  laying  on  of 
hands  on  baptized  believers  should  be  left  to  the  judgment 
of  the  individual  churches;  but  that  if  any  minister  con- 
tended for  it  as  a  term  of  communion,  he  should  not  be  per- 
mitted to  preach  in  any  of  tlie  churches  of  the  Association."'"" 
The  singing  of  psalms,  the  public  fasts,  and  other  topics, 
mark  the  early  gatherings  of  these  bodies.  Their  letters 
are  full  of  these  inquiries,  and  the  replies  which  were  given 
to  them.  In  many  cases  their  proceedings  were  not  printed, 
but  the  minister  or  messenger  of  each  church  was  expected 
to  take  a  copy  for  the  use  of  the  church,  and  in  many  cases 
they  were  regularly  transcribed  amongst  the  records  of  the 
church.      We  have  examined  some  of  them,  though  none  of 


Mould's  Norwich  Cr.se,  pp.  2.32,  239. 


224:  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

SO  early  a  date  as  1655.  Thomas  has  given  us  an  account  of 
these  gatherings  in  Wales  of  a  later  period,  when  vast  num- 
bers assembled  at  them.  "  About  a  eentmy  ago,"  he  says, 
"it  was  sometimes  necessaiy  to  prepare  for  700  or  800 
horses,  which  graze  in  the  time  of  sei'vice;  two  or  three 
persons  are  appointed  to  take  care  of  them.  The  inhabitants 
for  five  or  six  miles  round  the  place  provide  lodgings  for  the 
strangers,  and  good  entertainment  for  man  and  horse  gratis. 
The  generosity  of  the  county  is  sxich,  that  at  these  times 
all  descriptions  of  persons  open  their  doors  cordially,  whether 
religious  or  not,  gentlemen  as  well  as  farmers.  The  leading 
men  of  the  congregations  know  beforehand  where  to  send 
two,  four,  six,  or  more  guests,  and  there  are  persons  ready 
to  take  them  to  their  respective  lodgings.  On  Tuesday 
evening,  there  is  a  meeting  almost  on  pui-jiose  to  accom- 
modate the  strangers.  They  generally  take  their  horses 
with  them;  and  where  they  lodge  that  night,  they  commonly 
do  the  next.  The  chief  public  day  is  the  Wednesday. 
Thursday  is  the  afternoon  they  set  out  on  theii*  return. 
They  sup  and  breakfast  where  they  lodge.  The  people  before- 
hand bake  a  quantity  of  good  bread,  and  brew  good  table 
beer,  and  put  it  in  the  vestry,  or  some  convenient  place; 
this,  with  cheese  and  butter,  makes  their  dinner  on  Wed- 
nesday, which  they  take  in  and  about  the  meeting-house  on 
tables,  boards,  and  as  they  can.  As  no  meeting-house  will 
contain  the  people,  a  temporary  pulpit  is  prepared  in  a  most 
convenient  place,  that  the  auditory  may  hear  in  the  house 
and  out;  it  is  so  covered  as  to  prevent  the  sun  and  rain 
from  coming  to  the  minister.  The  multitude  is  peculiarly 
numerous  on  Wednesday,  as  all  the  neighbourhood  flock 
together  on  that  day,"  &c.* 

During  this  period,  many  sects  suddenly  rose  for  a  time 
before  the  people,  and  then  retired,  f    Under  various  names 

*  Thomas,  p.  87.  The  reader  may  consult  also  Douglas's  Northern 
Church.     Gould  has  collected  many  examples.     Norwich  Chapel  Case. 

1*  "  I  speak  not  of  sects  in  an  ill  sense,  but  the  nation  is  mightily  made 
up  of  them."— Cromwell's  Speech,  Jan.  25, 1057.     Burton,  vol.  ii.,  p.  365. 


THE    COMMONWEALTH.  225 

they  pass  before  lis.  Kanters,"'  Muggletonians,t  Seekei's,J 
Familists,||  and  Quakers. §  Many  of  these  frequently  were 
passed  as  Anabaptists,  and  not  less  frequently  the  latter 
were  confounded  with  them.  Most  of  the  former  sects  have 
passed  away,  and  the  followers  of  Fox  alone  remain  with 
any  distinct  organization.  Upon  many  of  them  the  hand 
of  the  Government  was  heavy.  Toleration  of  religious 
ojiinion  during  this  period  was  various.  Upon  Fox,  ISTaylor, 
and  others,  ])crsecution  fell  vei-y  severely.  Imprisonment, 
whipping,  the  stocks,  and  other  modes  of  treatment,  were 
familiar  to  these  men.  They  bore  their  trials  with  patience. 
Kor  were  our  own  brethren  free  from  this  kind  of  oppression. 
.Some  of  them,  far  from  the  seat  of  Government,  suffered 
frequently  from  the  little  men  in  power.  Mr.  Gi'antham 
says  : — "  In  the  tmie  of  Cromwell's  usurpation,  they  did  pull 
us  before  the  judgment-seats,  because  we  could  not  worship 
God  after  the  will  of  the  Lord  Protector;  for  so  they  styled 
him  in  their  articles  against  us.  And  we  had  then  our 
goods  taken  away,  and  never  restored  to  this  day."  The 
pretensions  of  some  of  the  former  were  blasphemous — their 
conduct  frequently  outraging  all  law,  interfering  with  the 
order  of  public  service,  and  it  is  probable  that  many  of 
them  would  be  treated  not  as  sufferers  for  religion,  but  as 
the  violators  of  public  order,  and  subject,  therefore,  to  the 
common  law.  We  only  suggest;  we  offer  no  apology  for 
suffering  for  conscience  sake. 


*  "They  made  it  tlieu"  business  to  set  up  the  light  of  nature,  untler 
the  name  of  Christ  in  man,  and  to  dishonour  and  cry  down  the  churcli. 
Scriptures,  ministry,  worship,  and  ordinances ;  and  called  men  to  hearken 
to  Christ  within  them,"  &c.— Baxter's  Life,  p.  101. 

t  Muggleton  and  Reeve,  the  founders  of  this  sect,  professed  to  be  the 
two  witnesses  clothed  in  sackcloth  spoken  of  in  the  Revelation. 

J  Tliese  taught,  "That  the  Scriptures  were  uncei'tain;  that  present 
mii-acles  are  necessary  to  faith ;  that  our  ministry  is  null,  and  without 
authority;  and  our  worship  and  ordinances  unnecessary  and  vain,"  &c. — 
Baxter,  p.  101. 

II  A  notice  of  the  founder  of  this  sect  has  appeared  in  vol.  i.  of  this 
work.  5  Fox's  Journal. 


22G  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

A  writer,  wlio  ordinarily  manifests  considerable  impar- 
tiality when  dealing  with  dissidents  from  his  church,  has 
said :  "  The  sectaries  Avho  broke  out  at  the  close  of  the  reign 
of  James,  and  were  now  (1642)  spreading  like  locusts  over 
the  whole  land,  held  and  taught,  without  any  reserve,  that 
the  actions  recorded  in  the  Old  Testament  were  recorded  for 
imitation."  Hence,  that  the  religion  of  many  "was  a 
strange  compotmd  of  Christian  doctrine,  often  distorted  and 
engrafted  upon  Jewish  modes  of  thought  and  principles  of 
action,"  &c.'""  This  is  true  in  a  wider  sense  than  this  ■s\a-iter 
affirms  here.  The  principle  from  which  it  springs  is  the 
corner-stone  of  all  national  establishments.  Our  brethren 
from  the  first  dissented  from  it  on  this  ground.  It  was 
against  their  principles;  as  Jewish,  and  not  Christian,  as 
sprung  from  Moses,  and  not  Christ;  as  one  of  compulsion, 
and  not  the  result  of  intelligent  conviction.  The  proof  of 
this  is  overwhelming.  If  by  sectaries  Mr.  INIarsden  means 
all  dissidents  from  Episcopacy,  then  his  statement  needs 
limitation.  Presbyterianism,  like  Episcopacy,  embodied  it  to 
a  great  extent.  To  the  records  of  the  Old  Testament  they 
frequently  appealed,  as  afibrding  a  broad  ground  of  justifica- 
tion for  imprisoning,  for  depriving  of  all*  civil  rights,  and 
forcing  into  exile  all  sectaries.  They  had  caught  the  spirit 
from  the  sister  establishment.  Other  sects  were  less  tinged 
with  it ;  for  though  the  Independents  had  not  yet  attained, 
nor  were  already  perfect,  though  they  had  much  to  learn  on 
the  power  of  the  magistrates,  and  the  perfect  freedom  of  the 
individual  conscience,  they  were  far  in  advance  of  the  advo- 
cates of  a  national  form  of  faith  enforced  by  the  sword  of 
the  civil  power.  The  more  sober  and  regular  Baptists  of 
this  period,  the  men  who  were  not  imbued  with  fifth 
monarchy  principles,  were  in  advance  of  their  brethren.  In 
no  sense  could  this  apply  to  them.  The  hostility  of  their 
essential  principles  to  these  views  exposed  them  to  the  scorn 

*  Marsden,  Early  Puritans,  pp.  419,  420. 


THK    COMMONWEALTH.  227 

of  the  holy,  and  to  the  wrath  of  kings.  The  church  at  pre- 
.sent  has  vindicated  their  accuracy  by  adopting,  to  a  great 
extent,  tlieir  primary  dogmas,  and  }nany  of  the  evangelical 
clergy  are  now  compelled  to  form  a  church  within  a  church. 
From  his  obscure  hiding-place,  one  of  the  Anaba])tist  fanatics 
thus  writes.  If  bishops  and  High  Commissions  had  taught 
these  doctrines,  the  crimes  and  miseries  which  marked  this 
period  of  our  history  would  have  been  unknown : — "  Lastly, 
my  judgment  concerning  this  point  is  (and  that  according  to 
the  best  light  that  it  hath  pleased  God  to  give  unto  me  by 
his  Word  and  Spirit),  that  the  Gospel,  or  New  Testament, 
is  that  part  (only)  of  God's  written  Word  whereby  we  Chris- 
tians (of  the  Gentiles)  are  to  be  regulated,  and  whereunto  oiu' 
consciences  are  (by  God'rf  appointment)  bound  to  have  due 
regard;  and  from  thence  to  i-eceive  our  warrant  and  direc- 
tions for  all  our  woi-ship  and  ser\T.ce  of  God  (John  v.  24; 
Jas.  i.  21  j  1  Peter  i.  8,  9;  Kom.  vi.  17 ;  Heb.  iii.  1-6).  Yet 
not  that  I  give  not  the  Old  Testament  all  holy  reverence  in 
its  due  place,  as — 1.  To  acknowledge  it  to  be  the  Word  of 
God,  indited  by  the  Spii'it  of  God,  and  written  for  the 
benefit  and  instruction  of  all  God's  people  in  all  ages. 
2.  That  any,  or  all  parts  thereof,  may  lawfully  and  profit- 
ably be  made  use  of  for  the  confii'mation  of  the  accomplish- 
ment of  all  God's  promises,  judgments,  and  projihecies, 
either  of  Christ,  or  of  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles ;  or 
briefly,  for  any  other  end  for  which  either  Christ  Jesus,  or 
any  of  his  penmen  of  the  New  Testament,  have  made  use 
thereof.  But  this  is  that  what  I  deny  unto  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, viz.,  authority  to  bind  our  conscience  by  any  of  the 
doctrines  whereof  which  have  not  their  confii'mation  in  the 
New  Testament."*  In  another  place  he  thus  writes : — 
"  Doth  not  the  Church  of  Scotland  make  the  whole  kingdom 
to  swear  (as  often  as  they  please)  to  a  covenant  that  they 
shall  prescribe  unto  them"?    And  have  they  not  their  lordly 

*  The  Mysterious  Kingdom  Discovered ;  by  Henry  Tuthill,  pp.  4,  5. 
No  titlepage.     Dated  Rotterdam,  Sept.  26,  1C44  (n.s.). 


228  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTLSTS. 

pimislmient  at  luiud  (by  the  magistrate's  sword  wliicli  they 
have  at  command)  against  all  refusers?  If  this  be  not  to 
rule  as  lords  over  God's  heritage ;  and  that  a  man  (though 
otherwise  never  so  godly)  cannot  be  suffered  to  dwell  in 
their  land,  unless  he  join  with  them  in  all  the  parts  of 
their  worship,  though  against  his  conscience,"  &c."' 

The  closing  scene  of  the  long  chequered  life  of  the  great 
Protector  was  now  rapidly  approaching.  Death  had  invaded 
his  domestic  circle,  always  the  abode  of  the  piirest  affection 
and  of  religious  life.  His  aged  mother  had  passed  away;  his 
son-in-law,  the  amiable  Rich,  had  been  car-ried  to  an  early 
grave;  and  finally  his  daiighter  Clayj)ole,  whose  losing  sj^irit, 
and  vigorous  and  well- cultivated  mind,  had  enthroned  her 
in  the  highest  place  of  her  father's  affection.  They  created 
a  void  which  nothing  could  fill.  The  sjilendour  of  his  all 
but  regal  state  was  dimmed  by  these  events.  He  found 
relief  in  loneliness  and  prayer.  Ague  seized  him  on  the  26th 
of  August,  and  after  lingering  for  some  time  his  great  spix-ifc 
bade  adieu  to  the  conflicts  of  the  present  life.  The  Protector 
died  on  the  3d  of  September,  the  anniversary  of  his  great  vic- 
tories at  Dunbar  and  Worcester.  His  funeral  was  conducted 
with  great  splendour.  His  detractors  have  delighted  to 
pourtray  the  final  scene  with  the  most  fearful  accompani- 
ments. Truth  never  checked  them,  in  their  miserable  and 
i;nmanly  course.  The  elements  raged  with  unwonted  fury. 
It  was  the  advent  of  the  great  adversary  to  fetch  his  victim. 
Nothing  coiild  be  more  certain  :  and  these  unprincipled 
writers  uttered  it  with  as  much  confidence  as  though  their 
great  master  had  imparted  to  them  his  design.  Goodwin, 
with  his  stern  pen,  has  swept  away  all  these  infamous  false- 
hoods. The  reports  of  Lady  Claypole;  the  inter^-iew  with 
Goodwin  and  Owen,  in  the  sense  in  which  the  writers  of  this 
period  have  misrepresented  it ;  and  tlie  furious  tempest 
which  occurred  on  the  day  of  his  departure,  are  myths,  and 

*  Tuthill,  p.  43. 


THE    COMMONWEALTH.  229 

not  historic  facts.""'  The  last  days  of  tliis  great  man  were 
marked  by  that  earnest  piety  which  ever,  more  or  less, 
distinguished  him  through  life.  The  night  before  he  died, 
he  was  heard  to  utter  this  prayer: — "Lord,  I  am  a  poor, 
foolish  creature;  this  people  would  have  me  live;  they  think 
it  will  be  best  for  them,  and  that  it  will  redound  much  to 
thy  gloiy :  all  the  stir  is  about  this.  Others  would  have  me 
die.  Lord  i>ardon  them,  and  pardon  thy  foolish  people;  for- 
give their  sins,  and  do  not  forsake  them ;  but  love  and  bless 
them,  and  give  them  rest,  and  bring  them  to  a  consistency; 
and  give  me  rest,  for  Christ's  sake:  to  whom,  with  thyself 
ajul  the  Holy  Spirit,  be  all  honour  and  glory."+  The  con- 
trast between  this  and  the  Lord's  anointed,  Elizabeth  and 
James,  cannot  fail  to  strike  all  our  readers.  No  one  can  tell 
with  accuracy  the  ultimate  results  of  a  single  action.  Events 
the  most  disastrous  or  benignant  may  follow  every  move- 
ment. One  step  leads  onward  to  another.  History,  to  say 
nothing  of  flicts  which  crowd  into  every  circle,  places  this 
l)efore  us.  "  The  great  men  of  action  never  construct  their 
plans  beforehand,  or  in  one  piece.  Their  genius  is  alike  in 
the  instinct  and  the  ambition.  From  day  to  day,  in  each  cir- 
cumstance as  it  occurs,  they  see  facts  such  as  they  really  are. 
They  discover  the  path  which  these  facts  indicate,  and  the 
chance  which  that  path  opens,  to  thein.  They  enter  it 
resolutely,  and  advance  along  it,  still  guided  by  the  same 


*  Goodwin,  vol.  iv.,  chap,  xxxiii.  "  The  truth,  however,  was,  that  this 
storm  preceded  his  death  by  five  da}'s,  happening  on  Monday,  the  30th  of 
August.  On  that  day  died  Dennis  Bond,  a  considerable  Hepublican ;  and 
the  Koyalists  turned  this  event  into  a  cold  pun,  saying  that  Cromwell 
not  being  ready,  the  devil  had  taken  Bond  for  his  future  appearing." — 
P.  .575. 

t  "The  Lord,"  says  Fleetwood,  "did  draw  forth  his  Highness's  heart 
to  set  apart  that  day  to  seek  the  Lord ;  and,  indeed,  there  was  a  very  good 
spirit  appearing.  Whilst  we  were  praying,  they  were  fighting ;  and  the 
Lord  hath  given  a  signal  answer.  And  the  Lord  hath  not  only  owned  us 
in  our  work  there,  but  in  our  waiting  upon  him  in  one  way  of  prayer, 
which  is,  indeed,  our  old  experienced  approved  way  in  aU  our  difficulties 
and  straits."-  Lingard,  vol.  xi.,  p.  346.     Thurloe,  vol.  viii.,  p.  159. 


230  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

light,  as  far  as  space  opens  before  them.  Cromwell  thus 
advanced,  on  and  on,  to  the  dictatorship  itself,  without  well 
knowing  whither  he  was  going,  or  at  what  cost;  but  onward 
still  he  went."*  Cromwell's  whole  life  manifests  this.  We 
are  not  forced  to  admit  his  h}-i:)ocrisy,  or  to  attribute  to  him 
an  ambition  limitless  in  its  recklessness,  to  account  for  the 
position  which  he  ultimately  reached.  His  career,  in  many 
respects,  has  no  parallel  in  liistoiy.  Occupying  the  lot  of  a 
country  gentleman  at  first,  busy  with  his  farms;  pondering, 
and  ultimately  enjojdng,  the  great  verities  of  the  Christian 
faith,  his  religious  conflicts  were  long,  and  marked  with 
much  anguish  of  mind.  It  was  a  discipline  in  perfect  har- 
mony with  God's  government.  He  always  prepares  men  for 
great  usefuhiess  in  public  life  by  previous  training.  It  has 
been  so  in  all  ages,  from  Moses  to  Bunyan.  It  was  pre- 
eminently so  with  Cromwell.  His  entrance  on  the  stirring 
period  of  his  early  life  gave  no  promise  to  some  of  futm'e 
greatuess.t  One  of  the  sycophants  of  the  day  thus  describes 
him : — "  The  first  time  that  ever  I  took  notice  of  him  was 
in  the  very  beginning  of  the  Parliament  held  in  November, 
1640,  when  I  vainly  thought  myself  a  courtly  young 
gentleman;  for  we  couiiiers  valued  ourselves  much  upon 
our  good  clothes.  I  came  one  morning  into  the  Hovise 
well  clad,  and  perceived  a  gentleman  speaking  (whom 
I  knew  not)  very  ordinarily  apparelled,  for  it  was  a  plain 
cloth  suit  which  seemed  to  have  been  made  by  an  ill 
country  tailor.  His  linen  was  plain,  and  not  very  clean; 
and  I  remember  a  speck  or  two  of  blood  upon  his  little 
band,  which  was   not   much    larger   than   his    collar ;   liis 

*  Giiizot's  Et)glish  Rev.,  p.  17. 

+  "Pray,  Mr.  Hampden,"  said  Lord  Digby,  "who  is  that  man,  that 
sloven,  who  spoke  just  now,  for  I  see  he  is  on  our  side  by  his  speaking  so 
warmly?"  "That  sloven,"  replied  the  gi-eat  patriot,  "whom  you  see 
before  you,  hath  no  ornament  in  his  speech;  that  sloven,  I  say,  if  we 
should  ever  come  to  a  breach  with  the  king,  which  God  forbid,  in  such 
case,  I  say,  that  sloven  wiU  be  the  greatest  man  in  England."  Hampden 
and  Cromwell  were  cousins. 


TIIi;   COMMONWEALTH.  231 

hat  was  without  a  hat-baud,  his  stature  was  of  good  size, 
his  sword  stuck  close  to  his  side,  his  comiteuance  swollen 
and  reddish,  his  voice  sharp  and  untamcable,  and  his  elo- 
quence full  of  fervour."*  His  own  words  give  us  a  glimpse 
of  the  motives  wliich  influenced  him,  and  discover  the 
secret  of  that  success  which  has  placed  him  high,  if  not  the 
very  highest,  amongst  the  politicians  and  rulers  of  modern 
times: — "  I  was  a  person  that  from  my  first  employment  was 
suddenly  i)referred  and  lifted  up  from  lesser  trusts  to  greater, 
from  my  being  first  a  captain  of  a  troop  of  horse.  And  I 
did  labour  as  well  as  I  could  to  discharge  my  trust;  and 
God  did  bless  me  as  it  pleased  him.  .  .  I  had  a  very 
worthy  friend  then,  and  a  very  noble  person,  and  I  know 
his  memory  is  veiy  grateful  to  yon  all,  Mr.  J.  Hampden. 
At  my  first  going  out  into  this  engagement,  I  saw  our  men 
beaten  on  every  hand;  and  I  desired  him  that  he  wonld 
make  some  additions  to  my  Lord  of  Essex's  ax'my  of  some 
new  regiments;  and  I  told  him  I  would  be  serviceable  to 
him  in  bringing  such  men  in  as  I  thought  had  a  spiiit  that 
would  do  something  in  the  work.  Yoiir  troops,  said  I,  are 
most  of  them  old  and  decayed  serving-men,  and  tapsters, 
and  such  kind  of  fellows;  and,  said  I,  theii-  troops  are 
gentlemen's  sous,  and  younger  sons,  and  persons  of  quality. 
Do  you  think  that  the  spirits  of  such  base  and  mean  fellows 
will  be  ever  able  to  encounter  gentlemen  that  have  honour 
and  courage  and  resolution  to  back  them'?  .  .  .  He  was 
a  wise  and  worthy  person,  and  did  think  I  talked  a  good 
notion,  but  an  impracticable  one.  Truly,  I  told  him  I  could 
do  something  in  it.  And  I  must  needs  say  (impute  it  to 
what  you  please),  I  raised  such  men  as  had  the  fear  of  God 
before  them,  and  made  conscience  of  what  they  did;  and 
from  that  day  forward,  I  must  say  to  you,  that  we  were 
never  beaten,  and  whenever  they  were  engaged  against  the 
enemy  they  beat  continually."    In  this  part  of  his  speech  to 

*  Warwick's  Memoirs  of  Charles  I.,  pp.  273,  274. 


232 


EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 


his  Parliament,  iu  1657,  we  discover  the  secret  of  the  Pro- 
tector's success.  His  power  of  attaching  men  to  his  standard 
was  unparalleled.  His  presence  would  quell  a  mutiny,  and 
his  voice  would  disarm  his  foes.  With  a  mind  of  vast 
jwwer,  with  resources  which  never  appear  to  have  been 
(ixhausted,  with  a  geniiis  for  command  of  the  highest  order, 
his  i^rojects  seldom  failed.  Steadily  Providence  seemed  to 
be  fitting  him  for,  and  leading  him  to,  his  exalted  state  of 
]iower. 

Judging  from  the  estimate  of  his  character  given  by  the 
writers  of  the  period  immediately  succeeding  him,  both 
political  and  ecclesiastical,  he  was  the  embodiment  of  all 
crimes,  the  incarnation  of  hypocrisy  and  cruelty.  The  lan- 
guage of  vituperation  was  exhausted.  He  was  lost  to  all 
sense  of  moral  feeling — low,  grovelling,  haunted  with  per- 
j)etvial  terror  through  life,  and  amidst  the  lightning's  flash 
and  thunder's  roai*,  snatched  away  to  the  abodes  of  darkness, 
Avhere  crime  reaps  its  ripened  harvest.  We  need  not  wonder 
that  this  necessity  was  upon  them.  To  the  court  of  the 
abandoned  monarch  who  succeeded  him,  nothing  was  so 
acceptable  as  to  insult  the  memory  of  their  invincible  foe. 
Their  unmixed  hatred  had  been  treasured  up  for  years.  In 
all  its  fulness  it  was  now  poured  out.  They  could  not  under- 
stand the  man.  The  loftiness  and  purity  of  his  principles 
were  in  bold  contrast  to  the  lasciviousness  of  their  idol. 
His  piety  was  a  power  which  their  formalism  and  h}q30crisy 
rendered  them  incapable  of  a]ipreciating,  and  his  large- 
heartedness  and  spirit  of  rational  liberty  chafed  their  proud 
and  stunted  souls.  But  all  were  not  blind.  Our  readers 
will  be  pleased  with  the  contrast.  A  spirit  more  intensely 
devoted  to  liberty  never  dwelt  in  the  bosom  of  an  indi- 
vidual, than  that  which  lived  and  breathed  in  the  bosom  of 
Milton.  In  the  full  confidence  of  Cromwell,  associated  with 
him  in  the  exercise  of  his  official  duties,  few  men  were 
more  capable  of  forming  an  estimate  of  the  man  than  the 
illustrious  poet.    Thus  he  described  his  friend  and  patron : 


THE    COMMONWEALTH. 


233 


"  He  was  a  soldier  tlioroughly  accomplished  in  the  art  of 
self-knowledge,  and  his  fii'st  successes  were  against  the 
internal  enemies  of  human  virtues, — vain  hopes,  fears,  aspir- 
ings, and  ambition.  His  first  triumphs  were  over  himself; 
and  lie  was  thus  enabled,  from  the  day  he  beheld  an  enemy 
in  the  field,  to  exhibit  the  endowments  of  a  veteran.  Such 
was  the  temper  aiid  discipline  of  his  mind,  that  all  the  good 
aiid  valiant  were  irresistibly  drawn  to  his  camp,  not  nierely 
a.s  the  best  school  of  martial  science,  but  also  of  piety  and 
religion;  and  those  who  joined  it  were  necessarily  rendered 
such  by  his  example.  lu  his  empire  over  the  minds  of  his 
followers,  he  was  surpassed  neither  by  Epaminondas,  nor 
Cyi'us,  nor  any  of  the  most  vaunted  generals  of  antiqiiity. 
Then  he  fornied  to  himself  an  anny  of  men  who  were  no 
sooner  under  his  command  than  they  became  the  pattern  of 
ordei-,  obedient  to  his  slightest  suggestions,  popular,  and 
})eloved  by  theii-  fellow-citizens,  and  to  the  enemy  not  more 
terrible  in  the  Held  than  welcome  in  their  quarters.  In  the 
towns  and  villages  where  they  sojourned,  in  no  way  oftensive 
or  rapacious,  abstaining  from  violence,  wine,  intemperance, 
and  impurity;  so  that  suddenly  the  inhabitants,  rejoicing  in 
their  disappointment,  regarded  them  not  as  enemies,  but  as 
guests  and  ])rotectors:  a  terror  to  the  disorderly,  a  safeguard 
to  the  good,  and  by  precept  and  example  the  teachers  of  all 
piety."*    At  the  policy  of  Charles,  we  may  for  a  moment 

*  Defensio  Secxmda,  1654.  lUd,  1058.  "The  superior  officers,  the 
subalterns,  the  privates,  all  held  themselves  forth  as  professors  of  godli- 
ness. Anaong  them  every  public  breach  of  morality  was  punished ;  the 
exercises  of  religious  worship  were  of  as  frequent  recurrence  as  those  of 
military  duty.  In  council,  the  officers  always  opened  the  proceedings 
with  extempore  prayer ;  and  to  implore  with  due  solemnity  the  protection 
of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  was  held  an  indispensable  part  of  the  preparations 
for  battle,"  &c.— Lingard,  vol.  xi.,  pp.  358-9.  Vide  Fletcher's  Hist. 
Indcp.,  vol.  iv.,  pp.  80,  83,  8-1.  "As  for  Col.  Cromwell,  he  h.ath  2,000 
brave  men,  well  disciplined;  no  man  swears  but  he  pays  his  twelve 
pence ;  if  he  be  drunk,  he  is  set  in  the  stocks,  or  worse ;  if  one  calls  the 
other  Roundhead,  he  is  cashiered ;  insomuch  that  the  counties,  where 
they  come,  leap  for  joy  of  them,  and  come  in  and  join  them."— Crom- 


234  EARLY    EXGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

glance.  Its  religious  aspect  we  have  to  do  with  in  the  main. 
Its  contx-ast  with  the  past,  we  see  in  his  own  words.  The 
court  party,  said  the  Protector,  sought  "  to  innovate  upon  us 
in  matters  of  religion  also ;  and  so  to  innovate  as  to  eat  out 
the  love,  and  power,  and  heart,  and  life  of  all  religion,  by 
bringing  on  us  a  company  of  poisonous  Popish  ceremonies, 
and  imposing  upon  those  that  were  accounted  the  Piu'itans 
of  the  nation,  and  professors  of  religion  among  us ;  desiring 
them  to  seek  their  bread  in  an  howling  wilderness :  as  was 
instanced  to  our  friends  who  were  forced  to  fly  for  Holland, 
New  England,  almost  anywhither,  to  find  liberty  for  their 
consciences."*  The  policy  of  the  great  Protector,  in  rela- 
tion to  the  various  sects,  was  for  the  time  an  enlightened 
one.  Though  far  below  Avhat  it  should  have  been,  it  was  far 
above  his  predecessors,  and  stood  in  the  boldest  contrast  to 
the  two  wretched  Ijigots  who  claimed  to  reign  by  Divine 
right  under  him.  The  Episcopalian  found  his  sway  easier 
than  that  of  the  Presbyterian  Commonwealth.  Theii"  private 
meetings  were  tolerated,  and  the  use  of  the  Prayer  Book 
winked  at.  Under  him  the  clergy  enjoyed  far  more  freedom 
than  they  granted  to  the  sects  in  the  palmy  days  of  their 
greatness  when  Laud  ruled,  and  covered  the  country  with 
multiplied  examples  of  his  ecclesiastical  displeasure.f 

But  justice  never  slumbers.  Her  decision  may  be  de- 
layed, but  in  the  end  she  utters  her  voice ;  and  the  mists  and 
dark  clouds  which  ignorance    and  malignity  have   thrown 

vrelliana,  p.  5.  Vide  Bakei-'s  Chronicles  for  a  similar  testimony.  "Now 
I  lived  in  peace,  and  enjoyed  sweet  communiou  with  the  religious  officers 
of  the  company,  wliich  used  to  meet  every  night  at  one  another's  quarters 
by  turns,  to  read  the  Scriptures,  to  confer  of  good  things,  and  to  pray 
together."  —  Life  of  Adam  Martindale,  p.  37.  Cheetham  Society. 
"Cromwell  was  a  man  of  great  \drtues,  sincere  in  his  religion,  fervent  in 
his  patriotism,  and  earnestly  devoted  to  the  best  interests  of  mankind." 
— Goodwin,  vol.  iv.,  p.  \-ii.  ^7e  cannot  refrain  from  recommending  to 
our  readers  an  admirable  lecture  on  Cromwell,  by  the  Kev.  N.  Haycroft, 
of  Bristol.     It  is  published  by  Snow,  London. 

*  Protector's  Speech,  January,  1G57. 

i"  Vide  examples  in  Lathorp,  Echard,  and  Evelyn. 


THE    COMMONWEALTH.  235 

around  the  characters  of  the  virtuous,  the  good,  and  truly 
great,  are  dispersed,  and  they  stand  out  before  us  as  the  models 
to  which  every  true  man  aspires,  and  the  admiration  of  the 
world.  It  was  so  with  the  great  Protector,  Whether  we 
compare  him  with  his  pi'edecessors,  or  contrast  him  with  the 
wretched  men  who  followed  him,  in  every  ^icw  the  com- 
parison only  enhances  the  majesty  of  Cromwell,  and  the 
boundless  debt  of  obligation  under  which  he  has  laid  us. 
His  own  utterances  and  letters  will  form  the  noblest  monu- 
ments to  his  fame.  Posterity  will  find  in  them  all  the  ele- 
ments of  true  greatness.  There,  the  patriot,  the  man  of 
genius,  and  the  true  Christian,  will  be  traced  in  all  their 
fulness  and  beauty.* 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  remind  the  reader  that  the 
moral  state  of  the  country,  for  the  most  part,  was  of  the 
highest  order.  This  may  be  affirmed  Avdth  confidence,  after 
large  allowances  have  been  made  for  the  impei-fections  of 
human  nature,  and  the  mere  fomialism  which  distinguished 
some.  Compared  with  the  past,  and  now  placed  in  contrast 
with  the  reign  that  followed,  the  difference  is  immeasurable. 
Eeligious  phrases  and  Scripture  allusions  marked  the  family 
cii-cle,  the  senate,  and  the  bar.  To  seek  God — to  fast  and 
pray,  marked  their  public  and  private  engagements.  They 
were  men  to  whom  religion  was  a  living  reality,  who  felt  its 
power,  who  aimed  to  realise  its  glorious  end.  Sacrifice  to 
them  was  easy ;  self-denial  a  daily  task.  If  anything 
clothed  life  with  interest,  it  was  the  opportunity  it  sup- 
plied for  glorifying  Christ.  Mistakes  there  were;  much  of 
Judaism  was  mingled  with  the  Gospel — much  of  the  spii'it 
of  the  world  with  the  lowly  one  of  Jesus;  much  bitterness 
was  manifested  against  our  brethren ;  still  truth  leads  (not 
constrains)  us  to  say,  that  there  were  men  of  the  highest 
Chi'istian  attainment,  whose  influence  still  operates,  and  as 


*  Vide  Carlyle's  Speeches  and  Letters  of  Cromwell.     A  noble  monu- 
ment to  the  immortal  Protector. 


236  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

truth  and  vii-tue  gain  power  in  the  future,  will  fill  a  wider 
circle,  and  lay  the  world  under  a  larger  debt  than  even  now. 
Cromwell,  before  his  death,  had  named  his  eldest  son 
Richard  as  his  successor.  There  were  but  one  or  two  elements 
of  character  which  they  had  in  common,  and  it  was  soon  mani- 
fest that  the  iron  will  was  broken,  and  that  the  hand  which 
held  together  the  heterogeneous  materials  of  which  the 
Commonwealth  was  composed  was  paralyzed.  High  above 
the  rest  rose  the  great  Protector,  with  more  martial  glory, 
with  a  loftier  genius  for  government,  and  far  more  resources 
at  command,  and  awed  ever}'-  aspirant  to  his  exalted  position. 
Not  so  Richard.  There  was  scarcely  a  single  element  in  his 
character  which  fitted  him  for  the  trying  crisis  through 
which  the  nation  was  now  passing.  One  that  knew  him  thus 
speaks  of  him: — "Richard  was  so  flexible  to  good  counsels, 
that  there  was  nothing  desirable  in  a  prince  which  might 
not  have  been  hoped  in  him,  but  a  great  spirit  and  a  good 
title;  the  first  of  which  sometimes  doth  more  hurt  than 
good  in  a  sovereign — the  latter  would  have  been  supplied  by 
the  people's  desired  approbation."*  Perhaps  the  pai-tiality  of 
the  father,  or  the  feeling  of  primogeniture  in  this  case,  might 
have  influenced  the  mind  of  Cromwell.  But  the  choice  was 
unfortunate.  The  second  son,  Lord  Henry,  had  more  fitness 
for  the  crisis.  He  had  filled  important  posts.  He  was  now 
Lord-Deputy  of  Ireland,  and  had  ruled  that  wild  and  savage 
nation  with  considerable  success.  Considering  the  circum- 
stances in  which  he  was  placed,  a  higher  meed  of  praise 
might  have  been  truthfully  pronounced.  Though  not  equal 
to  his  father  in  diplomacy  and  the  extent  of  his  resources — • 
though  not  clothed  "with  the  military  prestige  of  Lambert, 
as  the  hero  of  many  fights, — yet  he  exhibited  qualities  in 
governing,  and  a  temper  kind  and  winning,  which,  if  he  had 
been  i-aised  to  the  vacant  seat,  might  have  perpetuated 
the  house  of  Cromwell  even  with  regal  digiiity,  and  saved 


Mrs.  Hutchinson,  p.  110. 


THE   COMMONWEALTH.  237 

the  nation   from    the   disastrous    reigu  of  the  hist  of  the 
Stuarts. 

The  new  Protector  entered  on  his  mission  with  lofty  aims 
and  pure  motives.  He  assured  Colonel  Hutcliinscni,  "that 
since  God  had  called  him  to  the  Government,  it  was  his 
desire  to  make  men  of  uprightness  his  associates,  to  rule  by 
their  counsels  and  assistance,  and  not  enslave  the  nation  to 
an  enemy."*  Difficulties  soon  presented  themselves.  The 
exche(iuer  was  \ow,  and  the  troops  became  clamorous  for 
pay.  Large  arrears  were  due.  The  Government  had  no 
funds  to  meet  these  demands.  A  Parliament  was  necessary. 
Writs  were  issued  in  July.  They  were  sent  not  only  to  the 
cities  and  large  towns,  but  to  many  of  the  small  boroughs 
which  had  been  ignored  by  Oliver.  A  majority  for  the 
Government  was  obtained,  but  the  opposition  was  strong. 
Leading  Republicans — men  of  power,  eloquent,  and  conver- 
sant with  the  forms  of  the  House — ^were  associated  with  a 
few  whose  tendencies  \vere  unmistakably  in  favour  of  the 
Stuarts.  Long  and  various  were  the  debates  on  the  forms  of 
Government — the  power  of  the  new  Protector- — the  limits 
within  which  his  authority  should  be  confined — the  right 
of  the  Irish  and  Scotch  members  to  sit  and  vote.  The 
anise,  the  mint,  and  the  cummin,  exhausted  their  strength 
and  time,  whilst  the  weightier  matters  of  the  nation  lay 
comparatively  unheeded  before  them.f  It  was  not  long 
before  the  military  forces  Avere  in  collision  with  them. 
Theii*  rights  had  been  infringed,  and  the  various  sections 
into  which  the  commanders  had  been  divided  combined  to 
compel  Richard  to  dissolve  the  House.  Virtually  this  anni- 
hilated his  power.     But  he  had  no  sure  alternative,  if  he 

*  Mrs.  Hutchinson,  p.  110.  "The  Lord  hath  so  ordered  it,  that  the 
Council  and  army  hath  received  him  with  all  manner  of  affection.  He  is 
this  day  proclaimed,  and  hitherto  there  seems  great  face  of  peace :  the 
Lord  continue  it." — Thurloe,  vol.  vii.,  p.  372.  Baxter  also  says:  — 
"Many  sober  men  that  called  his  father  no  better  than  a  traitorous 
hypocrite,  did  begin  to  think  that  they  owed  him  subjection." — P.  100. 

t  Vide  Burton's  Diary,  for  proofs. 


238  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

would  avoid  a  renewal  of  civil  discord."  The  year  following, 
the  remains  of  the  Long  Parliament  were  recalled.  It  bears 
in  history  the  title  of  the  "  Rnmp."  It  did  not  exceed  one 
hundi'ed  on  its  first  gathering  in  Westminster;  and  it 
appears  to  have  inspired  the  army  ^vith  confidence,  and  it  is 
all  but  certain  the  Republicans  also.  Addresses  flowed  in 
upon  them  from  all  j^arts,  congratulating  them  on  their 
restoration.  Amongst  others,  Heath  tells  us  that  "  addresses 
likewise  came  from  the  Independents  and  Anabaptist 
churches,  some  of  Avhom  kept  a  thanksgiving,  and  invited 
all  the  other  congregations  of  that  sect  to  join  with  them 
in  that  voluntary  solemnization  of  this  good  proAidence ; 
the  chief  of  these  were  one  Jessey's  and  Canne's  disciples : 
the  prime  favourites  of  this  Rump."t 

Many  of  our  brethren,  animated  by  a  similar  spirit,  took 
an  active  part  in  these  affairs.  The  Commonwealth  was  dear 
to  them.  They  regarded  it  as  the  only  government  in  which 
perfect  liberty  could  be  enjoyed.  Vane,  who  symjiathised 
■with  them  in  politics,  and  regularly  preached  to  a  congrega- 
tion of  fifth  monarchy  men,  now  allied  himself  with  the 
Anabaptists,  Millenarians,  and  fifth  monarchy  men,  in  order 
to  secure  their  devoted  adherence  to  the  cause  of  the  Com- 
monwealth. J  They  had  united  before  with  Quakers  and 
others,  in  a  petition  to  the  House,  exjjressing  Republican  prin- 
ciples, and  ignoring  the  Protector.  In  tliis  feeling,  "the 
greater  number  of  the  officers  and  subalterns,"  says  Guizot, 
"  were  desirous  that  the  Commonwealth  should  be  re-estab- 
lished ;  the  Anabaptists,  fifth  monarchy  men,  and  other 
mystic  sectaries,  who  had  great  power  among  the  soldiers, 
were  all  furious  in  their  hostility  to  the  Protector.  Each  of 
these  various  factions  of  the  army  had  its  official  meetings, 
its  secret  conclaves,  its  agents,  preachers,  and  pamphlets, 
&c."    There  is  an  allusion  in  one  of  the  letters  of  the  French 

*  Vaughan,  vol.  ii.,  p.  553. 

+  Heath,  Chronicles,  p.  422. 

t  Guizot's  Richard  Cromwell,  vol.  i.,  p.  185.     Hid,  pp.  1.32, 133. 


THE   COMMONWEALTH.  239 

Ambassador,  which  give  us  a  glimpse  of  the  attitude  aud 
influence  of  our  brethren  at  this  time: — "Although  men 
now  despise  the  Anabaptist  faction,  and  they  have  been  for- 
bidden to  assemble  again,  some  satisfaction  will  nevertheless 
be  given  to  them;  and  it  is  said  that,  in  conformity  with 
their  wishes,  Fleetwood,  whom  they  wished  to  have  as 
general,  will  be  made  commander-in-chief."*  There  is  a 
statement,  also,  that  they  were  kept  in  check  by  the  hope  of 
obtaining  some  authority,  "if  the  House  of  Lords,  composed 
of  their  leaders,  Ls  contmued  in  existence."t  M.  Bordeaux, 
writing  to  Mazarin,  in  May,  referring  to  the  feeling  in  the 
city,  says:  ''Not  that  the  Corporation  of  the  city,  which  is 
composed  of  Presbyterians,  is  not  entii'ely  opposed  to  them 
(the  military  cliiefs),  as  well  as  the  ministers,  who  rightly 
think  that  their  tithes  will  be  in  danger  if  the  Government 
falls  into  the  hands  of  the  Anabaptists  and  other  sectaries, 
of  whom  Lieutenant-General  Fleetwood  is  reputed  to  be  the 
protector,"  «fec.:j:  Referring  to  the  order  for  organizing  the 
militia,  he  says :  "  The  Ajiabaptists  and  the  Quakers  are  the 
classes  in  whom  the  greatest  confidence  is  placed;  the  Pres- 
byterians murmur  Avithout  revolting,  and,  indeed,  there  is 
not  so  miich  talk  of  insurrection  since  the  tithes  have  been 
secured  to  the  ministers." ||  "  Their  strength  in  the  army  and 
the  House  was  not  equal,"  says  the  Frenchman.  "  These  two 
bodies  are  divided  into  two  factions — one,  of  the  true  Rejiub- 
licans,  who  are  reputed  Presbyterians;  aud  the  others,  of  the 
Anabaptists  and  JMillenarians,  or  saints.  That  the  former 
party  prevails  in  the  Parliament,  and  that  the  other  is  not 
so  powerful  in  that  assembly,  but  that  it  has  on  its  side  the 
majority  of  the  officers  of  the  army;  which  leads  to  the 
inference  that,  either  by  purgation  or  dissolution  of  the 
Parliament,  it  will  assume  the  entire  authority  of  the  State," 
&c.§  No  doubt  many  of  the  leading  officers  were  professed 
Baptists.     It  was  so  in  the  navy.     Admiral  Lawson,  and 

*  Guizot's  Richard  Cromwell,  vol.  i.,  p.  24G. 
t  Ibid,  p.  821.        t  Hid,  p.  373.       ||  Ibid,  p.  433.       §  Ibid,  pp.  485,  6. 


240  EAJtLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

many  other  dijitinguislied  comiaanders,  belonged  to  this 
community;  and  nearly  to  a  man  they  were  strongly  imbued 
with  Republican  principles.  But  their  wishes,  and  the 
exjiectations  they  had  cherished  from  the  re-assembling  of 
the  old  "Eump;'  were  doomed  to  early  disappointment. 
The  civil  and  military  elements  came  into  speedy  conflict. 

During  the  sitting  of  this  Parliament  the  case  of  Overton 
was  brought  up.  We  have  seen  before  the  suspicions  he  had 
excited,  and  his  arrest  liy  Cromwell.  No  doubt  he  was 
favourable,  from  disappointment  at  the  overthrow  of  the  Com- 
monwealth by  Oliver,  to  the  restoration  of  the  monarchy. 
He  had  been  confined  in  Jersey  since  January,  1655.  A 
frigate  was  prepared  to  be  sent  to  the  island  to  convey  him 
to  the  House.  He  reached  the  city  on  the  11th  of  March. 
He  was  ordered  to  attend  the  House.  Yane  said,  "He  is 
brought  so  weak  with  four  years'  imprisonment,  that  he  can 
scarce  go  over  the  floor.  If  you  please,  he  may  be  called  on 
Monday."  On  the  16th  of  March  he  went  to  the  House, 
attended  by  400  or  500  men  on  horseback,  and  a  vast  crowd 
bearing  branches  of  laurel  in  their  hands.  Standing  before 
the  members,  he  said :  "I  acknowledge  it  a  great  mercy  of 
God,  that  after  three  .years'  imprisonment,  succeeding  four- 
teen years  in  your  service,  I  am  brought  to  the  bar  of  this 
honourable  House.  As  I  have  been  in  a  suffering  condition 
for  four  years,  so  I  desire  to  be  passive  still.  I  had  better 
have  been  torn  in  pieces  by  wild  horses,  than  have  endured 
this  great  torment ;  that  would  have  been  but  for  a  moment. 
I  hope  I  have  not  done  anything  conti'ary  to  what  I  at  first 
engaged  and  fought  for.  You  are  my  judges,  and  I  think  it 
a  great  mercy  that  it  is  so.  I  most  humbly  leave  myself, 
my  cause,  and  condition,  to  this  House.  I  will  not  justify 
myself;  I  only  desire  one  way  or  other,  to  receive  as  I  have 
done."*  Overton  was  acquitted,  and  was  afterwards  restored 
to  his  goveraorshij)  of  Hull. 

*  Guizot's  Richard  Cromwell,  vol.  i.,  pp.  31-4.  Burton's  Diaiy,  vcl. 
iii.,  p.  448,  &c.  &c. 


THE    COMMONWEALTH.  241 

Hot-headed  men,  led  by  Haslerig,*  souglit  to  crusli  the 
men  of  the  sword.  Lambert,  Desborough,  and  other  chiefs, 
were  cashiered.  The  action  only  showed  the  depth  of  their 
hostility,  and  the  feebleness  of  their  power.  Whilst  aiming 
at  the  destruction  of  their  enemies,  they  were  crushed  by 
the  efibrt.  These  party  conflicts  only  hastened  the  downfall 
of  the  feeble  fabric  of  Government  then  in  power.  The 
nation  panted  for  repose.  A  settled  Government,  under 
which  the  people  could  pursue  their  occupations,  and  enjoy 
security  of  life  and  property,  was  desired.  The  restoration 
of  the  Stuarts  api)eai"ed  inevitable.  The  means  by  which 
tliis  was  eftected  can  only  bo  briefly  detailed  in  these  pages. 

The  Royalists  were  not  insignificant  in  numbers,  though 
greatly  reduced  in  wealth  and  influence,  under  Oliver. 
During  the  latter  part  of  his  life,  their  schemes  had  been 
various  to  overthrow  liis  power.  They  multiplied  now 
with  great  rapidity.  The  disorders  of  the  Commonwealth 
were  hopeful  to  them.  Those  immediately  around  the 
pei'son  of  the  exiled  prince,  and  those  at  home,  augmented 
them  in  every  way  within  their  powei*.  Many  of  the  leading- 
Presbyterians,  never  satisfied  with  the  Protectorate,  as  it 
limited  their  power,  now  gave  in  theii-  adhesion  to  the  Poyal 
cause;  and  even  Richard,  and  members  of  his  family,  were 
by  no  means  vmfavoui-able  to  the  restoration  of  Charles.t 
Encouraged  by  these  fiivourable  symptoms,  a  rising  was 
projected.  Cheshire  witnessed  the  unfurling  of  the  Royal 
Standard.  Sir  George  Booth  conducted  this  rash  enterprise, 
but  defeat  awaited  him.  J     Lambert,  with  the  forces  imder 

*  Ludlow  describes  him  as  "a  man  of  disobliging  temper,  sour  and 
morose  of  temper,  liable  to  be  transported  with  passion,  and  in  whom 
liberality  seemed  to  be  a  vice." — Memoirs,  p.  718.  Guizot's  Richard 
Cromwell,  vol.  i.,  p.  223.  t  HaUam,  vol.  i.,  pp.  G98,  9. 

J  About  this  time  many  political  squibs  were  issued.     In  one  of  the 
doggerel  pieces,  the  "  iN'ew  Liturgy,"  we  find  the  following : — 
"  From  the  Anabaptists  and  the  shivering  Quakers; 
From  such  as  rule  us  like  low-legged  bakers ; 
From  those  that  undo  us,  yet  are  good  law  makers ; 

—Libera  nos  Doviine." 


242  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

his  commantl,  speedily  dispersed  them,  and  for  the  pi'e- 
sent  threw  a  gloom  over  the  whole  circle.  Again  the  sword 
gave  place  to  the  pen,  and  for  a  time  the  soldiers  made  way 
for  the  politicians.  The  leading  men  were  again  tried. 
Fleetwood,  Lambert,  and  Monk,  were  the  chiefs.  Every 
influence  was  brought  to  bear  upon  them.  Pardon  for  the 
past  was  readily  promised.  Titles  and  wealth  were  lavishly 
offered.    Well  one  of  these  succeeded. 

Monk,  Ave  have  seen,  had  been  left  in  the  command  of  the 
forces  in  Scotland.  On  the  elevation  of  Richard,  he  ad- 
dressed him  in  the  most  friendly  manner,  suggesting  wise 
counsels  as  to  his  government  of  the  nation.  He  was  a  man 
of  no  principle.  No  engagement  could  bind  him,  and  only 
ambition  and  the  love  of  wealth  appear  to  be  the  motives  of 
his  conduct.  Amidst  the  numerous  actors  in  these  busy  • 
scenes,  Monk  stands  pre-eminent  for  all  that  is  mean,  hypo- 
critical, and  despicable.  He  was  a  traitor  to  every  high  and 
lioly  feeling.  Of  his  personal  courage  there  can  be  no  doubt; 
but  it  is  the  only  redeeming  element,  if  ever  that  can  be 
called  one,  in  a  character  formed  by  selfishness  and  hypocrisy. 
In  the  whole  of  his  forces,  a  baser  could  not  be  found  in  its 
lowest  ranks.*  Before  marching  to  England,  he  had  received 
his  brother,  a  devoted  Royalist,  into  secret  confidence  with 
him.f  It  was  at  this  time  he  had,  as  we  have  noted  already, 
weeded  his  forces  of  Baptist  officers  and  men,  and  placed  in 
their  stead  others  kno-svn  for  their  attachment  to  Charles. 


*  Fox's  James  II.,  p.  19. 

f  Dr.  Price's  Narrative.  Maseres  Ti-acts,  vol.  ii.  Tlioresby  says: — 
"  "Was  especially  pleased  ^\"itll  the  relation  of  Dr.  Fairfax's  secret  trans- 
action with  General  Monk,  to  whom  he  went  from  the  old  Lord  Fairfax 
into  Scotland,  where  he  conducted  that  great  transaction  about  the 
restoration  of  King  Charles  the  Second ;  j'et  M'itli  such  privacy,  that  he 
never  saw  Scotland,  though  the  matter  was  transacted  there." — Diary, 
vol.  i.,  p.  445  (Note).  "Towards  noon,  a  great  number  of  officers,  mostly 
Republicans,  Anabaptists,  or  Quakers,  came  to  dine  with  the  general,  and 
loudly  expressed  their  joy  at  the  intelligence  they  had  received." — The 
Defeat  of  Booth.     Guizot's  Richard  Cromwell,  vol.  ii.,  p.  13. 


THE    COMMONWEALTH.  243 

His  march  to  London  was  all  but  intercepted.  For  though 
Lambert  had  been  sent  to  oppose  his  f)rogress,  or  at  the 
least  to  watch  his  motions,  he  escaped  the  vigilance  of  that 
general,  and  appeared  in  the  vicinity  of  the  city.  Pepys 
thus  describes  the  scene  on  the  entrance  of  Monk: — "In 
Clieapside  there  were  a  great  many  bonfires ;  and  Bow  bells, 
and  all  the  bells  in  all  the  churches  as  we  went  home,  were 
a-ringiug.  Hence  we  went  homewards,  it  being  about  ten 
at  night.  But  the  common  joy  that  was  everywhei-e  to  be 
seen !  The  number  of  bonfires,  there  being  fourteen  between 
St.  Dunstan's  and  Temple  Bar;  and  at  Strand  Bridge,  I 
could  at  one  time  tell  thirty-one  fires.  In  King  Street, 
seven  or  eight;  and  all  along  burning  and  roasting,  and 
drinking  for  rumps.  There  being  rumi)S  tied  upon  sticks, 
and  carried  up  and  down.  The  butchers  at  the  maypole  in 
the  Strand  rang  a  peal  with  their  knives  when  they  were 
going  to  sacrifice  their  rumps.  On  Ludgate  Hill,  there  was 
one  turning  of  the  spit  that  had  a  rump  tied  upon  it,  and 
another  basting  it.  Indeed  it  was  past  imagination,  both  the 
greatness  and  the  suddenness  of  it.  At  one  end  of  the 
street  you  would  think  there  was  a  whole  line  of  fire,  and 
so  hot  that  we  were  fain  to  keep  on  the  further  side."* 
"Indeed,"  he  adds,  "the  city  is  ^'ery  open  handed  to  the 
soldiers,  that  they  are  most  o€  them  drunk  all  day,  and  had 
money  given  them."+ 

During  the  sittii^gs  of  the  Long  Parliament,  which  had 
been  convened  ^vith  the  full  accpiiescence  of  the  now  all- 


*  Di-iiy,  vol.  i.,  pp.  27,  28. 

J  Ibid,  p.  29.  "  Monday  at  night  (Feb.  13)  was  a  great  rejoicing  at 
Oxon,  for  the  news  that  there  was  brought  that  there  shoukl  suddenly  be 
a  Free  Parliament.  The  bells  rang,  and  bonfires  were  made,  and  some 
rumps  and  tails  of  sheep  were  flung  into  a  bonfire  at  Queen's  College 
gate.  Di\  John  Palmer,  a  great  Plumper,  warden  of  All-Souls'  College, 
in  the  place  of  Dr.  Sheldon,  being  then  very  ill  and  weak,  had  a  rump 
thro-mi  up  from  the  street  at  his  windows.  He  had  been  one  of  the 
Rump  Parliament,  and  a  great  follower  of  Oliver."— Wood's  Life,  by 
himself.     Vide  Oxonian,  vol,  ii.,  p.  217.     London,  1807. 


244  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

powerful  general,  we  have  another  notice  of  Praise  God 
Barebones.  He  had  received  a  lucrative  appointment 
only  a  shorf  time  before,  from  the  Parliament.  We  find  him 
now,  with  a  large  body  of  the  class  to  which  he  belonged, 
pz-esenting  a  petition  to  the  House,  full  of  the  wai-mest 
expressions  of  attachment  to  the  Commonwealth,  and  asking 
that  no  one  should  be  appointed  to  any  ci%-il  or  military  office 
xmless  he  expressly  abjured  Charles  Stuart  and  his  lUce,  and 
every  other  pretender  to  the  crown,  as  well  as  any  Upper 
House,  or  any  power  of  equal  authority  with  the  Commons. 
The  House  expressed  its  satisfaction,  by  conveying  to  the 
petitioners  their  warmest  thanks  for  the  address.  ■•■'  But 
their  anticipations  were  speedily  annihilated.  Monk  was 
steadily  pursuing  his  treacherous  course.  With  the  most 
solemn  impi'ecations  avowing  liis  fidelity  to  the  Common- 
wealth, he  was  pledging  himself  to  Charles,  and  secretly 
arranging  for  his  restoration.  Everywhere  suspicion  was 
awakened,  and  he  attempted  to  veil  his  designs  by  the 
most  solemn  oaths.  "  I  call  God  to  witness  that  the 
asserting  of  a  Commonwealth  is  the  only  intent  of  my 
heart."t  Just  before,  he  had  publicly  declared  for  the 
restoi-ation.  He  drew  ofi"  his  glove,  and  placing  his  hand  in 
that  of  Haslerig,  said: — "I  do  protest  to  you,  and  in  the 
presence  of  these  gentlemen,  tlio.t  I  will  oppose  to  the  utmost 
the  setting  u])  of  Charles  Stuart,  a  single  pei-son,  or  a 
House  of  Peers."  "It  is  most  manifest  that,  if  it  be 
monarchical  in  the  State,  the  Cluu-ch  must  follow,  and  pre- 
lacy must  be  brought  in ;  which  these  nations,  1  tuow,  can- 
not bear,  and  against  which  they  have  so  solemnly  .-.worn; 
and  indeed  moderate,  not  rigid,  Presbyterian  Government, 
with  a  sufficient  liberty  for  consciences  tiiily  tender,  appears 

*  Parliamentary  Historj',  vol.  iii.,  1569. 

f  Guizot,  Monk,  p.  227.  "Many  think,"  says  Pepys,  "that  he  is 
honest  yet ;  and  some  think  him  to  be  a  post  that  will  raise  himself,  but 
think  that  he  will  undo  himself  by  encouraging  it." — Diaiy,  vol.  i.,  p.  42. 
Other  instances  of  his  treachery  in  pp.  62,  63. 


THE    COMMONWEALTH.  245 

at  present  to  be  the  most  iiidilferent  and  acceptable  way  to 
the  church's  settlement."* 

The  Restoration  admitted  noAV  of  no  doubt.  The  details 
we  cannot  supply.  The  pent-up  fury  of  the  Royalists  was 
now  unloosed.  In  every  way  it  manifested  itself  Ballads 
of  the  most  ribald  kind  against  the  Sectaries  wei-e  widely 
circulated.  Men  known  I'or  their  Republican  principles 
were  loaded  with  insults.  Our  brethren  did  not  escape  their 
indignation.  Some  of  their  chapels  in  the  city  were  de- 
stroyed, and  theii-  congregations  dispersed.  Barbour,  Har- 
rison, and  others,  had  been  seized  by  an  order  of  the  Council 
of  State,  but  remained  at  liberty,  on  the  promise  that  they 
would  not  intei'fere.  We  have  a  sample  of  the  annoyances 
to  which  many  of  our  brethi'en  were  subjected,  in  the  case  of 
Mr.  Kiffin.  He  was  a  man  of  the  most  peaceable  spirit, 
opposed  to  the  fifth  monarchy  men,  but  warmly  attached  to 
the  late  Government.  He  had  been  returned  as  member  for 
Middlesex  in  1656.  Heath  thus  refers  to  it: — "  Thus  Buck- 
stead  got  himself,  witli  Kiffin,  the  Anabaptist,  returned  as 
Knight  for  Middlesex.  A  rout  was  brought  down  for  Kiffin, 
who,  together  with  the  Red  Coats  (that  were  only  the  good 
people,  and  had  most  right  to  choose),  bawled,  scuffled,  and 
juggled  a-way  the  fair  electors  for  yovtng  Mr.  Chute,  his 
father  difficultly  carrying  it."t  Ministers  were  not  excluded 
from  the  House  then.  Dr.  Owen  had  been  returned.  It  ap- 
pears probable,  from  some  allusions  in  a  pamphlet  published 
against  him,  that  Mr.  Kiftin  took  his  seat,  and  took  part  in 
the  discussion  in  that  assembly.  He  says : — "  A  little  before 
his  Majesty's  return,  upon  General  Monk's  coming  to 
London,  he  took  up  his  quarters  near  to  my  house.  In  a 
few  days  after,  I,  with  several  others,  were  seized  at  mid- 
night by  some  of  his  soldiers,  and  carried  to  the  Gate-House 
at  Paul's;  the  next  day  it  was  rumoured  in  the  city  that  a 
great  quantity  of  arms  had  been  taken  in  our  houses.    As 

*  Speech  in  Pai-liament.     Vide  Pari.  Hist.,  vol.  iii.,  p.  1580. 
t  Chronicles,  p.  383. 


24G  EARLY    EXGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

we  were  citizens,  and  not  soldiers  under  liis  command,  we 
tlioiiglit  it  convenient  to  write  to  my  Lord  Mayor,  Sir 
Thomas  Almin,  signifying  to  liim  the  scandal  that  was 
upon  ns;  liaving,  indeed,  had  no  arms  in  any  of  our  houses 
l)ut  what  was  ordinary  for  house-keeping.  We  prayed  him 
that  matters  might  be  examined  into,  and  that  we  might  not 
be  detained  from  our  callings,  and  kept  prisoners  without 
cause.  My  Lord  Mayor  was  pleased  to  order  the  letter  to 
be  read  at  the  Common  Council,  who,  being  satisfied  of  our 
innocence,  sent  some  officers,  desiring  that  we  might  be 
released,  and  our  arms,  which  had  been  taken  from  us, 
restored."*  Major-General  Harrison  was  brought  to  London 
by  force,  because  he  would  not  leave  his  home,  in  order  that 
he  might  not  desert  his  cause.  Thus  early  had  they  a  taste  of 
the  sufierings  which  in  the  reign  of  the  restored  Stuarts 
awaited  them.f  "We  have  only  to  add,  that  in  Ireland  the 
proposal  to  restore  the  prince  was  hailed  vnih  joy.  Heath 
gives  an  amusing  account  of  the  way  in  which  the  opposition 
of  some  of  our  brethren  in  that  country  was  overcome: — 
"  Sir  C.  Coot  declared  for  a  Free  Parliament,  1659,  by  the 
readmission  of  the  secluded  members,  and,  therefore,  jios- 
sessed  himself  of  Dublin  Castle,  having  first  of  all  sui'})rised 
Galloway  from  Colonel  Sadler  in  this  manner: — He  invited 
him  and  his  officers  (all  Anabaptists)  to  his  house  over  the 
waters,  to  be  merry;  which  doing,  Mr.  Coot  pretended  a 
desire  to  drink  a  glass  of  wine  in  Galloway,  privately,  with 
Sadler.  So  they  two  secretly  took  boat,  with  each  a  servant, 
and  being  on  the  other  side,  '  Sir  C.,'  said  Colonel  Sadler, 
'  I  am  resolved  for  a  Free  Parliament,  &c.  You  have  a 
sword,  draw  and  fight,  or  else  engage  your  honour  you  will 
make  no  kind  of  disturbance,'  &c.  The  Colonel,  surj^rised, 
acquiesced,"  ctc.+ 

*  Life,  p.  40.    Sometimes  he  is  called  Captain,  and  occasionally  Colonel. 
He  was  in  the  militia. 
+  Guizot,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  183, 184,  203,  209. 
J  Chronicles,  p.  438. 


CHARLES    THE    SECOND. 


Thus  pei-islied  a  form  of  government,  by  the  ambition  of 
military  chiefs,  and  the  conflicting  passions  of  religious  men, 
which  had  cost  much  bh)od  and  treasure,  and  gave  place  to 
one  which  ojjened  the  floodgate  of  vice  and  ci-uelty  through- 
out; the  whole  land. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND. 


Few  events  in  our  national  history  are  more  striking  or 
suggestive  than  the  restoration  of  the  exiled  Stuart  to  the 
throne  of  his  father.  It  was  hailed  with  the  wildest  tumult 
of  joy.  The  nation  was  intoxicated  with  delight.  Passion 
was  enthroned,  and  the  judgment  was  fettered.  Dissatisfied 
with  the  rivalry  of  men,  with  the  conflict  of  pai-ties,  and  the 
dawn  of  an  unchecked  military  despotism,  the  representative 
of  the  wretched  Stuarts  was  welcomed  by  men  who  had 
bitterly  opposed  the  second  of  that  dynasty.  Loyalty  harl 
no  limits.  It  overleaped  every  barrier  which  the  wisdom  of 
the  past  had  thrown  up  against  despotic  power,  and  men  who 
had  risked  all  in  the  defence  of  liberty  were  now  seen  pros- 
trate at  the  feet  of  a  monarch  who  had  no  moral  principles 
to  guide  him,  but  every  motive  to  wield  those  very  powers 
which  had  covered  the  reign  of  his  grandfather  with  infiimy, 
and  1)rought  his  father  to  the  block.  The  golden  age  was 
anticipated.  Bewildered,  fascinated  Ijy  the  smiles  of  royalty, 
the  men  of  mark  and  influence  looked  forward  to  a  reign  of 
prosperity,  of  morality,  and  peace.  Never  was  expectation 
less  realized;  never  did  the  nature  of  things  less  warrant  it. 
Eveiy  year  accumulated  proof  of  the  fearful  mistake  which 
had  been  made.  IMrs.  Hutchinson  thus  describes  it : — "  And 
almost  all  the  gentry  of  all  pai-ties  went — some  to  fetch  him 


34:8  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

over,  some  to  meet  liim  at  the  sea-side,  some  to  fetch  him 
into  London,  into  which  he  entered  on  the  29th  of  May,  with 
a  universal  joy  and  triumph,  even  to  his  own  amazement; 
who,  when  he  saw  all  the  nobility  and  gentry  of  the  land 
flowing  unto  him,  asked  where  were  his  enemies?  For  he 
saw  nothiag  but  prostrates,  expressing  all  that  love  that 
could  make  a  prince  happy.  Indeed,  it  was  a  wonder,  in 
that  day,  to  see  the  mutability  of  some  and  the  hypocrisy 
of  others,  and  the  servile  flattery  of  others.  Monk,  like  his 
better  genius,  conducted  him,  and  was  adored  like  one  that 
had  brought  all  the  glory  and  felicity  of  mankind  home 
with  this"  prince."* 

The  loyalty  of  the  North  was  not  less  intense  than  that 
of  the  South.  The  reason  will  be  manifest  from  the  facts 
already  detailed : — "As  soon  as  the  certainty  of  the  king's 
return  arrived  in  Scotland,  I  believe  there  was  never  acci- 
dent in  the  world  altered  the  disposition  of  a  people  more 
than  that  did  the  Scottish  nation.  Sober  men  observed  it ; 
it  did  not  only  inebriate  but  really  intoxicate,  and  made 
people  not  only  drunk  but  frantic;  men  did  not  think  they 
could  handsomely  express  their  joy,  except  they  turned 
brutes  for  debauch,  revels,  and  pageants;  yea,  many  a  sober 
man  was  tempted  to  exceed,  lest  he  should  be  condemned  as 
unnatural,  disloyal,  and  unsensible.     Most  of  the  nobility, 

■*  Hutchinson,  p.  116.  "The  Sectaries  will  not  he  ahle  to  do  anything 
to  prevent  the  king's  coming  in ;  oiu-  honest  Preshyterian  brethren  are 
cordial  for  him.  I  have  been  dealing  ^vith  some  of  them,  to  send  some 
testimony  of  their  affection  for  him ;  and  yesterday  some  of  them  pro- 
mised within  a  week  to  make  a  shift  to  send  1000  pieces  of  gold  to  him. 
The  Episcopal  party  are  making  application  to  the  Presbyterians  for  an 
accommodation;  biit  the  Presbyterians  resolved  to  stick  to  their  prin- 
ciples."— Woodi'ow,  vol.  i.,  p.  19.  (Shari^. )  At  .the  coronation,  Heath  says: — 
"Infinite  and  innumerable  were  the  acclamations  and  shouts  from  all 
parts  as  his  Magesty  passed  along,  to  the  no  less  joy  and  amazement  of 
the  spectators,  who  beheld  these  glorious  personages  that  rid  before  and 
behind  his  Magesty."— Heath,  p.  484.  "It  is  incredible  to  think  what 
costly  cloathes  were  worn  that  day ;  the  cloaks  could  hardly  be  seen  what 
silk  or  satin  they  were  made  of,  for  the  gold  and  silver  lace  and  en\- 
broidery  that  was  laid  upon  them,"  &c. — Ibid, 


CHARLES    THE    SECOND.  249 

gentry,  and  hungry  old  soldiers,  flew  to  London,  just  as  the 
vulture  does  to  the  carcase."*  "All  believed  it  wovdd  be 
the  golden  age,  when  the  king  returned  in  peace ;  and  some 
of  our  British  divines  made  it  the  date  of  the  accomplish- 
ment of  the  glorious  promises  in  the  Apocalypse,  not  doubting 
he  was  assiu-edly  to  be  the  man  who  should  destroy  Kome, 
as  sure  as  he  was  Constantine's  successor.  In  fine,  the  eagei-- 
ness  of  theii-  longing  was  so  gi'eat,  some  would  never  cut 
their  liaii-,  some  would  never  drink  wine,  some  would  never 
wear  linen,  till  they  might  see  the  desire  of  their  eyes — the 
king."t 

This  outburst  of  feeling  excites  no  surprise.  The  Pres- 
byterian body  had  taken  an  active  part  in  the  restoration. 
Without  their  aid,  it  would  have  been  impossible.  "  They 
were  in  possession  of  the  whole  power  of  England;  the 
Council  of  State,  the  chief  officers  of  the  anny  and  navy, 
and  the  governors  of  the  cliief  forts  and  garrisons  were 
there;  their  clergy  were  in  possession  of  both  universities, 
and  of  the  best  livings  in  the  kingdom.  There  was  hardly 
a  royalist  or  professed  Episcopalian  in  any  post  of  honour 
or  tinist ;  nor  had  the  king  any  number  of  friends  capable  of 
promoting  his  restoration,"  &c.  It  is  more  than  probable, 
we  tliink,  that  their  conduct  sprang  not  so  much  from  love 


*  Kirton's  History.  Apud  Woodrow,  vol.  i.,  p.  64.  "Five  drunkards 
in  Berks  agreed  to  di-ink  the  king's  health  in  their  blood,  and  that  each 
shovild  cut  a  piece  off  his  buttocks  and  fry  it,  wliich  foui-  of  them  did ; 
but  the  wife  of  the  fifth  coming  into  the  room,  and  taking  up  a  pair  of 
tongs  laid  about  her  so,  that  she  saved  the  cutting  of  her  husband." — 
Whitelocke,  p.  445.     Woodrow,  vol.  i.,  p.  225. 

■f"  Kirton's  History.  Apud  Woodrow,  vol.  i.,  p.  64.  "A  day  of 
thanksgiving  was  kept  in  Edinbro',  June  19,  1660.  After  sermons  were 
over,  the  magistrates  came  to  the  Cross,  where  was  a  covered  table 
ivith  sweetmeats;  the  Cross  ran  -with  wine,  300  dozen  of  glasses  were 
broke,  the  bells  tolled,  trumpets  sounded,  and  drums  beat.  There  were 
fireworks  upon  the  Castle  Hill,  mth  the  effigies  of  Cromwell  and  the 
devil  pursuing  him,  tUl  all  was  blown  up  iu  the  aii'.  Great  solemnity, 
bonfires,  music,  and  the  like,  were  in  other  places  upon  this  occasion," 
&c. — WoodroVs  Cli.  History,  vol.  i.,  p.  62. 


250  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

to  the  Stuarts,  as  very  ardent  attachment  to  monarchy.* 
Defeat  had  marked  their  movements  for  some  time  past. 
Under  the  loss  of  power  they  had  smarted,  and  the  preva- 
lence and  influence  of  the  sectaries,  especially  the  Anabap- 
tists, had  kindled  in  their  minds  an  intense  hatred  against 
tliem  and  the  Independents.t  Visions  of  power,  wealth, 
and  supremacy  gleamed  in  the  distance.  The  centre  figure 
was  the  exiled  monarch.  Their  great  Diana  could  only  be 
enthroned  by  his  restoration.  Reflection,  which  would  have 
placed  before  them  a  crowd  of  improbabilities  had  it  been 
indulged,  was  abandoned.  In  their  enthusiasm  for  the 
Covenant,  they  forgot  that  Charles  had  violated  already  his 
most  solemn  oath  to  them;  that  he  was  educated  amidst 
influences  of  a  Papal  rather  than  a  Protestant  character; 
that  he  had  renounced  the  faith  of  his  father,  and  been 
reconciled  to  the  Romish  church;^  that  he  was  sun-ounded 
by  men  whose   attachment   to  the   Episcopal  church  was 

*  "  The  king's  interest  is  also  supported  by  the  Presbyterians,  although 
tliey  are  Republicans  in  principle ;  and  it  is  only  the  fear  of  these 
sectaries  that  the  Anabaptists  and  other  sectarians  may  obtain  the 
Oovernment,  which  leads  them  to  oppose  the  present  authorities."— 
Guizot's  Richard  Cromwell,  vol.  i.,  p.  407.     Neal,  vol.  ii.,  chap.  iv. 

t  "  And  now  the  ministers  of  the  Presbj-terian  persuasion  daily  fre- 
quented St.  James's  (Plonk's  residence) ;  they  were  in  a  hopeful  expecta- 
tion tliat  all  those  sects  who  had  supplanted  them  would  with  little 
<lifficulty  be  put  under  their  feet ;  that  themselves  alone  shoiild  inherit 
the  blessing :  the  Church  of  England  at  that  time  being  below  their  fear 
(for  Monk  was  the  defender  of  their  faith,  and  had  wrested  the  sword  out 
of  the  army's,  their  enemies',  hands).  And,  indeed,  he  was  their  zealous 
votary ;  for  one  Lord's  day,  he  and  his  lady  went  and  communicated  {sic) 
at  Mr.  Calamy's  church,  who  afterwards  so  far  prevailed  with  him,  that 
none  were  to  preach  before  him  but  such  only  as  he  recommended,"  &c. 
— The  History  of  the  King's  Restoration;  by  J.  Price,  D.D.  Maseres 
Tracts,  vol.  ii. ,  p.  776.  This  apologist  of  Monk  supplies  us  with  the  most 
abundant  proof  of  the  duplicity  of  this  unprincipled  man. 

t  Neal,  vol.  ii.,  chap.  iv.  Hyde,  in  his  narrow-mindedness,  dissuaded 
the  prince  (Charles  II.),  when  in  France,  from  attending  the  Protestant 
places  of  worship  at  Charenton.  "He  was  then  at  liberty,"  says  Lord 
Campbell,  "without  interruption  to  devote  himself  on  Sundays  to  Miss 
Lucy  Walters,  and  other  ladies  of  the  same  stamp,  in  whose  society  he 
now  spent  ahnost  the  whole  of  his  time." — Chan.,  vol.  iii.,  p.  163. 


CHARLES    THE    SECOND. 


251 


increased  by  its  siifterings,  wliilst  a  crowd  of  Imngry  cour- 
tiers surrounded  the  profligate  prince,  waiting  to  gratify 
their  malignity,  and  to  relieve  their  poverty  by  gx-asping  at 
tlie  offices  and  wealth  of  their  adversaries.* 

From  Breda,  where  he  had  retired  to  be  in  readiness, 
Charles  issued  a  declaration  of  his  views  and  his  tolerant 
disposition.  It  was  full  of  promise,  and  for  the  time  answered 
the  end.  We  quote  a  part  of  this  memorable  document: — 
"We  do  declare  a  liberty  to  tender  consciences,  and  that  no 
man  shall  be  disquieted  or  called  in  question  for  differences 
of  opinion  in  matters  of  religion  which  do  not  disturb  the 
peace  of  the  kingdom ;  and  we  shall  be  ready  to  consent  to 
such  an  Act  of  Parliament  as,  upon  mature  deliberation,  shall 
be  offered  to  us,  for  the  full  granting  that  indulgence." 

Amongst  the  multitude  who  surrounded  the  exiled  prince 
at  Breda,  were  seen  some  of  the  gra-ve  and  leading  divines  of 
the  Presbyterian  body.  Reynolds,  Calamy,  Manton,  and 
others,  were  seen  mingling  in  social  intercouse  with  men 
who  laughed  at  their  rigid  formality,  and  intensely  scorned 
their  piety.  They  had  gone  to  enlist  the  sympathies  of  the 
lascivious  monarch  in  their  favour,  and  to  secure  his  patron- 
age for  their  religioiis  dogmas.  The  time  was  critical,  but 
Charles  and  his  counsellors  were  quite  adequate  to  the  task. 
The  game  was  deep,  but  it  was  well  played.  Promises  were 
made,  and  compliments  secured  the  admiration  and  attach- 
ment  of    the  visitors.     To   such   daring   impiety  did   the 

*  One  of  oiu-  brethren  thus  expresses  his  opinion  on  this  event : — "So 
that  now,  O  England !  thou  canst  not  so  complain,  for  by  a  miraculous 
hand  thy  head  is  restored  to  thee  again ;  examine  thyself  now  what 
benefit  thou  hast  received,"  &c.  "Tliat  England's  subjects  be  often 
with  the  Lord  in  behalf  of  their  king,  who,  from  his  long  exile  and 
restraint,  is  brought  again  into  this  land  of  his  nativity,  which  is  so  full 
of  licentiousness,  luxury  and  lasciviousness,  revellings,  rendings  and 
tcarings,  roarings,  rantings  and  swearings,  with  those  abominations  of 
stage  plays,  May  games  and  pastimes,  pride  and  prodigality,  that  God  in 
mercy  would  be  pleased  to  tiirect  his  heart  so  as  that  he  Ije  not  now 
either  to  own  or  allow  of  them;  but  to  disown,  dissuade,  and  discoun- 
tenance them."— Adis'  Fanatics'  Mite,  pp.  36-44. 


252  EARLY    EXGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

hypocrisy  of  the  monarch  cany  him,  whilst  they  were  one 
day  waiting  in  an  anteroom,  that  he  bended  before  the  God 
of  truth  and  holiness,  and,  in  their  hearing,  "  he  thanked 
God  that  he  was  a  covenanted  king;  that  he  hoped  the  Lord 
would  give  him  an  humble,  meek,  forgiving  spirit;  that  he 
might  have  forbearance  towards  his  offending  subjects,  as  he 
expected  forgiveness  from  offended  heaven."*  The  enthu- 
siasm of  the  deputies  rose  to  the  highest  point,  and  good 
Mr.  Chase,  in  raptm-e,  lifted  up  liis  hands  to  heaven  and 
blessed  God,  who  had  given  them  a  praying  king.f 

The  joy  of  the  cavaliers  was  not  yet  complete.  The 
return  of  the  monarch  was  associated  Vi^ith  visions  of  wealth, 
honour,  and  riches,  and  better  still,  with  full  revenge.  Upon 
some,  the  liighest  dignities  were  conferred.  Monk,  a  man 
whom  no  principle  could  bind,  who  could  ^wear  to  a  lie  vith 
as  much  calmness  as  another  would  to  fact,  was  raised  to  a 
dukedom.  Other  apostates  were  dignified  "with  smaller 
tokens  of  royal  gratitude;  but  dissatisfaction  was  felt  by  the 
mass  of  the  adherents  of  the  Stuarts.  Their  claims  were  of 
the  very  highest  order.  Many  of  them  had  suffered  long 
and  severely.  Exile,  poverty,  and  even  want,  had  been 
endured  by  some.  The  munificence  of  Charles  fell  far  short 
of  the  almost  boundless  expectations  of  his  friends.  The 
discovery  was  speedily  made  that  the  wild  outbursts  of 
loyalty  were  not  always  pure,  and  that  the  love  of  distinction 
and  wealth  were  not  quite  ignored  from  the  motives  which 
bound  some  to  the  cause  of  exiled  royalty. 


*  Neal,  vol.  ii.,  chap.  iv.  His  counsellors  at  Ereda  liad  instilled  into 
him,  "that  honour  and  conscience  were  burglars,  and  that  the  king 
ought  to  govern  himself  rather  by  the  rules  of  prudence  and  necessity." 
— Lingard,  vol.  xi.,  p.  114  (Note).  "  God  forbid  I  should  imagine  it  pos- 
sible for  the  king  to  counterfeit  longer  the  Presbyterians ;  all  his  excuse 
is,  that  he  was  forced,"  &;c.  — Hyde  to  Nicholas.  Clarendon,  vol.  iii., 
p.  33. 

t  "The  Presbyterians,  in  their  eagerness  to  be  revenged  on  the  Inde- 
pendents, sacrificed  their  liberty  and  deserted  all  their  old  principles." — 
Macaulay's  Essays.     Milton,  p.  22. 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND.  253 

But  if  dis.satisfoction  was  felt  here,  ample  room  was  given 
for  the  gratification  of  another  feeling — deep,  intense,  and 
long  cherished.  To  the  indulgence  of  their  revenge,  eveiy- 
thing  was  favourable.  Sympathy,  gratitude,  compassion,  had 
no  play.  Within  the  walls  of  St.  Stephen's,  men,  reckless  of 
character  and  destitute  of  principle,  were  gathered.  Hatred 
to  the  sectaries  and  blind  devotion  to  the  court,  had  sent 
many  of  them  there.  By  them,  the  Legislative  Acts  of  the 
past  were  eftaced  from  the  Statiite  Book.  The  labours  of 
men,  whom  people  now  delight  to  admire  as  some  of  the 
noblest  of  our  race,  were  overtnmed  by  the  mtlmgs  of  the 
day.  It  was  enough,  if  anything  had  on  it  the  stamp  of  the 
Commonwealth,  or  of  the  Long  Parliament,  to  be  rejected 
Avith  scorn.  To  other  sources  our  readers  must  go  fof  fuller 
details  of  these  all  but  insane  proceedings ;  only  to  one  can 
we  refer. 

The  regicides,  as  they  were  called,  felt  the  full  weight  of 
their  vengeance.  The  Ijlood  of  the  martyred  monarch  could 
only  be  atoned  by  slaughtering  the  men  who  had  shed  it. 
The  trial  of  some  of  these  Avas  speedy.  Others  were  par- 
doned; .some  sent  into  exile  even  woi-se  than  death.*  The 
judgment  hall  at  this  time  awakens  mingled  feelings.  As  we 
gaze  in  imagination  on  the  prisoners  at  the  bar,  we  feel  kind- 
ling within  us  the  loftiest  admiration  of  the  heroic  men  who 
stand  before  the  tribunal;  if  we  turn  to  the  seat  of  justice, 
we  see  humanity  in  its  most  loathsome  form;  for  among 
them  was  "  the  vile  traitor  who  had  sold  the  men  who  had 
trusted  him;  and  he  who  had  openly  said  he  opposed  the 
word  accommodation,  when  moderate  men  would  have  pre- 
A-ented  the  war ;  and  the  colonel's  'our  dear  friend,'  Avho  had 
Avished  damnation  to  his  soul  if  he  ever  suffered  pemiry  of 
any  man's  estate,  or  hair  of  any  man's  head  to  be  touched. "t 

*  The  reader  may  consult  Mis.  Hutchinson  for  proof  of  this. 

t  Hutchinson,  p.  120.  Monk,  Hollis,  and  Ashley  Cowper  are  the  party 
here  refeiTed  to.  Glyne  and  Maynard,  the  counsel  for  the  crown,  had  both 
held  ofiBce  under  Cromwell. 


254:  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Some  of  these  Avere  Baptists.  There  were  more  than  one 
amongst  the  judges  of  the  king.  At  the  bar  one  of  these 
stands,  venerable  for  years,  but  calm  and  undaunted.  We 
hope  to  do  more  justice  to  the  heroic  Harrison,  some  day. 
An  enemy  thus  describes  him : — "  Thomas  Hari'ison,  a  man 
of  veiy  mean  bii-th,  being  the  son  of  a  butcher  in  or  near 
Newcastle-under-Lyne.  He  was  servant  to  Mr.  Hulks,  an 
attorney-at-law;  but  preferring  war  before  peace,  got  into 
the  army,  and,  having  the  knack  of  canting,  was  believed  to 
be  a  person  of  surpassing  piety;  and  so  insinuated  himself 
from  one  command  to  another,  till  he  became  Major-General 
of  Wales,  being  dangerously  Anabaptistical  in  his  tenets, 
and  a  perfect  hater  of  Orthodox  divines,  and  a  denouncer  of 
their  biaintenance.  He  Avas  very  lately  a  preacher,  and, 
indeed,  head  of  a  rebaptized  congregation  in  London."* 
Before  his  judges  he  said,  as  to  the  blood  of  the  king: — "  I 
have  not  in  the  least  any  guilt  lying  on  me,  for  I  have  many 
a  time  sought  the  Lord  with  tears,  to  know  whether  I  had 
done  amiss  in  it,  but  was  rather  confirmed  that  the  thing 
was  more  of  God  than  man."t  His  character  for  piety  was 
eminent.    Baxter   says: — "I  happened  to  be  next  to  the 


*  Mystery  of  the  Good  Old  Cause,  &c.  Pari.  History,  vol.  iii.,  p.  1605. 
The  following  is  not  only  curious,  but  interesting: — "It  is  obsen'able 
tliat  Major-Gen.  Hamson  and  his  wife,  with  Mr.  John  Carew  and  Major 
Courteny,  though  formerly  supposed  to  be  persons  a  storey  or  two  above 
ordinances,  being  desirous  to  enter  into  the  way  of  the  rebaptized,  have 
all  of  them,  some  time  since  the  beginning  of  this  frosty  weather,  been 
dipped,  notwithstanding  the  bitterness  of  the  season.  And  it  is  further 
observable,  that  when  the  said  Major  Courteny  was  apprehended  (who 
■v\ith  Mr.  Rogers,  the  minister,  now  stands  committed  to  the  tower), 
there  was  found  in  his  lodging  several  dangerous  pamiohlets,  divers  of 
which  were  enclosed  in  letters,  directed  to  several  persons  in  the  county, 
being  the  veiy  same  with  those  wliicli  have  been  lately  scattered  up  and 
dovm  among  the  soldiery,  and  elsewhere."— Mercurius  Politicus,  No.  402. 
The  work  referred  to  was  probably  one  called  "Quaeries,  written  on 
purpose  to  prevent  those  called  Anabaptists,  and  disaffect  them  against 
the  Government,"  kc. — Mercurius  Politicus,  No.  363,  where  there  is  a 
proclamation  against  it. 

t  Pepys'  Diary,  vol.  i.,  p.  146.     Kennett,  p.  276. 


CHARLES    TJIE    SECOND.  ZOO 

Major  (Harrison)  when  the  flight  (of  Goring's  troops)  began, 
and  heai-d  liini  witli  a  loud  voice  break  forth  into  the  praise 
of  God  Avith  fluent  expressions,  as  though  lie  had  been  in  a 
raptui-e."  "  I  knew  none  of  them  but  ]Major-General  Har- 
rison, whom  I  love  so  well  that  I  wish  he  may  jiatronize  a 
better  cause."*  The  final  scene  is  thus  described : — "  The 
executioner,  in  an  ugly  dress,  with  an  halter  in  his  hand, 
was  placed  near  the  Major-General,  and  continued  there 
during  the  whole  of  his  trial."  Ludlow,  commenting  on  this, 
says: — "Which  action  I  doubt  whether  it  was  ever  equalled 
by  the  most  barbarous  nations.  But  having  learned  to  con- 
temn such  baseness,  after  the  sentence  had  been  pronounced 
against  him,  he  said  aloud,  as  he  was  withdrawing  from  the 
court,  that  he  had  no  reason  to  be  ashamed  of  the  cause  in 
which  he  had  been  engaged.  The  sentence  was  so  barbar- 
ously (and  literally)  executed,  that  he  was  cut  down  alive, 
and  saw  his  bowels  thrown  into  the  fire."t 

Nor  did  these  victims  satisfy  their  thirst  for  blood.  The 
resting-places  of  the  mighty  chiefs  were  invaded,  and  the 
triumphs  of  the  court  and  its  minions  reached  its  climax 
when  the  mouldering  skeletons  of  the  men  at  whose  names, 
when  alive,  fear  and  trembling  had  often  seized  some  of 
them,  were  suspended  on  the  gibbet.  The  remains  of  Crom- 
well, Ireton,  and  Bradshaw,  were  thus  dishonoured.  From 
the   Abbey   Church   at  Westminster,  the   bodies  of   Mrs. 

*  Infant  Church  Membership,  p.  373.  "Harrison  and  Rich  were  in 
the  small  but  ilhistrious  band  of  Repiiblicans,  who  never  compromised 
their  dignity  by  the  smallest  token  of  submission  or  deference  to  the 
jjresent  chief  magistrate.  Unyielding  virtue,  like  theirs,  extoi-ts  from  us 
an  involuntary  approbation."— Goodwn,  vol.  iv.,  p.  271  (Note). 

f  Memoirs,  vol.  iii.,  pp.  62,  63.  Amongst  the  crowd  attracted  to  this 
savage  scene  was  Pepys.  He  thus  refers  to  it : — "  I  went  out  to  Charing 
Ci-oss  to  see  Major-General  Hamson  hanged,  drawn,  and  quartered; 
which  was  done  there,  he  looking  as  cheerful  as  any  man  could  do  in  that 
condition.  He  was  presently  cut  do%vn,  and  his  head  and  heart  sho-WTi  to 
the  people,  at  wliich  there  was  great  sliouts  of  joy.  It  is  said,  that  he 
said  that  he  was  sure  to  come  shortly  at  tJie  right  hand  of  Christ,  to 
judge  them  that  now  had  judged  him ;  and  liis  wife  do  expect  his  coming 
again."— Pepys,  vol.  i.,  p.  146. 


256  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

Cromwell,  Pym,  aud  Twiss  aud  Marshall,  were  cast  out.* 
Lambei-t  and  Hutchinson  wasted  away  in  gloomy  confine- 
ment, and  the  inflexible  Vane  paid  the  penalty  soon  after  by 
suffering  on  the  block.  Punishment,  to  be  effectual,  must 
always  be  just.  If  passion  marks  it,  or  it  is  disfigured  by 
hate,  its  power  is  weakened.  By  the  thoughtless  and  the 
frivolous,  these  demonstrations  of  cruelty  were  hailed  with 
satisfaction ;  but  history,  always  faithful,  has  embalmed 
the  memory  of  these  men  as  some  of  the  noblest  cham- 
pions of  English  freedom,  and  future  ages  ^\^ill  confirm  her 
verdict. 

Immediately  after  Charles's  return,  doubts  were  excited, 
and  subsequently  oj)ened  the  eyes  of  the  nation  to  the  ti-ue 
character  of  the  monarch,  and  the  imposition  which  had 
been  practised  on  the  Nonconformists,  t  All  laws  passed 
during  the  interregnum  were  declared  null.     By  an  easy 

*  Lives  of  the  Regicides.  Pepj's,  vol.  i.,  p.  78.  Ludlow,  vol.  iii.,  p.  323. 
Evelyn  thus  embodies  the  malignant  feeUug  of  multitudes,  in  the  utter- 
ance of  his  own  rabid  nonsense.  "  This  day  (O,  the  stupendous  and 
inscrutable  judgment  of  God!)  were  the  carcases  of  those  ai'ch  rebels, 
Cromwell,  Bradshaw,  the  judge  who  condemned  his  Majesty,  and  L-eton, 
son-in-law  to  the  usurper,  di'agged  out  of  their  superb  tombs  in  "West- 
minster, among  the  kings,  to  Tyburne,  and  hanged  on  the  gallows  there 
from  nine  in  the  morning  tiU  six  at  night,  aud  then  buried  under  that 
fatal  aud  ignominious  monument  in  a  deep  pit ;  thousands  of  people, 
who  had  seen  them  in  all  theu-  pride,  being  spectators.  Look  back  at 
November  22, 1658  (Oliver's  funeral),  and  be  astonished !  aud  fear  God, 
and  honour  the  king !  but  meddle  not  mth  them  who  are  given  to  change." 
— Diary,  vol.  ii.,  p.  162.  This  maudlin  dabbler  in  judgments  lived  to  wit- 
ness the  most  revolting  profligacy  in  the  Lord's  anointed,  and  the  final 
expulsion  of  the  Stuarts  from  the  English  throne. 

f  "Charles  the  Second,  and  his  brother  the  Duke  of  York,  returned,  in 
fact,  into  England,  the  one  an  infidel  libertine,  who  falsely  gave  himself 
out  to  be  a  Protestant,  and  a  blindly  sincere  Catholic;  both  iml^ued  'vvith 
the  principles  of  absolute  jjower ;  both  dissolute  in  morals,  the  one  with 
elegant  and  heartless  cynicism,  the  other  with  shocking  inconsistency; 
both  addicted  to  those  habits  of  mind  and  life,  to  those  tastes  and  vices 
Avhich  render  a  court  a  school  of  arrogant  and  frivolous  con-uptions, 
which  rapidly  spreads  its  contagious  influence  through  the  higher  and 
lower  classes  who  hasten  to  the  court  to  imitate  and  seek  it." — Giiizot's 
Eichard  Cromwell,  vol.  ii.,  p.  203. 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND.  257 

fiction,  Ej)iscopaliani.sni  was  still  the  religion  of  the  State. 
"  The  coveiKinted  king"  sanctioned  the  liturgy  in  his  own 
chapel,  and  extended  his  patronage,  in  all  its  i)lenitude,  to 
the  bishops.  On  emerging  from  the  obscurity  in  which 
they  had  been  hidden,  like  the  sun,  when  the  thunder-cloud 
which  has  veiled  its  biightness  has  passed  away,  they  came 
forth  with  fresh  splendour,  and  more  than  their  wonted 
insolence.  Ministers,  who  for  moral  and  intellectual  unfit- 
ness had  been  removed  from  the  ministry,  now,  in  many 
cases,  resumed  their  rights,  and  luxuriated  in  their 
trimnph  over  the  men  who  had  been  placed  there  by  the 
highest  authority  of  the  nation.  Many  holy  and  useful 
ministers  were  compelled  to  retire  from  their  congregations 
at  an  early  period  of  the  monarch's  reign.  An  Act  of 
Indemnity  was  passed  by  the  Parliament.  Many  in  the 
House  needed  it.  But  it  excepted  many  from  the  royal 
clemency,  and  ofiered  pardon  to  others  on  terms  which 
conscience  and  a  sense  of  duty  prevented  their  accepting. 
The  feeling  which  pervaded  the  House  may  be  gathered 
from  tlie  language  of  the  Speaker.  He  had  been  an  active 
partizan  during  the  civil  conflict.  His  iitterances  proclaim 
the  depth  of  his  meanness.  He  thought  it  not  beneath  the 
dignity  of  his  character  to  feed  the  fire  of  revenge,  which 
he  knew  was  burning  in  the  breasts  of  men  who  had  the 
power  of  scorching  the  innocent  by  its  fury. 

"  But  looking  over  a  long,  black,  prodigious,  dismal  roll 
and  catalogue  of  malefoctors,  we  there  meet,  not  with  men, 
but  with  monsters,  guilty  of  blood — precious  blood — precious 
royal  blood — never  to  be  remembered  without  tears,  incom- 
parable in  all  kinds  of  villanies  that  were  acted  by  the 
woi-st  of  miscreants — perverters  of  religion,  subverters  of 
the  Government,  flilse  to  God,  disloyal  to  the  best  of  kings, 
and  perfidious  to  their  country,"  &c.* 


*  Pari.  Hist.,  vol.  iii.,p.  113.    In  contrast  to  this  we  place  before  our 
readers  another  opinion,  uttered  in  the  Long  Parliament ; — "  "Who  is  it  but 


258  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

But  things  were  not  yet  ripe  for  tlie  full  development  of 
the  policy  of  the  court.  Charles,  intensely  devoted  to 
pleasure,  willingly  resigned  the  care  of  Government  to 
Hyde.  The  Minister  hated  the  dominant  sect*  Still 
agaui  and  again  Charles  was  made  to  hold  out  the  hope  of  a 
comprehension.  In  the  senate,  and  in  private,  his  promises 
were  reiterated.  The  deception  was  increased.  "  To  keep 
them  somewhat  sanguine  in  theii-  expectations,"  says  Col- 
lier, "  Dr.  Pteynolds,  Dr.  Spiu'stowe,  Dr.  Wallis,  Dr.  Bates, 
Dr.  Manton,  Mr.  Calamy,  ]Mr.  Ask,  ]Mi\  Baxter,  Mr.  Chase, 
and  also  several  others,  were  made  the  king's  chaplains-in- 
ordinaiy,  though  none  of  them  ever  preached  before  his 
Majesty,  excepting  Mr.  Calamy,  Drs.  Reynolds,  Baxter,  Spur- 
stowe,  and  Woodbridge."t  Interviews  were  ever  graciously 
permitted,  petitions  were  received  with  royal  blandness,  and 
the  wily  monarch  even  condescended  to  listen  to  discussions 
in  the  House  of  the  Chancellor.  Division  excited  his 
regi'et,  and  "  he  was  resolved  to  leave  no  method  unat- 
tempted  for  procuring  a  harmony,  and  di'awing  the  distant 
persuasions  to  a  good  understanding.  To  this  end  he  desired 
them  to  lay  some  proposals  before  him  touching  chui'ch 
government,  that  the  main  difference  being  once  settled, 

he  that  hath  advanced  all  our  Popish  bishops?  These  are  the  men  that 
shoiild  have  led  Cluist's  flock,  but  they  are  the  wolves  that  have  devoured 
them;  the  sheep  should  have  fed  on  the  mountains,  but  the  mountains 
have  eaten  up  the  sheep,"  &c. — Vide  David's  Essex  Noncon.,  p.  191. 

*  "  Every  good  man  would  depart  from  many  little  things,  if  the  doing 
so  would  iirmly  unite  the  Presbyterians  to  the  Church — which,  I  confess, 
I  think  impossible ;  for  the  truth  is,  theij  are  a  pack  of  knaves.  .  .  . 
If  the  Presbyterians  once  believed  that  nothing  would  be  yielded  to 
them,  and  all  their  hopes  were  desperate,  it  wordd  be  the  best  measure 
to  reduce  them.  They  are  as  muck  afraid  of  the  Papists  and  Indepen- 
dents as  any  sober  man  can  be,  and  wiU  join  against  them  as  soon  as  their 
own  hopes  are  at  an  end."— Letter  to  his  Son,  about  1671.  Life  iii.,  p.  483. 
"  To  this  sect  may  be  attributed  all  the  schisms  that  have  happened  in 
Christianity,  with  most  of  the  wars  that  have  lacerated  poor  Em-ope  ever 
since ;  and  it  may  be  called  the  source  of  the  civil  distraction  that  now 
afflicts  this  poor  island." — Howell's  Letters,  p.  413. 

t  Collier,  vol.  ii.,  p.  871. 


CHARLES  THE   SECOND.  259 

other  matters  might  be  easily  accommodated."  *  Our  space- 
forbids  us  to  enter  into  the  various  means  adopted  for 
this.     There  is  only  one  to  which  wc  can  advert. 

The  Savoy  Conference  was  held  in  1G60.  In  this 
assembly  the  points  of  difference  were  to  be  discussed 
between  the  Episcopal  and  the  Presbyterian  parties.  By 
the  royal  mandate  it  was  convened.  "  The  king,"  said 
Sharp,  afterwaids  the  noted  archbishop,  "  ordered  a  letter 
to  Dr.  Reynolds  and  Mr.  Calamy,  ordering  them  to  nominate 
ten  to  themselves,  of  their  judgment,  to  meet  in  a  confer- 
ence with  twelve  of  the  Episcopal  pai'ty,  whom  he  will 
nominate."t  The  arrangements  were  soon  made;  but  the 
prospects  of  success  were  very  cloudy.  The  grandfather's 
farce  was  about  to  be  reacted  again.  "  The  king,"  says 
Kirton,  "  even  as  his  father,  was  resolute  for  bishops,  not- 
withstanding his  oath  to  the  contrary;  he  knew  well  bishops 
would  never  be  reprovers  of  the  court,  and  the  first  article 
of  their  catechism  was  non-resistance.  .  .  .  They  were 
the  best  tools  for  tyranny  in  the  world :  for,  do  a  king  what 
he  would,  their  daily  instruction  was — kings  could  do  no 
wrong,  and  that  none  might  put  forth  a  hand  against  the 
Lord's  anointed  and  be  innocent.  .  .  .  They  were  all  for 
the  king's  absolute  power,  and  most  of  them  for  the  uni- 
versal prosperity,  and  to  make  the  people  believe  the  king 
was  lord  of  all  their  ffoods  without  consent  of  Parliament,  "t 


*  Collier,  vol.  ii.,  p.  871. 

t  Sharp  to  Douglas.  Woocli-ow,  vol.  i.,  p.  42.  "A  knowing  minister 
told  me  tliis  day  that,  if  a  Synod  should  be  called  by  the  plurality  of 
incuiiibents,  they  would  infaUibly  carry  Episcopacy.  There  are  many 
nominal,  few  real,  Presbyterians.  The  cassock  men  do  swarm  here ;  and 
such  who  seemed  before  to  be  for  Pi-esbyterians,  would  be  content  of  a 
moderate  Episcopacy."  "  The  king  and  grandees  are  whole  for  Epiaco- 
pacy:  the  Episcopal  men  ai-e  very  high." — (Sharp)  Woodrow,  vol.  i., 
p.  33. 

:t  Hist.,  p.  132.  Woodi-ow,  vol.  i.,p.  225.  The  feeling  iu  relation  to  the 
Presbyterians  was  strong.  The  following  is  a  samjile :— "  This  rebellion 
fiist  bubbled  up  in  Presbyterian  pulpits :  yet  it's  impolitic  to  say  so  much. 
We  also  know  'tis  more  for  fear  of  the  fanatics  than  for  love  to  us,  they 


2G0  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

The  leading  bi.sliops  had  no  desii-e  for  a  comprehension. 
Restored  to  power  they  would  use  it.  Hailing  with  rapture 
their  exalted  position,  they,  nevertheless,  shrunk  from  an 
examination  of  the  basis  on  which  it  rested.  Sharp,  the 
correspondent  of  the  kirk  in  England,  in  one  of  his  letters, 
gives  us  a  glimpse  of  this.  ''  The  Episcopal  party,  who 
now  make  it  their  work  to  put  off  the  meeting  of  a  Synod, 
which  hitherto  hath  been  in  the  talk  of  all,  seeking  to 
settle  their  way  before  a  Synod  can  be  called.  I  see 
generally  the  cassock  men  appearing  boldly;  the  liturgy  in 
many  places  setting  up.  The  service  in  the  chapel  at  White- 
hall is  to  be  set  up  with  organs  and  choristers,  as  formerly. 
No  remedy  for  this  can  be  expected  from  the  Parliament, 
who,  for  the  majority,  are  ready  to  set  up  Episcopacy  to  the 
height  in  mattei's  ecclesiastical ;  and,  with  the  rest,  moderate 
Episcopacy  will  go  down."* 

On  the  other  hand,  various  causes  had  influenced  the 
minds  of  the  leading  Presljyterians.  Their  views  were  con- 
siderably modified.  The  Presbyterianism  of  the  "West- 
minster Assembly  had  lowered  its  tone  considerably.  Baxter 
and  others  had  no  objection  to  a  modified  Episcopacy.  No 
doubt  rests  on  this  fact.     Erom  the  correspondent  already 

now  are  loyal ;  so  also  it  is  our  necessity,  not  choice,  that  makes  us  court 

them.     Hug  them— you  cannot  hang— at  least,  till  you  can .     A  blue 

ribbon  and  a  star,  we  know,  -will  unbecome  a  rebel's  shoulder ;  but  fishes 
bite  at  baits.  He  is  an  ass  that  angles  and  hides  not  his  hook.  .  .  . 
But  he  came  in  on  tei-ms,  and  is  bound  up !  Tush  !  remember  that 
blessed  line  I  marked  in  Machiavel :  he's  an  oafe  that  thinks  an  oath, 
or  any  tender,  can  tame  a  pioneer  beyond  his  pleasure,"  &c. — News 
from  Brussels  in  Collection  of  Tracts,  vol.  iv.,  p.  473. 

*  Letter  to  Douglas.  Woodrow,  vol.  i.,  p.  39.  "The  Episcopalians 
drive  so  furiously,  that  all  lovers  of  religion  are  awakened  to  look  about 
them,  and  to  endeavoiir  the  stemming  of  the  fearful  imi>etuousness  of 
these  men;  all  that  is  hoped  is  to  bring  them  to  some  moderation  and 
closure  with  an  Episcoi^acy  of  a  new  make."  '"Tis  much  to  be  lamented 
that  such  men  as  Wren,  whose  corrupt  principles  and  wicked  practices,  in 
liersecuting  conscientious  ministers,  who,  though  conforming,  are  too  well 
known  to  be  soon  forgotten,  shoidd  have  the  impudence  to  appear  with 
these  Babylonish  brats." — Mr.  Douglas.     "Woodrow,  vol.  i.,  pp.  37,  38. 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND,  261 

quoted,  we  gathei-  that  "The  influencing  men  of  tlie  Pres- 
byterian judgment  ai'e  content  with  Episcopacy  of  Bishop 
Usher's  model,  and  a  liturgy  somewhat  connected  with  the 
ceremonies  of  surplice,"  &c.  "  The  moderate  Episcopalians 
and  Presbyterians  fear  that,  either  the  high  Episco})al  men 
be  uppermost,  or  that  the  Erastians  carry  it  from  both." 
"  Some  leading  Presbyterians  tell  me  they  must  resolve  to 
close  in  with  what  they  call  moderate  Ejiiscopacy,  else  open 
profanity  will,  upon  the  one  hand,  overwhelm  them,  or 
Erastianism  (which  may  be  the  design  of  some  statesmen) 
on  the  other.""' 

With  these  feelings  the  Conference  was  held.  Over  several 
days  it  extended.  Baxter  and  Gunning  Avere  the  chief 
gladiators  in  the  arena.  The  contrast  between  them  was 
great.  Men  more  unfit  for  the  task  could  not  have  been 
found.  Both  were  men  of  large  reading,  of  subtle  intellect, 
and  ti-ained  in  all  the  dialectics  of  the  schools.  "  They 
spent  some  days  in  much  logical  inquiry,  to  the  diversion  of 
the  town,  who  thought  them  a  couple  of  fencers  engaged  in 
a  dis})ute  that  could  never  be  brought  to  an  end  or  have  any 
good  efiect."t  The  demands  of  the  Presbyterians  were  not 
great.  Changes  in  the  liturgy,  modifications  in  the  festivals, 
occasional  free  prayer,  omission  of  the  Apocrypha  in  the 
service  of  the  church,  the  omission  of  the  cross  in  baptism, 
kneeling  at  the  Lord's  Supper,  embraced,  in  the  main,  the 
extent  of  their  demands.  To  embody  their  views  more 
clearly,  Baxter,  with  his  very  ready  pen,  produced  a  liturgy, 


*  Sha:-p  to  Douglas.  Woodrow,  vol.  i.,  pp.  33,  39.  It  may  amuse 
our  leaders  to  see  the  opinions  of  Douglas  on  Episcopacy  at  this  time  : — 
"The  government  by  presljytery  is  good,  but  prelacy  is  neitlier  good  in 
Christian  policy  or  civil.  Some  say,  May  we  not  liave  a  moderate  Epis- 
copacy? But  'tis  a  plant  God  never  planted,  and  the  ladder  whereby 
antichrist  mounted  his  throne.  Bishops  get  caveats,  and  never  kept  one 
of  them ;  and  will  just  do  the  like  again.  "Wc  have  abjured  Episcopacy, 
let  us  not  lick  it  up  again." — Sei-mon  by  Douglas,  1660.  Woodrow,  vol.  i., 
p.  62. 

t  Buniet's  Own  Times,  vol.  i.,  pp.  283,  284. 


262  EARLY   ElfGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

wliicli  he  tliought  might  satisfy  all  pai-ties.*  But  all  these 
efforts  were  vain.  The  results  of  the  Savoy  Conference 
stand  before  lis  as  a  monument  of  the  folly  of  such  gather- 
ings. The  bishops  would  not  move.  Concession  was  not 
their  aim.  On  no  point  would  they  change.  Both  parties 
now  appealed  to  the  king.  Promises,  as  usual,  were  given 
to  the  Presbyterian  party:  their  value  will  presently  be 
seen.  In  this  Confei-ence  the  Baptists  and  Independents 
had  no  part.t 

The  spii-it  of  the  leading  Presbyterians  in  Scotland  may 
be  gathered  from  the  paper  of  advice  sent  to  Sharp  about 
this  time:  "  We  shall  not  concern  to  dive  into  the  temper  of 
Independents  and  other  sectaries,  and  how  they  may  relish 
Episcopacy  and  the  liturgy  in  the  recent  establishment  of 
affairs;  nor  troiible  you  with  an  account  of  what  noise  is 
raised,  upon  the  very  appearance  thereof,  by  others  whom 
you  know;  but  if  his  Majesty  knew  what  giief  of  heart 
the  fear  of  Episcopacy  and  the  service-book  is  to  many 
loyal  and  honest  subjects,  who  have  much  and  often 
mourned  in  secret  for  him,  and  do  now  rejoice  in  his 
wonderful  restitution,  and  how  much  it  woixld  refresh  them 
to  be  secured  against  these  fears;  we  are  confident  he  would 
be  most  ready  to  satisfy  such  subjects,  who  will  count 
nothing  temporal  too  dear  to  be  laid  forth  as  his  Majesty's 
affairs  shall  requixe ;  and  though  it  may  be  conceived  that 
the  affairs  of  England  do  nothing  concern  them,  yet  they 
cannot  but  remember,  from  former  experience,  what  influ- 
ence the  state  of  the  Church  of  England  hath  had  upon 
this  chu.rch,"  etc.  J 

We  only  add  another  specimen  of  the  mean  and  despicable 
spirit  which  governed  some  of  these  men  at  this  time : — 

*  Calamy  lias  given  this  in  Ms  Life  of  Baxter.  An  outline  of  Usher 
will  be  found  in  the  same  work. 

+  Collier,  vol.  ii.,  p.  878,  &c.    Baxter's  Life  and  Times. 

t  Paper  of  Advice  to  Sharp  from  Messrs.  Douglas,  &c.  Woocli-ow, 
vol.  i.,  pp.  36,  37  (Note). 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND.  263 

"  We  tinist  that  our  courage  upon  all  occasions  shall  argue 
in  us  indelible  evidence  of  unstained  loyalty  and  love  to 
our  Sovereign,  whom  we  honour  as  a  man  next  unto  God, 
inferior  to  none  but  God,  who  is  his  only  judge ;  invested  by 
God  with  a  peerless  supremacy  over  all  persons  and  ranks  of 
persons  within  his  Majesty's  dominions;  the  chief  nurse, 
father  of  the  church,  and  keeper  of  both  tables  of  God's 
law,  the  Sovereign  pi-otector  and  defender  of  the  woi-ship 
and  ordinances  of  God;  God's  vicegei-ent,  sent  by  him  to 
bear  the  sword,  with  imperial  power,  to  punish  all  e\'il  deeds 
and  e\il-doers  trespassing  against  religion  and  piety,  or 
moral  honesty,  and  duties  that  man  doth  owe  to  man,  and 
to  put  any  one  in  his  dominions  to  the  doing  of  their  duty 
to  God  and  man,"  Ac*  And  this  from  a  body  of  men  who 
claimed  to  be  the  faithful  ministers  of  Christ,  to  a  man 
unprincipled,  hypocritical,  and  awfully  vicious,  t 

But  this  self-abasement  was  all  in  vain.  The  Episcopal 
party  soon  manifested  that  their  restoration  to  office  was 
not  a  mere  form.  The  return  of  royalty  to  the  thi-onc 
had  brought  back  the  full  power  of  the  church.;}:  The 
court  and  the  senate  presented  only  the  feeblest  bar- 
riers to  its  exercise.  Men  filled  the  E})iscopal  tlu-ones, 
who  had  pleaded  for  moderation  in  their  adversity;  but 


*  The  SjTiod  of  Fife,  April  2d,  1661.  Woodrow,  vol,  i.,  p.  120.  The 
city  of  John  Knox  thus  spoke:— "We  are  very  hopeful,  and  humbly 
supplicate  this  High  C'oui-t  of  Parliament  will,  by  their  civil  sanction, 
establish,  maintain,  and  defend  the  true  religion,  in  doctrine,  worship, 
discipline,  and  government,  presently  professed,  received,  practised ;  and 
restrain  and  suppress  aU  impiety,  vice,  profaneness,  and  whatever  is  con- 
trary to  ti-uth  and  godliness." — Petition  of  the  Presbytery  of  Edinboro', 
1661.     Woodi-ow,  vol.  i,  p.  113. 

+  It  is  said  that  on  the  first  night  of  his  landing,  he  took  from  her  hus- 
band Barbara  ViUiers,  a  woman  of  great  beauty,  but  of  most  dissolute 
manners. 

X  "Here  I  saw  the  Bishops  of  Winchester,  Bangor,  &c.,  all  in  theii- 
habits,  in  King  Henry  the  Seventh's  chapel.  But,  lord !  at  their  going 
out,  how  people  did  most  of  them  look  upon  them  as  strange  creatures, 
and  few  with  any  kind  of  love  or  respect."— Pepys,  vol.  i.,  p.  143.    1660. 


2G4  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS, 

who  now  appeared  animated  by  the  spirit  of  Bonner  or 
Laud.  No  toleration  for  tender  consciences  could  be  allowed. 
The  "  Liberty  of  Prophesying"  was  ignored,  and  measures 
were  soon  propounded  which  breathed  the  most  intense  hatred 
to  everything,  however  holy,  if  it  was  associated  with  the 
sectarians.  The  conscience  of  the  king,  if  ever  troubled 
about  his  declaration  from  Breda,  was  speedily  calmed  by 
Protestant  Jesuitry,  and  the  hope  of  toleration  was  soon 
extmguished  from  the  breasts  of  the  most  sanguine.  True 
it  is,  Charles  issued  a  declaration,  which  appeared  to  satisfy 
some  of  the  leading  Presbyterians,  but  which  shortly  after, 
when  submitted  to  the  Commons  that  it  might  have  the 
force  of  law,  was  rejected  by  that  sage  assembly  by  a 
majority  of  twenty-eight,  headed  by  the  ministei-s  of  the 
crown.* 

The  Baptists  were  very  early  made  to  feel  the  power  of 
their  oppressors.  Probably  none  were  more  obnoxious  to  the 
ruling  power  in  Church  and  State.  Suspected  by  the  latter  as 
opposed  to  all  monarchical  governments,  holding  and  teaching 
principles  which,  if  embraced  universally,  must  in  the  end 
overthrow  the  power  of  the  former,  both  had  motives  of  the 
most  potent  and  influential  kind  for  their  repression.  Na 
means  were  neglected  to  awaken  suspicion  as  to  their  want 
of  attachment  to  the  existing  Government.  Thousands 
were  ready  to  do  the  bidding  of  the  unprincipled  and  the 
vengeful  in  Church  and  State.  The  following  example  will 
illustrate  this.  Six  months  after  the  return  of  Charles, 
a  letter  was  addressed  to  Mr.  Kiffin  from  Taunton  to  this 
eflect: — "That  the  Princess  of  Orange  being  noAv  dead, 
they  wei-e  now  ready  to  put  their  design  into  execution ;  if, 
according  to  my  promise,  I  would  provide  and  send  doAvn 
powder,  matches,  bullets,  &c, ;  for  they  believed  the  promise 
that  one  of  these  should  chase  a  thousand,"  &c.  "  In  conse- 
quence of  this  letter,"  he  says,  "  I  was  seized  on  a  Saturday 

*  Vaughan,  vol.  ii.,  p.  590. 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND.  265 

at  midnight,  and  carried  to  the  giiard-house  at  Whitehall ; 
no  one  being  suffered  to  speak  with  me.  There  I  continued 
all  the  Lord's  day,  exposed  to  the  taunts  and  threats  of  the 
soldiers.  In  the  evening,  I  was  sent  for  to  appear  before 
General  Monk,  and  sevei-al  others  of  the  Privy  Council, 
who  read  the  above-mentioned  letter  to  me;  adding,  I  must 
needs  be  guilty  of  the  things  contained  in  it.  I  replied,  that 
I  knew  not  so  much  as  the  name  of  the  man  by  whom  it 
was  said  to  be  written;  and  that  I  did  abhor  even  enter- 
taining a  thought  of  doing  anything  which  might  lead  to 
the  tlisturbance  of  the  kingdom.  After  examination,  I  was 
again  placed  under  the  protection  of  the  soldiers,  avIio  were 
ordered  to  take  me  the  next  day  to  the  Lord  Chief-Justice 
Foster  to  be  examined.  They  took  me  to  an  inn  in  King 
Street,  whex-e  I  was  strictly  guarded  through  the  night. 
Under  this  dispensation,  I  found  much  support  from  God; 
and,  knowing  my  innocency,  I  did  not  doubt  but  he  would, 
in  some  way  or  other,  work  deliverance  for  me.  The  next 
day  I  was  taken  in  a  coach  to  Sergeants'  Inn,  to  be  examined : 
soldiers  being  about  the  coach  occasioned  a  great  concourse 
of  people,  who  inquired  what  was  the  matter;  some  of  them 
shouting,  'Traitoi-s,  rogues,  hang  them  all!'  Appearing 
before  my  Lord  Chief-Justice,  I  was  strictly  examined  by 
him  about  the  said  letter;  I  answered  all  his  lordship's 
questions,  and  then  told  him  that  I  did  not  doubt  but  his 
lordsliip  would  take  more  pleasure  to  clear  an  innocent  man 
than  to  condemn  one  who  was  guilty;  and  therefore  prayed 
him  I  might  have  liberty  to  speak  for  myself,  as  I  felt  per- 
suaded my  innocency  would  ajipear.  His  lordship  replied, 
I  might  speak  freely  what  I  could.  I  said  there  were  some 
things  in  the  letter  itself  which  might  satisfy  him  it  was  a 
forged  letter.  The  letter  takes  the  rise  of  the  execution  of 
this  plot  from  the  death  of  the  Princess  of  Orange,  and  yet 
it  was  dated  at  Taunton  three  days  before  she  died.  To 
which  his  lordship  replied,  it  was  indeed  a  weighty  obser- 
vation, and  seeing  the  date  of  the  letter  to  be  as  I  had  stated, 


266  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

observed  that  might  be  but  a  mistake  in  the  date,  and  yet 
the  letter  itself  might  be  true.  To  wliicli  I  answered,  I 
should  leave  that  to  his  honour's  consideration;  but  there 
•was  one  tiling  more,  in  which,  with,  submission  to  his  lord- 
ship's judgment,  there  could  be  no  mistake;  that  was,  there 
could  be  no  letter  written  from  London  to  Taunton,  and  an 
answer  to  it  be  obtained  from  Taunton,  from  the  time  of  the 
death  of  the  piincess  to  the  time  when  I  was  taken;  for  his 
lordshii)  knew  the  princess  died  on  the  Monday  night 
Now,  no  letter  could  give  advice  of  it  by  post  till  the  next 
night,  and  no  answer  could  be  obtained  to  that  letter  till  the 
next  Monday  morning;  but  I  was  seized  the  Satiirday  night 
after  her  death,  which  must  needs  be  before  any  post  came 
in.  Upon  which,  my  lord  looked  very  steadfastly  upon  the 
Lieutenant-Colonel,  whose  prisoner  I  was ;  and  the  said 
officer  desired  my  lord  to  put  me  upon  my  oath.  His  lord- 
ship replied,  in  great  anger,  he  would  not;  and  that  things 
were  come  to  a  fine  pass,  when  a  Lord  Chief-Justice  niiist 
be  instructed  by  a  soldier  telling  him  what  he  ought  to  do; 
telling  him  it  was  a  trepan.  And  then  directing  his  speech 
to  me,  he  said  he  was  persuaded  I  was  abused,  and  that  if  I 
would  find  out  the  authors  of  the  said  letter,  he  would 
punish  them ;  and  so  he  discharged  me.  Mr.  Henry  Jessey 
and  INIr.  Crape  were  also  mentioned  in  the  letter,  who  were 
examined  and  discharged.  Thus  did  God  work  deliverance 
for  me."  "  A  little  after  this  (1661),  being  at  a  meeting  on 
a  Lord's  day  in  Shoreditch,  we  were  apprehended  and  carried 
before  Sir  Thomas  Bide,  by  whom  I  and  some  others  were 
committed  to  the  new  prison;  but  ha\-ing  been  in  confine- 
ment three  or  four  days,  I  was  by  liim  released."* 

Upon  others  the  heavy  hand  of  the  oppressor  fell.  In  the 
county  as  well  as  the  city,  suspicion,  insults,  and  the  jail 
awaited  our  brethren.  These  pages  might  be  crowded  with 
examplies  of  the  cruelty  and  lawlessness  of  men,  who,  under 

*  Life,  pp.  43,  44. 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND.  26T 

the  pretence  of  sustaining  the  church  of  Clirist,  were  sapping 
its  foundation,  and  suspending  the  laljours  of  some  of  its 
brightest  ornaments.  The  case  of  John  Bunyan  can  only  be 
noticed,  and  that,  too,  in  the  very  briefest  way.  His  liistory 
is  fiimiliar  to  most.  For  some  time  he  had  laboured  with 
great  zeal  iu  Bedford,  and  the  neighboiuing  districts. 
Churches  had  been  formed  by  him  ui  various  places,  but  ail- 
on  the  mixed  principle.  It  is  doubtful  if  the  chiu'ch  at 
Bedford  was  ever  a  Baptist  church,  in  the  sense  in  which 
the  term  would  be  ordinarily  imderstood.  But  though  pro- 
fessing that  water  baptism  should  be  no  barrier  to  com- 
munion, sti-ange  as  it  may  appear,  he  invariably  declined  to 
dismiss  any  member  to  a  Baptist  church  where  the  com- 
munion was  restricted.*  A  congregation  had  gathered  in 
the  agricultural  village  of  Haslington  to  heai*  the  Gospel. 
It  was  about  the  12tli  of  November.  The  xisual  worship 
had  finished,  and  Bunyan  was  in  the  act  of  ministering  the 
ti-uth  of  God  to  the  people,  when  the  deep  attention  of  the 

*  The  following  extracts  from  the  Eedford  Church-Book  have  been 
supplied  by  our  friend  the  Eev.  J.  Jukes,  the  senior  pastor  of  the  chui'ch. 
there : — 

"Jan.  6, 1695.— At  a  church -meeting  held  at  Bedford,  cm-  Bro.  Henry- 
Mann's  letter  for  a  dismission  was  read ;  but  being  desired  to  be  dismissed 
to  a  baptized  congregation,  'twas  denied,  and  an  answer  to  be  sent : 
and  oui-  Bro.  Chandler  to  write  and  send  it. 

"1700.— At  a  chiu-ch-meeting  the  beginning  of  December,  a  letter 
from  our  Sister  Stover  to  the  church,  she  being  now  in  London,  was 
read,  wherein  she  desii-ed  to  be  dismissed  from  us  to  a  baptized  church  in 
London,  under  Mr.  Piggott ;  and  'twas  concluded  to  deny  it  her,  as  being 
contrary  to  the  mind  of  Christ,  and  the  received  principles  and  practices 
of  tills  church :  and  Bro.  Chandler  sent  her  the  church's  answer. 

"Jan.  4, 1720. — ^At  this  church-meeting,  our  Sister  Tutzell's  letter  was 
read,  desiring  dismission  to  the  Baptist  church  in  London  luider  Mr. 
Skip,  but  the  church  took  time  to  deliberate  upon  the  answer  to  her  tUl 
the  next  church-meeting. 

"  1st  March,  1720. — The  church  concluded  not  to  dismiss  Ann  Tutzell  to 
Mr.  Skip,  because  he  and  his  people  were  for  communion  with  baptized 
believers  only,  and  that  by  inmaersion." 

"We  have  impublished  letters  on  the  same  subject,  which  may  appear  in 
another  part  of  this  work. 


268  EARLY   EXGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

people  was  broken  by  the  entrance  of  tlie  constable.  Francis 
Wingate,  one  of  tlie  great  unpaid  ministers  of  justice,  had 
commissioned  tliis  man  to  execute  this  task.  Bunyan  was  a 
man  of  undoubted  courage.  In  the  army  of  his  countiy  he 
had  braved  danger.  "  Had  he  been  minded  to  play  the 
coward,  he  could  have  escaped  and  kept  out  of  then-  hands." 
He  felt  that  it  was  a  call  from  God,  and  he  was  ready  to 
obey  it.  Doubtless  the  change  of  the  times  had  prepared  him 
for  this.  He  knew  what  the  forlorn  hope  was,  and  from  it 
he  was  not  anxious  to  shrink.  In  the  morning  he  was  con- 
ducted before  the  magistrate.  The  threats  of  the  little  man 
in  authority  were  many.  Bunyan  had  broken  the  law;  such 
meetings  were  dangei'ous;  and  unless  he  was  prepared  to 
find  sureties  that  would  be  bound  to  keep  him  from  such 
practices,  their  bonds  would  be  forfeited,  and  he  must  go  to 
prison.  " 'Tis  useless,"  said  the  heroic  man;  "I  shall  bx'eak 
them,  for  I  shall  not  leave  speaking  the  Word  of  God."  To 
prison  Bunyan  went.  Efforts  were  made  by  his  friends  to 
mitigate  the  evil,  and  to  secure  his  liberation,  but  in  vain. 
For  five  weeks  the  prisoner  was  confined.  The  sessions  were 
now  held  at  Bedford.  Before  the  assembled  administrators 
of  law  the  prisoner  was  brought.  The  charges  against  him 
were  read.  They  were  of  the  gravest  kind.  The  indictment 
said : — "  That  John  Bunyan,  of  the  town  of  Bedford, 
labourer,  being  a  person  of  such  and  such  condition,  hath, 
since  such  a  time,  devilishly  and  perniciously  abstained  from 
coming  to  church  to  hear  the  Divine  service,  and  is  a  common 
upholder  of  several  unlawful  meetings  and  conventicles,  to 
the  great  disturbance  and  destruction  of  the  good  subjects  of 
this  kingdom,  contrary  to  the  laws  of  our  Sovereign  Lord 
the  King,"  &c.  The  prisoner  said : — "  We  have  had  many 
meetings  together,  both  to  pray  to  God  and  to  exliort  one 
another;  and  that  we  have  had  the  sweet  comforting  pre- 
sence of  the  Lord  amongst  us  for  our  encouragement  (blessed 
be  his  name,  therefore !),  I  confess  myself  guilty,  not  other- 
wise."    No  witnesses  were    examined,  but    the    plea  was 


CHARLES    THE   SECOND.  269 

recorded,  and  then  the  sentence  wa.s  passed.  For  the  great 
crime  of  preaching  God's  Word  to  a  few  poor  people  and 
praying  witli  them,  tlie  administrator  of  justice  said: — 
"  You  must  be  htul  back  again  to  prison,  and  thei*e  lie  for 
three  montlis  following;  and  at  the  three  months'  end,  if 
jow  do  not  submit  and  go  to  church  to  hear  Divine  service, 
and  leave  your  preacliing,  you  must  be  banished  the  realm; 
and  if,  after  such  a  day  as  shall  be  a})pointed  you  to  be  gone, 
you  shall  be  found  in  this  realm,  you  must  stretch  by  the 
neck  for  it,  I  tell  you  plainly;"  and  so  he  bid  the  jailor  have 
him  away.  To  the  solitude  of  the  cold  damp  prison-house  on 
Bedford  Bridge,  Bunyan  retired.  "We  can  have  no  difficulty 
in  conceiving  how  his  active  mind  would  I'evolve  every  ele- 
ment of  this  appalling  sentence.  Before  his  vivid  imagina- 
tion would  rise  the  wife  of  his  ardent  affection,  and  the 
loved  ones  whose  youthful  prattle  had  so  often  delighted 
him — their  wretchedness  and  sorrow,  theii-  want  and  unpro- 
tected condition.  The  reality,  or  even  worse  than  the  reality, 
would  be  distinctly  before  him.  Exile  from  his  country 
was  not  what  we  understand  by  it  in  these  happier  times. 
It  was  slavery.  Banishment  to  the  plantations  involved  all 
this.*  Of  this  he  could  not  be  ignorant,  as  only  a  short  time 
before  St.  Stephen's  had  rung  with  eloquent  invectives 
against  this  evil.  Return,  and  ignominy  and  death  awaited 
him.  But  all  this  could  be  escaj^ed.  Only  give  up  preaching ! 
Forsake  your  love  of  telling  the  poor  wanderer  of  Christ's 
love !  Come  to  church  and  hear  the  Divine  service  read  by 
some  unlioly  lips,  and  freedom,  domestic  enjoyment,  yea,  and 
patronage  too,  shall  await  you !  The  stmggle  was  fearful, 
but  it  was  soon  ovei\     Like  the   rock  in  the  ocean,  the 


*  "Some  were  employed  giinding  at  the  mills,  attending  at  the  fur- 
naces, and  digging  in  that  scorching  island  (Barbadoes),  being  bought  and 
sold  still  from  one  planter  to  another,  or  attaclied  as  horses  or  beasts 
of  burden  for  the  debts  of  their  masters,  being  whipped  at  the  whipping- 
posts as  rogues  at  their  masters'  pleasure,  and  sleeping  in  styes  worse  than 
hogs  in  England." — Burton's  Diarj-.     Liugard,  vol.  xi.,  p.  384. 


270  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

thtincler-cloud  gathers  around  it,  and  the  angry  billows 
dash  against  its  base;  but  it  remains  xinshaken  amidst  the 
wildest  confusion  of  this  war  of  elements.  Nothing  coiild 
move  the  illustrious  sufferer.  All  efforts  failed  to  change 
him.  All  efforts,  therefore,  for  his  release  were  abortive. 
For  twelve  years  his  imprisonment  was  continued.  God's 
hand  was  in  it.  The  wicked  ones  meant  it  for  evil ;  but  God 
designed  it  for  good.  From  that  prison-house  issued  words 
of  fire,  which  have  enlightened,  guided,  and  comforted  more 
"pilgrims  from  the  City  of  Desti'uction  to  the  Celestial 
City"  than  any  other  -sviitten  volume,  except  the  inspired 
one,  in  the  world.  But  of  the  glorious  dreamer — ^more 
hereafter."' 

Of  the  mad  attempt  of  Venner  and  his  fifth  monarchy 
men  at  insurrection,  and  their  defeat  and  subsequent  punish- 
ment, we  cannot  say  much,  beyond  the  fact  that  our 
brethren  were  free  fiom  it.  In  various  memorials  from 
Baptists  in  various  parts  of  the  kingdom  it  was  disowned, 
and  expressions  of  loyalty  and  attachment  to  the  reigning 
sovereign  were  laid  at  the  foot  of  the  thi'one.  But  all  was 
in  vain.  Alarm  was  excited  in  the  circles  of  power,  civil  and 
ecclesiastical.  It  was  only  a  pretence — a  veil  to  cover 
deeper  and  long-planned  designs.  The  dissidents  must  now 
be  punished.  Clarendon  and  his  colleagues  were  for  the 
work.  "He  and  Lord  Southampton,"  says  Clarke,  "with 
the  bishops,  were  the  great  opposers  in  the  House  of  Lords 
of  the  king's  inclinations  and  intentions  to  grant,  according 
to  his  promise,  given  at  Breda,  a  toleration  to  Dissenters  so 
limited  as  not  to  distui-b  the  public  peace  of  the  kingdom. "f 
The  meetings  of  the  Anabaptists,  Quakers,  and  fifth  monarchy 
men  were  forbidden  by  a  proclamation  from  the  king.  They 
might  meet  in  churches,  but  not  in  their  own  places  of  wor- 
ship.   In  private  houses,  with  the  consent  of  the  j^ropi^ietors, 

*  Pilgrim's  Progress,  by  Offor.     Hans.  KJnollys  Society.    Works  by 
Off 01%  3  vols.    Crosby  and  Ivimey  may  be  consulted  for  details, 
t  Life  of  James  n.,  vol.  i.,  p.  391. 


CHARLES  THE   SECOND.  271 

they  might  convene,  but  gatherings  anywhere  else  were 
declared  to  be  unlawful.  The  mayo  is  in  towns,  and  other 
officers  of  justice,  were  commanded  to  search  out  these  con- 
venticles, to  seize  the  persons  found  there,  and  bind  them 
to  appear  at  the  next  sessions.  Fully  convinced  of  the  will 
of  these  men  to  persecute,  their  power  to  execute  depends 
very  much  oa  circumstances.  The  disposition  of  a  people 
will  always  modify  the  mandates  of  a  tyrant,  lliglitly  then 
to  estimate  the  condition  of  our  brethren,  as  well  as  foi' 
other  reasons,  we  should  know  the  moral  state  of  the  people. 
To  inquire  into  the  causes  which  produced  the  marked 
change  in  the  moral  condition  of  the  nation  immediately  on  the 
accession  of  Charles,  though  a  subject  of  profound  interest,  is 
not  our  business  now.  No  one  familiar  with  the  period  can 
doubt  the  fact,  or  question  its  awful  magnitude.  The  court 
already  was  the  centre  of  corruption  and  impiety."  Virtues 
were  not  safe  within  its  precincts,  and  moral  principle  was 
unlaiown.  Charles,  fond  of  ease,  careless  about  business, 
gave  himself  up  to  self-indulgence  without  restx-aint.  But 
the  sources  of  enlightenment  and  spiritual  power  were  dark 
and  coiTupt.  Burnet,  in  his  MS.  History  of  his  own  Times, 
thus  describes  the  bishops  and  clergy : — "  Many  books  came 
out  against  the  Church  of  England.  This  alarmed  the 
bishops  and  clergy  much;  so  that  they  set  up  to  preach 
against  rebellion  and  the  late  times,  in  such  a  strain  that  it 
was  visible  they  meant  a  parallel  between  these  and  the  pre- 
sent times.  And  this  produced  at  last  that  heat  and  rage 
into  which  the  clergy  had  run  so  far,  that  it  is  like  to  end 
veiy  fatally.  They,  on  their  part,  should  have  showed  more 
temper,  and  more  of  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel;  whereas,  foi' 
the  greatest  part,  they  are  the  worst-natured,  the  fiercest^ 
indecentest,  and  most  persecuting  sort  of  jieople  that  are  in 
the  nation.    There  is  a  sort  of  them  do  aspii-e  to  preferment, 


*  "I  had  some  discourse  with  Povey,  who  is  mightily  discontented,  I 
find,  about  his  disappointment  at  court ;  and  says,  of  all  places,  if  there 
be  heU,  it  is  here." — Pepys,  vol.  ii.,  p.  450. 


^Ji-2  EARLY    ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

tliat  there  is  notliing  so  mean  aucl  indecent  that  they  will 
not  do  to  compass  it;  and  when  they  have  got  into  prefer- 
ment, they  take  no  care  either  of  themselves  or  of  those 
committed  to  their  charge,  but  do  generally  neglect  their 
parishes.  If  they  are  rich  enough,  they  hire  some  pitiful 
curate  at  as  low  price  as  they  can,  and  turn  all  over  to 
him;  or  if  their  income  will  not  bear  out  that,  they  perform 
the  public  offices  in  the  slightest  manner  they  can ;  but  take 
no  care  of  their  people  in  the  way  of  private  admonition, 
and  so  do  nothing  to  justify  the  character  of  pastors  or 
watchmen  that  feed  the  souls  of  their  people  or  watch  over 
them.  And  they  allow  themselves  in  many  indecent  liberties 
of  going  to  taverns  and  alehouses,  and  of  railing  scurrilously 
against  all  that  differ  from  them;  and  they  cherish  the  pro- 
faneness  of  their  people,  if  they  but  come  to  church  and  rail 
with  them  against  the  Dissenters;  and  are  implacably  set  on 
the  ruin  of  all  that  separate  from  them,  if  the  course  of  their 
lives  were  otherwise  ever  so  good  and  unblamable.  In  a 
word,  many  of  them  are  a  reproach  to  Christianity  and  to  their 
profession,  and  are  now,  perhaps,  one  of  the  most  corrupt 
bodies  of  men  in  the  nation."*  Though  the  bishop  modified 
this,  of  the  correctness  of  the  sketch  there  can  be  no  doubt. 
The  outline  may  be  accurately  drawn,  but  no  one  yet  has 
furnished  a  finished  portrait.  From  Episcopal  thrones  and 
parish  pulpits  the  doctrines  of  the  Laudian  school  were  pro- 
mulgated. Non-resistance  and  passive  obedience  were  every- 
where promulgated.    Vacancies  in  the  Episcopate  were  filled 


*  Maseres  Tracts,  vol.  i.,  p.  116.  The  bishop  modified  this  in  his  printed 
copy: — "A  nation  where  infidelity  was,  at  that  time,  considered  more 
pardonable  than  a  superstitious  reverence  for  saints,"  kc. — Strickland's 
Queen  Catherine  of  Braganza,  vol.  viii.,  p.  286.  "  Catherine  was  wedded 
to  the  most  witty  and  fascinating  prince  in  the  world,  constitutionally 
good  humoured,  but  mthout  religion  or  moral  principles— brave,  reckless, 
and  devoted  to  pleasure,"  &c. — Ibid,  p.  314.  "  The  clergy,"  says  Carlyle, 
"study  Pan,  Bacchus,  and  the  longs  and  the  shorts,  rather  than  the 
Hebrew  Bible,  and  the  truths  of  the  living  Jehovah,"— Cromwell, 
vol.  iii.,  p.  181. 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND.  273 

by  men  of  the  highest  church  principles,  "and  most 
inveterate  resentments."  Their  lines  on  the  renewal  of 
leases  were  extraoixlinary.  Bishop  Burnet  says: — "What 
the  bishops  did  with  these  great  lines  was  a  pattern  to  all 
their  lower  dignitaries,  who  generally  took  more  care  of 
themselves  than  of  the  church;  the  men  of  service  were 
loaded  with  many  livings  and  many  dignities.  With  this 
accession  of  wealth,  there  broke  in  upon  tlw;  church  a  great 
deal  of  luxuiy  and  high  living,  on  pretence  of  hospitality; 
and  with  this  onset  of  wealth  and  pomp  that  came  upon 
men  in  the  decline  of  their  age,  they  who  wei-e  now  gi-owing 
into  old  age  became  lazy  and  negligent  in  all  the  true  con- 
cerns of  the  church."  Nor  was  this  limited  to  Episcopal 
and  clerical  circles.  The  jfloodgates  of  vice  were  thrown 
open.  The  holy  checks  of  the  past  were  broken ;  the  mighty 
influence  of  the  Government  and  official  men  in  favour  of 
virtue  was  Avithdrawn ;  to  ridicule  and  insult  devout  ministers 
were  exposed;  and  in  the  place  of  them  every  encouragement 
was  given  to  the  most  sinful  habits  and  criminal  indulgences 
— gaming,  drunkenness,  and  kindred  exih.  The  psalm  gave 
place  to  the  lewd  song,  the  voice  of  prayer  to  the  voice 
of  mirth  and  ribaldry,  and  immorality  of  the  most  debasing 
kind  threatened  to  sweep  away  all  the  landmarks  of  virtue 
and  godliness.  One  of  our  brethren  thus  describes  tlie  city 
in  1660: — "But  the  moon-sick  madness  of  the  multitude, 
yet  unrepented  of,  together  with  the  revived  and  daily 
continued  acts  of  the  abominations  in  stage  plays,  May- 
games  and  pastimes,  with  the  many  bitter  and  most  horrid 
oaths  and  execrations,  uttered  almost  in  every  corner,  by 
ninepin,  ninehole,  and  by  pigeon-hole  players,  and  to  the 
poisoning  of  the  youth  of  oiu'  age  in  the  multitude  of 
damning  and  debauched  bawdiy-houses,  even  the  foul  and 
detestable    sham   of    a   Christian    kingdom,"    (fee*     Poets 


*  Fanatics'  Mite  Cast  into  the  King's  Treasuiy;  by  Henry  Adis,  a 
baptized  believer,  undergoing  the  name  of  a  Freewiller ;  and  also  most 


274  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

kindled  their  genius  at  tliis  altar,  and  iavoked  the  Mnse  to 
hold  lip  to  the  scorn  of  the  pampered  voluptuary  the  sacred 
claims  of  piety,  and  to  cherish  in  the  minds  of  the  reckless 
liostility  to  the  Gospel.*  The  reader  must  bear  in  mind  this 
state  of  things,  as  deepening  and  Avidening  in  its  influence 
throughout  the  whole  of  this  reign. 

Many  of  our  brethren  soon  felt,  as  we  have  seen,  the 
effects  of  this  change.  The  hostility  which  hatl  existed,  but 
■which  had  by  the  strong  hand  of  the  law  been  repressed, 
now  broke  forth.  To  escape  this,  a  number  of  Baptists,  with 
crowds  of  other  religionists,  fled  to  the  continent.  Holland 
now,  as  in  former  times,  was  a  refuge  for  these  oppressed 
ones.  The  sons  of  liberty  found  protection  under  the 
form  of  government  to  which,  by  suffering  and  toil,  tliey 
had  sought  to  conform  their  country.  "It  is  not  to  be 
believed,"  says  Sir  G.  Downing,  "  what  numbers  of  dissatis- 
fied persons  come  daily  out  of  England  into  this  country. 
They  have  settled  at  Rotterdam  an  Independent,  an  Ana- 
baptist, and  Quaker  church;  and  do  hire  the  best  houses,  and 
have  gi-eat  bills  of  Exchange  come  over  from  England.  .  i 
I  am  about  setting  correspondence  at  Rotterdam  and  other 
parts,  that  I  may  know  who  they  are,  and  what  they  do."t 
Clarendon  encouraged  this.  Again  and  again  in  his  own 
cori-espondence  with  this  unprincipled  creature,  we  find  him 
urging  it.ij:    Every  movement  was  watched,  and  all  their  pro- 

ignoniiniously  by  the  tongues  of  infamy  called  a  fanatic  or  a  madman. 
London,  1660. 

*  In  an  old  ballad  of  these  times,  the  following  occurs  :— 
"  Farewell,  Say  and  Seale,  with  hey  ; 
Farewell,  Say  and  Seale,  with  hey  ho ! 
And  those  valiant  sons  of  Aymon, 
May  they  hang  as  high  as  Hainan, 
AVith  the  old  Anabaptist  they  came  on, 
With  a  hely,  trolly,  lolly,  ho." 
-  A  Farewell  to  Parliament.     Vide  Prince  Rupert  and  the  Cavaliers, 
vol.  ii.,  p.  56.  t  Life  of  Clarendon,  vol.  iii.,  p.  144. 

+  Ibid,  vol.  iii.,  pp.  169,  170.  Letter  to  Downing.  Other  examples  of 
this  detestable  policy  may  be  seen,  vol.  iii.,  pp.  155,  388.  A  feeling  of 
alann  perhaps  prompted  this  conduct. 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND.  275 

ceedings  carefully  registered.  Witli  or  without  the  consent 
of  the  State,  Downing  would  have  seized  the  leading  exiles, 
and  exposed  them  to  the  malice  of  their  foes.  Hume  tells  us 
that  Downing  was  once  chaplain  to  Colonel  Oakey's  regiment. 
He  now  at  Delpt  seized  Corbet,  Oakey,  and  Buckstead, 
and  sent  them  to  England,  in  violation  of  the  laws  of  the 
States,  where  they  finished  their  course  on  the  gibbet,  and 
thus  added  to  the  long  list  of  victims  to  the  royal  ven- 
geance* 

Hostility  at  home  was  not  diminished.  From  place  to 
place  the  sectiiries  were  hunted.  Rumours  of  dissatisfaction 
with  the  exi.sting  Government  were  rife.  Sham  plots  were 
reported,  and  every  means  employed  to  awaken  suspicion  h\ 
the  minds  of  the  authorities  against  them.     The  jails  were 


*  Some  writers  distilled  their  own  gall,  and  dipped  their  pen  in  it. 
The  following  is  a  sample: — "Pettit  places  Baxter  in  hell,  where  Brad- 
shaw  acts  as  president  of  an  infernal  tribunal,  and  Halbcr  and  Neville 
strive  in  vain  to  obtain  from  his  adjudication  the  crown  for  pre-eminence 
of  evil  and  mischief  on  earth ;  which  he  awards  to  the  Nonconformists. 
•  Let  him  come  in,'  exclaims  the  new  Khadamau— thus,  '  and  be  crowned 
with  wreaths  of  seipents  and  chaplets  of  adders.  Let  his  triumphant 
chariot  be  a  pulpit,  drawn  on  the  wheels  of  cannon  by  a  brace  of  wolves 
in  sheep's  clothing.  Let  the  ancient  fathers  of  the  church,  whom  out  of 
ignorance  he  has  vilified ;  the  reverend  and  learned  prelates,  whom  out  of 
pride  and  malice  he  has  belied,  abused,  and  pei-secuted ;  the  most  right- 
eous king  whose  murder  he  has  justified,  come,  and  let  them  all  be  bound 
in  chains  to  attend  his  infernal  triumphs  to  his  Saint's  Everlasting  Rest ; 
then  make  room,  scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites,  atheists,  and  poli- 
ticians, for  the  greatest  rcliel  on  earth,  and  next  to  him  who  fell  from 
heaven.'" — Sir  J.  Stephen's  Essays.  South,  who  was  the  incarnation 
i)i  intolerance,  was  ever  spitting  forth  his  venom  upon  the  wise  and  the 
good.  Milton,  whose  genius  and  morals  he  could  never  reach,  and  cer- 
tainly could  never  appi-eciate,  was  the  blind  adder  who  spit  venom  on  the 
king's  person ;  and  Cromwell,  now  rising  from  the  mists  with  which  the 
age  of  Charles  II.  had  encircled  him,  in  all  his  massive  and  fair  proportions, 
was  only  a  bankrupt  beggarly  fellow,  who  entered  the  Parliament  House 
with  a  thread-bare  torn  coat  and  greasy  hat,  and  perhaps  neither  of 
them  paid  for.  South's  judgment  of  men  was  much  influenced  by  the 
cut  and  condition  of  the  garment.  Moral  worth  beyond  the  Episcopal 
pale  was  unmixed  pollution,  but  hypocrisy  and  the  most  revolting 
sensuality  were  trifles,  if  covered  by  an  Episcopal  cloak. — Vide  Life  and 
Seimous  of  South.     Bohn,  London,  1855. 


276  EARLY   EXGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

crowded  with  tliem.  From  tlieir  peaceful  homes  they  were 
dragged,  and  their  families  plunged  into  deepest  sorrow. 
Their  fortitude  was  tried  in  the  severest  way.  Hunger,  cold, 
and  insu.lts  were  theii-  daily  lot.  The  prisons  at  this  time 
were  foul  and  loathsome.  But  their  faith  failed  not.  In 
Kent — always  fruitful  in  heroic  confessors — there  was  a  large 
number  of  sufferers.  The  metropolis,  the  eastern,  the  mid- 
land, and  the  nortliern  parts  of  the  empire,  felt  the  power  of 
the  oppressors.  They  uttered  their  complaints  in  touching 
appeals  to  the  king.  Fi'om  some  of  them  we  extract  a  sen- 
tence or  two,  as  they  will  place  before  us  the  sentiments 
they  cherished  on  magistracy,  and  the  aimoyances  they 
endured.  "From  wliich  assemblings,  0  king,"  said  the 
General  Baptists  in  Lincolnshire,  soon  after  the  Eestoration, 
"  we  have  been  discharged  by  some  in  magisterial  capacity 
in  these  parts;  although  therein  we  bless  God,  none  hath 
ever  found  us  with  midtitude  or  tumult.  But  being  taught 
of  God  to  obey  him  in  the  things  by  liim  commanded,  rather 
than  man,  though  in  the  places  of  magistracy,  when  com- 
manding things  contrary;  we  durst  not  receive  that  dis- 
charge. Wherefore  some  of  us  have  been  silenced  from 
mention  of  the  name  of  the  Lord  as  formerly,  by  being 
entangled  in  bonds,  pretendedly  imposed  on  us  for  our  good 
behaviom-.  Since  thus  entangled,  O  king,  we  have  been 
much  abused  as  we  pass  in  the  streets,  and  as  we  sit  in  our 
houses;  being  threatened  to  be  hanged  if  heard  but  praying 
to  the  Lord  in  our  families,  and  disturbed  in  our  so  waiting 
upon  God  by  an  unci\il  beating  at  our  doors,  and  soxmding 
of  horns;  yea,  we  have  been  stoned  when  going  to  our 
meetings,  the  windows  of  the  places  where  we  have  been  met 
struck  down  with  stones ;  yea,  also  taken  as  evildoers,  and 
imprisoned  when  peaceably  met  together  to  worship  the 
Most  High,  in  the  use  of  his  most  precious  ordinances."* 
"We   have,  0  king,  spread  those  things  before  them   in 

*  Crosby,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  20,  21. 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND.  277 

authority  in  these  parts,  but  can  have  no  redress  from  them ; 
but  the  rage  of  oiu*  adveraaries  liath  been  augmented  by- 
hearing  us  abused  by  some  of  them  in  open  court,  who  sat 
on  tlic  bench  of  justice,  under  the  odious  terms  of  knavish, 
jtigglinff,  imjnulent  and  fanatic  felloivs,  &c.  And  as  if  all 
this  Avcre  too  littk',  they  have,  to  till  up  tlieir  measure,  very 
lately  indicted  many  of  us  at  the  sessions;  and  intend,  as 
we  are  informed,  to  impose  upon  us  the  penalty  of  £20  per 
month,  for  not  coming  to  hear  such  men  as  they  provide  us, 
of  whose  principles  and  practices  we  could  give  a  most  sad 
and  doleful,"  &c.  The  prisonei-s  in  Maidstone  jail  thus 
spoke  to  the  king : — "  Thou  hast  already  seen  our  Confession 
<if  Faith,  wherein  our  peaceable  resolutions  were  declared. 
We  have  not  violated  any  part  thereof,  that  should  cause 
that  liberty  promised  at  Breda  to  be  withdrawn.  And  now 
for  our  principles  that  most  particularly  relate  to  magistrates 
and  Government,  we  have  with  all  clearness  laid  them  before 
them ;  humbly  beseecliing  that  they  may  be  read  patiently, 
and  what'  we  say  weighed  in  the  balance  of  the  sanctuary, 
and  then  judge  how  worthy  we  are  of  bonds  and  impx'ison- 
ment.  And  this  we  do  the  more  earnestly  desire,  because 
not  only  our  owm  lives  are  in  danger,  but  also  an  irresistible 
destruction  cometh  on  our  wives  and  little  ones  by  the 
violence  which  is  exercised  on  us.  Disdain  not  our  plainness 
of  speaking,  seeing  the  gi'eat  God  accepts  of  the  like."* 

In  London,  many  were  "seized,  and  taken  out  of  their 
beds  at  midnight  by  soldiers  Avith  drawn  swords,  without  any 
warrant  from  a  justice  of  the  jieace;  others  being  taken  in 
their  religious  assemblies,  the  doors  of  which  were  open  that 
all  might  hear  what  they  said,  and  see  what  they  did;  and 
othei-s  being  assaulted  by  soldiers  whilst  they  were  passing 
along  the  streets  about  theix"  lawful  employment,  and  canied 
without  a  warrant  before  justices  who  acted  in  a  manner 


*  This  address  and  confession  may  be  seen  in  Tracts  on  Liberty  of 
Conscience.     Hans.  Knollys  Society. 


278  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

unworthy  of  the  office  which  they  sustained."  So  many 
were  "  thrust  into  little  rooms  togetlier,  that  they  were  an 
annoyance  to  each  other,  especially  in  the  city  of  London, 
where  the  Lord  Mayor  crowds  them  very  close  together; 
that  it  hath  been  observed  the  keepers  have  complained  they 
have  had  too  many  guests ;  and  whilst  they  suffer  there, 
some  of  their  wives  and  tender  babes  want  bread  at  home."* 
Adis  thus  refers  to  the  sufferings  of  some : — "  And  cause 
them  to  be  thrown,  as  it  were,  on  heaps,  one  upon  another, 
as  some  of  the  Baptists  lately  have  been — sixty  in  one  I'oom 
some  nine  feet  broad  and  foui-teen  feet  long,  in  Newgate; 
and  much  after  the  same  way  in  several  other  jails  and 
prisons  in  the  nation;  enough  to  breed  infections  and  dis- 
eases, had  not  the  God  whom  we  serve  appeared  mightily  on 
our  behalf. "t  "  This  I  humbly  beg,  that  if  you  are  not 
willing  that  we  should  serve  our  God  in  that  way  which  we 
have  received,  but  that  we  shall  be  taken  into  custody  for 
our  so  doing;  that  then  you  would  commissionate  some 
peace-officers  for  that  work  to  have  to  do  with  us ;  and  that 
we  be  not  left  to  the  mercy  of  the  rude  multitude,  nor  the 
violent  laws  of  the  mercenary  soldiers,  whose  actings  towards 
the  peaceable  have  been  very  iiide  and  inhuman  in  London 
and  Westminster;  where  at  one  meeting  they  wounded  one 
man  so  dangerously  on  his  arm,  that  it  is  greatly  feared  he 
will  lose  the  use  of  one  of  his  hands."  "  At  another  meeting- 
place,  they  rudely  came  and  drank  up  the  wine  that  was 
provided  by  the  congregation  to  celebrate  that  holy  ordinance 
of  communicating  at  the  table  of  the  Lord."  "  At  another 
meeting-place,  the   congregation   being   generally  dispersed 

*  Ivimey,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  316,  317. 

f  Fanatics'  Address  to  tlie  King  and  liis  Peers,  pp.  15, 16.  The  sufferings 
of  the  Friends  at  this  time  were  great.  Upon  them  and  onr  brethren  the 
chief  weight  fell.  "It  is  probable  that  in  1661  or  1662,  there  were  no 
less  than  4500  Friends  in  prison  in  England  and  "Wales  at  one  time,  for 
meeting  to  worship  God,  refusing  to  swear,"  &c.  Fox,  in  a  letter  to 
Charles  II.,  tells  him  (1662)  that  there  were  3068  Friends  imprisoned 
since  his  restoration. 


CHAKLES   THE   SECOND.  279 

before  tliey  came,  iii  revenge  whereof  the  sokliery  set  on  the 
rude  multitude  to  break  in  pieces  the  tabk's  that  they  used 
to  make  use  of  to  celebrate  the  Lord's  Supper  upon."  "  At 
another  meeting-place,  they  rudely  behaved  themselves, 
violently  casting  some  of  them  headlong  down  the  stairs; 
but  the  stairs  being  winding,  and  some  people  on  them,  the 
force  of  the  falls  (through  mercy)  being  thereby  broken, 
there  was  not  much  liarm  done  as  to  the  people,  the  greatest 
Iiarm  that  was  done  was  by  one  of  the  soldiers  to  himself." "' 
We  could  multi])ly  these  examples  gi-eatly,  but  our  space 
forbids.  The  soxirces  of  the  deepest  misery  arc  generally 
unseen;  the  acutest  sorrows  are  often  felt  in  the  home 
circle.  In  this  case  no  one  doubts  the  fact,  and  no  one  can 
fully  understand  it.  "  The  intemiption  of  family  ties,  the 
breaking  up  of  households,  the  loss  to  many  of  all  means  of 
support,  were  hard  and  cruel  sufferings  for  conscience  sake; 
but  they  were  generally  aggravated  at  this  period  by  the 
damp  and  filthy  condition  of  the  prisons,  holes,  and  dungeons 
in  which  the  sufferers  were  confined,  as  well  as  by  their 
crowded  condition.  And  to  all  these  circumstances  of  trial 
must  be  added  those  of  personal  abuse,  fines,  distraint,  and 
it  may  strictly  be  said,  of  wholesale  robberies  they 
endured.  Some  died  of  the  beatings  which  they  received  in 
the  breaking  up  of  their  meetmgs,  and  many  from  the  filthy 
and  close  state  of  the  piisons,  in  some  of  which  they  were 
so  closely  packed  that  they  had  to  take  it  by  turns  to  stand 
up  whilst  others  lay  down.  They  were  also  overrun  with 
lice  and  vermin."t  An  illustration  may  give  our  readers  a 
glimpse  of  some  things  which  marked  tlie  prison  life  of 
some  of  these  confessors.  "  On  the  3d  day  of  the  month 
called  August,  1G62— when  the  prisoners  in  Newgate,  called 
Baptists,  were  in  their  chamber  seeking  the  Lord,  and 
speaking  one  to  another,  that  they  might,  as  their  duty  is, 


*  Adis'  Fanatics'  Address  to  the  King  and  Peers,  pp.  15, 16. 
t  Fox's  Journal,  vol.  i. ,  p.  399. 


280  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

provoke  one  another  to  love  and  good  works — about  four 
o'clock  in  the  aftemoon,  the  thieves,  as  housebreakers,  pick- 
jjockets,  highwaymen,  came  with  violence  into  our  room; 
one  took  up  a  Bible  from  the  table,  and  threw  it  down  on 
the  ground,  asking  what  we  did  there.  Struck  one  in  the 
face  Avith  liis  fist,  and  he  and  the  rest  fell  upon  us,  drew  their 
knives,  and  endeavoured  to  stab  some  of  us.  But  the  Lord 
was  pleased  to  deliver  us  from  their  cruelty;  for  we  took 
coiu'age  to  defend  ourselves,  and  escaped  their  bloody  hands. 
And  on  the  same  day,  the  like  Adolence,  as  we  were  informed, 
was  offered  to  those  brethren  in  the  Wliite  Lion,  Southwark, 
by  the  felons  there.  And  on  the  1st  of  June,  so  called, 
16G2,  which  was  on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  after  we  were 
brought  to  prison,  some  of  the  keepers  did  come  upon  us, 
and  charge  us  that  we  shoiild  not  pray  nor  preach ;  for  if  we 
did,  they  had  orders  to  put  us  into  the  hole,  and  that  they 
must  do  it.  And  though  that  was  not  executed,  yet  the 
felons  did  come  violently  upon  us  in  our  room,  and  did  beat 
some  of  us,  and  threaten  us  all,  saying  they  would  now  order 
us  well  enough,  for  they  had  a  commission  so  to  do."* 

The  mai-tyrdom  of  John  James  must  close  this  narrative 
of  STiffering  for  the  present.  He  was  pastor  of  a  Sabbatarian 
church  ill  Bulstake  Alley,  in  the  city.  The  service  was 
interrupted  one  day  by  the  appearance  of  one  Justice  Chard, 
with  a  Mr.  Wood,  a  head  borough,  commanding  Mr.  James 
to  come  do\STi,  having  spoken  treason  against  the  king. 
Refusing  compliance,  Wood  then  advanced  to  the  middle  of 
the  room  again  in  the  king's  name,  and  threatened  to  pull 
him  down  if  he  did  not  obey.  The  threat  was  speedily  exe- 
cuted, and  he  Avas  dragged  to  prison,  with  several  of  his 
hearers.  The  next  day  they  were  brought  before  four 
justices,  who  were  sitting  at  a  public-house.  The  oath  of 
allegiance  was  tendered  and  refused  by  some  of  them,  and 
in  default,  both  men  and  women  were  committed  to  New- 

*  Crosby,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  178,  179. 


CIIAKLES    THE   SECOND.  281 

gate.*  "  Afterwards  the  same  justices  entering  the  meeting- 
place,  sat  down  about  the  table  with  their  cloaks;  and  Major 
Stanley  standing  by,  diil  send  for  John  James.  And  in  the 
meantime  the  Lieutenant  of  the  Tower  read  a  paper  which 
he  pulled  out  of  his  pocket,  saying  he  would  read  to  them 
what  tloctrine  was  jireached  there  that  day — being  of  the 
nature  of  a  charge,  which  they  drew  vip  from  Tipler's  moiith 
against  John  James,  demanding  of  certain  women,  relating 
to  the  meeting,  yet  detained,  and  whose  names  they  were 
then  taking,  how  they  could  hear  such  things  as  these."  To 
which  they  unanimously  replied  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord, 
"  That  they  never  heard  such  words,  as  they  shall  ansioer  it 
before  the  Lord :  and  they  durst  not  lie."  This  Tipler  was 
one  of  those  wretched  creatures  found  in  numbers  at  this 
time.  He  was  a  pipemaker's  assistant,  and  a  chai*acter  so 
worthless  that  even  the  magistrate  took  not  much  notice  of 
what  he  said.  James  was  now  brought  before  this  tribunal, 
and  after  mucli  questioning,  "the  lieutenant  told  him  he 
should  stretch  for  it;  and  if  he  were  not  hanged,  he 
would  be  hanged  for  him."  James  said,  "  he  was  not  careful 
in  that  matter,  and  that  they  could  do  no  more  than  they 
should  be  sulfered  by  the  Lord  to  do."  To  a  company  of 
soldiers  the  confessor  was  now  committed.  They  had  been 
waiting  around  the  doors  for  him.  To  Newgate  he  was  car- 
ried in  the  king's  name,  on  the  charge  of  speaking  in  a 
conventicle  treasonable  words  agfiinst  his  Majesty.  On  the 
14th  of  No-^ember,  the  trial  was  begixn  in  Westminster 
Hall.  The  Chief-Justice  Forster  presided,  aided  by  three 
others  of  the  judges.  The  charge  was  gi-ave  and  treasonable. 
Thus  it  nms: — "He  stood  indicted  for  compassing  and 
imagining  the  king's  death.     For  endeavouring  to  levy  war 

*  Many  of  tliem,  like  the  brethren  of  an  earlier  period  noticed  in 
the  former  part  of  tliis  volume,  objected  to  all  oaths,  and  on  principle 
declined  to  take  them.  Crosby  has  preserved  a  statement  of  theirs  on 
this  matter  in  Appendix  No.  v.  to  his  second  volume.  This  subject  vnll 
claim  the  reader's  attention  in  a  subsequent  chapter. 


282  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

against  the  king.  For  endeavouring  to  change  the  Govern- 
ment. For  saying  tlie  king  was  a  bloody  tyrant,  a  blood- 
sucker, a  bloodthirsty  man,  and  his  nobles  the  same.  That 
the  king  and  liis  nobles  had  shed  the  blood  of  the  saints  at 
Charing  Cross,  and  the  blood  of  the  Covenanters  in  Scot- 
land." "  That  the  king  was  brought  to  this  end,  to  fill  up 
the  measure  of  his  iniquity;  and  that  the  king's  cup  of 
iniquity  had  filled  more  within  this  last  year  than  in  many 
yeai-s  before.  That  he  much  feared  they  had  not  improved 
their  opportunity  when  they  had  the  power  in  their  hands ; 
that  it  would  not  be  long  before  they  had  power  agam,  and 
then  they  would  improve  it  better ;  and  he  learned  the 
apostacy  of  the  people  of  God,  and  said,  'They  had  not 
fought  the  Lord's  battles  thoroughly;  but  Avhen  the  Lord 
should  give  his  work  into  their  hands  again,  they  would  do  it 
better.  That  the  death  and  destruction  of  the  king  drew  very 
near.'"*  To  these  five  counts  he  pleaded  not  guilty,  but  in 
vain.  On  the  19th  the  trial  commenced  amidst  the  laughter 
and  scorn  of  the  bench  and  the  bar.  Intimation  had  been 
given  to  the  prisoner  that  a  packed  jury  would  be  selected, 
and  that  his  case  was  probably  hopeless.  Tipler  testified 
that,  being  in  a  yard  near  the  meeting-house,  he  did,  through 
a  window,  see  the  prisoner  in  the  pnlpit,  and  heard  him 
speak  the  words  laid  in  the  indictment;  adding,  that  he 
mightily  applauded  Cromwell,  saying  that  every  finger  of 
his  was  a  champion.  Osborn,  another  witness,  deposed  that 
lie  was  within  the  meeting-house,  and  heard  the  prisoner 
speak  the  words  laid  in  the  indictment,  or  to  that  eftect; 
another  deposed  that,  being  in  Tipler's  house,  and  hearing  a 
person  speaking  very  loud,  he  went  out  and  heard  the 
speaker  say,  "That  the  Lord  had  a  great  work,"  &c.,  but 
could  not  be  positive  that  the  preacher  was  the  person  that 
spoke  them.f  Witnesses  were  called  to  prove  the  contraiy; 
to  show  that  Osborn  had  said  that  he  was  compelled  to  give 

*  Salmon's  State  Trials,  p.  290.  f  Ibid,  p.  290. 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND. 


283 


evidence.  ]\Ir.  James  declared  his  innocency  of  the  charges ; 
that  lie  had  no  malice  against  the  king,  but  prayed  for  his 
soul;  that  he  never  had  any  public  emi)loyment  against  his 
present  Majesty  or  his  father,  and  denied  he  spoke  the  words 
in  the  indictment,  or  any  others  to  that  effect;  that  he  had 
always  declared  agamst  Cromwell's  usuriiation,  and  suffered 
under  it.  In  this  strain  the  prisoner  proceeded,  till  the 
Chief-Justice,  forgetting  the  dignity  of  the  bench  and  the 
responsibility  of  his  high  position,  interrupted  him  in  the 
most  unseemly  manner.  The  jury,  after  a  quarter  of  an 
hour's  retirement,  pronounced  their  verdict,  well  understood 
beforehand,  of  guilty.*  The  efforts  of  his  wife  to  save  him 
were  treated  with  contempt  by  the  monarch.  Lost  to  all 
sense  of  dignity  and  the  common  feelings  of  humanity,  he 
said,  in  reply  to  her  petition,  "  Of  John  James,  that  rogue, 
he  shall  be  hanged;  yea,  he  shall  be  hanged."  To  Tyburn 
the  mart}T  was  drawn  on  a  sledge,  and  on  the  2Gth  of 
November — and  after  showing  that  he  was  not  a  Jesuit  in 
disguise,  and  declaring  his  innocence  of  the  charge  for  which 
he  was  about  to  suffer — he  was  suspended  on  the  fatal  tree. 
After  hanging  for  about  an  hour,  he  was  disembowelled  and 
quartered,  and  his  limbs  placed  on  the  gates  of  the  city;  but 
his  head  was  placed  on  a  pole  near  his  meeting-house  in 
Wliitechapel.t  Thus  for  a  season  did  the  wicked  triumi:)h! 
Wales  did  not  escape  this  fiery  trial.  Vavaseur  Powell, 
who  had  continued  his  self-denying  labours  in  the  Princi- 
pality, "was,"  says  Mr.  Jessey,  "seized  upon  and  imprisoned 
in  Shrewsbury,  and  many  of  his  friends  in  several  northern 
counties  in  Wales ;  and  not  for  any  crime  committed  by  him 
or  them ;  yea,  and  divers  of  their  houses  plundered  by  sol- 
diers, sho^ving  no  warrant  for  their  proceedings  therein."+ 


*  Salmon,  p.  290. 

+  Ibid,  p.  291.     Crosby  gives  this  date  IGGl.     Salmon  in  1662. 

X  H.  Jessey's  Loud  Call  to  England,  p.  1.3.  This  volume  contains 
many  accounts  of  the  sufferings  of  our  hi-ethi-en ;  also  some  striking 
instances  of  disasters  and  sudden  death  of  their  persecutors. 


284: 


EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 


Here  he  was  confined  for  nine  weeks,  and  then  by  an  order 
of  the  Council  was  released  with  the  rest  of  liis  brethren. 
Soon  after  he  was  again  arrested,  and  by  an  order  of  Council 
was  removed  to  London.  He  was  confined  in  the  Fleet  for 
almost  two  years,  "  and  for  about  twelve  months  of  that 
time  in  such  close  confinement  that  he  was  not  sufiered  to 
go  out  of  his  chamber  door,  which,  together  with  the  ofien- 
sive  smell  of  a  dunghill  which  was  just  before  his  window, 
did  so  much  impair  his  health,  that  he  never  after  perfectly 
recovered  it."*  At  the  close  of  tliis  period,  he  was  suddenly 
removed  to  Southsea  Castle,  where  he  remained  a  close 
prisoner  for  five  years,  and  obtained  his  release  on  the  dis- 
mission of  Hyde  from  the  chancellorship,  f  The  Baptists  at 
this  time  were  confined  chiefly  to  the  northern  parts  of  the 
Principality.  At  the  time  of  the  Restoration  there  were 
about  thirty  ministers,  and  a  greater  number  of  chui'ches. 
These  felt  the  bitterness  and  fierceness  of  the  persecution 
which  followed.  J  Their  associational  gatherings  were  sus- 
pended for  about  twenty  yeai-s,  their  property  was  seized  by 
the  lawless  and  brutal  soldier}^,  and  their  persons  imprisoned 
in  filthy  and  unwholesome  jails,  "  because  they  would  not 


*  Life,  pp.  129, 131. 

t  Ibid,  p.  132.  Mr.  Powell  was  pastor  of  a  chui-cli  at  Dartford  for 
about  two  years. — Life,  p.  15. 

J  "The  great  talk  of  the  towi  is  the  strange  election  that  the  city  of 
London  made  yesterday  for  Parliament  men,  viz.,  Fouke,  Love,  Jones,  &c. 
.  .  .  Men  that,  so  far  from  being  Episcopal,  are  thought  to  be  Ana- 
baptists; and  chosen  with  a  great  deal  of  zeal,  in  spite  of  the  other  pai-ty 
that  thought  themselves  so  strong,  calling  out  in  the  hall,  '  No  bishops ! 
no  lord  bishops ! '  It  do  make  peoi^le  to  fear  it  may  come  to  worse,  by 
being  an  example  to  the  country  to  do  the  same ;  and,  indeed,  the  bishops 
are  so  high,  that  very  few  do  love  them."— Pepys,  vol.  i.,  p.  184.  Ibid, 
p.  338.  Sir-  H.  Bui-net,  in  a  letter  to  Charles,  says:— "It  imports  your 
Majesty  in  this  conjuncture  to  strengthen  youi-  authority  by  all  the 
means  and  ways  the  law  allows  you,  since  the  dissatisfaction  towards  the 
present  Government  (though,  God  knows,  very  undeservedly)  is  become 
so  universal  that  any  small  accident  may  put  us  into  new  troubles, 
though  they  should  not  as  yet  be  thoroughly  designed  by  those  that  wish 
for  them."— May  19, 1662,    Life  of  Clarendon,  vol.  iii.,  letter  98. 


CHAULES   THE   SECOND.  285 

forego  thch'  meetings,  and  join  with  tlicni  again  in  tlieir 
traditional  wt)rshii),  from  whom  the  Lord  liad  separated 
them."  Against  these  simple  and  earnest-minded  brethren  no 
other  chai-go  was  alleged.  They  suffered  for  nonconformity 
to  the  worship  of  a  church  they  considered  "  traditional." 

We  have  adverted  to  tliis  feature  of  our  history  at  some 
lengtli,  though  only  partially.  The  full  details,  wluch  are 
within  our  reach,  would  occupy  the  remainder  of  this 
volume.  From  every  county,  nay,  probably,  from  all  the 
hives  of  population,  naniitivcs  of  suflferings  might  be  drawn. 
These  were,  to  some  extent,  the  strongholds  of  the  body; 
where  energy  and  intelligence  were  found,  Baptist  principles 
were  sure  to  find  a  home.  But  we  are  only  entering  on  the 
exercise  of  that  sj)iritual  and  political  tp-anny  which  has 
made  this  reign  one  of  the  most  infamous  in  the  annals  of 
the  English  nation.  Upon  some  matters  we  must  now 
touch.  The  first  Parliament  called  by  Charles  was  thoroughly 
Episcopal.  It  was  composed  of  cavaliers  and  their  sons, 
who  entirely  predominated.  The  influence  of  the  great 
families  and  the  restored  priesthood  was  placed  in  their 
liands.  Only  some  fifty  or  sixty  men  of  popular  sympathies 
were  returned.  Pepys  gives  us  a  \dew  of  the  character  of 
the  former.  "  They  were  the  most  profane,  sweating  fellows 
he  had  ever  heard  in  his  life."*  The  members,  for  the  most 
part,  were  elected  agreeably  to  the  wishes,  and  without  doubt 
by  the  influence,  of  the  court.  "  The  greatest  part  were  high 
churclmien — that  is,  violent  enemies  of  the  Presbyterians, 
great  asserters  of  the  minutest  ceiemonies  of  the  Church, 
and  most  devoted  to  the  king  and  the  royal  prerogative." 
This  Parliament  was  managed  entirely  by  Clarendon,  and  is 
known  in  histoiy  as  the  Pensionaiy  Parliament,  from  the 
mighty  influence  of  the  court,  t  Tlieir  piety  and  attachment 
to  the  Church  were  manifested  at  an  early  period  of  the 
session.     The  majority  voted  that  all  their  members  should, 


*  Diary,  vol.  i.,  p.  113.  t  Rapin's  Hist.,  vol.  xi.,  p.  213. 


28Q  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

on  a  certain  day,  receive  the  Lord's  Supper  according  to  the 
Episcopal  litual,  and  that  the  Solemn  League  and  Covenant 
should  be  burnt  by  the  hands  of  the  common  hangman.* 
This  spirit  characterized  their  whole  proceedings.  ' '  Charles," 
says  Mr.  Lathorp,  "had  promised  liberty  to  tender  con- 
sciences; but,  if  disposed,  he  would  have  found  it  extremely 
difficult  to  have  kept  his  promise  with  a  Parliament  like  the 
present.  Charles  was  engi-ossed  by  his  pleasure;  and,  not- 
withstanding his  declaration,  he  was  ready  to  sacrifice  the 
Nonconformists  to  the  resentment  of  the  Pai-liament.  .  . 
Devoted  to  his  pleasure,  Charles  never  bestowed  a  thought 
on  the  subject  of  religion ;  and  was  heartily  desirous  to 
leave  the  whole  matter  with  the  Parliameut."t  The  plea- 
sure-loving and  sensual  monarch  had  no  doubt  about  the 
readiness  of  these  creatures  to  do  his  pleasure.  They  speedily 
reinvested  him  with  all  but  limitless  power,  and  affirmed  the 
doctrine  of  non-resistance  to  his  will.  Speedily  the  Bill  for 
regvilating  Corporations  was  passed.  It  was  a  daring  invasion 
of  the  libei-ty  of  the  subject.  The  Church  demanded  it, 
and  the  request  was  not  denied.  This  inquisitive  measure 
was  aimed  at  the  dissidents  from  the  Church.  "  It  enjoined 
all  magistrates  and  persons  bearing  offices  of  trust  in  corpo- 
rations to  swear  that  they  believed  it  unlawful,  on  any  pre- 
tence whatever,  to  take  arms  against  the  king,  and  that  they 
abhorred  the  traitorous  position  of  bearing  arms  by  his 
authority  against  his  person,  or  against  those  that  are  com- 
missioned by  him.  They  were  also  to  renounce  all  obliga- 
tions arising  out  of  the  oath  called  the  Solemn  League  and 
Covenant;  in  case  of  refusal,  immediately  to  be  dismissed  from 
office.  Those  elected  in  future  were,  in  addition  to  the  same 
oaths,  to  have  received  the  sacrament  within  one  year  before 
their  election,  according  to  the  lites  of  the  English  Church."J 

*  Hallam,  vol.  ii.,  p.  22.  +  English  Episcopacy,  p.  321. 

t  Hallam,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  27,  28.  The  Bill  passed  by  182  to  77.  Most 
readers  know  that  this  infamous  law  is  now  removed  from  the  Statute 
Book  of  the  realm. 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND.  287 

By  this  act  our  bretliren  were  at  once  deprived  of  all 
miuiicipal  rights.  It  touched  them,  probably,  beyond  any 
other  sect,  and  fully  exposed  them  to  the  malice  of  the 
ignorant  and  malicious  in  many  ways.  True  it  is  there  were 
a  few  excei)tions  to  this.  Amongst  this  class  wc  find  John 
Tonibes.  Singulai-ly  enough  this  eminent  scholar  and  devout 
man,  though  the  greatest  writer  in  existence  in  favour  of 
Baptist  views,  yet  not  only  preached  but  advised  occasional 
communion  with  the  corrupt  and  })ersecuting  Church.  Only 
one  example  of  this  can  we  give  here.  "  In  many  places  of 
my  writings,"  he  says,  "  I  have  disclaimed  separation  from 
that  wherein  I  Avas  disputing  with  others,  always  foreseeing 
that  a  groundless  separation  would  be  endless;  and,  there- 
fore, have  still  professed  my  desire  of  such  a  reformation 
as  might  be  without  separation  from  brethren,  who  are  not 
heretical  in  the  doctrine  of  Cluistian  faith,  nor  idolatrous  in 
their  woi-ship,  nor  impose  that  on  me  for  communion  with 
them,  which  I  cannot  yield  to  without  sinning  against 
God.  Yea,  when  some  of  those  who  agreed  with  nie  in 
that  tenet  which  my  writings  held  forth  differently  from 
others  were  moved  to  admit  me  to  their  communion;  and 
they  excepted  against  it,  because  I  did  not  disclaim  the 
Church  of  England,  nor  renounce  ordination  by  bishops, 
nor  desert  my  staiiding  as  a  parish  minister,  nor  my  main- 
tenance by  ty  thes  or  augmentation ;  nor  my  bearing  with  the 
world,  as  they  used  to  speak,  nor  some  such  like  practice  as 
was  inconsistent  with  the  principles  of  the  Separatists:  I 
refused  many  years  ago  to  join  with  them,  who  Avould  not 
otherwise  admit  me  then  on  such  terms ;  but  did  not  answer 
these  exceptions  against  me,  and  persisted  in  my  refusal 
unto  this  day.""'  As  an  occasional  communicant  with  the 
Church,  he  continued  till  his  death.  These  and  other  views 
held  by  Mr.  Tombes  will  be  found  in  another  chapter.  With 
othei-s  it  was  not  so.  Some  even  hesitated  about  hearing 
individuals  who  had  not  been  baptized. 

*  Theodulia  (Preface). 


288  EABLY   EKGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

The  issue  of  the  Savoy  Conference,  and  the  spirit  of  the 
Government,  as  seen  in  the  proceedings  of  the  Lov\'er  House 
without  restraint  from  the  Ministry,  had  filled  the  minds  of 
the  leading  Presbyterians  not  only  with  disappointment  but 
something  more.  Theii-  j  oy  was  turned  into  sailness,  and  their 
hope  into  doubt;  and  though  the  hand  of  persecution  had 
not  yet  grasped  them,  as  it  had  the  Baptists,  still  there  was 
cause  for  alarm.  A  modem  ^vTiter  thus  states  their  case : — 
"The  course  which  the  public  policy  of  the  realm  took 
on  the  i-estoration  of  King  Charles  was  in  all  respects  dis- 
appointing and  discouraging  to  every  branch  of  the  Puritan 
family;  but  it  was  especially  moi-tifying  to  the  Presb}^erians, 
who  were  still  the  most  numerous  and  valuable  part  of  that 
family,  to  see  themselves  confounded  with  the  wild  sects 
which  had  sprung  from  them  in  the  precedmg  period,  and 
subjected  to  the  same  i-igorous  measures;  and  to  find  no 
sense  entei-tained  of  their  sei-A'ices  in  promoting  the  i-estora- 
tion  of  monai-chy,  and  not  the  slightest  disposition  to  con- 
descend to  any  of  their  scruples  or  their  opinions  in  the  new 
settlement  which  it  was  necessary  to  make  in  the  ecclesias- 
tical affaii-s  of  the  English  nation."*  Greater  disappoint- 
ment awaited  this  narrow-mindedness  and  senseless  bigotry. 
Theii'  proud  and  lofty  pretensions  had  to  receive  a  gi-eater 
abasement  from  "their  covenanted  king." 

The  Parliament  of  Scotland  was  forbidden  to  allow  any 
one  to  renew  the  swearing  of  the  Solemn  League  and 
Covenant,  or  of  any  other  covenant  or  public  oaths  con- 
cerning the  govermnent  of  the  Church  or  kingdom,  without 
his  Majesty's  wari-ant.  To  add  to  the  distress  of  the  Pres- 
byterians in  the  northern  kingdom,  the  conflict  -with  black 
prelacy  was  about  to  be  renewed.  Sharp,  who  had  acted  as 
theii-  regent  for  some  time  in  London,  with  three  othei-s, 
renounced  their  Presbyterian  ordinations,  and  submitted  to 
be  re-ordained  by  the  Bishop  of  Winchester :  fii-st  as  to  the 

*  Himter  3  Life  of  O.  Hej~vvood,  p.  122. 


CHARLES    TIIK    SECOND.  289 

lower  orders  in  the  Church,  and  then  as  bishops.  Those  tools 
of  the  Government  then  procured  a  proclamation,  that  it 
was  tlu^  king's  pleasure  to  restore  the  constitution  of  the 
Church  by  archbishops  and  bishops,  as  it  was  settled  in  the 
year  1G73.'''  In  the  meantime,  the  meetings  of  Synods  and 
Presbyteries  had  l)een  interdicted  till  they  should  be  autho- 
rised by  the  newly-created  archbishops  and  bishops.  We 
cannot  trace  the  effects  of  this  tyrannical  measure — the  war, 
the  crime,  the  immorality,  and  the  public  and  social  miseries, 
which  resulted  from  it.  We  can  only  indulge  ourselves 
with  a  sentence  or  two  to  place  in  contrast  the  state  of  the 
country  undtn-  the  government  of  "the  usurper,"  "the 
murderer"  Cromwell,  and  that  of  the  "  Lord's  anointed." 
"At  the  king's  return  every  parish  had  a  minister,  every 
village  had  a  school,  every  family  almost  had  a  Bible ;  yea, 
in  most  of  the  country  all  the  children  of  age  could  read  the 
Scriptures,  and  were  provided  of  Bibles  either  by  the 
parents  or  by  their  ministei's.  Eveiy  minister  was  a  very 
full  professor  of  the  i-eformed  religion,  according  to  the 
large  Confession  of  Faith  frame'd  at  Westminster  by  the 
divines  of  both  nations.  Every  minister  Avas  obliged  to 
preach  thrice  a  week,  to  lecture  and  catechise  once,  besides 
other  private  duties  in  which  they  abounded,  according  to 
their  pi-oportion  of  faithfulness  and  abilities.  None  of 
tliem  might  be  scandalous  in  their  conversation  or  negligent 
in  their  office  so  long  as  a  Presbytery  stood,  and  among 
them  -were  many  holy  in  conversation  and  eminent  in  gifts; 
nor  did  a  minister  satisfy  himself  except  his  ministry  had 
the  seal  of  a  divine  approbation,  as  might  witness  him  to  be 
really  sent  of  God.  Indeed,  in  many  places,  the  Spiiit 
seemed  to  be  poured  out  with  the  word,  both  by  the  multi- 
tude of  the  sincere  converts,  and  also  by  the  common  work 
of  i-eformation  upon  many  who  never  came  the  length  of  a 
communion :  there  were  no  fewer  than  sLsty  aged  people, 

*  Collier,  vol.  ii..  p.  S87. 
T 


290  EARLY    JENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

men  and  women,  who  went  to  scliool,  that  even  then  they 
might  be  able  to  read  the  Scriptures  with  their  own  eyes. 
I  have  lived  many  years  in  a  parish  where  I  never  heard  an 
oath,  and  you  might  have  rid  many  a  mile  before  you  had 
heard  any ;  also,  you  could  not  for  a  great  part  of  the  country 
have  lodged  in  a  family  where  the  Lord  was  not  worshipped 
by  reading,  singing,  and  prayer.  Nobody  complained  of  our 
church  government  more  than  our  taverners,  whose  ordinary 
lamentation  was — their  trade  was  broken,  people  were  become 
so  sober."*  Referring  to  the  journey  of  the  commissioners 
for  the  establishing  of  the  Episcopate,  the  last  writer  says : — 
"  Many  remarks  upon  the  prodigality,  profaneness,  and  ter- 
rible revelling  at  this  progress,  were  made  at  this  time.  Such 
who  entertained  the  commissioners  (for  the  establishing  of 
the  bishops)  best,  had  their  dining-rooms,  their  drinking- 
rooms,  their  vomiting-rooms,  and  sleeping-rooms,  when  the 
company  had  lost  their  senses.  I  find  it  registered,  that  at 
Ayr-  the  devil's  health  was  drank  at  the  Cross,  in  one  of 
these  debauches  about  the  middle  of  the  night;  indeed  it 
was  a  work  of  darkness,  "t'*'Histoiy  has  portrayed  this  period 
of  Scottish  histoiy  in  the  darkest  colours.  Pride,  worldli- 
ness,  and  tyranny  on  the  part  of  Sharp  and  his  consecrated 
colleagues,  were  accompanied  by  an  outbreak  of  crime  and 
immorality  of  the  most  revolting  kind.:|: 

Jvixon,  who  had  been  raised  at  the  Restoration  to  the  see 
of  Canterbury,  was  old  and  infirm.  He  could  take  no  active 
part  in  the  great  revolution  now  rapidly  advancing.  The 
chief  ecclesiastical  power  was  in  the  hands  of  Sheldon,  who 
filled  the  metropolitan  see.  The  spirit  of  Laud  was  incarnate 
in  this  bishop.  §    The  Established  Chui'ch  was  perfect.     Con- 


*  Kirton's  Hist.,  pp.  68,  69.  Woodrow,  vol.  i.  Preliminary  Disserta- 
tion, p.  xi. 

t  'VVoodrow,  vol.  i.,  p.  282.  J  'Woodrow.     Life  of  Sharp,  &c. 

§  "Tliis  was  the  incendiary  ! — this  Sheldon— the  most  virulent  enemy 
and  poisoner  of  the  English  Church.  Alas !  she  still  feels  the  taint  in 
her  very  bones.  I  look  on  Gardiner  as  canonizahle,  compared  with 
Sheldon Much  as  I  love  the  Church  of  England,  I  have  no 


CHARLES    THE    SECOND.  291 

formity  to  her  rituul  and  teaching  Avas  essential  to  salvation. 
Dissent  from  any  part  of  her  formularies  was  a  crime  of  the 
deepest  dye.  The  toleration  of  .sectaries  would  expose  tlie 
nation  to  the  most  signal  marks  of  the  divine  displea.sure. 
To  cany  oiit  his  intolerant  views,  and  effectually  to  check 
the  growth  of  Nonconformity,  a  bill  was  brought  into  the 
House  to  enforce  Uniformity  in  Religion.  It  pa.ssed,  after 
some  sharp  debates,  and  received  the  royal  assent  on  the 
lOtli  of  April,  16G2.  It  enacted,  "  That  every  parson,  vicar, 
or  other  minister  whatsoever,  who  now  hath  or  cnjoyeth  any 
ecclesiastical  benefice  or  promotion  within  this  realm  of 
England,  or  i)laces  aforesaid,  .shall  in  tlic  church,  chapels,  or 
places  of  public  worshij)  belonging  to  his  said  benefice  or 
promotion,  upon  some  Lord's  day,  before  the  feast  of  St. 
Bartholomew  which  .shall  be  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  God 
1662,  openly,  publicly,  and  solemnly  read  the  morning  and 
evening  prayers  appointed  to  be  read  by,  and  according  to, 
the  said  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  at  the  time  then  ap- 
pointed; and  after  such  i-eading  thereof,  shall  openly  and 
publicly,  before  the  congregation  then  assembled,  declare  his 
vinfeigned  assent  and  consent  to  the  use  of  all  things  in  the 
said  book  contained  and  pi-escribed,  in  these  words  and  no 
others:— I,  A.  B.,  do  here  declare  my  xmfeigned  assent  and 
consent  to  all  and  everything  coutained  and  prescribed  in 
and  by  the  book  intituled  '  The  Book  of  Common  Prayer  and 
Administration  of  the  Sacraments,  and  other  rites  and  cere- 
monies of  the  Church,  according  to  the  use  of  the  Church  of 
England;  together  with  the  Psalter  or  Psalms  of  David, 
pointed  as  they  are  to  be  sung  or  said  in  Chiu'ches;  and  the 
form  or  manner  of  making,  ordaining,  and  consecrating  of 
Bishops,  Priests,  and  Deacons.'"  It  was  further  enacted, 
that  all  persons  holding  any  office  in  any  way  connected 

hesitation  in  asserting  (as  my  belief)  that  nothing  in  the  history  of  the 
Inquisition  was  equally  wicked  as  the  conduct  of  Sheldon  and  the  court 
after  the  Restoration."— Coleridge's  Notes  on  English  Divines,  vol.  ii., 
pp.  22,  45. 


202  KAKLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

witli  the  ClmrcL,  "and  every  sclioolmaster  keeping  any- 
public  or  private  school,  and  any  person  instiiicting  or 
teaching  any  youth  in  any  house  or  private  family  as  a  tutor 
or  schoolmaster,  who  shall,  u[»on  the  first  day  of  May  in  the 
year  of  our  Lord  God  IG 62,  or  at  any  time  thereafter,  be  in 
possession  of  any  deanery,  &c.  &c.,  shall,  before  the  feast  of 
8t.  Bartholome-sv  aforesaid,  make  the  following  declara- 
tion:— I,  A.  B,,  do  declare  that  it  is  not  lawful  on  any 
pretence  Avhatsoever  to  take  arms  against  the  King;  and 
that  I  do  abhoi-  that  traitorous  position  of  taking  arms 
by  his  authority  against  his  person,  or  against  those  that  ai'e 
commissionated  by  him ;  and  that  I  will  conform  to  the 
liturgy  of  the  Church  of  England  as  it  is  now  by  law 
established;  and  I  do  declare  that  I  do  hold  there  lies  no 
allegation  upon  me,  or  any  other  person,  from  the  oath  com- 
monly called  the  Solemn  League  and  Covenant,  to  endeavour 
any  change  or  alteration  of  government  either  in  Church  or 
State;  and  that  the  same  was  in  itself  an  imlawful  oath,  and 
imposed  upon  the  subjects  of  this  realm  against  the  known 
laws  and  liberties  of  this  kingdom.''* 

The  Prayer  Book  had  just  been  revised.  Upon  a  part,  to 
which  very  strong  objections  had  been  urged  by  the  Non- 
conformists, the  attention  of  the  bishops  had  been  fixed. 
They  knew  that  these  men  had  objections  to  many  of  the 
useless,  because  unmeaning,  ceremonies  of  tlie  Church,  and 
they  made  them  more  binding.  They  knew  that  they  re- 
garded the  Apocrypha  as  an  uninspired  book,  and  destitute  of 


*  Englisli  Puritanism.  Act  of  Uniformity.  George  Firman  relates 
that  a  lady  assured  liim  that  on  her  exj^ressing  her  dislike  to  a  member  of 
Parliament  of  the  Act,  saying  to  him,  "  I  see  you  are  laying  a  snare  in  the 
gate;"  he  replied,  "Aye,  if  we  can  find  any  way  to  catch  the  rogues,  we 
will  have  them."  "A  dignitary  of  the  Church  and  a  man  of  note  and 
figure,  when  a  sober  gentleman  showed  some  regret  that  the  door  was 
so  strait  that  many  sober  ministers  could  not  have  admission,  replied, 
'  It  was  no  pity  at  all ;  if  we  had  thought  so  many  of  them  would  have 
conformed,  we  would  have  made  it  straiter.' " — Noncon.  Memorial,  vol.  i., 
p.  3.     Life  of  Baxter,  p.  182. 


CHARLES    THE    SECOND. 


293 


authorit}',  and  they  iuserted  the  fable  of  liell  and  the  Dragon, 
and  the.  instructive  narrative  of  Susanna  and  the  Elders. 
They  demanded  also  a  reordination  where  the  Episcopate  had 
not  imparted  the  Holy  Spirit.  Other  things  also  aug- 
mented the  evil.  Such  was  the  si)irit  of  the  Ijishops  and 
the  Ministry  of  Charles.*  The  Church  must  be  puiificd. 
Not  a  taint  was  to  remain  of  sectarian  pollution.  Clothed 
afresh  in  the  garments  of  her  past  splendour,  she  was  to  fix 
the  thoughts  and  concentrate  the  aifections  of  the  nation  on 
lierself  for  all  time.  Alas!  never  was  mistake  more  glaring. 
A  greater  enemy  to  the  Church  than  Sheldon  was  never 
found.  The  hostility  of  the  Nonconformists  was  hamiless, 
compared  with  the  deadly  injury  inflicted  by  this  man.  To 
this  day  the  wound  is  not  healed.  It  is  corrupting  her  life, 
and  rendering  her  the  sport  of  the  infidel  and  the  scorn  of 
the  sceptic.  Cniel  as  the  demand  was,  the  sufferings  of  these 
servants  of  the  lo\'ing  Redeemer  were  augmented  by  the  time 
fixed  on  for  the  application  of  the  test.  The  ministry,  in  the 
main,  had  been  supported  by  tithes.  They  were  nearly  due. 
The  seceders  would  be  deprived  of  their  income,  without  any 
pro\nsion  for  their  wants,  and  their  successors  to  place  and 
power  would  be  put  in  full  possession  of  what  they  should 
have  enjoyed.  During  the  rule  of  Cromwell,  and  indeed 
before,  every  ejected  minister — and  be  it  remembered  only 
those  were  ejected  who  were  immoral  or  disloyal — had  been 
allowed  one-fifth  of  the  income  ;  but  no  provision  was  made 
in  this  case.  Probably  fidelity  to  conscience  was  never  more 
severely  tested.  The  nation  was  agitated  through  all  its 
length  and  breadth.  All  circles  felt  its  poAver.  We  caix 
easily  conceive,  though  not  so  easily  describe,  the  emotion 


*  HuUaiu,  vol.  ii.,  chap.  xi.  Against  the  terms  of  this,  the  objection 
has  been  urged  that  in  many  of  the  parishes  the  Act  came  into  force 
l)eforc  the  pastors  had  time  to  obtain  the  book.  We  attach  but  little 
weight  to  tliis,  inasmuch  as  the  Act  provides  that,  "  wthout  some  lawful 
impediment,  to  be  allowed  and  approved  of  by  the  ordinary  of  the  place, 
neglect  or  refuse  to  do  the  same,  &c.;  or  iu  case  of  such  impediment, 
within  one  month  after  such  impediment  is  removed,"  &c. 


294:  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAJ>TISTS. 

which  would  rise  in  the  minds,  not  of  ministers  only,  but  of 
thousands  of  the  holiest  and  best  men  in  the  land,  Hope 
and  fear  would  rapidly  alternate  in  many.  Intense  would 
be  the  solicitude  in  the  miuds  of  ministers  to  know  and  to 
do  what  was  right.  With  what  care  would  they  examine  the 
requisitions  of  this  iniquitous  law,  and  the  claims  of  their 
families !  Who  can  tell  the  depth  of  anguish  which  rolled 
across  the  mind  of  many  a  faithful  pastor,  as  he  gazed  on 
his  perhaps  delicate  wife,  and  the  suffering  and  want  to 
which  she  and  their  loved  but  helpless  little  ones  would  be 
exposed,  if  the  claims  of  conscience  were  heard !  We  may 
gauge  the  outward  suffering — we  may  estimate  the  physical — 
but  the  hidden  springs  which  poured  their  bitterest  sufferings 
upon  them  will  never  be  known.  Our  power  to  measure 
these  utterly  fails.  In  contrast  to  this,  we  can  have  no  diffi- 
culty in  imagining  the  emotions  of  Sheldon  and  his  brethren 
as  they  reposed  in  their  splendid  palaces  in  line  linen — if  not 
in  Imperial  purple — amidst  the  returned  luxuries  of  the 
revived  Chiirch,  waiting,  with  sanctified  hypocrisy,  the  success 
of  their  infamous  measures.  Their  feelings  even  then  would 
be  mixed.  And  how  would  these  multiply  their  influence  as 
the  day  approached!  It  came.  Hypocrisy  had  unveiled 
itself  before.  Thousands  had  thrown  aside  the  form  of 
godliness.  Vice  and  immorality  prevailed  in  the  palace  where 
virtue  and  purity  only  a  few  months  before  had  reigned ;  but 
on  this  day — memorable  in  the  history  of  Christ's  church — 
one  of  the  brightest  and  most  illustrious  examples  of  the 
power  of  tiTith  and  of  fidelity  to  Christ  was  witnessed.  It 
told  then;  it  tells  still;  and  future  ages  will  point  to  August 
the  24th,  1662,  as  a  memorable  proof  of  the  potent 
influence  and  of  the  living  power  of  true  piety.* 

*  "  It  is  somewhat  bold  in  Anglican  writers  to  complain,  as  they  now  and 
then  do,  of  the  persecutions  tliey  suffered  at  this  period,  when  we  consider 
what  had  been  tlie  conduct  of  the  bishops  before,  and  what  it  was  after- 
wards. I  do  not  know  that  any  member  of  the  Church  of  England  was 
imprisoned  under  the  Commonwealth,  except  for  some  political  reason; 
certain  it  is,  that  the  jails  were  not  filled  with  them." — HaUam,  vol.  ii., 
p,14. 


CllAllLES    THK    SECOND.  295 

It  is  difficult  to  teil  the  exact  number  of  the  faitliful  in 
this  time  of  trial.  More  than  7,000  ministei-s  liad  sworn  to 
the  Solemn  League  and  Covenant ;  at  least  5,000  now 
repudiated  it  iu  the  terms  of  the  Act.  The  number 'of  the 
dissidents  is  variously  I'eported.  Collier,  never  disposed  to 
exaggerate  on  tliis  side  of  the  question,  gives  them  at  2,000; 
Calamy  says  2,188 ;  Mather  estimates  them  at  2,500- 
Probably  the  first  is  near  the  mark.  To  these  must  be 
added  the  families  of  these  heroic  servants  of  Christ. 

Only  few  of  our  brethren  were  found  occupying  "  the  public 
places"  at  this  time.  Many  of  them  had  resigned  their  ap- 
pointments before.  Previous  writers  of  our  history  have 
given  us  a  list,  but  it  appears  to  us  defective.  Some  names 
are  inserted  wliich  should,  we  think,  be  left  out,  and  others 
are  omitted  which  should  find  a  place  there.  Ivimey  gives 
the  following  list: — 

Henry  Jessey,  M.A.      W.  DeU,  M.A.  F.  Bampfield,  M.A. 

Thos.  Jennings.  P.  Frenen.  J.  Head. 

J.  Tombes,  B.D.  D.  Dyke,  M.A.  R.  Adams. 

.J.  Miirsden.  T.  Hardcastle.  R.  Browne. 

G.  Camelford.  J.  Skinner.  —  Baker. 

J.  Gosnold.  T.  Quarrel.  T.  Ewin.s. 

L.  Wise.  J.  Donne.  P.  Hobson.* 

J.  Gibbs.  .J.  Smith.  T.  EUis. 

T.  Pickford.  J.  Chaimcey,  M.D. 

To  these  must  be  added  Thomas  Horrexe,  vicai-  of  Maldon,t 
Mr.  Woodward,  ejected  from  Southwood,  E.  Stennett,  from 

*  We  have  seen  that  Hobson  was  in  the  North,  and  we  find  that 
Burton  mentions  liim  as  a  visitor  to  the  intended  University  of  Durham, 
which  Cromwell  intended  to  found.  He  m\ist  have  heen  a  non-resident. 
He  is  called  Gentleman  of  Seggerston  Hugli. — Diary,  vol.  ii.,  p.  536. 

+  Davids'  Essex,  p.  425.  There  is  the  following  notice  of  Horrexe  in  an 
account  of  "Informations  of  Meetings  in  Hertfordshire,"  dated  Jan.  2, 
1664  :— "  Horre.Ke,  late  vicar  of  Maldon,  in  Essex,  who  hath  bin  severall 
times  indited  at  y'  assize  in  that  county  for  holding  conventicles,  is  now 
preacher  to  y'  Anabaptists  of  Hertford,  who  meet  on  Sunday  at  y"  house 
of  one  Hules,  a  flarmer,  cald  Brickingtonbury,  to  y°  number  of  500  at  a 
time,  from  y"  parts  thereabout.  These  talke  higli,  y'  the  time  of  their 
liberty  draweth  neare.     .     .     .     And  Horrexe,  aforesaid,  is  to  them  as 


296  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Wallingford,  B.  Cox,  and  about  tliirteen  in  the  Principality.'^ 
Let  it  be  remembered  that  the  public  places  were  occupied 
by  them  under  the  authority  of  the  Government,  simply  a,s 
places  where  they  could  preach  the  Gospel,  and  nothing 
more.  Their  churches  were  separate  things.  Their  relation  to 
the  latter  was  pastoral- — to  the  former  it  was  only  ministerial. 
Government  dealt  with  ecclesiastical  property  then,  as  it  may 
do  again,  as  the  property  of  the  nation,  and  placed  in  the 
ecclesiastical  structures  such  ministers  of  Christ  as  they 
approved,  without  restricting  their  teaching,  or  interfering, 
as  a  general  principle,  with  their  views  of  chui'ch  govern- 
ment. It  may  be  doubted  if  these  men  did  more  then  than 
the  most  consistent  voluntary  would  do  now,  if  placed  in 
.similar  circumstances.  Our  brethren,  at  least,  were  sinijily 
teachers — not  pastors  in  their  places. 

The  reader  may  like  to  know  with  ^\llat  feelings  these 
men  of  God  regarded  their  trial.  Only  with  a  sentence  or 
two  can  we  gratify  this  natural  desire.  With  the  fullest 
conviction  that  deep  and  bitter  hostility  from  men  in  power, 
from  the  highest  officer  of  the  Government  to  the  village 
constable,  was  cherished ;  that  poverty,  if  not  absolute  want, 
stared  them  in  the  face ;  that  their  property  and  theii-  do- 
mestic circles  would  be  invaded  by  the  ruthless  hands  of  their 
foes;  they  went  fortli  ■wdth  a  calmness  all  but  unparalleled, 
and  with  a  confidence  in  God  of  the  very  highest  degree.  "  So 
long  as  we  have  a  good  God,  a  good  cause,  and  a  good  con- 
science, why  .should  our  faces  look  pale  for  fear  of  man," 
said  one  of  these  confessors.     "  I  beg,"  said  another,  "  that 

one  of  the  fuiys  to  spurn  them  onward.  He  p(rea)ches  to  them,  y'  he 
comes  not  to  them  with  a  sennon  out  of  a  booke,  hut  with  that  which  the 
Lord  hath  spoken  to  him,  viz.,  y'  theye  must  not  goe  back  nor  bee  daunted 
with  any  terrors,  lest  God  spue  them  out  of  his  mouth."  Calamy  says 
that  Horrexe  died  at  Battersea,  about  1687.  The  institution  of  Head, 
his  successor  at  Maldon,  is  given  as  "per  inconformUatmii  Thomas 
Horrexe." 

*  Thomas's  Hist.,  pp.  17,  18.  Davids'  Essex,  pp.  425,  G31.  Life  of 
J.  Stcunett. 


ClIARLKS   THE   SECOND.  ^97 

you  would  not  suffer  our  Nonconfoi-mity,  for  which  we 
patiently  bear  the  loss  of  our  places,  to  be  an  act  of  un- 
))eaceablencss  and  disloyalty.  We  will  do  anything  for  his 
Majesty  but  sin.  We  will  hazard  anything  for  him  but  our 
souls.  We  hope  we  could  die  for  him,  only  we  dai-e  not  be 
damned  for  him.  We  make  no  question,  however  we  may 
be  accounted  of  here,  we  shall  be  found  loyal  and  obedient 
subjects  at  our  appearance  before  God's  trib\inal."  "  Brethren, 
T  could  do  very  much  for  the  love  I  bear  to  yo\i,  but  I  dare 
not  sin.  I  know  some  will  tell  you  this  is  pride  and 
|ice\Tshness  in  us,  and  that  we  would  fain  all  be  bishops; 
but  tlie  Lord  l)e  witness  between  them  and  us.  I  am 
sensible  what  it  is  to  be  reduced  to  a  morsel  of  bread.  Let 
the  God  of  heaven  and  earth  do  what  he  will  A\dth  me.  If 
I  could  subscribe  with  a  good  conscience,  I  would ;  1  would 
do  anything  to  keep  myself  in  the  work  of  God;  but  to  sin 
against  God  I  dare  not  do  it."  Noble,  true-hearted  men !  it 
was  not  your  disloyalty  to  Charles,  but  your  attachment  to 
•Tesus.*  It  was  neither  fancy,  faction,  nor  humour,  that 
made  you  not  comply,  but  simply  the  fear  of  offending  God. 
You  gave  up  all,  in  the  true  martyr-sjiirit,  rather  than  dis- 
honour your  gi-eater  Master.  Of  you  it  might  be  most  truly 
said,  "  Ye  took  joyfully  the  s])oiling  of  your  goods,  knowing 
that  for  yourselves  you  have  hi  iLcaven  a  better  and  'more 
enduring  substance. " 

Professedly  to  mitigate  the  evils  of  this  Act,  Charles  pro- 
posed an  indulgence,  and  to  grant  some  liberty  in  matters  of 
religion  to  the  suffering  Nonconformists.  For  a  short  time 
it  shed  a  gleam  of  light  on  their  dark  prospects,  but  the 
hypocrisy  of  the  monarch  was  soon  detected.     Popery,  not 


*  "The  king  by  name,  with  all  his  dignitaries,  is  prayed  for  by  tliem 
that  they  call  Fanatiques,  as  heartily  and  powerfully  as  in  any  of  the 
other  churches  that  are  tliought  better;  and  that,  let  the  king  think  what 
lie  will,  it  is  them  that  must  help  him  in  the  (hiy  of  war.  For,  generally 
they  are  the  most  substantial  yieople,  and  tlie  sobiircst." — Pepys,  vol.  ii., 
p.  118. 


298  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTLSTS. 

Nonconformity,  the  Papists,  "who  had  deserved  well  of  him," 
not  the  men  who  had  hailed  his  retui-n  and  prepared  the  way 
for  it,  were  the  objects  of  his  Royal  solicitudes.  Popular 
feeling  in  the  House  and  in  the  nation  was  roused  against 
it.  Low  as  moral  sentiment  had  fallen,  Romanism  was  still 
detested.  Pepys  says : — "  All  the  news  is  the  great  odds 
yesterday  in  the  votes  between  them  that  are  for  the  indulg- 
ence of  Papists  and  Presbyters,  and  those  that  ax-e  against 
it,  which  did  carry  it  by  200  against  30."* 

In  1 663  Juxon  died,  and  Sheldon  was  raised  to  the  throne 
of  Canterbury.  The  change  brought  no  relief  to  the  perse- 
cuted. About  the  time  of  his  enthi'oning,  the  nation  wit- 
nessed another  mthless  attack  on  the  liberty  of  conscience. 
The  Conventicle  Act  joassed  the  Commons,  and  received  the 
Royal  assent.  Tliis  infamous  measui-e  pro^dded,  amongst 
other  things,  "  That  any  person  above  sixteen  years  of  age, 
present  at  any  meeting  imder  pretence  of  any  exei'cise  of 
religion,  in  other  manners  than  is  the  practice  of  the  Church 
of  England,  where  there  are  five  persons  more  than  the 
household,  shall,  for  the  first  oflence,  by  a  justice  of  peace  be 
recorded,  and  sent  to  jail  three  months,  tiR  he  pay  £5 ;  and 
for  the  second  oflence,  six  months,  till  he  pay  £10;  and  the 
thii-d  time,  being  convicted  by  a  jury,  shall  be  banished  to 
some  of  the  American  2Jla'ntations,  excepting  iVew  England 
or  Virginia." -^^  The  former  conviction  could  be  effected 
without  a  jury.  The  squire,  armed  with  magisterial  autho- 
rity, could  call  before  him  a  suspected  one,  and  sentence  to 
fine  or  imprisonment  without  the  intervention  of  a  third 
party.  "We  shall  presently  see  with  what  fearful  power  it 
was  made  to  act. 


*  Diary,  vol.  ii.,  \}.  10.  "A  work  published  about  this  time,  though  in 
favour  of  the  hieraichy,  complains  of  about  3000  ministers  admitted  into 
the  Church,  who  were  unfit  to  teach  because  of  their  youth ;  and  of  1500 
debauched  men  ordained ;  and  of  more  unlearned  men  ordained ;  and  of 
1342  factious  ministers  a  little  before  ordained,"  &c.  The  bishops  had 
cast  out  the  fine  gold,  and  with  a  judicial  blindness  kept  -vvith  com- 
placency tlie  dross. — Baxter's  Life,  p.  307. 

i"  The  Act  may  be  seen  in  "English  Puritanism." 


CHARLES    Tni:    SECOND. 


299 


Mad  uijon  his  pleasure,  Charles  appears  to  have  grown 
insensible  to  all  moral  claims.  The  diaries  already  quoted 
give  us  a  glimpse  of  the  life  of  this  abandoned  prince. 
"  The  king  do  mind  nothing  but  pleasure,  and  hates  the 
very  sight  or  thouglit  of  business.  If  any  of  the  councillors 
give  him  good  advice,  and  move  him  to  anything  that  is  to 
his  good  and  honour,  the  other  party,  which  are  his  coun- 
cillors of  pleasure,  take  him  when  he  is  with  Lady  Castle- 
maine,  and  in  a  humour  of  delight,  and  then  pei-suade  him 
tliat  he  ought  not  to  listen  to  the  advice  of  these  old  dotards 
or  councillors  that  were  heretofore  his  enemies,  when,  God 
knows,  it  is  they  that  now-a-days  do  most  study  his  honour."* 
"  The  king,"  says  another,  "  was  inordinately  fond  of  plea- 
sure, and  lamentably  ignorant.  It  was  difficult  to  get  him 
to  write  even  a  short  letter;  only  oa  one  day  in  the  week 
(Friday)  would  he  devote  any  time  to  such  duties;  and  even 
that  day  was  often  entirely  disposed  of  other  ways,  and  a 
whole  week  would  elapse  before  he  could  be  persuaded  to 
repair  the  omission."!  Absorbed  in  his  seraglio;  amusing  him- 
self and  his  mistresses  with  the  most  frivolous  engagements; 
sometimes  hunting  a  moth,  or  engaged  in  kindred  sports,  or 
planning  new  schemes  of  pleasure  and  extravagance  unworthy 
of  the  monarch  of  a  gi-eat  nation,  the  appearance  of  the 
plague  in  the  metropolis  filled  the  abandoned  king  and  his 
debauched  court  with  alarm.  The  first  thought  on  the  con- 
firmation of  the  repoi-t  was  flight.  To  escape  with  his  con- 
cubines and  the  panderers  to  his  lusts  to  a  place  of  safety, 
was  the  absorbing  desire.  About  the  people  there  was  no  care. 
Death  was  everywhere.  Every  day  augmented  the  conster- 
nation. Business  almost  ceased.  Fear  was  in  every  hoxise, 
and  social  intercourse  was  dreaded.  Ten  thousand  a  week  at 
the  crisis  fell  by  the  power  of  this  fearful  scourge.  J    Many 

*  Pepys,  vol.  iL,  p.  37. 
t  Life  of  Clarendon,  vol.  i.,  p.  888. 

X  At  least  more  than  100,000  died  by  this  visitation  in  London  and  the 
villages  around  it.     In  a  letter  to  Sancroft  from  J.  Tillison,  the  writer 


300  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

of  tlie  clergy  fled,  and  left  their  charges  uucared  for.  The 
bishops  found  it  convenient  to  visit  their  dioceses,  and  give 
tliemselves  np  to  the  spiritual  improvement  of  the  rural 
population.  Heedless  of  Lnv,  fearless  of  the  contagion  which 
everywhere  was  spreading,  into  this  sea  of  death  many  of 
the  persecuted  ministers  threw  themselves.  They  occupied 
the  deserted  churches,  and  thousands  hung  on  their  lips  with 
an  intensity  of  feeling  imknown  before ;  into  the  lanes  and 
ilark  alleys  of  the  city,  where  Death  was  holding  liis  court, 
they  penetrated,  warning,  encouraging,  and  shedding  the 
radiance  of  ho})e  on  the  prospects  of  the  dying.  Theii-  self- 
denial,  their  faithfulness,  and  their  success,  whilst  they  stood 
in  the  boldest  relief  to  the  heartlessness  of  their  rivals, 
awakened  no  gratitude  in  their  minds,  but  rather  intensified 
the  hatred  of  the  Episcopate  against  them. 

The  monarch  and  his  court  had  fled  to  Oxford.  There 
the  Parliament  also  w^as  convened.  Another  Act  of  oppres- 
sion was  proposed.  The  Act  of  Uniformity  imposed,  with 
other  things,  upon  every  ofiicial  person  connected  with  the 
Church,  an  oath  that  it  was  not  lawful,  under  any  pretence 
whatever,  to  take  up  arms  against  the  Sovereign,  or  persons 
commissioned  by  him.  Under  the  influence  of  this  it  was 
now  sought  to  bring  all  the  Nonconformist  clergy.  It  was 
now  enacted,  that  all  persons  in  holy  orders  that  had  not 
subscribed  the  Act  of  Uniformity  should  take  the  oath,  and 
in  case  of  refusal,  they  were  rendered  incapable  of  teaching 
schools,  and  prohibited  from  coming  within  five  miles  of  any 
city,  corporate  town,  or  borough  sending  members  to  Parlia- 


says : — "  The  desolation  of  the  city  is  very  great.  That  heaii  is  either  of 
steel  or  stone  that  will  not  lament  this  sad  visitation,  and  will  not  bleed 
for  those  unutterable  woes !  What  eye  would  not  weep  to  see  so  many 
habitations  uninhabited  —the  poor  sick  not  visited—  the  hungry  not  fed — 
the  grave  not  satisfied.  Death  stares  us  continually  in  the  face  in  every 
infected  person  that  passes  by  us,  in  every  coffin  which  is  daily  and  hourly 
carried  along  the  streets.  The  custom  was  in  the  beginning  to  bury  the 
dead  in  the  night  only;  but  now  both  night  and  day  will  hardly  be  time 
enough  to  do  it."— Ellis's  Letters,  &c. 


CHARLES    THE    SECOND.  301 

ineut.  Sheldon  aided  Clarendon  witli  all  bis  might  to  cany 
this  measure.     Success  crowned  their  effoi'ts. 

The  influence  of  these  measures  on  the  Nonconformists 
generally,  and  the  Baptists  in  particular,  was  great.  To  the 
fall  power  of  their  foes  they  were  now  exposed,  and  the  latter 
used  it  in  no  small  degree.  They  had  no  protector  but  God. 
To  no  law  could  they  appeal.  No  liberty  could  they  plead. 
E\erywhere  they  were  met  with  dangers,  imprisonments,  or 
exile.  The  Act  of  Uniformity  cast  them  from  their  livings, 
and  cut  oii"  their  ordinary  means  of  support;  the  Conventicle 
Act  sought  to  annihilate  the  congregations  which  had 
gathered  around  them,  by  tine,  imprisonment,  and  exile; 
and  now  this  Five-mile  Act  forbade  their  approach  to 
cities  and  corporations  where  their  influence  had  been  felt, 
and  where  merchants  and  the  trading  community  had 
gathered  around  them,  and  drove  them  into  the  sparsely 
occupied  districts  of  the  coiintry,  in  too  many  cases  the 
abodes  of  ignorance  and  vice,  Avhere  their  means  of  support 
were  hourly  diminished.  Pepys  thus  notices  the  sutfer- 
ings  of  some  of  these  confessors: — "  Many  j)ious  ministers 
of  the  Word  of  God,  some  thousands  of  them,  do  now  beg 
tht'ir  bread;  and  told  me  how  highly  the  present  clergy 
carry  themselves  everj'where,  so  as  that  they  are  hated  and 
laughed  at  by  eveiybody;  among  other  things,  for  their 
excommunication,  which  they  serve  upon  the  least  occasion 
almost  that  can  be.  .  .  .  He  gave  me  many  stories  of 
the  affronts  which  the  clergy  receive  in  all  places  of  England 
from  the  gentry  and  ordinary  persons  of  the  parish."* 
Some  days  after,  he  refers  to  this  again : — "  I  saw  several 
poor  creatures  carried  by  constables  for  being  at  a  conven- 
ticle. They  go  like  lambs,  without  any  resistance.  I  would 
to  God  they  would  either  conform,  or  be  more  wise  and  not 
be  catched."t 

But  their  cup  of  misery  was  not  yet  full.     They  were 

*  Diarj-,  vol.  i.,  pp.  116,  117.  t  Ibid,  vol.  ii.,  p.  20;>. 


302 


EAKLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 


prostrate  before  the  successors  of  the  apostles,  but  the  foot  of 
the  conqueror  was  not  yet  on  the  neck  of  the  foe.  From 
the  churches,  from  the  cities  and  corporate  towns  of  the 
kingdom,  from  the  back  streets  and  upper  rooms  where  they 
met  to  carry  on  theii-  simple  worship,  they  had  been  hu.nted; 
their  means  of  suppoi-t  had  been  abridged,  if  not  entirely 
destroyed;  still  they  did  not  quail  before  the  mitred  dignity, 
but  lived  and  laboured  on.  Where  did  they  reside*?  who 
gave  them  shelter?  By  what  means  did  they  support  their 
families  in  the  difficulties  in  which  they  had  been  plunged? 
These  and  other  kiudred  questions  did  the  mind  of  the 
imperious  Sheldon  i-evolve,  as  he  lounged  at  ease  amidst  the 
splendour  of  Lambeth.  His  restless  spirit  could  find  no 
ease  whilst  Mordecai  sat  at  the  gate. 

In  1665,  the  archbishop  issued  orders  to  all  the  bishops  of 
his  province,  commanding  them : — "  Particularly  certify  me 
the  names,  surnames,  and  degrees  of  all  nonconforming 
ministers  that  within  their  resi^ective  dioceses  have  been 
ejected  out  of  any  ecclesiastical  benefice,  promotion,  or 
charge  for  non-subscription  or  nonconformity;  and  wliere, 
and  how,  and  in  what  profession  of  life  they  do  now  live; 
and  how  they  behave  themselves  in  relation  to  the  peace  and 
quiet  as  well  of  the  Church  as  of  the  State;  and  fui-ther,  if 
any  such  Nonconformists  shall  have  removed  from  any  other 
diocese  into  any  of  their  respective  dioceses,  that  they  certify 
the  same  thing  concerning  them,"  &c.*  With  relentless 
severity  was  this  measure  executed.  The  names  and  resi- 
dences, the  employment  and  other  sources  of  support,  of  the 
Nonconformist  ministry,  wei-e  reported  to  the  bishops,  "  in 
order,"  says  Lister,  "  that  their  retreats  might  be  discovered, 
and  all  sojourners  within  interdicted  limits  summarily  dis- 
lodged. There  are  many  unoffending  men  whose  conscien- 
tious disinterestedness  had  deprived  them  of  theii-  ecclesias- 
tical incomes,  who  were  again  excluded  from  the  means  of 

*  Life  of  Clarendon,  vol.  ii.,  p.  294. 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND.  303 

subsistence  which  they  had  subseqiieutly  adopted,  and  were 
driven  from  the  vicinity  of  friends  who  had  ministered  to 
their  comfort  and  support.  The  first  pei-secutuig  statutes 
had  deprived  them  of  theii-  preferment ;  the  second  debarred 
them  from  public  worship;  the  third  drove  them  from  their 
homes."*  To  this  pitch  had  persecution  risen  within  six  years, 
from  the  king's  Declarations  promising  "indulgence  to  tender 
consciences."  No  one  was  safe;  no  home  was  free  from  the 
intrusion  of  the  spies  of  the  bishops.  Uncei-tainty  and 
dread  guarded  the  fireside.  No  act  was  so  innocent,  no 
word  so  harmless,  but  they  might  be  urged  against  the  per- 
secuted. Into  eveiy  city,  town,  village,  and  hamlet,  the  emis- 
saries of  evil  jjenetrated.  In  almost  every  vicar  and  parish 
curate  the  Nonconformist  found  a  bitter  foe.  Tlie  justice, 
the  constable,  the  unprincipled,  were  banded  against  them. 
Their  holiness  was  a  living  rebuke  to  the  immorality  which 
existed ;  their  high  principle  a  constant  condemnation  of 
the  hypocrisy  and  deceit  which  abounded.  Into  the  woods 
and  the  forests,  which  were  not  few  at  this  time,  many 
of  them  were  driven.  In  dark  places  they  were  com- 
pelled to  hide,  when  the  jaQ  was  not  their  home.  Under 
the  cover  of  midnight  they  frequently  met  for  worship,  or 
in  some  hidden  room  carefully  watched  by  some  faithful  one 
from  the  stealthy  footfall  of  the  unprincipled.  The  sufferings 
of  oui-  brethx'en  may  form  the  subject  of  another  chapter, 
and  we  will  only  give  one  or  two  examples  of  individual 
suffering  here.  Page  after  page  could  be  covered,  but  selec- 
tion must  be  the  rule. 

The  case  of  Kiffin  shows  to  what  means  the  friends  of  the 
Chvu'ch  had  recourse.  Plots,  intended  murdei-,  and  risings 
were  laid  to  the  charge  of  our  brethren.  "About  midnight," 
says  Mr,  Eliflin,  "I  was  seized  by  Mr.  Wickliam,  one  of  the 
messengers  of  the  Privy  Council,  by  order  of  the  Duke  of 
Buckingham.   By  him  I  was  given  in  chai-ge  to  Mr.  Clifford,  a 


*  Cardwell,  vol.  ii.,  p.  275,    This  inquiry  was  repeated  in  1678. 


304  i;akly  English  baptists. 

gentleman  belonging  to  tlie  duke.  Many  othei*s  also  were 
seized  at  the  same  time.  I  was  taken  to  York  House,  and 
continued  there  till  the  next  night,  under  the  care  of  soldiers. 
In  the  evening  the  duke  came  to  me,  accompanied  by  several 
others,  and  told  me  I  would  have  hired  two  men  to  kill  the 
king,  saying,  if  they  would  not  do  it,  I  would  do  it  myself ; 
adding,  if  I  would  confess  the  truth,  care  should  be  taken  that 
I  should  not  suffer.  I  was  gi'eatly  amazed  at  the  charge,  and 
returned  the  duke  for  answer, '  that  I  would  rather  he  should 
charge  me  with  the  crime,  than  I  should  give  the  least  enter- 
tainment to  such  an  intention  so  much  as  in  my  thoughts ;  for, 
I  thanked  God,  I  did  abhor  from  my  soul  such  a  design  against 
the  meanest  man  in  the  kingdom,  mxich  more  towards  his 
Majesty;'  and  I  further  said,  that  the  person  could  not  be 
considered  his  Majesty's  friend  that  should  say  a  word  of 
tlie  saving  the  life  of  any  man,  if  in  his  wits,  that  should 
speak  of  any  such  thing!  The  duke  told  me  he  knew  I 
could  speak  well  enough  for  myself,  having  so  often  spoken 
before  the  Council ;  but  what  he  had  charged  me  with  would 
be  proved  by  two  witnesses,  and  ordered  Clifford  to  deliver 
me  to  the  soldiers  till  the  rest  had  been  examined,  whose 
crimes,  it  seemed,  were  not  so  great  as  mine.  I  certainly 
felt  some  consternation,  thoiigh  I  knew  my  innocence;  but 
it  pleased  the  Lord,  whose  care  and  goodness  had  been 
extended  towards  me  in  all  diiKculties  to  that  day,  greatly  to 
revive  me,  bringing  that  Scripture  with  great  power  to  my 
soul,  Isa.  xli.  10,  '  Fear  not,  I  am  with  thee,'  &c.  .  ,  . 
I  was  made  willing  to  submit  to  whatever  the  pleasure  of 
God  should  be  towards  me  in  this  matter.  About  two  hours 
after,  when  all  were  examined,  and  several  had  been  sent  to 
the  Gate-House,  Mr.  Wickham  requested  the  duke  that  I 
might  be  his  prisoner;  it  was  accordingly  so  ordered  that 
I  went  to  his  house,  where  I  went  to  bed  and  slept  soundly. 
The  next  day  Lady  Eanelagh  came  to  visit  me.  She  ad- 
vised me  to  write  to  the  Chancellor  to  acquaint  him  with 
my  present  condition,  and  offering  to  carry  it  to  him  herself. 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND.  305 

She  did  so.  The  Chancellor  having  read  it,  told  her  there 
was  nothing  of  those  things  before  them  in  Council,  and 
said  he  wonld  lay  the  matter  before  the  king.  The  next 
morning  the  letter  was  read,  and  the  Secretaries  of  State 
were  asked  if  any  charge  against  me  had  been  received.  On 
their  saying  there  was  none,  an  order  for  my  discharge  was 
issued  without  the  i)ayment  of  fees.  I  thouglit  the  storm, 
was  over,  and  that  I  was  again  delivered  out  of  the  hands 
of  wicked  and  unreasonable  men.  Having  been  infonned  of 
the  kindness  of  the  Chancellor,  I  went  the  next  morning 
to  liis  house  to  acknowledge  my  obligation  to  him.  While 
I  stood  without,  I  saw  go  to  him  the  Lord  Chief-Justice 
Bridgman;  Sir  G.  Palmer,  the  Attorney-General;  Sir  H. 
Finch,  the  Solicitor-General;  and  Sir  R.  Brown.*  After 
some  time  I  was  called  in,  and  asked  if  1  was  still  a  pri- 
soner. I  told  him  I  had  been,  but  was  come  to  thank  him 
for  presenting  my  case  to  his  Majesty,  and  obtaining  my 
pardon.  He  asked  me  how  it  was  that  I  was  released.  I 
.said  by  order  of  the  king  and  Council.  He  asked  for  the 
order.  I  told  him  the  original  was  in  the  messenger's  hands, 
but  that  I  had  a  copy  of  it.     He  told  me  that  there  had 


*  "  This  man,  who  had  been  a  very  active  partizan  during  the  civil  war 
and  the  Piotectonite,  had  manifested  strong  Eoyalist  tendencies.  He  had 
been  forbidden  the  House;  but  amidst  the  tide  of  loyal  feeling,  'the 
Acts  passed  against  Major-General  Brown,  a  timber  merchant  in  London, 
who  had  greatly  distinguished  himself  of  late,  were  abrogate,  and  liberty 
was  given  him  to  resume  his  place  in  the  House.'" — French  Ambassador, 
Guizot,  vol.  ii.,  p.  363.  The  fury  of  tliis  apostate  is  thus  indicated  by  a 
sufferer  from  his  malice : — "  Why  are  we  in  several  gaols  and  dungeons 
in  most  counties  in  England,  where  are  found  no  evil  doers,  when  they 
have  nothing  against  us  in  anything  save  in  the  matter  of  our  God ; — who 
saith  by  his  Son,  ' Swear  not  at  all '  1  Nay,  why  are,  ;ind  have  been,  several 
imprisoned  that  have  sworn  ?  .  .  .  Why,  cry  out  sevei'al  in  Newgate, 
are  we  thus  rudely  imprisoned  by  Richard  Brown,  and  kept  in  without 
trial?  Why  were  we — cry  out  some  thirty  of  them,  committed  to  New- 
gate the  10th  day  of  Abib  (Exo.  xiii.  4),  or  the  iii-st  month — driven 
from  our  peaceable  meeting  out  of  Birch  Lane,  by  the  city  marshal,  till, 
the  18th  day  after,  we  were  carried  before  him ;  the  tenderest  of  whose 
mercies  are  mere  cruelty?" — Adis'  Fanatics'  Alarm  to  the  Mayor,  p.  22. 
U 


306  E,\RLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

been  such  an  oi'der  issued,  biit  that  last  night,  just  after- 
wards, the  Duke  of  Buckingham  came  and  brought  in  the 
charge;  and  it  was  ordered  that  I  should  remain  with  the 
messenger,  and  that  I  must  retiu-n  again  to  his  care,  and 
that  I  should  have  a  fair  and  speedy  trial.  1  thanked  his 
lordship,  and  said  I  was  very  willing  to  do  so,  knowing  my 
innocence.  He  wished  me  to  go  to  the  back  stairs  at  White- 
hall, and  speak  to  one  of  the  king's  pages  who  attended  there, 
and  desire  him  to  tell  the  king  that  I  was  there.  I  went 
immediately.  Tlie  king  was  gone  out,  and  I  returned  to  the 
city,  and  took  two  sufficient  citizens  with  me  to  tender  bail, 
if  it  were  demanded,  and  hastened  back  again.  As  the  pro- 
vidence of  God  ordered  it,  just  as  the  king  came  into  the 
palace,  the  Chancellor  had  come  into  the  king.  At  the 
door  I  was  remanded,  and  after  waiting  an  hour,  the  mes- 
senger came  to  tell  that  the  king  said  I  might  go  home.  He 
asked  if  there  was  a  messenger  with  me;  but  finding  none, 
he  said  that  if  there  had  been  one,  he  had  orders  to  dis- 
charge me,  but  I  must  be  ready  at  all  times  to  come  when 
his  Majesty  sent  for  me."  The  reflections  of  this  good  man, 
on  this  interposition  of  the  Divine  hand,  we  dare  not  omit. 
"This  great  deliverance  was  cause  for  wonder  to  all  that 
heard  of  it:  for  many  who  were  taken  at  the  same  time, 
whose  charges  were  not  by  any  means  so  high  as  mine,  were 
kept  in  the  Gate-House  more  than  six  months,  although 
nothing  was  ever  exliibited  against  them  fi'om  their  commit- 
ment until  their  release."* 

To  another  scene  the  reader's  attention  must  now  be 
turned.  Not  only  did  the  men  in  power  tiy  to  silence  the 
voice,  but  they  would  not  allow  their  victims  to  use  the  pen 
with  impunity.  Deprived  to  a  great  extent  of  the  liberty 
of  ministering,  some  of  our  brethren  sought  to  inculcate 
the    truth   of    God    through    the    medium   of    the    press. 

*  Life,  pp.  47-51.  We  have  slightly  abridged  this.  It  is  due  to  Hyde 
to  say,  that  in  more  than  one  instance  he  showed  favour  to  Kiffin  and  hie 
friends. 


CHARLES  THE   SECOND.  307 

AmoTigst  these  was  Benjamin  Keach.    He  had  suftered  mvich 
before.     He  had  been  dragged  from  his  meeting-house  by 
troojjei-s,  threatened    to  be   trampled   to  death  with    their 
horses,  and  was  only  saved  from  this  fate  by  the  interposition 
of  an  officer.    Tlirown  across  the  back  of  one  of  the  animals, 
he  w;is  conilucted  to  prison.   About  this  time  he  printed  and 
published  a  small  book,  entitled  "  The  ChilcUs  Instnictoi'; 
or,  A  New  and  Easy  Primer^    A  coi)y  of  this  little  book 
falling  into  the  hands  of  Mr.  Stafford,  a  magistrate  of  the 
county,  he  went  w^th    a  constable   to   Mr.  Keach's ;   and, 
seizing  all  the  copies,  bound  him  over  to  the  assizes  at  £100, 
and  two  sureties  in  bonds  of  £50  each.    The  assizes  w^ere  held 
at  Aylesbury,  October  8th,  1G64.     Chief-Justice  Hyde  pre- 
sided.   At  an  early  period  the  prisoner  was  called  before  him. 
Hyde  was  one  of  those  time-serving  men  who  had  no  sense  of 
justice,  and  disgraced  the  bench  on  which  they  sat.  Ridiculing 
Mr.  Keach's  person  and  profession,  he  held  up  the  little  book, 
and  ii,sked  the  culprit  if  it  was  not  his  ju-oduction.     Mr. 
Keach's  assenting  brought  down  another  dignified   tirade 
against  him,  alike  expressive  of  the  ignorance  of  the  man 
and  the  unfitness  of  the  ermined  villain  for  his  office.    The 
following  samples  of  his  insolence  may  be  selected : — 

"  Chief-Justice. — In  your  book  you  have  made  a  new 
creed;  I  have  seen  three  creeds  before,  but  I  never  saw  a 
fourth  till  you  made  one, 

^' Keach. — I  have  not  made  a  creed,  but  a  confession  of 
the  Christian  faith. 

"  Chief-Jiistice. — What  is  a  creed,  then? 
"  Keoxh. — Your  lordship  said  that  you  had  never  seen  but 
three  creeds,  but  thousands  of  Christians  have  made  a  con- 
fession of  their  faith !" 

Upon  the  natiire  of  baptism  and  the  ministry  his  lordship 
expatiated ;  and  Mr.  Keach,  attempting  to  correct  his 
mistakes,  was  insolently  rebuked,  and  told  that  he  should 
not  preach  there,  or  give  the  reasons  of  his  damnahh 
doctrines   to   seduce   and    infect  the    lieges    of    the  king. 


308  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

During  the  prepai'atiou  of  the  indictment,  the  Chief- 
Justice,  breaking  through  all  law  and  decency,  represented 
him  to  the  grand  jury  as  a  man  of  the  most  dangerous 
principles,  attempting  to  poison  the  minds  of  chikken  by 
his  pernicious  priuciples;  and  exhorted  them  to  do  their  duty 
when  the  bill  came  before  them.  The  next  day  the  judge 
was  gratified  with  the  success  of  his  appeal;  a  true  bill  was 
brought  in  against  the  author.  Standing  at  the  bar,  the 
following  indictment  was  read  by  the  clerk : — "Thou  art  here 
indicted  by  the  name  of  Benjamin  Keach,  of  Wiiaslow,  in  the 
county  of  Bucks,  for  that  thou,  being  a  seditious,  heretical, 
and  schismatical  person,  evily  and  maliciously  disposed,  and 
disafiected  to  Ms  Magesty's  Government  and  the  government 
of  the  Church  of  England,  didst  maliciously  and  wickedly, 
on  the  first  day  of  May,  in  the  1 6tli  year  of  our  Sovereign 
Lord  the  King,  write,  print,  publish,  or  cause  to  be  written, 
printed,  and  published,  one  seditious  and  venomous  book, 
entitled  '  Tim  Child's  Instructor ;  or,  A  New  and  Easy 
Primer;^  wherein  are  contained,  by  way  of  question  and 
answer,  these  damyiahle  2Jositio7is,  contrary  to  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer  and  the  liturgy  of  the  Church  of  England; 
that  is  to  say,  in  one  place  you  have  thus  written: — 
Ques.  Who  are  the  right  subjects  of  baptism?  Ans.  Be- 
lievers, or  godly  men  and  women  only  who  can  make  con- 
fession of  their  faith  and  repentance.  And  in  another  place 
you  have  maliciously  and  wickedly  written  these  words: — 
Ques.  How  shall  it  go  with  the  saints'?  Ans.  O,  very  well; 
it  is  the  day  they  have  longed  for;  then  shall  they  hear  that 
sentence,  '  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  king- 
dom prepared  for  youf  and  so  shall  they  reign  with  Christ 
on  the  earth  a  thousand  years,  even  on  Mount  Zion,  in  the 
new  Jerusalem,  for  there  will  Christ's  throne  be,  on  which 
they  must  sit  down  with  him."  Omitting  a  paragraph,  as 
not  necessary  to  a  correct  view  of  the  proceedings,  the 
indictment  proceeds.  "  In  another  place,  you  have  wickedly 
and  maliciously  written  these  plain  English  words ; — Ques. 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND.  309 

Why  may  not  infants  be  received  into  the  church  now,  as 
they  were  xiiider  the  lawl  Ans.  Because  the  fleshly  seed  is 
cast  out,  though  God  under  that  dispensation  did  receive 
infiints  in  a  lineal  way  by  generation ;  yet  he  that  hath  the 
key  of  Da^■id,  that  openeth  and  no  mtm  shuttcth,  that 
shutteth  anil  no  niaii  openeth,  hatli  shiit  up  that  way  into 
the  church,  and  hath  opened  the  door  of  regeneration,  re- 
ceiving in  none  now  but  bclievei-s.  Qioes.  What,  then,  is  the 
case  of  infants ']  A  'tis.  Infants  that  die  arc  members  of  the 
kingdom  of  glory,  though  they  be  not  members  of  the  visible 
church.  Ques.  Do  they,  then,  that  bring  in  infants  in  a 
lineal  way  by  generation  err  from  the  way  of  truth? 
Ans.  Yea,  they  do;  for  they  make  not  God's  Holy  Word 
their  nde,  but  do  presume  to  open  the  door  that  Christ  hath 
shut,  and  none  ought  to  open,"  &c.  Other  points  are 
alleged,  l)ut  they  need  not  be  quoted.  Such  now,  gentle 
reader,  were  the  gnxvc  charges  for  which  an  Englishman 
and  a  Christian  minister  was  depi'ived  of  libei-ty,  imprisoned, 
and  called  before  the  bar  of  his  coimtiy !  The  trial  was  a 
mockery  of  justice.  Bullied  by  the  judge,  who  compelled 
liim  to  i)lead  before  he  would  allow  him  a  copy  of  the 
indictment — the  chai-ges  in  it  were  compared  with  the 
tendency  of  the  Prayei"  Book.  Being  found  in  opposition  to 
its  pernicious  doctrines — the  juiy,  after  some  delay,  and  an 
abusive  chai-ge  from  Hyde,  brought  him  in  guilty.  Upon 
this,  the  Chief- Justice  said: — "Benjamin  Keach,  you  are  here 
con^^cted  for  writing,  printing,  and  publishing  a  seditious 
and  schismatical  book,  for  which  the  court's  judgment  is  this, 
and  the  court  doth  award,  that  you  shall  go  to  gaol  for  a 
period  of  fourteen  days  ^vithout  bail;  and  that  next  Saturday, 
to  .stand  upon  the  pillory  at  Ailsbmy,  in  the  open  market, 
for  the  space  of  two  houi-s,  from  eleven  o'clock  till  one,  with 
a  paper  on  your  head  with  this  inscription :  '  For  wi-iting, 
printing,  and  publishing  a  schismatical  book,  entitled  The 
Child's  Instructor;  or,  A  New  and  Easy  PrlmerJ  And  the 
next  Tuesday,  to  stand  in  the  same  manner  in  the  market  of 


310  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Win.slow;  and  there  your  book  shall  be  openly  burnt  before 
your  face  by  the  common  hangman,  in  disgrace  of  you  and 
your  doctrine.  And  you  shall  forfeit  to  the  king's  Magesty 
the  sum  of  £20;  and  shall  remain  in  gaol  until  you  find 
sureties  for  your  good  beha\'iour  and  appearance  at  the  next 
assizes,  there  to  renounce  your  doctrines,  and  make  such 
public  submission  as  sliall  then  be  enjoined  you."  "  I  hope 
I  shall  never  renounce  those  doctrines  which  are  taught  in 
that  book,"  said  the  heroic  sufferer,  at  the  close  of  this 
unjust  sentence.""' 

To  the  letter,  and  more,  was  this  order  carried  out.  In 
the  market-places  of  these  two  towns,  Mr.  Keach  appeared 
on  the  appointed  days.  The  sympathies  of  some  were 
warmly  expressed,  wliilst  the  insults  and  scoffs  of  others 
marked  the  scene.  Such  was  English  liberty  in  the  days  of 
the  restored  Stuarts;  such  is  a  sample  of  the  feeble  evidence 
on  which  devout  men  were  exposed  to  suffering ! 

The  confessors  were  not  alone  in  their  complaints  of  the 
cruelty  of  these  men  of  peace.  The  conduct  of  the  bishops 
awakened  in  other  minds — minds  that  had  no  sympathy, 
because  they  could  not  comprehend  the  lofty  principles  by 
which  the  Baptists  and  their  brethi-eu  were  influenced — the 
deepest  anxiety.  As  politicians,  if  not  as  enlightened  Chris- 
tian men,  they  could  see  the  monstrous  evils  of  the  course 
which  Sheldon  and  his  brethren  Avere  pursuing.  The  conduct 
of  many  of  the  clergy  was  in  striking  contrast  to  that  of  the 
persecuted  ministers.  With  the  loftiest  pretensions  to  sanctity 
and  Divine  authority,  immorality  and  vice  were  wide-spread 
and  unchecked  in  the  presence  of  these  men.  Every  barrier 
was  overleaped,  and  true  piety  had  retired  from  the  cathedi-al 
to  the  watched  haunts  of  the  fanatics.  As  a  sample  of  the 
feeling  indicated,  we  select  the  following,  t    Referring  to  the 

*  We  have  abridged  Crosby's  Narrative,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  180,  209. 

t  Pepys'  Diary,  vol.  iv.,  pp.  26,  27,  41,  42.  "Wickedness,  like  a  flood, 
is  like  to  drown  our  English  world.  It  begins  already  to  be  above  the 
tops  of  the  mountains ;   it  has  almost  swallowed  up  all ;  our  youth, 


CHARLES    THB    SECOND.  311 

bishops,  the  writer  says: — "I  know  they  iiiust  fall,  and  they 
are  near  it,  taking  all  the  ways  tliey  can  to  nndo  themselves, 
and  showing  \is  tlie  way."  "The  king  is  for  toleration, 
thougli  the  bishops  be  against  it.''  "  Much  discourse  about 
the  bad  state  of  the  Church,  and  how  tlie  clergy  are  come  to 
be  men  of  no  worth  in  the  world;  and  as  the  world  do  now 
generally  discourse,  they  must  be  reformed;  and  I  believe  the 
liierarchy  will  in  a  little  time  be  shaken,  whether  they  will  or 
no — the  kiug  being  offended  with  them  and  set  upon  it,  as  I 
hear."  In  the  highest  circle  this  feeling  was  growing.  About 
this  time.  Clarendon,  with  all  his  faults,  and  they  were  not  few 
— the  friend  of  his  father,  and  the  devoted  adherent  of  Charles 
in  all  his  wanderings,  and  since  his  restoration  the  able 
minister  of  the  crown — was  driven  into  exile.  Men  steeped  in 
corruption  grasped  the  helm  of  the  State,  and  left  tin;  monarch 
unchecked  in  his  senseless  and  lascivious  career.  The  influ- 
ence of  this  is  thus  given  by  a  writer  whose  testimony  can- 
not well  be  doubted  by  the  friends  of  monarchy  and  the 
Church : — "  The  king  was  now  at  liberty  to  pursue  his  own 
})rojects,  not  only  without  restraint,  but  even  mth  the  aid 
of  counsellors  more  fertile  in  expedients  and  more  regardless 
about  consequences  than  he  himself  was.  And  this  was  the 
darkest  and  most  intricate  period  of  a  reign  which  may 
justly  be  called  throughout  the  greater  portion  of  it,  the 
mystery  of  iniquity.  Within  the  compass  of  a  few  years 
the  king  resolved  to  be  independent  of  Parliament,  entered 
into  a  war  to  which  the  nation  was  generally  adverse, 
declared  his  treasmy  insolvent,  united  himself  with  France, 
and  became  the  pensioner  of  the  French  monarch,  formed  a 
secret  compact  to  surrendei-  the  liberties  and  religion  of  his 
own  kiugdom,"  &c.* 

middle  age,  old  age,  and  all  are  almost  earned  away  by  this  flood.  O 
debauchei7,  debauchery,  what  hast  thou  done  in  England !  Thou  haat 
corrupted  our  young  men,  and  hast  made  our  old  men  beasts ;  thou  hast 
deflowered  our  virgins,  and  hast  made  matrons  bawdy.  Thou  hast  made 
our  earth  '  to  reel  to  and  fro  like  a  drunken  man,'"  kc. — Bunyan,  vol.  iii., 
p.  593.  *  Cardwell,  vol.  ii.,  p.  282  (Note). 


312  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Another  view  our  readers  must  have,  if  they  are  rightly 
to  understand  the  circumstances  in  which  our  brethren  were 
placed.  Not  only  was  the  fountain  of  honour,  as  it  is  called, 
thoroughly  polluted,  but  the  Senate  was  probably  never 
more  corruirt.  Lost  to  all  moral,  to  all  patriotic  feeling, 
the  legislators  were  selfish,  and  luxuriated  in  the  misery 
and  ruin  of  their  country.  Well  might  one  of  England's 
noblest  sons  say,  referring  to  the  Lower  House: — "  It  is  too 
notorious  to  be  concealed,  that  near  a  tliird  part  of  the  House 
have  beneficial  offices  under  his  Majesty  in  the  Privy  Council, 
the  army,  the  navy,  the  law,  the  household,  the  revenue, 
both  in  England  and  Ireland,  or  in  attendance  on  his 
Majesty's  person.  ,  .  .  Then  those  that  are  both  hungry 
and  out  of  office  make  another  third  part  of  this  House  of 
Commons.  There  are  such  as  having  observed  by  what 
steps,  or  rather  leaps  or  strides,  others  of  this  House  have 
ascended  into  the  highest  places  of  the  kingdom,  do  upon 
measuring  their  own  birth,  estates,  parts,  and  merits,  think 
themselves  as  well  and  better  qualified,  in  all  respects,  as 
their  former  companions.  They  are  generally  men  who,  by 
speaking  against  the  French,  inveighing  against  the  de- 
baucheries of  the  court,  talking  of  the  ill-management  of 
the  revenue,  and  such  popular  flourishes,  have  cheated  the 
country  into  electing  them,  &c.  In  money  matters  they 
seem  at  first  difficult;  hut  having  been  discoursed  with  in 
private,  they  are  soon  set  right,  and  begin  to  understand  it 
better  themselves,  and  also  begin  to  correct  their  brethren. 
There  is  a  third  part  still  remaining,  but  as  contrary  in 
themselves  as  light  and  darkness ;  they  are  either  the  worst 
or  the  best  of  men;  the  first  are  the  most  profligate  persons, 
that  have  neither  estate,  conscience,  nor  good  manners; 
yet  are  therefore  picked  out  as  the  necessary  men,  and 
■whose  votes  will  go  furthest;  the  charges  of  their  elections 
a/re  defrayed,  whatever  they  amount  to ;  tables  are  kept  for 
them  at  Whitehall,  and  through  Westminster  they  may  be 
ready  at  hand  within  call  at  a  question :  all  of  these  are 


OHAKUflS    THE    SECOND.  313 

received  into  pension,  and  know  tlieii-  pay-day,  which  they 
never  fail  of;  insomuch  that  a  gi-out  oflicer  (the  Lord  Trea- 
surer) wji,s  pleased  to  say,  that  they  came  about  him  like  so 
many  jackdaws  for  cheese  at  the  end  of  tlio  session.  If  they 
be  not  in  Parliament,  they  must  be  in  prison."  Justice 
demands  that  we  should  add,  from  this  faithful  amongst  the 
faithless : — "  But  notwithstanding  these,  there  is  a  handful  of 
salt,  a  sparkle  of  soul  tliat  hath  hitherto  preserved  tlus 
gi-oss  body  from  putrefaction ;  some  gentlemen  that  are  con- 
stant, invariable,  indeed  Englishmen ;  such  as  are  above 
hopes  and  feat's,  or  dissimulation;  that  can  neither  flatter  nor 
betray  their  king  or  country;  but  being  conscious  of  their 
own  loyalty  and  integrity,  proceed  through  good  and  bad 
report  to  acquit  themselves  in  tlieir  duty  to  God,  their 
prince,  and  their  country."* 

Nor  was  this  all.  Official  life  was  as  polluted  as  senatorial. 
Places  were  bought  and  sold  as  any  other  article  in  the 
market.  Many  of  these  passed  through  the  hands  of  the 
court  ladies.  The  wretched  mistresses  of  the  wretched 
monarch  were  often  the  brokei-s  in  these  matters,  and  the 
bribes  tliey  i*eceived  were  no  trifles.  Nay,  the  highest  per- 
sonages in  the  land,  as  well  as  the  ministers,  pai-ticipated  in 
this  corruption.!  "There  was  one  Gi-aham  who  told  me 
that  he  knew  the  designs  the  king  of  France  had  upon  Eng- 

*  Andrew  Marvell's  Works.  "  Being  absolutely  resolved  to  sell  my  place, 
and  being  dispensed  with  by  his  Royal  Highness  (Duke  of  York)  from 
any  attendance  in  it  till  I  have  disposed  of  it,  you  may  imagine  I  shall 
be  very  glad  to  make  the  best  of  it,"  &c.  "  And  considering  both  Mr. 
Loftus'  desire  and  his  conditions,  if  I  ask  £2,000  for  it  and  take  £1,800, 
I  think  I  do  not  use  him  iU ;  if  he  seems  very  averse  to  any  such  proposi- 
tion, which  I  desire  may  be  insisted  on  awhile,  the  best  terms  he  shall 
ever  receive  from  me  shall  be  £1,600,  of  which  I  will  have  £1,200  down," 
&c. — SaviUe  Con-espondence,  Let.  xxviii.,  p.  30.     Camden  Society. 

t  Dalrj-mple  supplies  abundant  proof,  vol.  ii. ;  also  Burnet,  Raresby, 
and  others.  Lady  Danby  and  the  Countess  of  Lauderdale  were  regular 
traffickers  in  these  matters.  "I  presume  you  know  that  H.  Sidney 
hath  bought  Mr.  Godolphin's  place  of  the  Master  of  the  Robes;  gives 
£5,000,"  &c.— Saville  Correspondence,  pp.  46-48. 


314  KARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

land;  that  he  distributed  every  year  £3,000,000;  that  he 
knew  who  it  is  gone  to ;  and  if  the  king  give  liim  orders,  he 
will  discoA^er  it,"  Ac*  The  fountain  of  justice  was  not  pure. 
Examples  of  the  Adolation  of  all  law  by  the  highest  judicial 
authority  have  already  passed  before  us.  They  existed 
everywhere.  The  highest  and  most  important  transactions 
of  the  coui-t  Avere  marked  by  manifest  injustice.  Trial  by 
jury  was  a  farce;  fine  or  imprisonment  frequently  compelled 
the  juroi-s  to  give  a  verdict  the  opposite  of  truth.  In  many 
cases  the  wishes  of  the  court  ruled,  not  law.  No  man  could 
be  sure  of  the  decision  of  the  court.  He  might  be  right; 
no  doubt  could  exist  as  to  the  case;  still  he  would  retire 
with  defeat  and  heavy  costs.  The  Conventicle  Acts  and 
other  oppressive  statiites  were  made  to  tell  with  feai'ful 
effect.  In  the  hands  of  the  notorious  Justice  Keeling,  and 
men  of  his  class,  they  became  terrible  instruments  of  op- 
pression. 

It  is  not  easy  to  conceive,  much  less  to  describe,  the  con- 
dition of  the  population  at  this  period.  The  head  and  heart 
of  the  community  were  immoral,  vicious,  and  degraded.  A 
writer,  by  no  means  of  Puritan  or  Nonconformist  sympathies, 
says : — "  In  carne  a  torrent  of  atheism  and  debauchery,  as 
if  all  sense  of  good  and  evil  was  qiiite  obliterated  out  of 
their  minds.  What  nursing,  sweainng,  whoi'ing,  blas- 
pheming, even  in  the  face  of  the  sun !  All  manner  of  filthi- 
ness,  even  to  a  prodigy!  And  he  was  no  gentleman,  nor 
person  of  any  honour,  that  had  not  a  two  hoiirs'  sitting  at 
wine;  or  invented  some  new  modish  oath;  or  found  out  the 
late  intrigue  between  the  L.  B.  and  L.  P.;  laughed  at  the 
fopperies  of  priests,  and  made  lampoons  and  drolleries  on 
the  sacred  Scriptures  themselves.  This  was  and  is  the  prac- 
tice of  our  young  nobility  and  gentry,  to  the  great  scandal 
and  reproach  of  their  families."t    This  witness  is  true,  not 

*  Sidney's  Diary,  vol.  i.,  p.  267. 

t  Great  Interest  of  King  and  People.  Maseres  Tracts,  vol.  i.,  p.  53. 
Another  glimpse  of  social  life  : — "I  have  been  all  tbis  day  sick  to  agonies 


CHA,RLK3    THK   SECOND.  315 

only  ill  relation  to  the  higher  classes,  but,  in  the  main,  to  tlie 
community  at  large. 

Tlie  fall  of  Clarendon  pUioed  the  full  power  of  the  State 
in  the  hands  of  men  who  have  scarcely  been  surpassed  for 
infamy  in  tlie  annals  of  the  nati(jn — Shaftesbuiy,  Ai'ling- 
ton,  Buckingham,  Clilford,  and  Lauderdale."  From  the 
initials  of  their  names,  it  was  called  the  Cabal  ministry. 
Cliftbrd  and  Ai'liugton  were  Romanists;  Buckingham,  the 
most  debauched  man  of  his  age,  was  an  Atheist;  Ashley  was 
a  Deist;  and  Lauderdale  as  unprincipled  as  any  of  them. 
Under  the  guidance  of  these  men  the  court  aimed  at  the 
diffusion  of  Popery,  and  the  establishment  of  arbitrary 
power.  Romanists  had  .suflered  but  little  since  the  Restora- 
tion. Laws  had  \wv.n  enacted,  and  edicts  fulminated  against 
them,  but  Charles  had  managed  to  neutralize  the  one  and 
counteract  the  other.  In  every  way  the  royal  convert  to 
Rome  aided  then>.+    Under  the  mask  of  favour  to  the  Non- 


with  foiu'  days'  swallowing  more  good  ale  and  ill  sack  than  one  would 
liave  thought  a  countiy  town  would  hold ;  and  this  worthy  employment 
must  be  begini  again  to-nioiTow,  though  I  burst  for  it." — An  Election  of 
Newark.  Sa^dlle  Correspondence,  p.  'M.  "You  woidd  have  laughed  to 
see  how  pleased  I  seemed  to  be  in  kissing  of  old  women,  and  drinking 
\vine  with  haudfuls  of  sugar,  and  great  glasses  of  burnt  brandy — three 
things  much  against  tlie  stomach,  yet  with  a  very  good  will,  because  to 
serve  him  I  most  honoured."— Sidney's  Diary,  vol.  i.,  p.  119. 

""  The  reader  may  consult  Burnet's  Own  Times.  "  It  is  almost  unneces- 
.sary  to  remind  the  reader,  that  Lauderdale  was  one  of  the  most  depraved 
characters  of  his  age,  and  totally  without  principle,  whether  considered 
as  a  Covenanter  in  the  reign  of  Charles  I.,  or  as  an  enemy  to  that  party 
a  few  years  afterwards."— Napier's  Montrose,  &c.,  p.  4.53. 

t  But  little  doubt  can  be  cherished  about  Charles's  early  reconciliation  to 
Rome.  Dalrymple  supplies,  we  tliink,  abundant  proof  of  this.  Later 
still  we  find  the  following :— "The  king  of  Great  Britain,  beibg  convinced 
of  the  truth  of  the  Catholic  religion,  and  resolved  to  declare  himself  a 
Catholic  and  to  be  reconciled  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  thinks  the  assistance 
of  his  most  Christian  Magesty  necessary  to  facilitate  his  design;  it  is 
tlierefore  agreed  and  concluded  upon,  that  his  most  Christian  Magesty 
sliall  furnish  to  the  king  of  England,  before  the  said  declaration,  the  sum 
of  Jt;200,000,  iic.  And  further,  that  the  said  lord,  the  most  Christian 
king,  shall  assist  his  Britanick  Magesty  with  troops  and  money  as  often 


316  EAKLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

conformists,  lie  urged  on  his  Parliament  a  toleration  of  dis- 
sidents from  the  Church.  Sheldon  and  his  persecuting 
brethren  had  lost  much  of  their  influence  with  the  court  on 
the  fall  of  their  patron.  But  it  was  not  so  in  the  Senate. 
Many  causes  contributed  to  this.  Our  limits  forbid  details. 
It  is  enough  to  say  that,  though  the  court  brought  all  its 
influence  to  bear  on  the  Commons,  the  proposition  was 
rejected.  More;  the  House  in  1670  passed  a  Bill  enacting 
additional  and  more  severe  clauses  to  the  Conventicle  Acts. 
Upon  all  classes  of  Nonconformists  it  fell  with  terrible 
power.  No  motives  more  powerful  could  be  presented  to  the 
minds  of  the  abandoned  to  annoy  and  distress  the  Baptists 
than  this  bill  supplied.  It  gave  one-third  of  the  fines  in- 
flicted on  oficnders  "to  the  informer  or  his  assistants,  regard 
being  had  to  their  diligence  and  industry  in  discovering,  dis- 
pensing, and  punishing  the  said  conventicles."  It  inflicted 
on  the  teacher  of  any  conventicle  £20  for  the  first  ofience, 
and  £40  for  the  second.  Upon  those  who  allowed  their 
barns,  houses,  yards,  to  be  used  for  any  service,  the  fine  was 
£20.  The  bill  also  provided  an  easy  process  by  which  con- 
viction might  be  obtained.  Distraint  on  the  ofiender's  goods 
was  allowed,  and  in  case  of  poverty,  on  those  of  others. 
Authority  was  given  to  all  constables  and  head-boroughs  to 
break  open  and  enter  any  place  where  they  might  suspect  the 
ofi"enders  to  be  assembled.  Under  these  provisions,  and  in  the 
hands  of  such  men,  the  reader  will  easily  conceive  the  dis- 
tress and  sufierings  which  our  brethren  endured  throughout 
the  nation.  The  remainder  of  this  volume  might  be  filled 
with  the  most  affecting  details. '"'  Many  will  appear  in 
another  chapter.  The  oppression  fell  upon  all  classes. 
The  people  as  well  as  the  ministers  suffered.  Cutlers,  shoe- 
as  there  shall  be  need,  in  case  the  subjects  of  the  said  lord  the  king  shall 
not  acquiesce  with  the  said  declaration,  but  rebel  against  his  said  Britanick 
Magesty,"  &c. — Leagues,  &c.  Dalrymple,  vol.  ii.,  p.  49.  Charles's 
Ministers  bribed  by  France.  Ibid,  vol.  ii. ,  p.  82. 
*  Ample  details  will  be  found  in  the  pages  of  Crosby  and  Ivimey. 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND.  317 

makers,  tanners,  di-apei-s,  grocei-s,  gardenei-s,  maltstei-Sjand  the 
names  of  almost  every  class  of  trades  appear  in  the  records. 
Fines  were  inflicted  of  every  def];ree,  from  five  shillings  and 
upwards.  Their  houses  were  broken  open,  their  goods  seized, 
and  in  the  public  markets  they  were  exposed  for  sale.  The 
distress  of  famili(;s,  the  teai-s  of  the  widow,  and  the  plaints  of 
the  children,  had  no  effect  on  the  minds  or  hearts  of  these  men. 
Invincible  hatred  to  the  princii)les  of  our  brethren,  and  the 
love  of  gain,  were  motives  of  the  very  highest  power  in  this 
case.  The  spirit  and  temper  of  the  judges  and  justices  were 
such,  that,  when  any  of  these  men  came  before  them  with 
accusations  against  our  brethren,  they  were  zealous  in  aggra- 
vating their  crime,  and  aiding  in  every  way  in  then-  oppres- 
sion. Many  of  thesi;  informers  were  men  who  had  formerly 
associated  with  them,  united  in  their  assemblies,  and  made 
loud  and  earnest  professions  of  their  attachment  to  Christ's 
holy  Gospel.  Seasons  of  persecution,  whilst  they  agitate 
the  Church  to  its  centre,  invariably  separate  from  it  the 
formalist  and  the  hypocritical.* 

Such  a  course  of  action  on  the  part  of  the  men  in  office 
was  not  powerless.  Indeed,  long  ere  this  the  splendid  vision 
which  the  Restoration  had  opened  to  some  minds  had 
vanished.  Presby-terian  songs  of  gladnesst  had  given  place  to 
the  wail  of  sorrow.     Persecution  had  fallen  with  a  heavy 


•  Crosby,  vol.  ii.,  p.  258. 

t  "Mr.  Newcome,  of  Manchester,  addressed  the  people  of  that  town 
in  a  strain  of  vehement  indignation  against  the  persons  who  had  abolished 
monarchy  for  their  own  selfish  ends,  and  nearly  destroyed  religion  itself." 
"Mr.  Heyrick  preached  on  the  day  of  the  king's  coronation  from  the 
words,  '  And  he  brought  foi-th  the  king's  son,  and  put  the  crown  upon 
him,  and  gave  him  the  testimony,  and  they  made  him  king  and  anointed 
him;  and  they  clapped  their  hands  and  said,  God  save  the  king,'  "  &c. — 
Hunter's  Life  of  Oliver  Heywood,  p.  120.  Other  examples  are  given.  "The 
Presbyterian  pulpits  do  tliunder  against  our  electors,  and  Baxter,  the 
Corypheus  of  Worcestershire,  is  come  here  for  no  good.  I  am  certain  he 
labours  much  to  preach  on  Sunday  before  Monk,  who  is  not  now  to  be 
altered." — Lady  Willoughby  to  Hyde.     Clarendon  State  Papers,  vol.  iii, 

p.  7;u. 


318 


EARLY    ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 


hand  on  tJiose  who  hailed  the  return  of  the  exiled  monarch 
its  an  era  of  peace  and  liberty.  The  iron  yoke  of  Cromwell, 
which  was  to  give  place  to  silken  cords  and  a  gentle  and  loving 
sceptre,  was  followed  by  the  reign  of  the  lowest  vice  and 
the  most  revolting  corruption.  The  palace  of  St.  James's, 
adorned  by  the  lofty  but  stern  virtue  of  the  Puritan  Pro- 
tector, had  become  the  abode  of  the  courtezan,  and  the  home 
•  •f  every  corraption,  and  the  living  embodiment  of  all  that 
wiis  opposed  to  purity  and  domestic  virtue.  The  influence 
of  the  monarch  filled  a  wide  circle.  His  example  operated 
with  fearful  eftect.  Says  one : — "  The  exiled  and  outcast  king 
seemed  to  have  brought  back  the  seven  spirits  of  holy  writ 
— two  more  besides  the  personages  in  the  Cabal;  and  the 
last  state  of  England  was  worse  than  the  first.  There  never 
was  a  period  in  honest  England  in  which  all  the  virtues  and 
even  the  decencies  of  life  were  so  disregarded."*  The  Dutch 
war,  which  covered  the  nation  with  infamy,  deepened  the 
feeling  of  discontent.f  The  past  was  again  compared  with 
the  present.  "  The  relation  of  England  to  Europe  during 
the  Protectorate — the  might  of  her  naAdes,  the  extent  of  her 
commerce,  and  the  terror  of  her  name  in  countries  which  had 
no  sympathy  with  her  religion — rose  up  before  the  public,  and 
tinged  the  dark  cloud  which  had  been  cast  on  the  memory  of 
the  great  ones  of  that  wondrous  period  of  our  national  history 
Avith  a  gleam  of  brightness."  "  It  is  strange,"  says  the  old 
diarist,  "how  everybody  do  now-a-days  reflect  upon  Oliver, 
and  commend  him  wliat  brave  things  he  did,  and  made  all 
the  neighbour  princes  fear  him;  while  here  a  prince  comes 
in  with  all  the  love  and  prayers  and  good  liking  of  his 
people,  who  have  given  greater  signs  of  loyalty  and  willing- 

*  Warburton,  vol.  iii.,  p.  465. 

t  "The  night  the  Dutch  burnt  our  ships,"  says  Pepys,  "the  king  did 
sup  Avith  Lady  Castlemaine  at  the  Duchess  of  Monmouth's,  and  they  were 
all  mad  in  hunting  a  poor  moth.  The  king  has  taken  ten  times  more 
pains  in  making  friends  betAveen  my  Lady  Castlemaine  and  Mrs.  Stuart 
Avhen  they  have  fallen  out,  tlian  ever  lie  did  to  save  his  kingdom. "—Diary, 
vol.  iii.,  pp.  262,  208, 


CHARLES    THE    SECOND.  -HO 

ness  to  serve  him  with  their  estates  than  ever  wiis  done  V»y  any 
people,  hatli  lost  all  so  soon  that  it  is  a  miracle  Avhat  way  a 
man  could  devise  to  lose  so  much  in  so  little  time."*  Danger 
was  npprcliended  hy  many,  and  a  loader  of  courage  might 
have  closed  the  despicable  dynasty  of  the  Stuarts  sooner  by 
some  yeai"S  than  it  was.+ 

The  j)olicy  of  the  court  about  this  time  underwent  a  great 
change.  Persecution  was  to  give  plac(.'  to  the  spii-it  of 
toleration.  The  favour  of  the  Dissenters  was  to  be  culti- 
vated. Tlie  penal  laws  were  to  be  suspended,  and  liberty  of 
conscience,  to  some  extent,  was  to  be  enjoyed.  In  1G72,  the 
Indulgence  was  issued,  (shades  confesses  that  coercion  had 
failed.  For  twelve  years  the  experiment  had  been  tried, 
and  with  only  a  very  little  fruit.  Now,  he  says: — "We 
think  ourselves  obliged  to  make  use  of  that  supreme  power 
in  ecclesiastical  matters  Avhich  is  not  only  inherent  in  us,  but 
liath  boon  declared  and  recognized  by  several  statutes  and 
Acts  of  Parliament."  In  relation  to  Disscmters,  the  will  of 
the  monarch  was,  "  That  none  of  our  sulyects  do  presume  to 
meet  in  any  place,  initil  such  place  be  allowed,  and  the 
teaclier  of  that  congregation  be  allowed  by  us."  His  Majesty 
was  prompted  to  this  act  by  his  clemency  and  indulgence; 
but  every  violation  of  the  Declaration  would  be  visited  with 
the  strongest  marks  of  the  royal  displeasure.     The  Declara- 


*  Diary,  vol.  iii.,  p.  289.  At  a  little  earlier  period  we  discern  the  fol- 
lowing contrast :—  "  Of  all  the  old  army,  now  you  cannot  see  a  man  beg- 
ging about  the  streets;  but  what?  You  shall  have  this  captain  turned  u 
shoemaker ;  the  lieutenant  a  baker ;  this  a  brewer ;  that  a  haberdasher ; 
this  common  soldier  a  porter :  and  eveiy  man  in  his  apron  and  frock,  &c., 
as  if  they  had  never  done  anything  else ;  whereas  the  others  go  with  their 
belts  and  swords,  swearing  and  cursing  and  stealing;  running  into  people's 
houses  by  force,  oftentimes  to  cany  away  something;  and  this  is  the 
difference  between  the  temper  of  the  one  and  the  others,"  &c. — Pepys, 
vol.  iL,  pp.  118, 119. 

t  Even  the  idtra  Royalist  Evelyn  could  tell  Pepys,  "That  wise  mew 
do  purpose  to  remove  abroad  what  they  have,  for  that  we  must  be  levised, 
our  case  being  so  past  relief;  the  kingdom  so  much  in  debt,  and  the  king 
minding  nothing  but  his  lusts."— Diary,  vol.  iii.,  p.  321. 


320  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

tion  failed.  Most  saw  that  it  was  not  Protestantism  that 
was  shielded  by  this,  but  Popery.  Many  of  the  Presby- 
terians embraced  this  liberty  and  took  out  licences,  and  here 
and  there  Baptists  did  the  same ;  but  the  mass  of  them  could 
not.  It  recognized  a  power  they  could  not  acknowledge. 
On  all  grounds,  both  civil  and  political,  then-  compliance 
would  have  invoked  a  sacrifice  of  i)rinciple.  But  the  exist- 
ence of  the  Declaration  was  only  veiy  brief.  In  the  Senate, 
the  right  and  the  tendency  of  the  Act  were  questioned; 
and  so  strong  was  the  feeling  of  the  Lower  House  against 
it,  not  so  much  from  hostility  to  Dissent  as  to  Popery,  that 
it  was  speedily  recalled.* 

The  growth  of  Popeiy  had  been  rapid.  All  the  influences 
which  the  court  durst  bring  were  thrown  around  it.  Facts 
place  it  beyond  all  doubt  that  Charles  for  years,  if  not 
before  his  restoration,  had  been  a  convei-t  to  Popery,  f  At 
the  Duke  of  York's  he  often  met  with  Lords  Arlington, 
Clifford,  and  Arundel,  to  advise  on  the  best  methods  of 
advancing  Romanism  in  the  kingdom.  ^:  Even  Clarendon, 
the  patron  of  Sheldon,  had  invoked  the  aid  of  the  Romanists 
in  behalf  of  a  king  "who  will  perform  whatsoever  can 
reasonably  be  asked  of  him,  and  under  whom  his  Catholic 
subjects  might  enjoy  a  full  happiness,  flatter  themselves 
that  they  shall  enjoy  protection  and  security  under  these 
devils,  who,  in  the  end,  will  extirpate  them  out  of  all  their 
dominions,"  &c.§ 

The  Duke  of  York  left  no  doubt  about  his  state.     More 

*  Hallam  hints  that  Charles's  women  prevailed  on  him  to  bow  to  the 
wishes  of  the  Commons. — Vol.  ii.,  p.  90. 

f  Vide  Evidence  in  Jessey's  Memoirs,  vol.  ii.,  p.  3.52. 

+  Clarke's  Life  of  James  II.,  vol.  i.,  pp.  441,  442. 

§  Life,  vol.  iii.,  pp.  55,  56.  "  The  Duchess  of  Orleans  had  prevailed  on 
her  brother  to  relinquish,"  says  Hume,  "the  most  settled  maxim  of 
honour  and  poUcy,  and  to  finish  his  engagement  witli  Lewis  for  the 
destruction  of  Holland,  as  well  as  for  the  subsequent  change  of  religion 
in  England." — Pari.  Hist.,  vol.  iv.,  p.  455.  "Papists  and  swaims  of 
sectaries  now  boldly  showing  themselves." — Evelyn's  Mem.,  vol.  i., 
p.  450. 


CHARLES    THE    SECOND.  321 

conscientious  tlian  Charles,  he  had  declined  keeping  tip  the 
awful  hypocrisy  of  commtiiiing  with  the  EstablLshinent, 
though  urged  again  and  again  to  continue  the  solemn 
mockery  by  his  unprincipled  brother.  The  conviction  was 
growing  in  the  national  mind,  that,  under  the  combined 
influence  of  the  two  brothers  and  the  reckless  men  at  the 
head  of  the  State,  an  eftbrt  would  be  made  to  restore  the 
tlctosted  system  of  Popeiy.  Probably  from  this  feeling,  a.s 
much  as  from  hatred  to  Nonconformity,  the  Legislature 
added  another  Act  to  its  o])pressive  enactments.  We  refer  to 
the  Test  Act.  This  bill  passed  the  Legislature  in  1673.  It 
excluded  from  all  places  of  civil  trust  all  persons  who  did  not 
receive  the  Sacrament  in  the  State  Church,  and  required  the 
renunciation  of  the  cardinal  doctrine  of  Rome — the  dogma 
of  transubstautiation.  The  penalty  of  disobedience  was  a 
fine  of  £.500;  incapacity  for  suing  in  the  law  eoui-ts;  for 
being  an  executor  or  administrator  in  any  case.  No  legacy  or 
deed  of  gift  could  be  enjoyed,  and  the  guardianship  of 
children  was  taken  from  them.  The  whole  influence  of  the 
court  was  exerted  agamst  the  bill.  Pity  for  the  Noncon- 
formists was  urged.  Their  loyalty  was  undoubted,  and  the 
measure  would  be  as  unjust  as  it  was  cruel.  The  representa- 
tives of  these  men  repudiated  the  former.  They  expressed  their 
willingness  to  suffer,  rather  than  impair  any  Act  which  would 
retard  the  progress  of  a  system  which  would  enthrone  both 
a  cixW.  and  a  religious  despotism  in  the  nation.  Tliis  Act  told 
with  power  on  many  of  the  class  at  which  it  was  aimed. 
The  Duke  of  York  gave  u})  his  office,  and  the  most  unprin- 
cipled and  dangerous  men  in  the  ministry  were  compelled 
to  retii-e  to  private  life.*  From  this  vantage  ground 
the  Commons  advanced,  and  implored  the  interposition  of 
the  king  against  the  marriage  of  the  duke  with  a  Popiiih 
princess. 

*  Pari.  Hist.,  vol.  iv.     Prallam,  vol.  u.,  pp.  91,  92.     Neal,  vol  ii., 
pp.  566,  567. 


322  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

The  patriotism  of  the  !N"onconforniists  was  followed  on  the 
one  hand  by  the  eifoi-ts  of  the  Lower  House  to  ameliorate 
their  condition,  but  the  indulgence  was  defeated  in  the 
Upper  House  through  the  bitterness  of  Sheldon;  on  the  other 
hand,  the  hatred  of  the  court  was  kindled  afresh.  From  all 
restraint  the  penal  laws  were  now  released.  The  mitred 
priests,  acting  in  consort  with  the  di-unken  iiiffians,  inter- 
fered again  \\dth  the  peaceful  habits  and  religious  sei-vices  of 
the  brethren.  Sheldon  employed  his  old  tactics.  Cii'cular 
letters  were  addi'essed  by  him  to  the  bishops,  commanding 
them  to  tell  their  ofl&cials  to  employ  informers  to  ascertain 
eveiything  about  the  Dissenters  in  their  parishes,  and  to 
report  to  him.  The  labour  was  one  of  love  in  many  cases. 
From  place  to  place  the  ministers  were  driven.  Many  fled 
to  the  New  World — the  plantations,  as  the  Colonies  were 
then  called.  Owen  had  made  arrangements  for  his  depar- 
ture, but  was  prevented  by  the  express  command  of  the 
king.  The  details  of  the  sufferings  of  other  bodies  may  be 
found  in  various  works  on  this  subject.* 

Amongst  this  cloud  of  confessors,  our  brethren  were  not 
the  least.  Compression  is  necessary;  ovu'  pages  might  be 
crowded  with  examples  of  moral  heroism  of  the  highest 
order.  In  every  way  the  hand  of  the  oppressors  fell  heavily 
upon  them.  Their  meetings  were  disturbed,  their  ministers 
imprisoned  and  fined,  and  their  people  subjected  to  every 
form  of  annoyance.  Informers  evei-ywhere  surrounded  them. 
They  were  followed  in  the  streets  by  these  colleagues  of  the 
Episcopate.  Into  theii'  secret  retirement  they  intruded; 
and  like  the  frogs  of  Egypt,  they  were  found  everywhere. 
No  means  came  amiss  to  these  men,  which  could  impair  the 
confidence  of  the  public  in.  our  brethren,  or  hold  them  up  to 
the  sconi  or  contempt  of  the  commimity.  We  have  an 
example  before  us.    "  In  1673  was  issued  a 'pamphlet,  under 


•  *  The  reader  may  consvdt  Neal,  Calamy's  Noncon.  Memorial,  Baxter's 
Life,  Bnrnet's  Own  Times,  &c. 


CHARLES    THE    SECOND.  323 

the  alarming  title  of  ' Mr.  Baxter  Bajitized  in  Blood' "  To 
give  wciglit  to  its  statements,  Dr.  Samuel  Parker,  a  man  of 
some  note  in  the  ecclesiastical  world,  licensed  the  publication. 
[t  professes  to  give  an  account  of  a  horrible  murder  com- 
mitted by  four  Baptists,  at  Boston,  in  New  England,  upon  a 
minister,  a  Mr.  Josiah  Baxter,  because  he  had  defeated  them 
in  a  dispute.  It  assumes  the  form  of  a  narrative,  detailing  the 
jilace,  the  names  of  the  disputants,  the  speeches — and  then 
gives  all  the  particulars  of  the  tragedy.  Full  details  are  given 
of  their  enteiing  his  house,  seizing  the  godly  man,  wliip- 
ping  him,  then  disembowelling  him,  and  finally  flaying  him 
alive,  amidst  the  shrieks  of  liis  family  lying  bound  before 
hiin.  This  libel  was  professedly  ])ublished  by  the  brother  of 
the  muidered  man,  Mr.  B.  Baxter,  residing  in  Fenchurch 
Street,  London.  The  writer  says,  in  closing : — "  I  have 
penned  and  published  this  narrative  in  lyerpetuam  rei 
memoriam,  that  the  world  may  see  the  spirit  of  tliese  men, 
and  that  it  may  stand  as  an  eternal  memorial  of  their  cruelty 
and  hatred  to  all  orthodox  ministers."  Though  the  animus 
wsis  evident,  its  eftect  was  not  powerless.  Hajjpily,  the 
infamous  fraud  was  soon  detected.  Mr.  Kiffin,  whose  influ- 
ence at  court  had  often  been  exei-ted  on  behalf  of  the 
oppressed,  brought  the  matter  before  the  Privy  Coimcil. 
After  a  rigid  examination,  the  following  order  was  issued  by 
that  board: — "Whereas  there  is  a  pamphlet  lately  pub- 
lished, entitled  '  Mr.  Baxter  Baptized  in  Blood,'  containing 
a  horrible  murder  committed  by  four  Anabaptists  upon  the 
pei-son  of  Mr.  Josiah  Baxter,  near  Boston,  in  New  England ; 
the  whole  matter  having  been  inquired  into  and  examined 
at  the  Council  board,  is  found  altogether  false  and  fictitious." 
More  than  this: — "The  licenser.  Dr.  Samuel  Parker,  being 
also  acquainted  with  the  whole  matter,  confesseth  his  mis- 
take, and  too 'sudden  credulity  in  the  licensing  so  strange 
a  ])amphlet,  as  appears  by  the  testimonial  under  liis  own 
hand."  The  sale  was  interdicted  by  order  of  the  Lord 
Mayor;  and  some  of  the  publishers  were  imprisoned.    The 


324  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

strongest  suspicion  was  fixed  on  tliis  violent  cLurcliman  as 
the  autlior  of  this  attempt  to  identify  the  sect  with  the  fol- 
lowers of  Jolm  Leyden  and  the  Munster  Anabaptists.* 
With  the  exploits  of  these  men,  the  brethren  had  been  pelted 
by  all  sects.  Of  this  treatment,  Bunyan  complains  again 
and  again.  "  It  was  rumoured  that  he  was  a  witch,  a  pirate, 
a  highwayman."  His  moral  character  was  impeached,  and 
charges  of  the  most  infamous  kind  alleged  against  it.  They 
charged  me,"  he  says,  "  that  I  went  thither  (to  London)  to 
plot  and  raise  tlivision,  and  make  insurrections  :  which  God 
knows  was  a  slander."  The  mud  stuck  for  a  while,  but  soon 
fell  off,  and  left  the  garment  unsullied  by  the  contact. 

The  Society  of  Friends,  or  Quakers  as  they  were  called, 
originated  at  a  much  later  period  than  the  Presbyterians,  or 
either  of  the  Congregational  bodies.  The  founder,  George 
Fox,  was  marked  by  many  elements  of  greatness.  Dissatis- 
fied with  all  other  sects,  he  began  a  course  of  religious  refor- 
mation, and  soon  gathered  around  him  a  number  of  followers. 
"We  pass  over  the  lofty  pretensions  and  the  unmixed 
fanaticism  of  many  of  the  early  members  of  this  sect. 
Forgetfubiess  of  their  errors  is  best.  Their  hostility  to 
others,  and  especially  the  manner  in  which  it  was  mani- 
fested, exposed  them  to  the  greatest  suffering.  Into  the 
"public  places"  they  would  intrude;  and  not  only  interrupt 
the  services,  but,  in  language  which  nothing  could  justify, 
denounce  the  ministers.  This  conduct  was  pursued  every- 
where. Fox  travelled  the  country,  propagating  his  religious 
views,  and  opposing  all  others.  During  the  Commonwealth 
and  the  Protectorate,  and  up  to  the  present  time,  their 
sufferings  had  been  almost  unparalleled,  t  They  were  the 
Ishmaelites  of  the  ecclesiastical  world ;  they  were  against 
every  man,  and  every  man's  hand  was  against  them, 

*  Crosby,  vol.  ii.  Ivimey,  vol.  ii.  The  reader  will  find  more  details 
in  Marvell's  Works,  wlio  distinctly  charges  Parker  -with  this  infamous 
attempt  to  augment  the  hostility  of  the  country  against  this  sect. 

+  The  reader  may  consult  Burton's  Diary  for  the  trial  and  punishment 
of  Naylor  hy  the  Commons. 


OUAKLES    THE    SECOXP.  <>--J 

Time  luul  niocUficd  their  pugnacity  only  in  a  very  small 
degree.  With  the  Baptists  they  had  had  numy  a  tierce 
encounter.  The  wordy  war,  at  the  ])i-esent  time,  broke  out 
afiesh.  It  involved  the  leading  men  of  both  sides;  and  it 
was  protracted  and  tierce.  It  would  be  amusing  to  collect 
choice  specimens  of  the  phraseology  of  both  parties.  The 
vocabulary  of  abusive  terms  was  exhau.sted.*  Boroughs' 
reply  to  Bunyan  shall  su])ply  an  example  or  two: — "How 
long,  ye  crafty  fowlers,  will  ye  prey  upon  the  innocent,  and 
shoot  at  him  craftily?  How  long  shall  the  righteous  be  a 
jn-ey  to  your  teeth,  ye  subtle  foxes,  who  seek  to  devour?" 
"  And  John  Bunyan  and  his  fellows,  who  have  joined  them- 
selves to  the  broken  army  of  Magog,  now  in  the  heat  of  the 
day  of  great  stirring,  are  not  the  least  of  all  guilty  amongst 
their  brethren  of  secret  .smiting  the  innocent  with  secret 
lies  and  slanders,  who  have  showed  themselves  in  defence  of 
the  Dragon  against  the  Lamb."  Warmer  and  still  warmer 
Edward  becomes.  Flash  after  flash  illuminates  the  darkness, 
as  he  proclaims  Bunyan  "of  the  stock  of  Ishmael,  and  of  the 
seed  of  Cain,  whose  line  reacheth  unto  the  m\irdering  priests 
and  Scribes  and  Pharisees,"  "  O  thou  blind  priest,"  he 
exclaims,  "whom  God  hath  confounded  in  thy  language — 
the  design  of  the  devil  in  deceiving  souls  is  thy  own,  and  I 
toss  it  back  to  thee."  "  The  Lord  rebuke  thee,  thou 
unclean  spirit,  who  hast  falsely  accused  the  innocent  to  clear 
thyself  from  guilt."  In  this  spirit  Christian  verities  were 
frequently  discussed  in  those  days.     Abuse  was  often  con- 


*  Baxter  gives  an  amusing  instance  of  their  abuse : — "  The  Quakers  in 
theii"  shops,  when  I  go  along  London  streets,  say  :  'Alas!  poor  man,  thou 
art  yet  in  darkness.'  They  have  oft  cnnie  to  the  congiegation,  when  I 
had  liberty  to  preach  Chiist's  Gospel,  and  cried  out  against  me  as  a 
deceiver  of  the  people.  They  have  followed  me  lionie,  I'rying  out  in  the 
streets,  '  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  coming,  and  thou  shalt  perish  as  a 
deceiver.'  Theyhave  stood  in  the  market-place,  and  under  my  window, 
year  after  year,  crying  to  the  people,  'Take  heed  of  your  priests,  they 
deceive  your_8ouls;'  and  if  any  one  wore  a  lace  or  neat  clothing,  they 
cried  out  to  me,  'These  are  the  fruits  of  yoiu-  ministry.'"— Sir  J. 
Stephen's  Essays — Richard  Baxter. 


326  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

founded  with  argument,  and  impudence  with  depth  of 
conviction.  In  too  many  cases  it  marked  all  professors.* 
The  present  dispute  originated  in  a  publication  by  Mr. 
Thomas  Hicks,  charging  the  Friends  with  certain  errors, 
which  he  thought  subversive  of  the  Christian  faith.  WiUiam 
Pemi,  George  Whitehead,  and  others  of  the  Friends,  inished 
into  the  arena  in  defence  of  their  principles,  charging  Hicks 
with  falsehood,  <kc.  From  his  own  pen,  at  public  meetings, 
and  by  the  investigations  of  liis  brethren,  his  character  was 
cleared  from  the  imputations  of  his  adversaries.  The  con- 
flict was  long  and  painful,  and  ended  in  no  satisfaction 
to  some  engaged  in  it.+  Early  on  in  his  career,  Fox  had 
frequent  collisions  with  the  Baptists.  The  complacency  with 
which  he  records  his  triumphs  is  amusing.  He  never  fails. 
Always  he  drives  his  opponents  as  chaff  before  him.  One  or 
two  instances  may  be  given.  They  refer  to  an  earlier  period 
than  the  present ;  but  they  contain  information  we  do  not 

*  Samples  on  the  other  hand  from  ourselves.  Bunyan  thus  complains 
in  one  place  :— "  At  tills,  Mr.  AV.  KifBn,  Mi-.  Thomas  Paul,  and  Mr.  Henry 
D'Anvars,  and  Mr.  Denne,  fell  with  might  and  main  upon  me ;  some  com- 
paring me  to  the  devil,  others  to  a  bedlam,  others  to  a  sot,  and  the  like, 
for  my  seeking  peace  and  truth  amongst  the  gotUy." — "Works,  vol.  ii., 
p.  656.  And  John  Tomhes  writes  thus  contemptuously  of  Sam.  How,  one 
of  his  brethren  : — "How,  the  cobbler,  a  much  followed  preacher,  a  gi-eat 
while  ago  vented  in  print  that  learned  scholars  do  make  the  Scriptures  as 
a  nose  of  wax;  are  but  jugglers  and  deceivers;  which  are  too  often 
insinuated  into  the  minds  of  well-meaning,  but  weak  minds,  whereby 
they  are  more  addicted  to  such  men  as  How,  TUlinr/hast,  and  other 
popular  orators,"  &c. — Theodulia,  p.  358. 

+  Crosby  and  Ivimey  give  fuller  details.  As  a  sample  of  the  wild 
enthusiasm  into  which  some  of  these  men  ran,  we  give  the  following  :— 
"William  Simpson  was  moved  of  the  Lord  to  go,  at  several  times,  for 
three  years,  naked  and  barefoot  before  them,  as  a  sign  unto  them  in 
markets,  coiu-ts,  towns,  cities,  to  priests'  houses,  and  to  gi-eat  men's 
houses;  so  shall  they  all  be  stripped  naked  as  he  was  stripped  naked. 
And  sometimes  he  was  moved  to  put  on  hair  sackcloths,  and  to  besmear 
his  face,  &e.  Great  sufferings  did  that  poor  man  undergo ;  some  whip- 
pings with  horsewlups  and  coachwhips  on  the  bare  body,  grievous  stonings 
and  imprisonments,  in  three  years'  time,  before  the  king  came  in,"  &c.— 
Lingard,  vol.  xi.,  p.  294.     Fox's  Journal,  vol.  i.,  p.  572.     Vide  Naylor's 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND.  327 

wish  to  lose.  "In  1649,  there  were  some  BaptLstn  in 
Leicestershire  whom  I  desired  to  see  and  speak  with,  Ije- 
cause  they  were  separated  from  the  public  worship.  So  one 
Gates,  who  was  one  of  their  chief  tcivchers,  and  others  of 
the  heads  of  them,  with  several  othei-s  of  their  company, 
came  to  meet  ns  at  Barrow;  and  there  we  discoursed  with 
them.  One  of  them  said,  '  What  was  not  of  faith  was  sin.' 
Whereupon  I  asked  them  what  faith  wa.s?  and  how  it  was 
wrought  in  mani  But  they  turned  off"  from  that,  and  spoke 
of  their  baptism  in  water.  Then  I  asked  them  whether 
their  mountain  of  sin  was  brought  down  and  laid  low  in 
them;  and  their  rough  and  crooked  ways  made  smooth  and 
straight  in  them?  for  they  looked  on  the  Scriptui-es  as 
meaning  outward  mountains  and  ways.  But  I  told  them 
they  must  find  them  in  their  own  hearts;  which  they  seemed 
to  wonder  at.  We  asked  them  who  baptized  John  the  Baj)- 
tist?  and  who  baptized  Peter,  John,  and  the  rest  of  tln^ 
apostles  1  and  put  them  to  prove  by  Scripture  that  they  were 
baptized  in  water;  but  they  were  silent,  &c.  &c.  So  after 
some  discourse  we  parted;  and  some  of  them  were  loving  to 
us,"*  Travelling  north  in  1653,  he  gains  another  victory 
over  his  assailants: — "  From  thence  we  came  to  Carlisle;  and 
the  pastor  of  the  Baptists,  with  most  of  his  hearers,  came  to 
me  to  the  Abbey,  where  I  had  a  meeting,  and  decUred  the 
word  of  life  amongst  them;  and  many  of  the  Baptists  and 
of  the  soldiers  were  convinced.  After  the  meeting,  the 
pastor  of  the  Baptists,  a  high  notionist  and  a  flashy  man, 
came  to  me  and  asked  me,  '  What  must  be  damned  V  I  was 
moved  immediately  to  tell  him,  '  that  which  spoke  in  him 
was  to  be  damned.'  This  stopped  his  mouth;  and  the  wit- 
ness of  God  was  raised  up  in  him.  I  opened  to  him  the 
state  of  election  and  reprobation,  so  that  he  said  he  never 
heai'd  the  like  in  his  life.  He  also  came  afterwards  to  be 
convinced."    The  last  glimpse  we  get  of  the  spiritual  soldier 

*  Fox's  Journal,  vol.  i, ,  pp.  77,  7S. 


328  EARLY    ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

in  conflict  with  our  brethren  is  in  1657  : — "  In  Leith,  there 
came  in  many  Baptists,  who  were  very  rude;  but  the  Lord's 
power  came  over  them,  so  that  they  went  away  confounded." 
"  In  Edinbro',  when  I  had  done,  I  went  to  one  meeting, 
whither  many  rude  people  and  Baptists  came.  The  Baptists 
began  for  to  vaunt  with  their  logic  and  syllogism  ;  but  I  was 
moved  by  the  Lord's  power  to  thrash  their  chaffy,  light 
minds,  and  showed  the  people  that  after  that  fallacious  way 
of  discoursing,  they  might  make  Avhite  seem  black,  and 
black  white;  as  that  because  a  cock  had  two  legs,  and  each 
of  them  had  two  legs,  therefore  they  were  all  cocks,  &c. 
Hereupon  those  Baptists  went  their  way;  and  after  they 
were  gone,  we  had  a  blessed  meeting  in  the  Lord's  house, 
which  was  over  all."* 

The  influence  of  France  in  English  councils  was  all- 
powerful.  Louis  all  but  literally  niled  in  the  kingdom. 
His  pensioners  were  as  numerous  in  the  Legislature  as  in 
St.  James's.  Corruption  was  unblushing.  Its  polluting 
touch  was  felt  in  every  department  of  the  State,  f  National 
honour  was  extinct,  and  the  degradation  of  England  at  this 
period  was  never  surpassed.     The  gloom  and  superstition  of 


*  Journal,  vol.  i.,  pp.  157,  317,  318. 

+  The  following  shows  that  it  existed  where  we  should  not  have  sup- 
posed:—"  Afterwards  Sir  J.  Baker  came  to  me  and  complained  of  the 
Prince  of  Orange  for  being  so  unkind  to  the  Presbyterians,  and  told  me 
there  were  ways  of  reconciling  himself  to  them ;  he  confessed  they  had 
behaved  themselves  ill  in  the  last  sessions,  and  lays  all  the  fault  on  my 
Lord  Shaftesbury,"  &c. — Sidney's  Diary,  vol.  i.,  pp.  3,  4.  "  He  was  agent 
for  the  Presbyterians  and  the  Duke  of  York." — Ibid,  vol.  i.,  p.  3.  "He 
is  set  down  in  Barillon's  (French  Ambassador's)  list  as  one  of  those  mem- 
bers of  the  popular  party  who  were  pensioners  of  Louis  for  500  guineas." 
The  same  says: — "The  Chevalier  Baker  is  he  through  whom  I  have  a 
connexion  with  the  Presbyterians.  He  is  a  rich  man,  and  afraid  of 
troubles;  at  the  bottom  he  is  attached  to  the  Duke  of  York.  I  see 
plainly  that  the  pains  he  has  taken  have  not  been  useless,  for  the  Presby- 
terians are  entirely  against  the  Prince  of  Orange ;  and  I  believe  it  will  be 
very  difficult  to  set  to  rights  what  has  been  done  against  him." — Note  to 
Sidney's  Diary,  vol.  i.,  pp.  3,  4.  "  It  is  manifest,  from  the  despatches  of 
the  French  Ambassador,  that  not  only  did  Cliai-les  obtain  large  sums  for 


CHARLES   THE    SECOND.  320 

mind  of  James,  unchecked  by  defeat,  and  unmoved  by  the 
growing  power  of  a  living  Protestantism,  embraced  every 
<ipi)ortunity  of  promoting  the  interests  of  the  church  whose 
corrupt  faitli  lie  liad  esj)oused.  Anxious  to  unite  his 
thiughter  to  the  son  of  Louis,  in  order  ta  strengthen  hLs 
own  interest,*  liis  plans  were  defeated,  and  Mary  became  the 
wife  of  William  of  Orange;  and  this  laid  the  foundation  of 
a  union,  the  ultimate  issue  of  which  compelled  James  to 
lly,  and  enthroned  William  in  the  vacant  seat  as  the 
champion  of  Protestantism.  Our  space  forbids  us  to  trace  the 
stniggle,  which  extended  over  years,  the  efforts  of  the  pa- 
triot party  to  cut  off  James  from  the  succession,  the  attempts 
of  the  monarch  and  his  unprincipled  favourite  to  grasp 
arbitrary  power,  the  plots  against  the  patriots,  and  the  cruel 
ileaths  of  some  of  England's  noblest  sons.t  We  can  only 
indicate  the  feeling  of  the  monarch  in  an  instance  or  two. 
"  On  the  Exclusion  Bill,"  says  Sidney,  "  the  king  acts  as 
though  lie  were  mad.  The  bill  was  yesterday  cast  out  of 
the  Lords'  House,  and  oui-  friend  is  in  great  disgrace  for 
giving  his  vote  for  the  bill.  All  things  are  coming  to  the  last 
confession,  in  all  appearances;  but  yet  the  Commons  are  the 


tiistribution  amongst  the  members  of  the  Senate,  but  that  the  represen- 
tative of  Spain  and  the  Emperor  were  purchasing  the  support  of  this 
chvss."  -  Dalrjnnple,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  110,  111.  Again  and  again  did  this 
despicable  monarch  prorogue  his  Parliament  for  larger  sums  from  France. 
Louis  governed  more  effectually  by  his  gold  than  Charles  by  the  Consti- 
tution.— Ibid,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  112, 113.     Lingard,  vol.  siii.,  pp.  4,  5. 

*  "  The  duke  had  hopes  of  marrying  the  Princess  Mary  to  the  Dauphin, 
thus  rendering  England  a  province  of  France." — Reresljy's  Mem.,  p.  109. 

+  Calamy  thus  refers  to  the  feeling  in  the  city  in  1678,  in  regard  to 
the  murder  of  Sir  E.  B.  Godfrey: — "The  fi-equent  execution  of  traitors 
that  ensued,  and  the  many  dismal  stories  handed  about  continually, 
made  the  hearts  not  only  of  younger  but  elder  persons  to  quake  with 
fear.  Not  so  much  as  a  house  was  at  that  time  to  be  met  with  but  what 
was  provided  with  arms ;  nor  did  any  go  to  rest  at  night  -vvithout  appre- 
hensions of  somewhat  that  was  very  tragical  that  might  happen  before 
morning.  And  this  was  then  the  case,  not  for  a  few  weeks  or  mouths 
only,  but  for  a  great  while  together."— Life  of  E.  Calamy,  D.D.,  by  J.  T. 
Kutt,  London,  1830,  voL  i.,  pp.  83,  84. 


330  EAELY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

patientest,  prudentest  persons  (that)  ever  was."*  Mortified, 
and  perhaps  alarmed,  at  the  elements  of  danger  which  were 
rapidly  gathering  around  him,  Charles  tried  to  avert  this 
by  another  project.  The  diarist  tells  us: — "The  king  had 
resolved  to  propose  something  that  should  satisfy  everybody, 
and  that  I  believe  is  but  the  rest  of  an  expedient  that  was 
thought  of  before  that  Parliament  broke,  and  which,  for 
anght  I  know,  might  have  done  then,  but  I  doubt  will  not 
now.  'Tis,  in  short,  for  the  duke  to  have  the  name  of  king 
after  the  king's  death;  but  the  kingdom  to  be  governed  by 
a  Protector  and  Council,  and  the  Prince  of  Orange  to  be  the 
Protector,"  &c.t  To  other  sources  the  reader  must  be 
i-eferred  for  information  on  these  and  other  topics. 

No  concession  relieved  the  friends  of  liberty  of  the 
anxiety  they  felt  as  to  the  future.  The  tendencies  of  the 
court  were  unmistakable.  Popery  and  arbitrary  power 
everywhere  marked  it.  With  the  latter  a  considerable 
number  of  the  higher  clergy  sympathized.  In  this  cu-cle  it 
flourished.  Nothing  in  the  past  exceeded  it.  Oxford  then, 
as  now,  was  the  hotbed  of  corruption.  In  1683,  the  Uni- 
versity issued  its  infamous  dogma,  in  which  passive  obedi- 
ence was  inculcated,  and  the  absolvite  authority  of  kings 
over  everything  was  affirmed.  Upon  twenty-seven  proposi- 
tions, drawn  fi-om  the  works  of  leading  Nonconformists, 
these  men  of  light  and  power  stamped  their  disaj")probation. 
They  were  dangerous — nay,  blasphemous.  All  teachers,  of 
whatever  degree,  were  ordered  to  inculcate  on  theii-  pupils 
the  duty  of  submitting  to  any  ordinance  of  man  for  the 
Lord's  sake ;  and  this  obedience  was  to  be  clear  and  absolute, 
and  without  exception  of  any  order  of  men.  "  They  passed 
judgment,"  says  one,  "  on  certain  pernicious  books  and 
damnable  doctrines  destiiictive  to  the  sacred  persons  of 
princes,"  &c.     Twenty-seven  propositions  were  embraced  in 

*  Diary,  bv  the  Hon.  Henry  Sidney,  vol.  i.,  p.  12-5.     London  :  Colbtini, 
1843. 
t  Sir  AV.  Temple.     Ibid,  vol.  ii. ,  p.  1 77. 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND. 


331 


this  censure.  Baxter,  Buchanan,  Knox,  Goodman,  Owen, 
&c.,  supplied  tlie  materials.  The  learned  convocation  de- 
creed— "  That  the  books  which  contained  the  aforesaid  pro- 
positions and  imjiious  doctrines  arc  fitted  to  deprave  good 
manners,  corrupt  the  minds  of  unwary  men,  stir  up  sedi- 
tions and  tumults,  overthrow  states  and  kingdoms,  and  lead 
to  rebellion,  murder  of  princes,  and  atheism  itself;  and, 
therefore,  we  interdict  all  members  of  the  University  from 
the  reading  of  the  said  books,  under  the  penalties  in  the 
statutes  expressed.  We  also  order  the  before-recited  books 
to  be  i)ublicly  burned  by  the  hand  of  our  marshal,  in  the 
court  of  our  school."  To  this  Index  Expuryatorium  of  Rome 
they  would  have  added  the  Auto-da-fe  of  Spain,  if  their 
power  had  been  equal  to  their  will.* 

On  tlie  other  hand,  the  })atriots,  fully  alive  to  all  this, 
gathered  around  them  all  the  elements  of  strength  they 
could  command.  The  crisis  was  serious,  and  they  felt  its 
importance.  At  the  polling-booths  the  battle-cry  was,  "  No 
Popeiy!"  "No  arbitrary  power!"  In  St.  Stephen's  the 
stiniggle  was  severe.  Around  them  a  small  b\it  influential 
body  of  clergy  gathered — men  in  advance  of  thousands  of 
their  brethren.  The  sympathies  of  the  Nonconformists 
were  with  the  friends  of  progress,  and  all  the  friends  of  the 
Prince  of  Orange,  now  increasing  rapidly,  secretly,  if  not 
all  of  them  openly,  aided  in  the  good  work.  The  intei-ests 
of  the  latter  prince  were  becoming  more  and  more  identified 
with  England's  liberties.  He  was  the  guiding  star  of  many, 
and  the  hope  of  multitudes.  And  even  some  of  the  leaders 
so  far  forgot  their  own  dignity  and  the  grandeur  of  their 
mission,  as  to  receive  bribes  from  France,  and  court  the 
aid  of  the  unprincipled  monarch  of  that  nation.  Calm, 
determined,  and  armed  with  moral  power,  the  patriots 
entered  on  the  struggle.     It  was  marked  by  many  of  the 


*  Maseres  Tracts,  vol.  iii.,  p.  226,  227.     Lingard,  vol.  .\iii.,  340,  34L 
Orme's  Owen,  p.  238. 


332  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

characteristics  of  the  early  period  of  the  fii'st  Charles.  Plots 
and  counterplots  of  Papal  and  Protestant  ever  and  anon 
agitated  the  country.  The  Pyms  and  Elliots  of  the  past, 
were  represented  by  the  Sidneys  and  Russells  of  this  era. 
Their  blood,  shed  by  the  tyrant,  only  hastened  the  downfall 
of  his  dynasty,  and,  in  a  few  years,  the  expulsion  of  the 
last  of  the  Stuarts  from  the  throne. 

The  recollection  of  this  is  necessary  to  form  an  accurate 
conception  of  the  state  of  things  which  marked  the  ecclesi- 
astical world,  and  the  opposite  motives  by  which  they  were 
called  into  existence.  Two  things  resulted  from  this.  The 
opponents  of  the  coiirt  and  its  despotic  tendencies  became 
more  favourable  to  the  aSTonconformists.  It  was  natural. 
Upon  their  love  of  liberty,  Sidney,  Russell,  and  their  com- 
peers, could  repose  with  the  fullest  confidence.  In  the 
Commons,  sympathy  with  their  past  sufferings  was  ex- 
pressed, and  efforts  were  not  wanting  to  relieve  them  of 
existing  burdens.  More  than  this,  there  was  much  talk  of 
a  scheme  of  comprehension,  by  which  the  Nonconformists 
should  be  brought  into  the  Church.  The  Baptists  would 
have  been  untouched  by  it.  No  scheme  would  have  recon- 
ciled them  to  so  anti-Chiistian  a  union  as  that  of  Church 
and  State.  Many  of  their  members  were  excluded 
from  the  churches,  for  hearing  the  ministers  of  the  State 
Church.  But  they  were  probably  alone  in  tliis.  The 
Presbyterian  body  would  have  hailed  it.  Baxter,  ever 
active,  prepared  a  scheme  by  which  this  matter  might  be 
accomplished.  Tillotson,  Stillingfleet,  and  others  of  this 
class,  now  rising  into  view,  held  frequent  interviews  with 
the  leading  members  of  this  body.  How  far  the  Congi-ega- 
tional  body  would  have  gone  in  this  direction,  we  are  not 
prepared  to  say.  Owen  was  not  behind  his  brethi-en  in  any 
matter;  but  his  views  on  the  prince's  power  to  interfere 
with  the  Church,  to  enforce  truth  and  repress  error,  happily 
woidd  find  no  sympathy  with  his  successors  in  the  present. 
But  failure  marked  it.  Pear  ]>robably,  not  love,  was  the 
most  potent  motive. 


CHAltLKS   THE   SECOND.  333 

Ou  the  other  liand,  the  position  the  Nonconformists  had 
taken  in  relation  to  the  Test  Act  and  the  Popish  designs  of 
the  court,  had  aroused  tlie  anger  of  the  monai'ch.  The 
penal  laws  were  unloosed,  and  every  impediment  to  tlieir 
full  working  was  removed.  Sheldon  and  many  of  his 
brethren  hated  Dissent  more  than  Popery.  Their  love  of 
arbitrary  power  we  have  seen;  their  detestation  of  Non- 
conformity was  as  intense.  Into  all  the  persecuting  mea- 
sures of  the  infixtuated  monarch  they  readily  fell.  The 
appliances  of  the  bishops  for  this  work  were  ample.  They 
had  only  to  speak,  and,  in  every  parish  in  the  kingdom,  the 
instruments  of  their  power  were  found.  For  the  work  of 
suflering  the  machinery  was  perfect ;  but  for  life  and  purity 
it  was  powerless.  A  letter  from  the  Princess  Anne,  after- 
wards queen,  to  her  sister  of  Orange,  gives  us  a  glimpse  of 
the  men  who  ruled  in  the  highest  circles.  Referring  to 
Sunderland,  she  says : — "  Everybody  knoAvs  how  often  this 
nian  turned  backwards  and  forwards  in  the  late  king's 
reign,  and  now,  to  complete  all  his  ^drtues,  he  is  working 
with  all  his  might  to  bring  in  Popery.  He  is  perpetually 
with  the  jn-iests,  and  stirs  up  the  king  to  do  things  faster 
than  I  believe  he  would  of  himself  Things  are  come  to 
tliat  pass  now,  that  if  they  go  on  much  longer,  I  believe,  in 
a  little  while,  no  Pi-otestant  will  be  able  to  live  here."* 
Upon  our  brethren  the  storm  broke  with  great  fuiy. 
Escape  was  impossible.  From  all  i)arts  of  the  empire  the 
cry  was  heard,  and  probably  not  a  county  in  the  kingdom 
that  did  not  supply  some  \Tictim  to  gi'atify  the  saintly 
malice  of  Sheldon  and  his  Poi)ish  auxiliaries.t 


*  Sidney,  voL  ii.,  p.  263.  "Mr.  Godolpliin,  Mr.  May,  and  two  oi-  three 
more,  are  still  very  honest,  but  have  little  power  with  the  king;  the 
others  are  great  I'ogues,  and  betray  their  master  every  day." — Sidney  to 
the  Prince  of  Orange.     Diary,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  21G,  217. 

+  From  the  Correspondence  of  Thoreshy,  we  get  some  curious  glimpses 
of  the  religious  life  of  the  Pi-eshyterians  of  this  time.  It  excites  no 
wonder  in  us.  Sharp,  of  Leeds,  thus  writes  :— "  Men  choose  new  things 
with  us,  as  in  the  Egyptian  darkness  men  know  not  what  way  to  go— 


334  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Only  a  few  examples  cau  be  given  of  this  savage  raid 
against  peaceable  and  honest  men.  First  in  the  list  of  suf- 
ferers, and  perhaps  illiistratuig  the  spirit  of  the  court  and 
the  Episcopate  as  fully  as  any  one  we  can  select,  we  place 
Delaune.  His  crime  in  the  eyes  of  his  oppressors  was  of 
fearful  magnitude.  He  had  simply  asserted  the  dignity  of 
our  common  humanity,  and  maintained  the  birthright  of 
every  man  to  think  for  himself.  A  Dr.  Calamy,  who  would 
never  have  emerged  from  the  obscurity  to  which  natm-e  and 
Providence  would  have  consigned  him,  -with  the.  impudence 
inseparable  from  little  minds,  in  a  printed  sermon  abused 
the  Nonconformist  body,  and  in  the  plenitude  of  his  conde- 
scension ui-ged  them  to  propound  theii-  doubts,  and  offered  to 
give  them,  if  they  were  meek  enough  to  receive,  instruction. 
To  this  insolence,  Delaune  replied  in  his  unanswered  and  un- 
answerable ^^  Plea  for  the  Nonconformists^*  Little  doubt 
can  be  chei-ished  about  Calamy.  It  was  a  bravado — a  flash 
of  zeal  for  a  certain  purpose.  The  practice  is  common 
enough  with  men  of  his  class.  No  answer  could  be  expected ; 
none  was  desii-ed.  The  hint  that  such  an  one  was  preparing 
was  enough.  Its  publication,  if  possible,  must  be  ctecked. 
Only  one  way  was  ojieu  to  these  thoughtful  and  truthful 
instructors  of  the  people.    It  was  a  favoui'ite  one.    Within 

some  to  Quakerism,  Anabaptism,  Antinomianism,  and  they  will  not  leave 
their  Delilahs,  theii-  beloved  errors. "—Sharp,  of  Leeds.  Thoresby's 
Diary,  vol.  i.,  pp.  58,  59,  "Most  of  our  people  are  Protestants  upon  no 
better  principle  than  many  of  them  are  Papists,  ^dz.,  education  and  inte- 
rest, &c.  &c.;  carnal  policy  and  interest  make  many  seem  fine  Protestants 
that  else  see  or  know  little  difference  between  religion,  nor  are  one  jot 
better  in  their  practice.  Most  conclude  a  freehold  is  better  than  a  life 
estate ;  and,  as  it  is  not  genteel,  so  it  would  not  be  worth  their  while  to 
change  their  religion  on  such  imcei-tainties.  Could  they  secure  the  suc- 
cession, and  get  off  all  penal  laws,  that  it  should  not  be  high  treason  (as 
our  law  makes  it)  to  qxiit  their  own  and  embrace  the  Eomish  communion, 
they  would  go  over  by  shoals,  of  all  ranks  and  professions,  that  now  seem 
much  averse  to  it,"  &c. — E..  Steelton.  Conespondence  of  K.  Thoresby, 
vol.  i.,  p.  90. 

*  A  Mr.  Hart  published  a  reply  to  this,  entitled,  ''The  Bulwark 
Stormed." 


CHAKLES    THK    SECOND.  335 

the  damp  walls  of  the  wretched  j>rison-house,  liberty  could 
be  abridged.  Means  might  be  employed  there  to  calm  the 
spirit  of  the  insulted  one.  It  was  so  with  Delauue.  Before 
the  publication  of  his  "  Plea,"  he  was  lodged  within  the 
walls  of  Wood  Street,  by  a  warrant  from  the  Recorder 
(Jenner),  Nov.  30th,  1G83.  Writing  to  his  antagonist,  he 
thus  describes  his  suffering.  It  is  only  a  sami)lc  of  what  his 
brethi-cn  in  jirison,  Bamplicld,  Ralphson,  and  others,  had  to 
endure : — "  I  was  turned  in  among  the  common  side  prisonei-s, 
where  a  hard  bench  was  my  bed,  and  two  bricks  my  i)illow ; 
and  I  was  not  suffered  to  see  some  of  my  acquaintance  who 
were  prisoners  there  as  Dissenters.  I  was  soon  after  sent  to 
Newgate,  and  lodged  among  felons,  whose  horrid  company 
made  a  perfect  representation  of  that  place  which  you  de- 
scribe when  you  mention  hell.  But  after  two  days  and 
nights,  without  any  refreshments — the  unusualness  of  that 
society  and  place  has  changed  my  health,  the  constitution  of 
which  at  best  is  very  tender  and  crazy — I  was  removed, 
and  am  now  in  the  press-yard,  a  place  of  some  sobriety, 
though  still  a  prison."  Failing  in  this  appeal,  he  again 
addressed  the  orthodox  di\dae.  His  claim  was  ju.st  and 
reasonable.  "  I  had  some  thoughts  that  you  would  perform 
the  office  of  a  divine  in  ^dsiting  me  in  my  place  of  confine- 
ment, either  to  argue  me  out  of  my  doubts,  which  you  pro- 
mised Scripture  and  reason,  not  a  mittimus  and  Newgate, 
could  easily  do.  To  the  fonner  I  can  yield ;  to  the  latter  it 
seems  I  must.  This  is  a  severe  kind  of  logic,  and  will  pro- 
bably dispute  me  out  of  the  world."  The  logical  power  of 
this  argument  wa.s  well  understood  by  Calamy  and  his 
friends.     Experience  had  frequently  tested  its  force. 

Before  the  infamous  Jeffreys  Mr.  Delaune  was  called.  The 
highest  legal  officials  of  the  Government  were  engaged  against 
him, — men  who  knew  that  the  more  abuse  they  laAoshed  on 
him  the  more  acceptable  woiild  their  service  be.  He  was 
tried  in  the  Court  of  the  Old  Bailey.  In  such  cases,  the 
fountain  of  justice  was  corrupt  in  the  extreme.     The  follow- 


S3 6  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

ing  portion  of  the  indictment  will  show  the  animus  of  the 
whole: — The  "Plea"  was  a  libel  of  the  worst  character,  and 
"  contained  these  false  fictions  and  scandalous  sentences  fol- 
lowing, viz. :  The  Church  of  Rome  and  England,  who  are 
great  transgressors,  to  i)resume  to  vary  from  Christ's 
precepts  in  altering  or  adding  to  the  form  of  words  ex- 
pressed by  Christ  in  the  11th  of  Luke:  for  so  they  have 
done.  They  say,  '  Forgive  us  our  tresjiasses,  as  we  forgive 
them  who  trespass  against  us,'  when  there  are  no  such 
words  in  Christ's  prayer.  His  words  are,  '  Forgive  us  our 
sins  or  debts,  for  we  also  forgive  every  one  that  is  indebted 
to  us.'  And,  says  the  indictment,  in  another  pai't  of  the 
said  libel,  are  contained  these  false  fictions,  seditious  and 
scandalous  sentences  following,  viz. :  And  may  we  not  say 
that,  in  these  following  particulars,  we  do  symbolize  with 
idolatrous  Rome  herein?  Firstly,  enjoining  and  imposing 
this  (the  Common  Prayer),  as  a  set  form,  as  they  do  with 
penalties  contrary  to  the  Scriptures.  Secondly,  by  an  open 
repetition  of  the  same  form  in  the  exercises  three  or  four 
times,  at  least,  insomuch  that,  in  cathedral  churches,  it  is 
said  or  sung  ten  or  twelve  times  a  day,  contraiy  to  Christ's 
express  words  that,  '  When  we  pray,  we  do  not  make  vain 
repetitions  as  the  heathen  do,  for  they  think  they  shall  be 
heard  for  their  much  speaking.'  Thirdly,  by  enjoining  the 
whole  congregation,  men  and  women,  to  repeat  after  the 
priest,  though  no  such  directions  by  Christ:  nay,  he  forbids 
women  to  pray  or  prophesy  in  the  church.  Fourthly,  in 
singing  this  prayer  in  the  cathedrals  by  responses  of  people, 
without  the  least  warrant  from  Christ  for  such  song- 
praying."  "Then  the  indictment  ends  with  a  fearful 
aggravation  that  is  in  contempt  of  the  king,  and  to 
the  evil  and  most  pernicious  example  of  all  such  other 
delinquents  in  the  like  case,  and  against  the  peace  of  the 
said  lord  now  king,  his  crown  and  dignity."  Such  was  the 
crime  of  this  heroic  sufferer  for  Christ. 

Agaiast  these  charges  the  pleadings  of  IMr.  Delaune  were 


CHARLES   THE   SECOND.  337 

in  vain.  lu  that  court,  and  under  sucli  a  president,  Iiojh' 
had  vanished.  The  Attoniey-General  made  very  large 
demands  on  his  powers  to  pervert  the  facts.  Jeffreys,  with 
his  all  but  unequalled  talent  for  abuse,  and  utter  absence  of 
all  moral  principle,  bullied  the  prisoner;  and  the  jury  decided, 
in  harmony  with  the  unmistakable  wishes  of  the  coui-t, 
that  he  was  guilty  of  the  charges  alleged  in  the  indictment. 
The  sentence  was  as  follows : — "  Thomas  Delauno,  fined  one 
hundred  marks,  and  to  be  kept  prisoner  (i.e.,  till  the  fine 
was  paid),  and  to  find  good  security  for  his  good  behaviour 
for  one  whole  year  afterwards ;  and  that  the  said  books  and 
seditious  libels,  by  him  published,  shall  be  burnt  with  fire 
before  the  Royal  Exchange  in  London;  and  if  he  be  dis- 
charged, to  pay  six  shillings." 

Well  may  De  Foe  say,  "  To  answer  sober  argument  with 
sour  conscience,  to  dispute  by  the  gaol  and  the  hangman, 
to  debate  by  the  prison  and  not  by  the  pen — these  have  been 
the  peculiar  tactics  of  the  paxty — and  the  power  of  persecu- 
tion, not  of  persuasion,  has  been  the  way  of  their  usage  to 
the  Dissenter."  For  fifteen  months  Delaune  endured  his  con- 
fijiement,  in  the  midst  of  poverty  and  extreme  siiffering,  and, 
by  lingering  sickness,  closed  his  chequered  career.  "  I  cannot 
refrain  saying,  such  a  champion,  of  such  a  cause,  desei'ved 
better  usage.  But  it  was  very  hard,  such  a  man,  such  a 
Christian,  and  such  a  scholar,  and  on  sixch  an  occasion, 
should  starve  in  a  dimgeon,  and  the  whole  body  of  Dis- 
senters in  England,  whose  cause  he  died  for  defending, 
should  not  raise  him  £Q6  I3s.  id.  to  save  his  life."  "We 
would  not  mitigate  this  crime  an  atom;  but  it  is  right  to 
suggest  that  Mr.  Delaune  may  have  interdicted  the  jmyment 
of  the  fine.  It  is  not  likely  that  the  associate  of  Knollys, 
Kiffin,  Keach,  and  others  of  this  class,  would  excite  no 
interest.  The  man  that  could  present  £10,000  to  Charles, 
would  not  hesitate  about  the  payment  of  a  trifle  for  the  relief 
of  such  a  man  from  the  power  of  the  harpies  of  the  law,* 

*  Plea  for  the  Nonconformiats. 
Y 


338  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

Tliis  case  is  only  a  sample  of  a  numerous  class.  Multi- 
tudes crowded  the  horrid  dens,  called  at  this  time  prisons. 
Newgate,  the  Fleet,  the  Gate-House,  were  the  chief  places 
where  holy  men  endured  the  cruel  imposition  of  jailors  and 
their  savage  wardens,  and  the  revolting  annoyances  which 
marked  these  residences  of  the  most  hardened  criminals  of 
the  nation.  Mr.  Delaime,  in  his  touching  narrative,  men- 
tions the  names  of  two  of  his  fellow-sufferers — Bampfield 
and  Ralphson.  Their  crimes  were  similar  to  his  own;  their 
imprisonment  was  more  pi-otracted ;  and  both  of  them  fell 
Anctims  to  disease,  induced  by  the  sanitary  condition  of 
these  sinks  of  corruption.*  Both  of  these  men  had  laboured 
with  great  devotedness  in  their  ministry.  Forced  from  one 
place,  they  repaired  to  another,  and  proclaimed  the  glad 
tidings.  From  the  pulpit  both  of  them  were  carried  to 
prison,  where  they  found  other  confessors  sulfering  in  the 
.Saviour's  cause.  In  this  list  of  sufferers  at  this  time,  the 
names  of  Griffiths,  Gifford,  KnoUys,  and  others,  stand  out 
prominently  before  us.  The  former  was  the  companion  of 
Bampj&eld ;  the  latter,  torn  from  the  bosom  of  his  family 


*  "We  have  a  glimpse  of  the  state  of  tlie  prisons  after  the  Restoration. 
Ellwood,  the  friend  of  Milton,  thus  refers  to  one: — "At  night  all  the 
prisoners  were  lodged  in  one  room,  wliich  was  large  and  round,  having  in 
the  middle  of  it  a  great  pillar  of  oaken  timber,  which  bore  up  the  chapel 
over  it.  To  this  pillar  was  fastened  our  hammocks  at  one  end,  and  to 
the  opposite  wall  on  the  other  end,  quite  round  the  room,  and  in  three 
degi-ees  or  three  storeys  high,  one  over  the  other,  so  that  they  who  lay  in 
the  upper  and  middle  rows  of  hammocks  were  obliged  to  go  to  bed  first, 
because  they  were  to  climb  up  to  the  higher  by  getting  into  the  lower. 
And  under  the  lower  rank  of  hammocks,  by  the  wall  side,  were  laid  beds 
on  the  floor,  in  which  the  sick  and  such  weak  persons  as  could  not  get 
into  the  hammocks  lay.  And,  indeed,  though  the  room  was  large  and 
pretty  aiiy,  yet  the  breath  and  steam  that  came  from  so  many  bodies  of 
different  ages,  conditions,  and  constitutions,  jiacked  up  so  close  together, 
was  enough  to  cause  sickness  amongst  lis,  and  I  believe  did  so,"  kc. — 
EUwood,  p.  164.  In  1579,  one  hundred  persons  died  within  the  King's 
Bench  in  a  few  days.  "  Many  times  it  so  happened,  viz.,  in  the  summer, 
persons  that  through  want  of  air,  and  to  avoid  smouldering,  were  forced 
in  the  night  to  call  out  to  come  and  open  the  windows  of  the  wards." — 
Strj^pe's  Stow,  b.  iv.,  p.  10. 


fHAKLES    THE    SECOXD.  33li 

amidst  the  infinuities  of  age,  was  kei)t  in  conftnemeufc  for  six 
inoiith.s.  Gitibrd  was  liunted  from  place  to  pWe.  In  Bristol, 
Kingswood,  and  the  adjacent  districts,  he  jireached  to  the 
colliers  and  othei"s  with  great  success.  The  rapidity  of  his 
movements,  and  the  various  disguises  he  }>ut  on,  saved  him 
lor  a  season;  but  at  last  Gloucester  Castle  received  the  ser- 
vant of  God.  Other  details  of  the  sufl"erings  of  those  men 
will  be  found  elsewhere. 

A  little  before  this  time,  a  new  and  important  movement 
was  commenced  by  our  brethren,  which  has  exerted  an  influ- 
ence of  the  very  best  kind  on  the  denomination.  Their 
<)p]»onents  had  lavished  every  species  of  abuse  on  them  for 
\\  suit  of  learning.  To  the  scorn  of  the  nation  their  ministers 
had  been  held  up,  as  tradesmen  u(  the  lowest  order. 
Exam})lcs  of  this  have  been  already  given.  Not  only  so; 
l)ut  the  charges,  though  utterly  without  foundation,  had 
been  made,  that  they  were  opposed  to  a  learned  ministry. 
They  were  not  the  patrons  of  ignorance,  or  opposed  to 
secular  learning;  but  they  despised  the  useless  forms  of  the 
schools  for  the  higher  teaching  of  the  divine  Spirit;  they 
trampled  on  the  mischievous  formalities  of  Episcopal  and 
l*resbyterian  introductions  to  the  miuistiy,  and  rested  more 
fully  on  the  judgment  and  authority  of  the  church,  in 
estimating  the  fitness  of  those  they  called  to  office  to  contri- 
l)ute  to  the  full  development  of  their  spiritual  welfare. 
lUitei-ate  some  of  them  might  be;  but  none  were  ignorant. 
They  could  not  annotate  a  Greek  play;  but  they  could 
expound  the  language  of  a  Paul,  and  inculcate  the  sublime 
morality  of  Jesus.  The  immort^il  dreamer  belonged  to  this 
class.*  He,  too,  was  branded  by  the  lofty  scorn  of  these 
l^retendei-s,  whilst  true  enlightenment,  in  modern  times,  has 
f«  irgottea  the  tinker  in  the  man  of  genius,  and  hailed  him  as  a 


*  Lord  Campbell  says  of  his  Pilgrim: — "AAHiich  has  done  more  to 
R.waken  i)iety,  and  to  enforce  tlie  precepts  of  Chiistiau  morality,  than  all 
the  sermons  that  have  been  published  by  all  the  juelates  of  tlie  Anglican 
Church."— Chief  Justices,  vol.  i.,  p.  561. 


340 


EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 


teaclier  for  all  times,  for  all  nations,  for  the  child  as  well  as 
the  man  of  years,  for  the  philosopher  as  well  as  the  peasant. 
Kiffin,  Dyke,  Collier,  and  other  ministerial  brethren,  in 
1675,  called  the  attention  of  the  whole  body  to  the  im- 
portance of  training  young  men  for  the  ministry.  The 
great  national  schools  were  closed  against  them.  Into 
Oxford  and  Cambridge  none  could  enter  without  the  most 
costly  sacrifice  which  man  can  make.  At  the  thresholds  of 
these  seats  of  learning,  where  Owen  and  Goodwin  and  Dell 
had  shed  the  light  of  their  genius,  stood  the  representatives  of 
proud  prelacy,  forbidding  the  approach  of  the  student,  unless 
he  would  have  the  badge  of  slavery  stamped  on  his  forehead. 
To  the  continent  many  of  the  younger  men  retired  for  their 
education.  At  Leyden,  and  other  places,  they  sought  the 
intellectual  culture  which  was  denied  them  at  home.  Gale, 
Stennett,  and  others,  gathered  their  rich  stores  of  learning 
there.  There  was  no  alternative  before  them.  Circumstances, 
for  a  time,  prevented  their  realizing  their  purpose.  But  the 
object  was  not  relinquished.  Two  years  later,  an  assembly 
was  held;  and  though  we  have  no  record  of  its  deliberations 
on  the  subject  of  ministerial  training,  we  have  a  valuable 
Confession  of  Faith,  issued  under  its  authority. 

The  closing  scene  of  the  life  of  the  monarch  was  drawing 
nigh.  Evelyn,  the  adorer  of  Charles,  shall  supply  the  pic- 
ture of  his  last  Sabbath: — "I  shall  never  forget  the  inex- 
pressible luxuiy  and  profaneness,  and  all  dissoluteness,  and 
as  it  were  total  forgetfulness  of  God,  it  being  Sunday.  The 
kiag  sitting  and  toying  with  his  concubines,  Portsmouth, 
Cleveland,  Mazarine,  &c. ;  a  French  boy  singing  love  songs 
in  that  glorious  gallery ;  whilst  about  twenty  of  the  great 
courtiers,  and  other  dissolute  persons,  were  at  basset  around 
a  large  table,  a  bank  of  at  least  £2,000  in  gold  before 
them."*    This  was  on   the  15th  of   Febmary,  1685.    On 


*  Diary,     Macaulay,  with  his  usual  skill,  has  amplified  this  into 
gorgeous  picture.— Vol.  ii.,  chap.  iv. 


CHARLES   THE    SECOND. 


341 


Monday  morning  the  scene  changed.     Consternation  filled 
the  palace.     The  news  reached  the  sultana,  that  the  monarch 
was   smitten  by  an  invisible  hand.     Apoplexy  had  seized 
him.     For  a  short  time  he  rallied,  but  it  wtus  only  for  a  day. 
Aroimd  him  the  dignified  clergy  crowded,  but  he  heeded  not 
their  admonitions.     His  hypocrisy  had  been  long,  but  he 
shrank  from  it  now.     For  years  he  had  been  reconciled  to 
the  Church  of  Rome.*    At'the  suggestion  of  his  early  mis- 
tress, a  priest  was  smuggled  into  the  chamber  of  death,  and 
in  broken  accents  the  dying  man  acknowledged,  in  general 
terms,  the  wickedness  of  his  life;  absolution  of  all  his  sins 
was   then   pronounced,  the   body  and   blood  of   the   Lord 
administered,  and  the  tender  mother  received  her  straying 
son  into  her  maternal  bosom.    With  such  perfect  ease,  with- 
out  any  signs  of  genuine  penitence,  conld  the  Church  of 
Rome  cancel  the  guilt  of  a  Ufe  of  extraordinaiy  turpitude, 
and  marked  by  the  most  revolting  vices.f 

Our  space  forbids  a  lengthened  re^dew  of  the  character  of 
this  embodiment  of  the  veiy  worst  elements  of  human 
nature.  Indeed,  the  necessity  is  by  no  means  m-gent.  Every 
reader  will  at  once  see  that  he  stands  alone  in  the  pages  of 
our  history.  All  the  worst  characteristics  of  his  family  were 
intensified  in  him,  without  a  single  redeeming  feature. 
Raised  to  the  throne  amidst  the  wHdest  outbursts  of  loyalty, 
a  prospect  of  national  prosperity  and  peace  lay  before  him 
unequaUed  in  the  past.:}:    The  nation  panted  for  repose;  he 

*  Lord  CampbeU,  vol.  ii.,  p.  214.  ,  ,     ,,     t.        u  a    v,  „ 

t  The  death  of  Charles  is  minutely  descnbed  by  the  French  Ambas- 
sador. Dalryiuple,  vol.  ii.,  p.  98.  It  was  attributed  to  poison  The 
reader  may  consvdt,  on  this  matter,  the  examination  of  J.  Dugdale,  ajid 
others,  pubHshed  by  order  of  ParUament.  Rome  rejoiced  at  his  death. 
ParL  Hist.,  vol.  iv.  ,,     ■■,  t,  vr^ni= 

t  "Theii-  hearts  are  fiUed  with  a  veneration  of  you,  said  D.  Hollis, 
"longings  for  you,  confidence  in  you,  and  desire  to  see  and  serve  you; 
and  their  tongues  do,  upon  all  occasions,  express  it,  and  m  so  domg  they 
are  (according  to  the  nature  of  Parliament)  the  true  representatives 
of  the  whole  nation;  for  they  but  do  that  in  a  more  contracted  and 
regular  way,  which  the  generaUty  of  the  people  of  the  land,  from  one 


3-12  EARLY    EXGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

could  have  given  it.  With  few  exceptions,  men  anticipated 
a  reign  of  peace,  of  wealth,  and  liberty.  The  vision  wii.-* 
speedily  dissipated.  He  had  gathered  no  experience  from 
the  past.  The  errors  of  liis  lamily  had  supplied  no  elements 
of  warning.  Blinded  hy  the  sudden  changes  from  exile 
to  the  throne — from  the  deepest  poverty  to  the  voluntary 
homage  and  wealth  of  the  nation — he  rushed  into  the  vortex 
of  self-indulgence  at  once,  and  made  the  gratification  of  his 
passions,  not  the  dignity  and  prosperity  of  the  nation,  the 
absorbing  end  of  his  life.  "Charles,"  says  Macaulay,  "was 
sensual,  indolent,  unequal  to  any  strong  intellectual  exeition, 
and  destitute  alike  of  all  patriotism,  and  of  all  sense  of  per- 
sonal dignity."  Carry  this  description  to  the  highest  degree, 
and  our  readers  will  form  nearly  an  accurate  conception  of 
this  monarcl !."■■■ 


end  of  it  to  the  other,  do  in  a  more  confused  and  disorderly  manner,  yet 
as  heartily  and  as  afifectionately,  all  degi-ees  and  ages  and  sexes,  high  and 
low,  ricli  and  poor  (as  I  may  say),  men,  women,  and  children,  join  in 
sending  up  their  pi-ayers  to  heaven,  '  God  bless  King  Charles !  long  live 
King  Charles!'  So  as  our  English  air  is  not  susceptible  of  any  other 
sounds,  and  echoes  out  notliing  else;  our  bells,  bonfires,  peals  of  ord- 
nance, volleys  of' shot,  the  shouts  and  acclamations  of  the  people,  bear  no 
other  moral,  have  no  other  signification  but  to  triumph  in  the  triumphs 
of  our  king  in  the  hearts  of  his  peojile,"  &c.  &c. — Speech  to  the 
King  at  Breda.  Pari.  Hist.,  vol.  iv.,  pp.  38,  .56.  Clarendon's  History, 
vol.  vi.,  p.  773.  Such  was  the  tumult  of  passion,  that  it  is  said  that  some 
of  the  old  cavaliers  died  from  joy.  "The  ^xliole  country  flocked  in,  and 
cutting  down  palms  and  stre-iving  the  way  with  all  sorts  of  fragrant 
flowers,  an<l  decking  the  lawns  and  passages  with  the  greatest  variety  of 
country  pomps,  garlands  bent  with  rings,  ribands,  and  the  like;  the  air 
echoing  all  along,  and  redoubling  the  pei-petually  iterated  hosannas,  he 
came  to  London." — Walker's  Histoi-y  of  Independency,  pai-t  iv.,  p.  105. 
Life,  vol.  iii.,  p.  30G.  "  Charles  displayed  his  gratitude  to  heaven,  for  his 
wonderful  restoration,  by  passing  the  night  of  his  return  with  Mrs. 
Palmer  (afterwards  the  celebrated  Duchess  of  Cleveland)." — Jessey's 
Memorials,  vol.  iii.,  p.  308. 

*  "  The  king  and  the  court  were  never  in  the  world  so  bad  as  they  are 
now  for  gaming,  swearing,  women,  drinking,  and  the  most  abominable 
vices  that  were  ever  in  the  world;  so  that  all  must  come  to  nought." — 
Pepys'  Diary,  vol.  iii.,  p.  303.  Lister's  Life  of  Clarendon,  vol.  ii., 
pp.  389,  390,  491,  492. 


CHARLES   THE    SKCONU.  •i'i^i 

Cromwell  had  i-aised  the  nation  to  the  highest  pitch  of 
dignity  and  prowess.  His  fleets  swept  the  seas.  His  nanso 
was  a  tower  of  strength.  The  mightiest  sought  his  friend- 
ship, and  stood  in  awe  of  his  genius.  The  contrast  now  was 
of  the  boldest  kind.  Into  the  lowest  depth  the  legitimate 
king  sunk  it.  Liberty  was  sufiering  froni  the  despotic 
tendencies  of  the  worthless  monarch.  The  fountain  of 
justice  was  polluted  at  its  source;  the  financial  condition  of 
the  country  was  at  the  lowest  ebb  ;*  whilst  French  gold,  and 
the  influence  of  his  mistresses,  govei-ned  the  countiy.t  In 
the  seraglio  the  booming  of  Dutch  cannon  was  heard,  as  the 
fleets  of  Holland  swept  the  seas  and  threatened  the  capital ; 
but  Charles  was  wrapt  up  in  the  noble  gratification  of  hunting 
a  moth  with  liLs  painted  courtezans.  Under  the  blighting 
influence  of  a  man  so  destitute  of  all  that  was  emiobling, 
all  that  was  great  aiid  good  in  the  nation  all  but  perished.^ 

*  Whilst  the  couutry  was  suffering,  the  monarch  was  squandering  im- 
mense sums  on  his  mistresses.  "No  less  a  sum  than  £130,008  10s. 
appeai-s  to  have  been  bestoweil  by  the  profligate  monarch  on  this  woman 
witliin  the  space  of  ouo  year,  and  this  at  a  period  wlien  the  wages  of  the 
servants  of  the  royal  household  were  doled  out  by  beggarly  instalments." 
Vide  Moneys  Received  and  Paid  for  Secret  Services,  pp.  viii.  ix.,  1681. 
Camden  Society.  Others  may  be  seen  in  this  volume.  "  The  king  having 
all  this  day  no  haudkerclnefs,  and  but  three  bands  to  his  neck."— Pepys, 
vol.  ii.,  p.  346. 

t  "Rouvigny  (the  French  Aml)assador)  writes,  2d  September,  1674, 
that  Charles  had  agreed  either  to  prorogue  his  Parliament  till  April,  1675, 
in  consideration  of  500,000  crowns;  or,  if  he  convened  it  in  November,  to 
dissolve  it  in  case  it  should  refuse  to  give  him  money,  in  consideration  of 
wliich  he  was  to  have  a  pension  of  £100,000  from  France.  Charles  after- 
wards chose  the  first  of  these  alternatives,  got  Ids  money,  and  France 
was  enabled  to  carry  on  the  war  a  year  without  any  fear  of  an  English 
Parliament."— Dah-ymple,  vol.  ii.,  p.  99.  "In  case  the  conditions  of 
peace  shall  be  accepted,  the  king  expects  6,000,000  of  livres  (£300,000) 
yearly  for  three  years,  from  the  time  that  this  agreement  shall  be  signed 
between  his  Majesty  and  the  king  of  France ;  because  it  will  be  two 
or  three  years  before  he  can  hope  to  find  his  ParUament  in  humour  to 
give  him  supplies,  after  yoiu-  having  made  any  peace  with  France." — 
Letter  of  E.  Danby,  March  25, 1078.     Pari.  Hist.,  vol.  iv.,  pp.  1060, 1061. 

t  "To-day,  for  certain,  I  am  told,  how  in  Holland  publickly  they  have 
pictured  uur  king  with  reproach,     One  way  is,  with  his  pockets  turned 


344  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

The  influence  of  the  court  was  all-powerful.  Through 
oveiy  grade  of  society  it  extended.  Nothing  could  with- 
stand it.  Onward  the  tide  of  immorality  flowed.  The 
landmarks  of  public  and  almost  of  private  \-irtues  were  swept 
away.  Sensuality,  not  love — gigantic  vices,  not  moral  vir- 
tues, flourished.  The  former  stalked  in  public  without  a 
blush.  The  baronial  residence,  the  house  of  the  merchant, 
the  cot  of  the  peasant,  according  to  their  degrees,  were  the 
abodes  of  deep,  of  unmixed  profligacy.  Men  in  courtly 
dress,  and  with  pretensions  to  the  character  of  gentlemen, 
could  barter  the  virtues  of  a  sister  or  a  wife  without  a  blush, 
for  some  paltry  distinction.  In  the  higher  circles,  the  dignity 
of  the  English  matron  was  forgotten,  and  the  purity  of 
British  maidenhood  all  but  unknown.  Every  man  had  his 
price;  everything  was  bought  and  sold.  The  coronet  of  the 
peer,  the  ermine  robe  of  the  judge,  and  the  cassock  of  the 
bishop,  were  disposed  of  to  the  highest  bidder.  Charles's 
mistresses  derived  great  gain  from  the  sale  of  these  attractive 
baubles.  It  marked  every  period  of  his  reign.  During  the 
supremacy  of  Buckingham,  he  extorted  very  large  sums 
from  aspirants  to  oflice.  His  low-bom  mother  was,  if 
possible,  woi-se.  "  No  man  was  in  those  times  safe  who 
could  not  secure  Lady  Buckingham's  favour.  Those  whom 
she  smiled  on  prospered;  those  whom  she  frowned  on  fell." 
Bacon,  Montague,  Yelverton,  and  others,  were  forced  from 
oflice  to  give  place  to  her  creatui'es.  Every  sentence  in  the 
court  of  law  was  a  kind  of  stock  which  the  coui-tiers  could 
sell  in  the  open  market.  The  very  highest  persons,  often 
ladies,  dealt  in  this  infamous  ware.  Lady  Sufiblk  kept  a 
regular  office  for  the  sale  of  pardons.     The  price  was  always 


the  -wrong  side  outward,  hanging  out  empty ;  another  with  two  courtiers 
picking  of  his  pockets ;  and  a  third,  leading  of  two  ladies,  while  others 
abuse  him."— Pepys,  vol.  ii.,  p.  125.  "They  have  pictured  the  Church  of 
England  in  Holland  in  the  shape  of  a  goose ;  the  Papists  plucking  one 
wing,  and  the  Dissenters  another,  with  this  label  from  her  mouth, 
'  Pastive  obedience.'"— Thoreshy,  voL  i.,  p.  91. 


CHAKLEB   THE   SECONLt,  34D 

regulated  by  the  magnitude  of  the  offeucc.  The  annals  of 
those  times  ax'e  full  of  these  infamous  px-actices.  As  Macaulay 
somewhere  says,  the  age  "  was  the  paradise  of  cold  hearts 
and  narrow  minds,  the  golden  age  of  the  coward,  the 
bigot,  and  the  slave."  Under  the  shadow  of  his  court, 
the  Church  was  all  but  powerless.  Absorbed  in  other 
matters  than  the  cultivation  of  pure  and  uudefiled  re- 
ligion, the  dignified  clergy  had  no  power  to  an-est  the  tide 
of  corruption  which  flowed  in  every  direction.  Their  monu- 
ments were  acts  of  cnielty,  not  virtues;  their  labour  the 
extirpation  of  sectaries,  not  the  conversion  of  the  imgodly; 
and  from  Sheldon  and  his  colleagues  no  power  went  forth  to 
check  the  mad  career  of  tliis  head  of  the  Church."  The 
harvest  of  immorality  all  but  covered  the  land.  Godliness 
was  laughed  at,  and  public  opinion  was  ridiculed;  and,  but 
for  the  persecuted,  piety  would  have  retii-ed  from  the  land. 
The  characteristics  of  the  Stuarts  were  inherent  in  Charles. 

•  Though  it  is  long,  we  cannot  deny  our  readers  the  pleasure  of  reading 
the  following :—"  Deep  and  latent  as  are  the  ultimate  causes  of  the  con- 
tinued existence  of  Episcopacy  in  England,  nothing  can  be  less  recondite 
than  the  human  agency  employed  in  working  out  that  result.  Nursed  by 
the  Tudors,  adopted  by  the  Stuaiis,  and  wedded  in  her  youth  to  a  power- 
ful aristocracj-,  the  Anglican  Church  retains  the  indelible  stamp  of  these 
early  alliances.  To  the  great,  tlie  learned,  and  the  worldly-wise,  it  has 
for  three  centuries  afforded  a  resting-jjlace  and  a  refuge.  But  a  long 
intei-val  had  elapsed  before  the  national  temples  and  hierarchy  were  con- 
secrated to  the  nobler  end  of  enhghtening  the  ignorant,  and  of  adnunis- 
tering  to  the  poijr.  Ricli  beyond  all  Protestant  rivaliy  in  sacred  literature, 
the  Church  of  England,  from  the  days  of  Pai-ker  to  those  of  Laud,  had 
scarcely  produced  any  one  considei-able  work  of  popular  instruction. 
The  pastoral  care  which  at  a  later  period  Burnet  depicted,  was  till  then 
a  vision  which,  though  since  nobly  fulfilled,  no  past  experience  ]  had 
realised.  The  alphabet  was  among  the  mysteries  which  the  English 
Church  long  concealed  from  her  catechumens.  There  is  no  parallel  in  the 
annals  of  any  other  Protestant  State  of  so  wonderful  a  concentration,  and 
so  imperfect  a  diffusion  of  learning  and  genius,  of  piety  and  zeal.  The 
reigns  of  'Whitgift,  Bancroft,  and  Laud,  were  unmolested  by  cares  so 
rude  as  those  of  evangelising  the  artisans  and  peasantry.  Jewell  and 
Bull,  Hall  and  Donne,  Hooker  and  Taylor,  lived  and  wrote  for  their 
peers,  and  for  future  ages,  but  not  for  the  commonalty  of  their  own." — 
Sir  J.  Stephen's  Essays— Eichard  Baxter. 


316  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

The  spirit  of  kingcraft  ruled  him.  The  thirst  of  the  first 
diaries  for  arbitrary  jiower  was  not  more  intense.  It  was 
the  only  thing  which  could  interest  him.  With  the  nation's 
liberties,  liis  high  and  true  interests,  he  had  no  sympathy. 
Tliese  never  stood  in  the  way  of  his  gratification.  Without 
a  pang  he  would  have  immolated  the  whole.  The  despotic 
power  of  liis  patron,  the  French  monarch,  was  the  only 
model  he  had  any  ambition  to  imitate.  His  ministers  and 
judges*  only  found  favour  with  him,  as  they  sympathized 
with  this  spirit ;  whilst  the  mass  of  the  clergy  were  most 
zealous  for  the  "  Divine  right."  No  instrument  was  too  low, 
no  means  unwoi-thy,  wliich  could  secure  this.  Advancing 
years  augmented  this.  Self-respect  had  long  retired  from 
lnm,+  and  his  moral  sense  was  entirely  blunted,  so  tliat  wliat 
would  have  checked  ordinary  men  had  no  influence  on  the 
monarch.  J    The  spirit  of  despotism  pervaded  many  of  his 


*  "The  High  Courts  of  Justice  were  presided  over  by  men  as  destitute 
of  principle  as  any  of  those  who  liad  disgraced  the  ermine  in  the  former 
reign.  Lord  0.  Finch  aided  the  monarch  in  stealing  away  a  bill  which 
had  passed  the  House,  for  the  relief  of  Dissenters  from  persecution  for 
not  going  to  church.  Lord  Guildford's  policy  was  to  study  the  peculiar 
Inimour  of  the  king — to  do  whatever  was  most  agreeable  to  him  personally 
— to  pass  for  the  king's  friend,  and  to  be  solus  cum  solo."  —North's  Life, 
vol.  ii.,  pp.  163,  165,  169.  Campbell's  Lives,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  409,  429,  437, 
471,  480.  "  England  during  the  Stuart  reign  was  cursed  with  a  succession 
of  rufBans  in  ermine,  who,  for  the  sake  of  court  favoui-,  violated  the  prin- 
•ciples  of  law,  the  precepts  of  religion,  and  the  dictates  of  humanity." — 
IbM,  vol.  iii.,  p.  581. 

t  "Besides  all  this,  when  the  king  was  at  "Windsor,  because  he  would 
not  stay  so  long  as  the  duke  (Buckingham)  would  have  him,  he  took  the 
bridle  off  the  king's  horse,  to  the  great  danger  of  the  king's  person."  - 
Pari.  Hist.,  vol.  iv.,  p.  632. 

:;:  "That  in  several  counties  many  Protestant  Dissenters  have  been 
indited,  under  the  notion  of  Popish  recusants ;  and  the  penalties  of  the 
law  levied  upon  such  Presbyterian  Dissenters;  when  the  Papists  there 
have  been  either  totally,  or  for  the  most  part  discharged,"  &c.  —Reasons 
on  the  Danger  of  tlie  Growth  of  Popery,  presented  by  the  Commons  to 
tlie  Lords,  1678.  Pari.  History,  vol.  iv.,  p.  964.  "Since  the  king's 
Restoration,  Popery  has  played  in  court,  in  oiir  negociations  of  war  and 
peace,  of  setting  up  ministers  and  taking  them  do%\Ti;  and  God  knows 
where  it  will  end,"  &c.— Sir  H.  Capel.     Pari.  His.,  vol.  iv.,  p.  1043. 


CHARLES    THK    SECONO.  347 

acts,  and,  but  for  the  persecuted — the  cherished  sons  of 
liberty,  who  aided  the  inflexible  band  of  pati'iots  led  by  a 
Sidney  and  a  Russell — the  nation  would  again  have  had  to 
force  the  monarch  into  exile,  or  have  groaned  for  a  season 
under  the  yoke  of  bondage. 

There  is  one  incident  in  tlu^  domestic  life  of  the  monarch 
we  cannot  omit.  It  places  the  character  of  the  voluptuary 
in  the  strongest  light.  The  annals  of  profligacy  probably 
])rcsent  no  parallel  to  it.  We  refer  to  his  treatment  of  his 
wife.  We  give  it  in  the  words  of  the  heartless  sensualist; — 
"  I  wLsh,"  ho  says,  in  a  letter  to  Clarendon,  "  that  I  may  be 
unhaitjiy  in  this  world  and  the  world  to  come,  if  I  fail  in 
the  least  degree  of  what  I  have  resolved,  which  is,  of  making 
my  Lady  Castlemaine  of  my  wife's  bedchamber;  and  whoso- 
ever I  find  use  any  endeavour  to  hinder  this  resolution  of 
mine  (except  it  be  to  myself),  I  will  be  his  enemy  to  the 
last  moment  of  my  life.  ...  If  you  will  oblige  me 
eternally,  make  this  business  as  easy  to  me  as  you  can."* 
Beyond  this  bnitality  cannot  go.  An  insult  cannot  be  offered 
to  a  wife  of  greater  magnitude.  Her  entreaties,  her  threats, 
her  tears,  had  no  avail  with  the  unfeeling  monster ;  and  the 
keeper  of    his  conscience,  Clarendon,  triumphed  over   the 

*  Life  of  Clarendon,  vol.  ii.,  p.  148.  "Vol.  iii.,  p.  202,  where  the  letter 
is  given.  Lister,  Life  of  Clarendon,  thus  speaks  of  this  profligate: — 
"^^^l0  had  laboured  to  debase  the  morality  of  the  country  by  an  un- 
blushing display  of  the  grossest  profligacy,  and  to  ruin  its  finances  by  tlie 
wildest  extravagance ;  who  had  shamefully  forgotten  the  responsibilities 
of  his  station,  and  neglected,  in  the  pursuit  of  the  most  frivolous  amuse- 
ments, the  important  interests  of  his  country ;  who,  immediately  after 
the  fire  of  London,  applied  the  energies  of  his  mind  to  a  change  of  tlie 
court  costume;  who,  while  the  Dutcli  were  burning  our  ships  in  the 
Thames,  was  amusing  himself  and  Lady  Castlemaine  with  the  dignified 
pastime  of  hunting  a  moth;  wlio  was  most  anxiously  engaged  at  this 
season  of  i>eril  in  composing  the  quarrels  of  his  rival  mistresses,"  &c. — 
Vol.  ii.,  pp.  389,  390.  Pepys  confirms  this.  "Sir  H.  Chomlcy  came  to  me 
to-day,  and  tells  me  the  court  is  as  mad  as  ever ;  and  that  the  night  the 
Dutch  burned  our  ships,  the  king  did  sup  with  Lady  Castlonaine  at  the 
Duchess  of  Monmouth's ;  and  they  were  all  mud  in  hunting  of  a  poor 
moth." — Diary,  vol.  iii.,  p.  2G2. 


348  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

hapless  queen,  and  Charles  had  the  infamous  sai^isfaction  of 
seeing  this  shameless  prostitute  installed  as  the  attendant  on 
his  wife  in  her  most  domestic  seclusion. 

But  the  most  enormovis  e\als  are  never  unmixed.  The 
wildest  tempest  is  often  followed  by  largest  benefits.  The 
greatest  tyranny  is  often  the  birthtime  of  liberty.  So  here 
the  unparalleled  evils  which  marked  the  reign  of  the  restored 
Stuart,  wrought  out  for  the  nation  an  earlier  dawn  of  free- 
dom. "  We  are,  however,  much  indebted  to  the  memory  of 
Barbara,  Duchess  of  Cleveland;  Louisa,  Duchess  of  Ports- 
mouth ;  and  Mrs.  E.  Gwyn.  We  owe  a  tribute  of  gratitude 
to  the  Mays,  the  Killigi-ews,  and  the  Chaffinches  of  the 
Government.  They  played  a  serviceable  part  in  ridding  the 
kingdom  of  its  besotted  loyalty;  they  saved  our  forefathers 
from  the  '  Star  Chamber  and  the  High  Commissioned  Court;' 
they  laboured  in  theii'  vocation  against  standing  armies  and 
corruption;  they  pressed  forward  the  great  ultimate  security 
of  English  freedom,  the  expvilsion  of  the  house  of  Stuart."* 


*  Hallam,  vol.  ii.,  p.  53. 


END   OF   VOL.    II. 


J.   HEATON   AND   SON,   PRINTERS,   PATEBNOSTER-BOW,   LONDON. 


BX6275.E92V.2 

The  early  English  Baptists. 

Princeton  Theological  Seminary-Speer  Library 


1    1012  00035  6214 


