CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 





Cornell University 
Library 



The original of tiiis book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101105033 



THE 

PULPIT COMMENTARY, 

EDITED BY THE 

VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D., 

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER; 
AND BY THE 

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY THE 



VEN. AECHDEACON T. W. FAEEAE, D.D., F.E.S.— EIGHT EEV. H. COTTEEILL, B.D., 
y.E.S.E.— VEET EEV. PEINCIPAL J. TULLOCH, D.D.— EEV. CANON Q. 
EAWLINSON, M.A.— EEV. A. PLmiMEE, M.A., D.D. 



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
New Yoek and Toronto. 



THE 

PULPIT COMMENTARY, 



KIITED BY TBI 



REV. CANON H. D. M. SPENCE, M.A., 

ura ainui. DBAS or st. panoras, and examinino ohafIiAih to the lord 

BI8B0P OF OLOUOESTEB AND BBISTOL ; 
AND BY THE 

EEV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 



ST. MAEK. 

(Exposition 
Bt VEEY rev. E. BICKERSTETH, D.D., 

DBAK OF LIOHFISIiO, 

l^omilettcs 
By ret. prof. J. R. THOMSON, M.A. 

l^omfUes bg Fatfous authors. 

SET. A. ROWLAND, B.A., LL.B. BEV. PEOF. J. J. GITES, M.A. 

fiBV. A. V. MUIE, M.A. EEV. PEOF. E. JOHNSON, M.A 

BEV. B. GEEEN. 

VOL. L 



FUNK & "WAGISTALLS COMPANY 
New York and Tobonto. 



S^^OS'x^lB 



THE 

GOSPEL ACCOEDIN& TO ST. MAEL 



INTEODUCTION. 

The four living creatnres mentioned in Ezekiel (i. 10), and which reappeu 
in a modified form in the Apocalypse of St. John (iv. 7), are interpreted by 
very many Christian writers to signify the fourfold Gospel, the four faces 
representing the four evangelists. The face of a man ia supposed to denote 
St. Matthew, who desoribes the actions of our Lord more especially as to 
his human nature. The face of an eagle ia understood to indicate St. John, 
who soars at once into the highest heavens, and commences his Gospel with 
that magnificent declaration, " In the beginning was the Word, and the 
Word was with God, and the Word was God." Then the face of an om 
■ymbolizes St. Luke, who commences his narrative with the priesthood of 
Zacharias. While, lastly, the face of a lion represents St. Mark, because he 
opens his Gospel with the trumpet voice, like the roaring of a Uon, the 
loud call of the Baptist to repentance. These four carried the ohariot of 
the gospel throughout the world, and subdued the nations to the obedience 
of Christ, the mighty Conqueror. 

Other interesting interpretations have been suggested for ihese sym- 
bols ; amongst them " the whole animate creation," the number four being 
understood to symbolize the material world, as the number three represents 
the Divine Being. But the former interpretation is largely supported by 
early Christian antiquity, and has been made familiar to us through the 
ages past in the representations of ancient art, both sculpture and painting. 
If early testimony is to have its due weight, St. Mark wrote his Gospel 
in Greek, and at Bome, and apparently for Gentiles, certainly not 
exclusively, or in the first instance, for Jews. There are explanations given 
here and there in his Gospel which would be superfluous if it were written 
only for Jews. Jordan, when he first mentions it, is called "the river 
Jordan." It is true that many good authorities read " the river Jordan " 
in St. Matthew (iii. 6); but this may have been introduced to make his 
Gospel more clear to those who were unaoquainted with the geography 
of Palestine. "John's disciples and the Pharisees used to fast" (^<rav 
vria-Tevovrei) ; literally, " were fasting." This would have been unnecessary 
information for Jews. "The time of figs was not yet." Every inhabitant 
of Palestine would have known this. St. Mark alone preserves those words 

ST. MASK. a 



INTBODUCTIOJ^ TO 



of onr Lord, " The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath," 
(oh. ii. 27) — a great principle, belonging to all nations alika He alona 
qnotes the words (xi. 17), "of all nations," literally (iraa-i toIs tOveaiv), 
" for all the nations," in connection with our Lord's cleansing of the temple. 

Early writers speak of St. Mark as the " interpreter " of St. Peter ; by 
which expression it seems to be meant that he put down in writing, what 
he had heard orally from St. Peter, the things relating to the life of our 
Lord. It seems also plain that he must have had access to St. Matthew's 
GospeL But he was not a mere copyist. He was an independent witness. 
He often supplies a sentence, detailing some little incident which he oonld 
only have received from an eye-witness, and which forms an additional Knk 
to the narrative, explaining something which had been left obsoure, and 
filling up the picture. If we imagine St. Mark with St. Matthew's Gktspel 
at hand, and with oopioHS memoranda of the observations and graphic 
descriptions of St. Peter, together with his own peculiar gifts as a writer, 
and the unerring guidance of the Holy Spirit, we seem to see at once 
the sources of St. Mark's Gospel. 

St. Mark's Gospel is the shortest of all the four Gospels ; and yet there 
is a unity about it which, as has been well said, "quite excludes the 
notion that it is either a mere compendium of some richer, or an expansion 
of some briefer, Gospel" ('Speaker's Commentary'). The writer avails 
himself of all the information that he can procure ; at the same time, he 
is an independent witness, giving, as all the sacred writers are permitted 
to do, the colouring of his own mind, his own " setting," so to speak, to 
those great truths and facts which the Holy Ghost moved him to oom- 
municate. His frequent use of the present for the aorist; his constant 
repetition of the word eidimi, " straightway " (carefully marked in the new 
Eevision by the employment of the same English synonym, " straightway," 
throughout) ; his employment of diminutives, and his introduction of little 

details, imparting freshness and light to the whole narrative; all these 

and many other circumstances give to St. Mark's Gospel a character of ita 
own, distinct from, and yet in harmony with, the rest. It is a compendinm 
of our blessed Lord's life upon earth; but it is a compendium with a 
peculiar richness and originality which differences it off from the other 
Gospels, making ns feel that if we were called upon to part with any one 
of the four, we certainly could not spare that of St. Mark. 

Another thought which is impressed upon us by the study of this Gospel 
is the shortness of the time within which the amazing mystery of our 
redemption was actually wrought out, and the marvellous activity of the 
earthly life of the Son of God. St. Mark's narrative, giving for the most 
part the salient facts and events, without the discourses and parables which 
enrich the other Gospels, presents us with a comprehensive conspectus, 
which is of special use in its relation to the other Gospels, in which we are 
led rather to dwell upon the details, and to linger over the Divine words 
instructive as they are, until we almost lose sight of the grand outline 



THE GOSPEL AOCOEDINO TO BT. MABK. 



of tbe history. St. Mark, by the strnctnre of his narrative, helpa v* mora 
readily to grasp tiie whole of the sublime and impressive record. 

Take, for example, St. Mark's account of our Lord's ministry in Galilee. 
How it revolves around the familiar Lake of Gennesaretl A aeries of 
striking miracles at Capernaum and in that neighbonrhood, commencing 
with the casting out of the " unclean spirit," excites the attention of the 
whole Jewish population, and exalts the fame of Jesus even amongst the 
heathen beyond the Jewish borders, so that they flock to him &om every 
quarter. But the miracles were only intended to challenge attention to 
the words of Jesus ; and therefore we find him continually, preaching to 
the dense masses on the seashore, until they thronged him so that he was 
obliged to direct a boat to be always in attendance upon him, into which 
he might retreat, and which he might use as his pulpit when the preasnra 
of the crowd became inconveniently great. Then there is the frequent 
crossing over the lake to and firo, &om west to east, and back from east to 
west — ^the sea itself ministoring to him, gathering into a storm at his 
bidding, and at his bidding becoming still. Then there are the miraolea 
and the preaching on this side and on that, amongst a Jewish popula- 
tion here and a Gentile population there. And then there is the jealousy 
of the chief priests and scribes, sent purposely from Jerusalem to watoh 
him, and to find grounds for accusation against him, while the mass of the 
people recognize him as the great Prophet that should come into the world. 
A few short chapters sufiSce to exhibit all this to us, and to present us with 
a striking and vivid iUnstration of the fulfilment of the prophecy quoted 
by St. Matthew (iv. 16, 16) : " The land of Zabulon, and the land of 
Nephthali, by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles ; 
the people which sat in darkness saw great light ; and to them which sat 
in the region and shadow of death light is sprung up." 

The connection of St. Peter with this Gospel has already been noticed; 
and, assuming the correctness of the supposition that St. Mark, in writing 
his Gospel, was to a great extent the "interpreter" of St. Peter, it is 
interesting to observe how the internal evidence supplied by this Gospel 
tends to confirm this view. Instead of being put prominently forward, 
as in the other Gospels, in this the Apostle Peter falls bm much as possible 
into the background. When his name first occurs, it appears as Simon. 
It is not until the third chapter that he is spoken of as Peter, and then 
only in the simplest terms : " Simon he sumamed Peter " (ch. iii. 16). In 
the eighth chapter, while our Lord's severe rebuke of him is recorded, there 
is no mention of the noble confession which he had made just before. In 
the fourteenth chapter, while we are informed that our Lord sent two of 
his disciples to prepare the Passover, the names of the two are not given, 
although we know from another evangelist that they were Peter and John. 
In the same chapter, when they were in the Garden of Gethsemane, we read 
that our Lord singles out Peter as one who was heavy with sleep, and 
applies his remonstrance ■peoially to him, addressing him as Simoni 



»▼ INTEODUCTION TO 



utd fwying, "Simon, sleepeat thou?" The partionlara of this apoetle'i 
denial of Ghrist are, as we might expect, given also with great minuteness. 
The only other notice that we find of him is that message sent to him by 
the angel after onr Lord's resurrection, " Qo tell his disciples and Peter, 
He goeth before yon into Galilee" — a message which, while it would 
recall to him his sin, would also assure him of. his forgiveness. Now, all 
this manifestly confirms the ancient traditions that St. Peter influenced the 
compilation of this Gospel. He had said (2 Pet. i. 15), " Moreover I will 
endeavour that ye may be able after my decease to have these things always 
in remembrance " — a sentence which shows his great anxiety that there 
should be a trustworthy record preserved for all future ages &om the lipi 
and pens of those who were eye-witnesses of Christ's majesty. Thus all 
that we read leads us to the conclusion that we have in St. Mark a faithful 
exponent of what St. Peter heard and saw and communicated to him ; so 
that if we wanted another title for this Gospel, we might oaU it "The 
Gospel acoording to St. Peter." 

I. The Life of St. Mark the Evangelist. 

The name of Mark is by some supposed to be derived from the Latin 
" marcuB," a hammer ; not " maroellus," a little hammer, but " marcus," a 
strong hamm«r, able to crush the flinty rock, and thus indicative of the 
spiritual power wielded by the evangelist, and enabling him to break 
the stony hearts of the Gentiles, and to rouse them to penitence and faith 
and a holy life. The prae-nomen Marcus was in frequent use amongst the 
Romans, and often given to those who were the firstborn. Cicero was 
called Marcus TuUius Cicero, because he was the firstborn of his family. 
So St. Mark was in a spiritual sense the firstborn and weU-beloved of 
St. Peter. " The Church that is at Babylon [literally, ^ iv Ba/3uA.5v^ ' she 
that is in Babylon '], elected together with you, saluteth you ; and so doth 
Marcus my son " (1 Pet. v. 13). St. Mark drew his spirit and his ardour 
from St. Peter. St. Peter, as his father in Christ Jesus, impressed his 
wisdom and holiness upon him. 

Who, then, was St. Mark ? He appears to have been a Hebrew by nation, 
and of the tribe of Levi. Bede says that he was a priest after the order of 
Aaron. There is very good reason to believe (although Grotius, Cornelius 
k Lapide, and others, think diflferently) that he is the same person who is 
mentioned in the Acts (xii. 12, 25) as " John whose surname is Mark." 
John was his original Jewish name ; and Mark, his Eoman prefix, was 
added afterwards, and gradually superseded the other name. We can trace 
the process of the change very clearly in the Acts and in the Epistles. 
We find John and John Mark in the earlier part of the Acts ; but in Acts 
XV. 39 John disappears altogether, and in the Epistles he is always called 
Mark. His surname appears to have gradually taken the place of his other 
name, just as Paul takes the place of Saul. Then further we find him 
associated with St. Peter ; which furnishes another evidence of his identity, 



THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINa TO ST. MARE. 



M also does the fact that he was sister's son, or consin (avci^tof ) to Barnabas, 
who was himself on terms of close fellowship with St. Peter. Moreover, 
the general consensus of the early Church identifies John Mark with the 
writer of this Gospel, whioh Eusebins informs us was written under the 
eye of St. Peter. The substitution of a Eomau name for his family Jewish 
name was probably intentional, and designed to indicate his entrance upon 
a new life, and to prepare him for intercourse with Gentiles, especially 
Romans. 

Assuming, then, that " John whose surname was Mark " was the writei 
of this Gospel, we have the following particulars respecting him: — He 
was the son of a certain Mary who dwelt in Jerusalem. She appears to 
have been well known, and to have been in a good position. Her house was 
open to the friends and disciples of our Lord. It is possible that hers may 
have been the house where our Lord " kept the Passover " with his disciples 
on the night of his betrayal ; perhaps the house where the disciples were 
gathered together on the evening of the Besurrection ; perhaps the house 
where they received the miraculous gifts on the day of Pentecost. It was 
certainly the house to which Peter betook himself when he was delivered 
out of prison; certainly the first great centre of Christian worship in 
Jerusalem after our Lord's ascension, and the site of the first Christian 
church in that city. It is probable that it was to the sacred intercourse of 
that home that John Mark owed his conversion, which may very probably 
have been delayed in consequence of his having been by birth of the family 
of the Jewish priesthood. It is more than probable that St. Mark, in ch. 
xiv. 61, 62, may have been relating what happened to himself. All the 
details fit in with this supposition. The action corresponds with what we 
know of his character, which appears to have been warm-hearted and earnest, 
but timid and impulsive. Moreover, the linen cloth, or sindon, cast about 
his body, answers to his position and circumstances. It would not have 
been worn by a person in very humble life. Indeed, nothing but the name 
is wanting to complete the evidence of the identity of " John whose surname 
was Mark " with Mark the writer of this Gospel. It will be remembered 
that St. John in his Gospel evidently speaks of himself more than once 
without mentioning his name, calling himself " another disciple." St. Mark, 
if the hypothesis be correct, speaks of himself as " a young man," probably 
cecause he was not yet a disciple. 

We may assume, then, that the events of that terrible night and of the 
following day, followed by the great event of the Besurrection, so wrought 
upon the mind of John Mark, that they brought him to a full acceptance 
of Christ and his salvation. Hence we are not surprised to find that he 
was chosen at an early period in the history of the Acts of the Apostles 
(Acts liii. 5) to accompany Paul and Barnabas as their minister, or 
attendant (xnrrjpeTrjs), on their first missionary journey. But we next read 
of him that when they reached Perga, in Pamphylia (Acts xiii. 13), John 
Mark left them and returned to Jerusalem. The sacred narrative does no« 



INTEODUCTION TO 



giye the reason for this defection. Pamphylia was a wild, rough district . 
and St. Paul and hiB companiong may have encountered Bome danger* 
before reaching Perga, if Strabo's account of the Pamphylians is to be 
relied upon. Then John Mark may have felt a longing for his mother's 
home at Jerusalem ; and some good opportunity for leaving them may have 
offered itself to him at Perga, which was not far from the sea. At all 
events, it is consistent with what we know of his character that he should 
have suddenly determined to leave the apostles. However, if any un- 
worthy motive influenced him, he soon recovered himself; for not long 
after, we read of his having been again associated, not indeed with Paul, 
but with Barnabas, his cousin, in missionary labour. Indeed, Mark was 
the cause of a temporary estrangement between Paul and Barnabas, 
although, in the providence of him who is ever bringing good out of evil, 
this estrangement led to a still wider diffusion of the gospel. 

The next notice that we have of Mark is in St. Paul's Epistle to the Ooloa 
sians, written by him from Bome during his first imprisonment. At the 
close of that letter St. Paul writes (Col. iv. 10), " There saluteth you, . . . 
Marcus, sister's son to Barnabas, touching whom ye received command- 
ments: if he come unto you, receive him." It is probable that these 
Christians at Colosse had heard of the temporary separation of Paul and 
Barnabas, and of its cause ; and if so, there is something very pathetio ia 
this allusion to Mark in this Epistle. It is as though the apostle said, 
" You may have heard of the separation between Barnabas and myself on 
account of Mark. Yon will therefore now rejoice to know that Mark is 
with me, and a comfort to me, and that he sends you Christian greetings 
by my hand. I have already given you directions concerning him : if he 
come unto you, receive him." (See Wordsworth, in foe.) 

Nor is this all. Later on, in his Second Epistle to Timothy, written 
during his second imprisonment at Eome, St. Paul (iv. 11) desires his 
own son in the faith, Timothy, to come to him ; and he adds, " Take 
Mark, and bring him with thee; for he is profitable to me for the 
ministry ; " literally, " he is useful to me for ministering " (€<m yap fioi 
eiSvpijoTos e« Sta/covtav). It would seem as though these words had refer- 
ence rather to Mark's useful qualities as an attendant (iinjpiTris), though 
possibly the higher service may be included. This is the latest notice that 
we have of Mark in the New Testament. But St. Peter, writing from 
Babylon, perhaps about five or six years before St. Paul sent this message 
to Timothy, alludes to Mark as having been with him there at that time, 
and calls him, " Marcus my son," as has already been noticed. 

It will be seen, then, from hence that Mark had close and intimate 
relations with both St. Peter and St. Paul; and that he was with the one 
apostle at Babylon, and with the other at Bome. I am quite unable to 
accept the view that St. Peter, when mentioning Babylon, is referring 
mystically to Bome. This is not the place in which to look for figurative 
language. Ner is there anything remarkable in St. Peter, the apostle of 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MABK. tH 

the circumcision, having gone to Babylon, where we know there was a large 
colony of Jews, or in his having been accompanied thither by Mark him- 
•elf, also a Jew of the family of Aaron. The whole is consistent with the 
idea that Mark wrote his Gospel nnder the direction of St. Peter, Ancient 
writers, as Irensens, TertuUian, St. Jerome, and others, with one consent 
make him the interpreter of St. Peter. Eusebius, quoting from Papias, 
says, " Mark, being the interpreter of St. Peter, wrote down exactly what- 
ever things he remembered, yet not in the order in which Christ either 
spoke or did them ; for he was neither a hearer nor a follower of our 
Lord, but he was afterwards a follower of St, Peter." St. Jerome says, 
" St. Mark, the interpreter of the Apostle St. Peter, and the first bishop 
of the Church of Alexandria, related what things he heard his master 
preaching, rather according to the truth of the facts, than according to 
the order of the things that were done." 

St. Augustine calls Mark the " breviator " of St. Matthew, not because h« 
made an abridgment of St. Matthew's Gospel, but because he relates more 
briefly, according to what he had received from St. Peter, those things 
which St. Matthew relates more at length. 

According to the testimony of St. Jerome, he wrote a short Gospel at 
Borne at the request of the brethren there ; and St. Peter, when he had 
heard it, approved of it, and appointed it to be read in the churches by his 
authority. St. Jerome says, further, that St. Mark took this Gospel and 
went into Egypt; and, being the first preacher of Christ at Alexandria, 
established a Church with so much moderation of doctrine and of life, that 
he constrained all those who had opposed Christ to follow his example. 
Eusebius states that he became the first bishop of that Church, and that the 
catechetical school at Alexandria was founded under his authority. It is 
farther stated that he ultimately died a martyr's death at Alexandria. 
But the evidence upon this latter point is not sufficiently trustworthy. 

Tradition says that the body of St. Mark was translated by certain 
merchants from Alexandria to Venice, A.D. 827, where he was much 
honoured. The Venetian Senate adopted the emblem of St. Mark — the 
lion — for their crest ; and when they directed anything to be done, they 
affirmed that it was by the order of St. Mark. 

n. Observations on the Genuineness and Authenticitt oy thh Last 
Twelve Verses of St. Mark's Gospel. 

These verses have been admitted by the Eevisers of 1881 into the text, 
but with a space between ver. 8 and ver. 9, to show that they hava 
received them with some degree of caution and reserve, and not without 
having carefully weighed the evidence on both sides. The most important 
features in the evidence are the following : — 



viU INTRODUCTION TO 



1. The Evidence of ManuteripU. 

(1) Of the Uncial Manuscripts. The two oldest, namely, the Sinaitia 
and the Vatican, omit the whole passage, but under different conditions. 
The Sinaitic omits the passage absolutely. The Vatican omits it, but with 
a space left blank between the eighth verse of Mark xvi,, and the begin- 
ning of St. Luke, just sufficient for its insertion ; as though the writer oi 
the manuscript, hesitating whether to omit or to insert the verses, thought 
it safest to leave a space for them. 

But there is another and much later Uncial Manuscript (L), of about the 
eighth century. Of this manuscript it may be said that, although somu 
four centuries later, it bears a strong family resemblance to the Sinaitic and 
the Vatican. This manuscript does not omit the passage, but it interpolates 
between it and the eighth verse an apocryphal addition, and then goes on 
with ver. 9. This addition is given at p. 538, second edition, of Dr. 
Scrivener's admirable work on the ' Criticism of the New Testament.' 

It should be added here that there is a strong resemblance between the 
Sinaitic and Vatican manuscripts ; so that practically the evidential value 
of these three manuscripts amounts to little more than one authority. 

With these three exceptions, all the Uncial Manuscripts maintain the 
twelve verses in their integrity. 

(2) The Cursive Manuscripts. The evidence of the Cursives is unani- 
mous in favour of the disputed verses. It is true that some mark the 
passage as one of which the genuineness had been disputed. But against 
this there has to be set the fact that the verses are retained in all but two 
old manuscripts, and those two in all probability not independent. It has 
been clearly shown by Dean Bnrgon that the verses were read in the public 
•ervices of the Church in the fourth century, and probably much earlier, 
as ihown by the ancient Evangelisteria. 

2. Evidence of Ancient Versioni. 

The most ancient versions, both of the Eastern and of the Western Churchea, 
without a single exception, recognize this passage. Of the Eastern versions 
the evidence is very remarkable. The Peshito Syriao, which dates from the 
second century, bears witness to its genuineness ; so does the Philoxenian ; 
while the Caretonian Syriao, also very ancient, far earlier than the Sinaitic 
or Vatican manuscripts, bears a very singular testimony. In the only extant 
copy of that version, the Gospel of St. Mark is wanting, with the excep- 
tion of one fragment only, and that fragment contains the last four of 
these disputed verses. The Coptic versions also recognize the passage. 

The same may be said of the versions of the Western Church. The 
earlier version of the Vulgate, called the Old Italic, has it. Jerome, who used 
the best manuscript of the Old Italic when he prepared his Vulgate, felt 
himself obliged to admit this disputed passage, although he did not scrupl(» 



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. 



to allege the objections to its reception, which were the same as thooa 
urged by Eusebius. The Gothic Version of Ulphilaa (fourth century) ba« 
the passage &om Ter. 8 to Ter. 12. 

3. Evidence of the Early Fathen, 

There are some expressions in the ' Shepherd of Hermas,' written in all 
probability not later than the middle of the second oentuiy, which are 
evidently taken from St. Mark (xvi. 16). 

Justin Martyr (about a.d. 160) quotes the last two verses. 

The evidence of Irenseus (i-D. 177) is yet more striking. In one of hia 
books (' Adv. Heer.,' iii. 10) he quotes the beginning and the end of St. 
Mark's Gospel in the same passage, in the latter part of which he says, 
" But in the end of his Gospel Mark saith, ' And the Lord Jesus, after he had 
spoken unto them, was received into heaven, and sitteth at the right hand 
of God,' confirming what was said by the prophet, ' The Lord saith unto 
my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy 
footstool.' " 

This evidence of Irenseus is conclusive as to the fact that in his time 
there was no doubt as to the genuineness and authenticity of the passage 
in Asia Minor, in Gaul, or in Italy. 

There yet remains the question of internal evidence. 

Now, to begin with. If it is assumed that St. Mark's Gospel ended at 
the close of ver. 8, the abruptness of the conclusion is very striking in the 
English, and still more so in the Greek (i<l>oj3ovvTo yap). It seems scarcely 
possible to suppose that it could have ended here. Benan says on this 
point, "On ne peut guere admettre que le texte primitif finit d'une 
maniere aussi abrupte." 

On the other hand, having regard to the mode in which St. Mark opens 
his Gospel, we might suppose that he would condense at the close as he 
condenses at the beginning. The first year of our Lord's ministry is dis- 
posed of very briefly ; we might, therefore, expect a rapid and compendious 
conclusion. Two or three important evidences of our Lord's resurrection 
are concisely stated ; then, without any break, but where the reader must 
supply an interval, be is transported into Galilee. St. Mark had already 
recorded the words of Christ (xiv. 28), " But after that I am risen, I will 
go before you into Galilee." How natural, therefore, that he should refer in 
gome way to our Lord's presence in Galilee after his resurrection ; which 
he does in the most effective manner by quoting the words which St. 
Matthew (xxvii. 16, etc.) tells us were spoken by him in Galilee. Then 
another stride from Galilee to Bethany, to the last earthly scene of all — ^the 
Ascension. The whole is eminently characteristic of St. Mark. His Gospel 
ends, as we might expect it to end, from the character of its beginning. 
On the whole, the evidence as to the genuineness and authenticity of thii 
passage seems irresistible. 



INTRODUCTION TO 



HL Amaltsis of Contbnts of St. Maek's Gk)8PBu 

CH. L 

1 — 8 Preaching of John the Baptist. 

9 — 11 Baptism of Jesus by John. 
12, 13 Temptation of our Lord in the wildernesi. 
14, 15 Commencement of our Lord's public ministry. 
16 — 18 Call of Andrew and Simon. 
19, 20 Call of James and John, sons of Zebedee. 
21, 22 Our Lord preaches in the synagogue at Capernaum. 
23 — 28 The casting out of the uncleau spirit in the synagngue. 
29 — 34 The healing of Simon's wife's mother, and many other*. 
36—37 Eetirement of our Lord for prayer. 
38, 39 Missionary circuit throughout Galilee. 
40—45 Healing of a leper. 

OH. n. 

1 — 12 Christ heals the pandytio at Oapemaum, 
13—17 The call of Levi. 

18 — 22 Discourse with the Pharisees about fasting. 
23 — 28 The disciples pluck the ears of 'V)m on the sabbatk. 

CH. m. 
1 — 6 The healing of the man whose hand wag withered. The malice of the Pharisee* 

and Herodians. 
7 — 12 Jesus withdraws to the sea, followed by a great multitude. A little boat waits 

upon him because of the crowd. He performs many miracles. 
13 — 19 Jesus goes into the mountain, and there appoints the twelve to be his apostles. 
20 — 30 Jesus returns to Capernaum. He is again thronged by a multitude. His 

friends come to lay hold of him. His miracles are ascribed to Beelzebub by 

his enemies. He warns them of the danger of resisting the Holy Spirit, 
31 — 36 His mother and his brethren come seeking him. 

CH. rv. 

1 — 20 The parable of the sower, and its explanation. 
21 — 25 Further discourse on the responsibility of hearing, 
26 — 29 Parable of the seed growing secretly. 
30 — 34 Parable of the grain of mustard seed. 
36 — 41 Our Lord stills the tempest, as he crosses the sea to the country of the 

Oerasenes. 
OH. ▼. 
1 — 20 On landing on the eastern coast, our Lord is met by a man who is possessed 

Our Lord heals him, and suffers the dispossessed evil spirits to enter into a 

herd of swine. 
21 — 24 Our Lord crosses over again to the western shore, where he ia met by Jairus, 

who seeks healing for his little daughter. 
25 — 34 On his way to the house of Jairus he heals a woman with an issue of blood. 
35^-43 He enters the house of Jairus, and raises to life again his daughter now dead. 
cm. n. 
1 — C Our Lord visits Nazareth, where, being met with unbelief, he works but few 

miracles. He leaves Nazareth, and makes another missionary circuit, 
7 — 13 He now sends forth the twelve whom he had already appointed, and eivM 

them instructions for their mission. 
14 — 29 Herod the tetrarch hears of the fame of Jesus. The account of the death of 

John the Baptist. 
80 — 44 Our Lord and his disciples again cross the sea, and are met by a great multi- 
tude. The five thousand are miraculously fed. 
45—63 Our Lord walks on the sea, and stills the tempest. 
68—56 Our Lord and his disciples roach the country of Oennesaret, where they art 

ftgain met by great numbers wherever they go ; and he heals many. 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



<]H. Tn, 
1 — 13 The complaint of the Pharisees aad scribes against the disciples lot eating 
bread with unwashen hands. The traditions of the elders. 
14 — 23 The true sources of defilement. 
24 — 30 The Syro-phoenician woman. 
31—37 The healing of the deaf and dumK 

OH. vni. 
1 — 10 The feeding of the four thousand. 
11 — 13 The Pharisees demand a sign from heaven. 
14 — 21 The leaven of the Pharisees and of Herod. 
22—26 The healing of the blind man at Bethsaida. 
27—33 Simon Peter's confession. Our Lord rebukes Ua. 
34—38 The value of the souL 

OH. IX. 

1 — 13 The Transfiguration. 
14 — 29 The healing of the epileptic child. 
30 — 32 Our Lord predicts his sufferings and death. 
33 — 37 Our Lord teaches the lesson of humility. 
38 — 42 How the disciples were to treat those who did miracles in Christ's Name, amI 

yet followed him not. The danger of offending any who believed in him. 
43 — 50 Fain preferable to sin. 

OH. X, 

1 — 12 On divorce. 
13—16 Little children brought to Christ. 
17 — 31 The rich young man. 

32 — 34 Christ again predicts his sufferings and death. 
35 — 45 The request of James and John, the sons of ZebedMw 
46 — 52 Blind Bartimssus receives his sight. 

CH. SI. 

1 — 11 The triumphant entry into Jerusalem. 
12 — 14 The ourstng of the fig tree. 
16 — 19 The casting out of tfa« profaners of the tempi*. 
20 — 26 The withered fig tree and its lessons. 
27 — 33 Jesus questioned by the chief priests as to his authorit^ti 

«a. xn. 
1 — 12 The vineyard and the husbandmen. 
13 — ^17 The tribute money. 
18 — 27 Christ reasons with the Sadducees. 
28 — 34 The first and great commandment. 
35 — 40 Christ warns the people against the scribe*. 
41 — 44 The poor widow and her two mites. 

OH. xm. 

1 — 34 The destruction of the temple and the oalamitiea of the Jews fttretolL 
35—37 Exhortation and watchfulness. 

CH. xrv. 

1—9 The anointing of our Lord at Bethany. 
10, 11 The betrayal. 

12 — 26 The institution of the Lord's Supper. 
27 — 31 Our Lord's warning to his disciples, that they would forsake him whea he vt.t 

delivered up. 
32 — 42 The agony in the garden. 
42 — 50 Our Lord delivered up. 
51, 52 The young man who fled naked. 
53 — 65 Our Lord arraigned before the high priesta 
6ft— 72 Peter's threefold denial. 



INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINO TO ST, MARS. 



OH. XT. 

1 — 15 Our Lord arraigned before Pilate, and condemned to be uruciS'od. 
16 — 36 Our Lord mocked and crucified. 
87—39 The death of Christ, 
40, 41 The ministering women from Galilee. 
42—47 The burial of Christ. 

CW.XYI. 

1 — 8 Visit of the women to the empty tomb, and tbe appearance t« them of ac 
angel. 

9 — 11 Christ's appearance to Mary Magdalene. 
12, 13 Christ's appearance to two others. 
14 Christ's appearance to the eleven. 

15 — 18 Christ's last command to his apostles. 

19 Christ's ascension. 

20 The apostles go forth to preach, and frith power to work miracles in proof ti 

their mission. 

IT. LiTEBATirBX. 

Pkpias ; Irencna ; Tertullian ; Origen ; Clemens Alexandrinus ; Eusebius ; Jerome ; 
Gregory ; Augustine ; Chrysostom ; Cornelius Jl Lapide ; the ' Catena Aurea ' of ThomM 
Aquinas ; Joseph Mede ; Dr. Job q Lightfoot ; Bengel's ' Gnomon ; ' Dean Alford ; Bishop 
Wordsworth; Meyer; Stanley's 'Sinai and Palestine;' 'Speakers' Commentary;' Smith^ 
• Dictionary of the Bible ; ' Dr. Morison's ' Commentary on St. Mark ' (3rd edit.) ; Dr. 
Scrivener on the Criticism of '■Jhe New Testament ; I)«aa Burgoa ob Ota last twain 
Torsas of St Mark'i Gosj^ 



THE 



GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MAEL 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER L 



Ver. 1. — ^The beginning of the gospel of 
Jesus Christ. These words mean, not the 
title of the book, but the commencement 
of the narrative ; and so they depend upon, 
•what follows, namely, "as it is written" 
(Ko8ajj for iis), " even as it is written." The 
words " the gospel of Jesus Christ " do not 
signify the book which St. Mark wrote, but 
the evangelical teaching of Jesus Christ. 
St. Mark means that the gospel announce- 
ment by Jesus Christ had such a beginning 
as had been predicted by Isaiah and Ma- 
lachi, namely, the preachiag of John the 
Baptist, and his testimony concerning 
Christ, to be fully laid open by the preach- 
ing and the death of Christ. The preach- 
ing of repentance by the Baptist was ihe 
preparation and the beginning of the evan- 
gelical preoehing by Christ, of whom John 
was the forerunner. It has been well ob- 
served that St Matthew and St. John begin 
their Gospels from Christ himself; but St. 
Matthew from the human, and St. John from 
the Divine, generation of Chiist. St. Mark 
and St. Luke commence from John the 
Baptisf; but 81 Luke from his nativity, 
and St. John from his preaching. The 
words, the Son of God, are rightly retained 
in the Bevised Version, although they are 
omitted by some ancient authorities. 

Ver. 2. — ^Even as it is written in the pro- 
phet!. The weight of evidence i» here in 
favour of the reading "in Isaiah the pro- 
phet." Threeofthe most important unciala 
(K, B, and L), and twenty-six of the cursives, 
have the reading "Isaiah." With these 
agree the Italic, Coptic, and Vulgate versions. 
Of the Fathers, Irennus quotes the passage 
three times, twice using the words " in the 
prophets," and once " in Isaiah the prophet." 

8T. UABK. 



Generally the Fathers agree that "Isaiah" 
is the received reading. The more natural 
reading would of course be " in the pro- 
phets," inasmuch as two prophets are 
quoted ; but in deciding upon readings, it 
constantly happens that the less likely 
reading is the more probable. In the oaae 
before ns we can hardly acconnt for 
"Isaiah" being exchanged for "the pro- 
phets," although we can quite under- 
stand "the prophets" being interpolated 
for "Isaiah." Assuming, then, that St. 
Mark wrote "in Isaiah the prophet," we 
may ask why he mentions Isaiah only and 
not Malachi ? The answer would seem to 
be this, that here the voice of Isaiah is the 
more powerful of the two. But in real 
truth, Malachi says the same thing that 
Isaiah says; for the messenger sent from 
God to prepare the way of Christ was none 
other than John, crying aloud and preach- 
ing repentance as a preparation for the 
receiving of the grace of Christ. The 
oracle of Malachi is, in fact, contained in 
the oracle of Isaiah ; for what Malachi pre- 
dicted, the same had Isaiah more clearly 
and concisely predicted in other words. 
And this is the reason wily St. Mark here, 
and other evangelists elsewhere, when they 
cite two prophets, and two or more sentences 
from different places in the same connec- 
tion, cite them as one and the same testi- 
mony, each sentence appearing to be not 
so much two, as one and the same declara- 
tion differently worded. 

Ver. 4. — John came, and preached the 
baptism of repeutauoe. John came, that is, 
that he might rouse the people to repent- 
ance, and prepare them, by the outward 
cleansing of ueir bodies, to receive the 
cleansing of their louli through Christ's 
baptism, which was to follow his. So that 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK- [ch. v 1—45. 



the baptism of John was the profession of 
their penitence. Hence they who were 
baptized with his baptism confessed their 
Bins, and thus made the first step towards 
the forgiving mercy which was to be found 
in Christ ; and the seal of his forgiveness 
they were to look for in his baptism, which 
is a baptism for the remission of sins to 
all true penitents and faithful believers. 
Christ's baptism was, therefore, the per- 
fection and consummation of the baptism 
of John. 

Ver. 6. — Clothed with camel's hair. This 
was a rough, coarse garment, characteristic 
of the doctrine -which John taught, namely, 
penitence and contempt of the world. 
Camels abounded in Syria. And a leathern 
girdle about his loins. Not only the pro- 
phets, but the Jews and the inhabitants of 
Syria generally, used a girdle to keep the 
long flowing garment more closely about 
them, so as to leave them more firee for 
journeying or for labour. Thus our Lord 
says (Luke xii. 35), " Let your loins be 
girded about, and your lamps burning." 
And he did eat locusts and wild honey. 
The insect called the locust (aitpis) was per- 
mitted to be eaten (see Lev. xi. 22). It 
'vas used as food by the common people in 
Judaea. The Arabs eat them to this day ; 
but they are considered as a common and 
inferior kind of food. They are a sign of 
temperance, poverty, and penitence. The 
wild honey due'Xi &y/>iov) was simply honey 
made by wild bees, either in the trees or in 
the hollows of the rocks. Isidorus says that 
it was of an inferior flavour. Both these 
kinds of food were consistent with the 
austere life and the solemn preaching of 
the Baptist. 

Ver. 7. — The latchet of whose shoes I am 
not worthy to stoop down and onloose. This 
was the menial office of the slave, whose 
business it was to take off and put on the 
shoes of his master, stooping down with all 
humility and respect for this purpose. Thus 
John confessed that he was the servant of 
Christ, and that Christ was his Lord. In 
a mystical sense the shoes denote the 
humanity of Christ, which by its union with 
the Word became of the highest dignity 
and majesty. St. Bernard says, "The 
majesty of the Word was shod with the 
sandal of our humanity." 

Ver. 8. — I baptized yon with water; but 
he shall baptize yon with [or in] the Holy 
Ohost. It is as though he said, "Christ 
vrill pour his Holy Spirit so abundantly 
upon you, that he will cleanse you from aU 
your lins, and fill you with holiness and 
love and all his other excellent graces." 
ChriBt did this visibly on the day of Pente- 
cost. And this he does invisibly in the 
•aorament of Holy Baptism, and in the rite 



of Confirmation, which is the completion of 

the sacrament of Baptism. John baptized 
with water only, but Christ with water and 
the Holy Spirit. John baptized the body 
only, Christ baptizes the soul. By how 
much, therefore, the Holy Spirit transcends 
the water, and the soul excels the body, by 
so much is Christ's baptism more excellent 
than that of John, which was only prepara- 
tory and rudimentary. If it be asked why 
it was needful that our Lord should be 
baptized with John's baptism, the best 
answer is that given by Christ himself, 
" Suffer it to be so now ; for thus it becometh 
o« to fulfil all righteousness ; " it becometh 
us — me in receiving this baptism, and you 
in imparting it. Christ was sent to do the 
whole will of God ; and as in his circum- 
cision, so in his baptism, " he was made to 
be sin for us, who knew no sin." 

Ver. 10. — Straightway (eufleaj) coming np 
out of the water, he saw the heavens 
opened (o-xiC''/'^e'"'"0; literally, rent asunder. 
The word evOeas occurs more than forty 
times in this Gospel, and is so character- 
istic of St. Mark that,inithe Eevised Version, 
it is uniformly rendered by the same Eng- 
lish synonym, "straightway." He saw. 
Elsewhere we are told (John i. 32) that St. 
John the Baptist saw this descent. The 
earliest heretics took advantage of this state- 
ment to represent this event as the descent 
of the eternal Christ upon the man Jesus for 
personal indwelling. Later critics have 
adopted this view. But it need hardly be 
said here that such an opinion is alto- 
gether inconsistent with all that we read 
elsewhere of the circumstances of the 
Incarnation, and of the intimate and indis- 
soluble union of the Divine and human 
natjires in the person of the one Christ, from 
the time of the " overshadowing of the Virgin 
Mary by the power of the Higliest." The 
Spirit descending upon him at his baptism 
was not the descent of the eternal Christ 
upon the man Jesus. It was rather the 
conveyance to one who was already prepared 
for it as God and man, of office and 
authority as the great Prophet that should 
come into the world. St. Luke says parti- 
cularly (iii. 21) that it was when Jesus had 
been baptized and was praying, that the 
Holy Spirit descended upon him; plainly 
showing us that it was not through the 
baptism of John, but through the meri 
torious obedience and the prayer of the Son 
of God, that the heavens were "rent 
asunder," and the Holy Spirit descended 
upon him. 

Ver. 12. — Driveth him (iK0itK\ei) ; liter- 
ally, drivelh him forth. That Holy Spirit, 
which not long before be had re- 
ceived at his baptism, impelled him with 
great energy ; so that of his own accord ha 



CH. 1, 1—45.] THE GOSPKL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. 



went forth, armed with Divine power, into 
the desert, that there, as in a wrestling-plaoe, 
he might contend alone with Satan. There 
Christ and antichrist met, and entered 
upon the conflict upon the issue of which 
our salvation depended. 

Ver. 13. — Forty days tempted of Satan. 
Bt. Mark gathers up the whole temptation 
into this one sentence; and the passage 
would seem to imply that the three tempta- 
tions recorded by St. Matthew and St. Luke 
were not the only trials tlirough which our 
Ix>rd passed during those forty days, al- 
though they were no doubt the prominent 
and the most powerful assaults upon our 
Redeemer. And he was with the wild beasts 
(jisTi. Tuv Bripltiv). This shows the extreme 
solitude of the place. It shows also the 
innocence of our Lord, that there, in that 
will and desolate district, amongst lions, 
and wolves, and leopards, and serpents, he 
neither feared them nor was injured by them. 
He dwelt amongst them as Adafn lived 
with them in his state of innocence in 
Paradise. These wild beasts recognized 
and revered their Creator and their Lord. 
And the angels ministered unto him. This, ' 
as we learn from St. Matthew (iv. 11), was 
after his temptation and victory. Some 
have thought that Jesus became known to 
the devil as the Son of God, by the reverence 
and adoration of the angels. Thus Jesus 
showed in his own person, when alone he 
bad striven with Satan and had overcome 
him, that heavenly comfort and the ministry 
of angels are provided by God for those 
who overcome temptation. 

Ver. 14. — Now after that John was put in 
prison (/icrct rh trapaSoBTJiiai) ; literally, was 
delivered up. This was our Lord's second 
coming into Galilee. Galilee had been 
specially designated as tlie scene of the 
Divine manifestation (see Isa. ix. 1, 2). The 
land of Galilee, or of Zebulun and Naphtali, 
had the misfortune to be the first in 
the sad calamity which fell upon the 
Jewish nation through the Assyrian in- 
vasion ; and, in order to console them under 
'this grievious affliction, Isaiah assures them 
that, by way of recompense, tliey, above the 
rest of their brethren, should have the chief 
share in the presence and ministry of the 
future promised Messiah. It seems pro- 
bable that our Lord remained some time in 
Judssa after his baptism. From thence he 
went, with Andrew and Peter, two of John's 
disciples, into Galilee, where he called 
Philip. And then it was that he turned 
the water into wine at the marriage feast in 
Cans. This was his first coming out of 
Judaa into Galilee, related by St. John 
(1. 43, etc.). But the Passover brought him 
baok into Judsa, that he might present 
himself in the temple; and then occurred 



his first purging of the temple (John 
ii. H). Then came the visit of Nicodemui 
to him by night ; and then he began openly 
to preach and to baptize (John iii. 26), and 
thus incurred the envy of the scribes and 
Pharisees. Therefore he left Judsea, and 
departed again into Galilee ; and this is the 
departure here recorded by St. Mark and 
by St. Matthew (iv. 12). Hence it came to 
pass that it was in Galilee that Christ called 
to himself four fishermen — Andrew and 
Peter, James and John. 

Ver. 15.— The time is fulfilled; that is, the 
time for the coining of Messiah and of his 
kingdom. The kingdom which had been 
shut for so many ages was now to be re- 
opened by the preaching and the death 
of Christ. The time is very accurately 
indicated. St. Matthew tells us (iv. 12) 
that " when Jesus had heard tl:iat John 
was cast into prison, he departed into 
Galilee ; " and then presently afterwards he 
adds, " From that time Jesus began to 
preach and to say. Repent, for the kingdom 
of God is at hand." The time and place are 
also accurately specified by St. Peter (Acts 
X. 36, 37), where he tells Cornelius that 
" the word of peace, preached by Jesus 
Christ, was published throughout all Judsen,, 
and began from Galilee, after the baptism 
which John preached." It was necessary 
that these cii'oumgtances should be carefully 
detailed, because they were among the 
proofs of the Messiahship of Jesus. £li3,B 
must come first; and he had come in tha 
person of the Baptist, although the pro- 
phecy probably awaits its full accomplish- 
ment in the actual reappearance of the 
great prophet of Israel before the second 
coming of our Lord. Kepent ye, and believe 
the gospel. These words may be regarded 
as a summary of the method of salvation. 
Repentance and faith are the conditions o£ 
admission into the Christian covenant. Re- 
pentance has a special reference to God the 
Father, and faith, to Jesus Christ the eternal 
Son. It is in the gospel that Christ is 
revealed to us as a Saviour ; and therefure we 
find Jesus Christ, as the object of our faith, 
distinguished from the Father as the object 
of our repentance. Repentance of itself is 
not sufficient — it makes no satisfaction for 
the Law which we have broken ; and hence, 
over and above repentance, there is required 
from us faith in the Gospel, wherein Christ 
is revealed to us as a propitiation for tin, 
and as the only way of reconciliation with 
the Father. Without faith repentance be- 
comes despair, and without repentance 
faith becomes only presumption. Join the 
two together, and the faithful soul is borne 
onward?, like a well-balanced vessel, to the 
haven where it would be. 
Ver. 16. — Now as he walked by the eat 



THE GOSPEL ACUORDINO TO ST. MAEK- [oh. i. 1—iSk 



of Galilee; a better reading is {Kolwapiyav), 
and passing along. Our Lord came np 
from the south, passing through Samaria, 
till he readied Oana of Galilee. He then 
passed along by the seashore towards 
Capernaum ; and on liis way found the four 
disciples whom he had previously nomi- 
nated, but who weie now engaged in their 
calling of fishermen-. St. Mark then relates 
the circumstances of their call in the exaut 
words of St. Matthew, which were in all 
probability those of apostolical tradition 
(' Speaker's Commentary '). It will be seen 
that St. Mark's account, in this introductory 
portion of his Gospel, is very concise, and 
that there are many things to be supplied 
from the first chapter of St. John ; as, for 
example, that after our Lord's baptism by 
John, and after his fasting and temptation 
in the desert, tlie Jews sent messengers to 
the Baptist, to inquire of liim whether he 
were the Clirist. John at once confessed 
that he was not the Christ, but that tli ere 
was One even then among them, though they 
knew him not, who was indeed the Christ. 
And then, the very next day after, Jesus 
came to him, and John then said to those 
around him, " Behold the Lamb of God I " 
Upon this two of John's disciples at once 
betook themselves to Jesus. The first was 
Andrew, who forthwith brought his own 
brother Simon, afterwards called " Peter," 
to our Lord. Again, the day after this, our 
Lord called Philip, a fellow-citizen with 
'Andrew and Peter, of Bethsaida. Then 
Pliilip brought Natbanael. Here, then, we 
have some more disciples nominated, who 
were with Jesus at the marriage in Cana of 
Galilee. Then Jesus returned again into 
Judsea ; and those disciples " nominate," as 
we might call them, went back for a time to 
their occupation of fishermen. Meanwhile 
oui Lord, wTiile in Judsea, wrought miracles 
and preached, until the envy of the scribes 
and Pharisees constrained him to return 
again into Galilee. And then it was that 
he solemnly called Andrew and Peter, and 
James and John, as recorded by St. Mark 
here. So that St. John alone gives some 
account of the events of the first year of 
our Lord's ministry. The three synoptic 
Gospels give tlie narrative of his public 
ministry, oummencing from the second 
year. He saw Simon and Andrew, the 
brother of Simon, casting a net in the sea 
(PdWovras hji^i^XiiarpOf iv rp 8a\i<T(rri). 
Such was the text underlying the Autho- 
rized Version; but a better reading is 
aij,ipiPdWovTas iv rfj ScAdirirji, St. Mark 
thinki it nnnecessary to mention the net 
at all; though doubtless it was the 
ii,/i<j>l0\-^a-Tpov, or caating-net. When our 
Lord likena his gospel to a net, he uses the 
figure af the drag-net (,faytivn)t a net of a 



much larger size. But whether it be the cast- 
ing-net or the drag-net, the comparison is • 
striking one. It is plain that, in the pur- 
suit of his calling, the fisherman has no 
power to make any separation between the 
good fish and the worthless. He has little 
or no insight into what is going on beneath 
the surface of the water. So with the 
" fisher of men." He deals with the world 
spiritual and invisible ; and how, then, can 
he be fully conscious of the results of his 
work ? His work is pre-eminently a work 
of faith. It may be observed here that St. 
Mark, in this earlier part of his narrative, 
speaks of St. Peter as Simon, though after- 
wards (ch. iii. 16) he calls him Peter. Wb 
may also notice here, once for all, St. Mark's 
constant use of the word " straightway" 
(tie^as or eiBiis). This word occurs no less 
than ten times in this chapter. In th6 
Authorized Version the word (eiSewj) is 
rendered indifferently by various English 
synonyms, as " forthwith," " immediately," 
etc. ; whereas in the Eevised Version it has 
been thought fit to note tliis peculiarity or 
mannerism in St. Mark's Gospel by the use 
pf the same English synonym, " straight- 
way," throughout this Gospel. The Holy 
Spirit, while guiding the minds of those 
whom he moved to write these records, did 
not use an overpowering. influence, so as to 
interfere with their own natural modes of 
expression. Each sacred writer, while 
guarded against error, has reserved to him 
his own peculiarities of style and expression. 

Vers. 19, 20. — The calling of James and 
John, the sons of Zebedee. St. Mark here 
mentions that they left their father Zebedee 
in the boat with the hired servants 
(/iirrck tSiv luataT&v). This mention of the 
" hired servants " is peculiar to St. Mark. 
He often follows the narrative of St. 
Matthew ; but he adds little details such as 
this, here and there, which show thathe knew 
St. Matthew's narrative to be true, and also 
that he was an independent witness. This 
circumstance here incidentally mentioned 
shows that there was a difference in 
position in life between Zcbedee's family 
and that of Simon and Andrew. It appears 
that all Jews had free right of fishing in the 
sea of Galilee, which abounded in fish. 
Zebedee, therefore, whose home seems to 
have been at Jerusalem, had a fishing es- 
tablishment in Galilee, probably managed 
by his partners, Andrew and Simon, during 
his absence. But he would naturally visit 
the establishment from timo to time with hie 
sons, and especially before the great festivals, 
when a larger supply of fish than usual 
would be required for the visitors crowding 
to Jerusalem at that time. (See < Speaker's 
Commentary.') 

Ver. 21. — And thsy went into Caper- 



, L 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MaEK. 



literally, they go into Capernaum 
(^fiavopeiovTai). St, Mark is fond of the 
historical " present " tense, which often adds 
Ufa and energy to his narrative. Who go 
into Capernaum? Our Lord and these four 
disciples, the elementary Ohnrch of God, 
the nucleus of that spiritual influence which 
is to spread wider and wider unto the per- 
fect day. It does not follow that this going 
into Capemstum took place on the same day. 
They would nqt have been fishing on the 
■abbath day. The synagogue here spoken 
of was the gift of the good centurion of 
whom we read in St. Matthew (viii. 5) and 
St. Luke (vii. 2). Thus the first synagogue 
in which our Lord preached was the gift of 
« generous Gentile officer. It was an 
emblem of the anion of Jews and Gentiles 
in one fold. 

Ter. 22. — Tluij were Mtonished at his 
teaching (^e^eTrA-fitrtroyTo e»l rp 5i5axp). The 
verb in the Greek ii a very strong and 
expressive one ; it is a very suitable word to 
express the first impressions of utter amaze- 
ment produced by our Lord's "teaching." 
There were several things whi^h caused his 
teaching (SlSaxn) to differ from that of the 
■cribes. There was no lack of self-assertion 
in their teaching ; but their words did not 
carry weight. Their teaching was based 
«hiefly on tradition; it dwelt much on the 
" mint and anise and cummin " of religion, 
but neglected "judgment and mercy and 
&ith." Christ's teaching, on the contrary, 
was eminently spiritual. And then he prac- 
tised what he taught. Not so'the scribes. 

Thus far St. Mark's narrative bears tlie 
character of brevity and conciseness, suit- 
able to an introduction. From this point 
hia record is rich in detail and in graphic 
description, 

Ver. 23.— And straightway there was in 
their synagogue a man with an unclean 
spirit. According to the best authorities, 
the sentence in the Greek runs thus. Km ei6bs 
fjv if Tp iruvayaiyii avrSiv : And straightway 
there viae in their aynagogue, etc. This word 
" straightway " adds much force to the 
sentence. It marks the immediate effect of 
our Lord's preaching. A man with an un- 
clean sptrtt. The words are literally, " a 
man in an unclean spirit" (^» irvei/j-ttn 
OLKajBajiTif) ; in his grasp, so to speak ; pos- 
gessed by him. There can be no reasonable 
doubt as to the personality of this unclean 
spirit (see ch. iv. 21 ; xii. 41). The man 
was so absolutely in the power of this evil 
spirit that he seemed to dwell in him ; just 
as the world i« said by St. John (1 Epist. 
V. 19) to lie " in the evil one " {iv r^ irovijp^). 
And he cried out. Who cried out ? Surely 
the nnclean spirit, using the possessed man 
M his instrument. In the case of a true 
prophet, inspiied by the Holy Spirit, he is 



permitted to use his own gifts, his reason, 
and even his own partioilar manner ol 
speech ; whereas here a false and lying spirit 
usurps the organs of speech, and makes them 
his own. 

Ver. 24. — The expression, 'Eu, incorrectly 
rendered Let us alone, has not sufficient 
authority to be retained here, though it is 
rightly retained in the parallel passage in 
St. Luke (iv. 34), where it is rendered in the 
Revised Version "Ah!" or "Hal" If 
rendered, " Let us alone," or " Let alone," 
it must be assumed to be the imperative of 
Ha. It will be observed that this cry of 
the unclean spirit is spontaneous, before our 
Lord has addressed him. In real truth, the 
preaching of Jesus has already thrown the 
whole world of evil spirits into a state of 
excitement and alarm. The powers of dark- 
ness are beginning to tremble. They resent 
this intrusion into their domain. They feel 
that One greater than Satan has appeared, 
and they ask. What have we to do with 
thee t Wherein have we injured thee, that 
thou shouldest seek to drive us out of our 
possession? We have nothing to do with 
thee, thou Holy One of God ; but we have a 
right to take possession of sinners. Bede 
says that the evil spirits, perceiving that 
"our Lord had come into the world, b^ 
lieved that they were about at once to be 
judged. They knew that dispossession 
would be their entrance upon a condition 
of torment, and therefore it is that they 
deprecate it." I know thee who thou 
art, the Holy One of God. St. 5Iark is very 
careful to bring out the hidden knowledge 
possessed by evil spirits, which enabled them 
at once to recognize the personality of Jesus 
(see ch. i. 34; iii. 11), It was given to 
them by him who has supreme power over 
the spiritual as well as the material world, 
to know as much as he saw fit that they 
should know ; and he was pleased to make 
known as much as was needful. " But he 
made himself known to them, not as he 
makes himself known to the holy angels, 
who know him as the Word of God, and 
rejoice in his eternity, of which they par- 
take. . To the evil spirits he made himself 
known only so far as was requisite to strike 
with terror the beings from whose tyranny 
he was about to free those who were pre- 
destinated unto his kingdom and the glory 
of it " (see St Augustine, ' City of God,' 
bk. U. § 21). 

Ver. 25. — Hold thy peace, and come out 
of him. It was necessary that our Lord 
should at once assert his absolute power 
over the evil spirits ; and not only this, but 
also that he should show that he had 
nothing to do with them. Later on in his 
ministry it was objected to him that he cast 
out devils by the prince of the devils. Then, 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. i. i— i5. 



further, the time WM not yet arrived when 
Christ was to be publicly proclaimed as 
ihe Son of God. This great truth was to 
be gradually unfolded, and the people were 
to be persuaded by many miracles. But at 
present they were not prepared for this, and 
therefore our Lord charged his apostles that 
they should not make liim known. 

Ver. 26.— And when the unclean spirit 
had torn him, and cried with a loud voice, 
he came out of Wt" (xai (nrapd^av avrhu). 
The Greek word (rirapaaaa may be rendered 
in the passive to bt convulsed. It is so used 
by medical writers, as Galen. It could 
hardly here mean physically "laceration," 
for St. Luke (iv. 35) is careful to say that 
" when the devil had thrown him down in 
the midst, he came out of him, having done 
him no hurt." At all events, the ex- 
pression indicates the close union of the 
evil spirit witli the possfssed man's con- 
sciousness and with his physical frame. 
And the manner in which he departed 
showed his malignity, as though, being 
compelled by the supreme authority of 
Christ to leave the man, he would injure 
him as far as he was able to do so. But 
the power of Christ prevented him from 
doing any real injury. And all this was 
done (1) that there might be clear evidence 
that the man was actually possessed by the 
evil spirit ; (2) that tlie anger and malice of 
the evil spirit might be shown ; and (3) that 
It might be manifest that the unclean spirit 
came out, not of his own accord, but con- 
strained and v«nquiBhed by Chrisst. We 
may observe also that the power of Christ 
restrained him from the use of any articulate 
words. While he was in possession he used 
the possessed man's organs of speech; but 
when he came out there was no articulate 
speech — it was nothing but a cry. 

Ver. 27. — What thing is this? what new 
doctrine is this? The now generally ap- 
proved text gives a different rendering, 
namely. What it thisi a new teaching J 
(Ti iffrl toOto ; SiSaxv Kaivii). If this is the 
true reading — and there is excellent au- 
thority for it — it would mean that the 
bystanders inferred that this new and 
unexampled power indicated the accom- 
panying gift of a "new teaching," a new 
revelation. Nay, more, it indicated tliat 
he who wrought these miracles must be 
the promised Messiah, the true Uod ; for he 
alone by his power could rule the evil spirits. 

Ver. 28.— All the region round about 
Galilee; more literally, all the region of 
Oalilee, round about ; and the best readings 
add " everywhere " (rravraxov els iKriv 
T^v Tepix<'P<»' '''V^ ra\iKttitts), Tliis is, of 
course, said by anticipation. 

Ver. 29. — They came; a better reading 
is, ka eamt {1i\eiv). St. Matthew and St. 



Lvike speak of this honge as the house of 
Simon Peter only; but St. Mark, writing 
probably under St. Peter's direction, includes 
Andrew as a joint owner with Simon Pete*. 

Vers. 30, 31. — Lay sick of a fever (k areKeiTii 
irvfiaaovaa). St. Luke (iv. 38) uses a 
stronger expression, "was liolden with a 
great fever" (o'yi'6XO/xei/?j irvpeTw jue-yaA^J. 
There were marshes in that district ; hence 
the prevalence of fevers of a malignant 
character. There is no mention of the wife 
of Peter by name in the New Testament. 
We may infer, from the fact that his wife's 
mother lived with him, that he was the 
head of the family. St. Paul (1 Cor. ix. 5) 
intimates that he was a married man, and 
tliat his wife accompanied bim on his mis- 
sionary tours. According to the testimony 
of Clement of Alexandria, and of Eusebiua 
(iii. 30), she suffered martyrdom, and was 
led away to death in the sight of her hus- 
band, whose last words to her were, "Re- 
member thou the Lord." St. Mark here 
tells us that Jesus came and took [Simon's 
wife's mother] by the hand, and raised 
her up. St.. Luke (iv. 39) says that "he 
stood over her and rebuked the fever." 
Immediately the fever left her. The 
word "immediately" (c69eo>s), familiar as it 
is to St. Mark, is here omitted by the best 
authorities. But the omission is of no 
importance; for the fact that "the fever 
left her," and that she was at once strong 
enough to " minister to them," proves that 
it was not like an ordinary recovery from 
fever, which is wont to be slow and tedious. 

Ver. 32. — At even, when the sun did set 
It was the sabbath day ; and, therefore, the 
sick were not brought to our Lord until six 
o'clock, when the sabbath ended. When 
the sun did set (ore I5u i SjAios). St. Luke's 
phrase is (Smovros tov ri\lov), " When the 
sun was, so to speak, subnjerged tn the sea." 
So in Virgil, • .^Eneid,' lib. vii. 100— 

"... qua sol utrumque reonrrens 
Adspicit Oceanum ; " 

the - popular idea being that, when thia 
sun sets, it sinks into the ocdan. 

Vers. 33, 34. — The whole city was leathered 
together at the door. This would probably 
be the outer door in the wall, opening into 
the street ; so that this need not be regarded 
as a hyperbolic statement. It is evidently 
the description of an eye-witness, or of one 
who had it from an eye-witness. He healed 
all that had need of healing, and he suffered 
not the devils to speak, for the reasons 
assigned at ver. 25. 

Ver. 35. — And in the morning, a great 
while before day, he rose up and went out, 
and departed into a desert place, and there 
prayed. Our Lord thus prepared hnnself 
by prayer for his first departure on a nua- 



OH. L 1—45.] 



THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST, MARK. 



rionary tonr. This would be the morning 
of the first day of the week. A great while 
before day he left the scene of excitement. 
That was not a time for preaching the 
Gospel of the Kingdom. The miracles 
attracted attention to him, but they were 
not the object for which he came. They 
were necessary as means of stirring and 
awakening men's minds, and of fixing their 
attention upon him and upon the great sal- 
vation which he came to reveal. So he left 
the miracles to do their subordinate work; 
and he himself went into a desert place, 
that he might pray with more quiet and 
less distraction. He retired that he might 
escape the applause of men, which they 
were ready to lavish upon him after seeing 
go many miracles ; that be might thus teach 
US to shun the praise of men. Let us learn 
from Christ to give the early morning to 
prayer, and to rise with the dawn of day, 
that we may have time for meditation, and 
give the firstfruits of the morning to God. 
The early morning is favourable for study ; 
but it ia specially dear to God and his 
angele. 

Ver. 36. — ^And Simon and they that were 
with him followed after him (^KareSia^ai''); 
the word implies an " earnest pursuing." 
They that were with him would doubtless 
include Andrew and James and John, and 
probably others whose enthusiasm had been 
kindled by Simon Peter. St. Luke, in the 
parallel passage (iv. 42), tells us that " the 
multitudes sought after him, and came unto 
him, and would have stayed him, that he 
should not go from them." 

Ver. 37.— All are seeking thee. The 
" thee " is here emphatic (irdvres Onroval o-e). 

Vers. 38, 39. — These two verses indicate 
the extent and duration of our Lord's first 
missionary journey. It must have been 
considerable. He preached in the syna- 
gogues. This would be on successive sab- 
baths. According to Josephus, Galilee was 
a densely populated district, with upwards 
of two hundred villages, each containing 
several thousand inhabitants. 

Ver. 40. — The healing of the leper is 
recorded in all the three synoptic Gospels; 
but St. Mark gives more full details. From 
St. Matthew we learn that it took place after 
the sermon on the mount ; and yet not at 
the very close of his missionary circuit. 
St. Luke (v. 12) says tliat the diseased man 
was " full of leprosy " (irx-hpiis \eirpas). The 
disorder was fully developed ; it had spread 
over his whole body ; he was leprous from 
head to foot. Tliis leprosy was designed 
to be specially typical of the disease of sin. 
It was not Infectious. It was not because it 
was either infectious or contagious that the 
leper was bidden under the Jewish Law to 
warn others ofi", in the words, " Unclean I un- 



clean I" It was in some cases hereditary. II 
was a very revolting disease. It was a 
poisoning of the springs of life. It was a 
living death. It was incurable by any human 
art or skill. It was the awful sign of sin 
reaching unto death; and it was cured, as 
sin is cured, only by the mercy and favour of 
God. No wonder, then, that our Lord specially 
displayed his power over this terrible disease, 
that he might thus prove his power over 
the still worse malady of sin. St. Mark 
here tells us that this leper knelt down 
(koI •YovmriTuv). St. Matthew says (viii. 2) 
that he "worshipped him," (irpoireKivti out^); 
St. Luke says (v. 12) that "he fell on his 
tace" (Tri(rti>v iirl itpiaamov). We thus seethst 
the scriptural idea of worship is associated 
with some lowly posture of the body. But 
with this worship of the body, the leper 
ofiered also the homage of the soul. Uis 
prostration of himself before Christ was not 
merely a rendering of honour to an earthly 
being ; it was a rendering of reverence to a 
Divine Being. For he does not say to him, 
"If thou wilt ask of God, he will give it 
thee ; " but he says, " If thou wilt, thou 
canst make me clean." It is as though he 
said, " I knnw that thou art of equal power 
with the Father, and therefore supreme 
Lord over diseases; so that by thy word alone 
thou canst remove this leprosy from me. I 
ask, therefore, that thou wouldst be willing 
to do this, and then I know that the thing is 
done." The leper had faith in the Divine 
power of Christ, partly out of his own in- 
ward illumination, and partly by the evi- 
dence of the miracles which Christ had 
already wrought. If thou wilt, thou canst. 
Observe the hypothetic expression, " If thon 
wilt." He has no doubt as to Christ's power, 
but the words, " If thou wilt" show that his 
desire for healing was controlled by resig- 
nation to the will of God. For bodily diseases 
are often necessary for the health of the 
soul ; and this God knows, though man 
knows it not. Therefore, in asking for earthly 
blessings, it behoves us to resign ourselves 
to the will and wisdom of God. 

Ver. 41. — Observe in this verse that Jesus 
stretched forth his hand and touched the 
leper. Thus he showed that he was superior 
to the Law, which forbade contact with a 
leper. He touched him, knowing that he 
could not be defiled with the touch. He 
touched him that he might heal him, and 
that his Divine power of healing might be 
made manifest. " Thus," says Bede, " God 
stretched out his hand and touched the 
human nature in his incamatioB, and 
restored to the Church those who had been 
cast out, that they might be able to offer 
their bodies a living sacrifice to him of 
whom it is said, ' Thou art a priest for ever 
after the order of Melchisedeo.' " Xwill; bf 



THE GOSPEL ACOOEDING TO ST. MAEK. [oh. i. 1— 4* 



fhov clean; literally, he thou made dean 
jicoOopMrjTi). It is well observed here by 
Bt Jerome that oilr Lord aptly answers both 
the petitions of the leper. " If thou wilt ; " 
"I will." "Thou canst make me clean;" 
"Be thou made clean." Indeed, Christ 
gives him more than he asks for. He makes 
him whole, not only in body, but in spirit. 
Thus Christ, In his loving-kindness, exceeds 
the wishes of his snpplicants, that we may 
learn from him to do the same, and to 
enlarge our hearts, both towards God and 
towards our brethren. 

Ver. 42.^Straightway— St. Mark's fa- 
vourite word — the leprosy departed from 
him. There is no interval between the 
command and the work of Christ. "He 
spake, and it was done." His will is his 
omnipotence. By this act Christ showed 
that he came into the world as a great 
Physician, that he might cure all diseases, 
and cleanse us from all our defilements. 
The word " straightway " shows that Christ 
healed the leper, not by any natural means, 
bnt by a Divine power which works in- 
stantly. He is alike powerful both to com- 
mand and to do. St. Matthew says here 
(viii. 3) that straightway " his leprosy was 
cleansed" (^iKudapiaQri avrov tj Kiirpa). There 
is here what is called a "hypallage," or in- 
version of the meaning, which is, of course, 
that " he was cleansed from his leprosy." 

Ver. 43. — And he straitly charged him. 
The Greek verb here (e/njSpi/iijo-tJ/iews) has a 
tinge of severity in it, "he strictly [or 
iteimly] charged him." Both word and 
action are severe. He straightway sent him 
out Q4^e0i\€y avrhv). It may be that he 
had incurred this rebuke by coming so near 
with his defilement to the holy Saviour. 
Christ thus showed not only his respect for 
the ordinances of the Jewish Law, but also 
how hateful sii( is to the most holy God. 

Ver. a. — See thou say nothing to any man. 
St. Chrysostom says that our Lord gave him 
this charge, " to shun ostentation, and to 
teach ua not to boast of our virtues, but to 



hide them." It is evident that he wished 
to draw the thoughts of men away from his 
miracles, and to fix them upon his doctrine. 
00 thy way, show thyself to the priest; 
the priest who in the order of hi< course 
presided over the rest. Our Lord sent him 
to the priest, that he might be seen to re- 
cognize their special office in cases of 
leprosy ; and further, that the priest himself 
might have clear evidence that this leper 
was oleans'sd, not after the custom of the 
Law, but I y the operation of grace. 

Ver. 45. — Bnt he went out, and beg^ to 
publish it mnoh, and to spread abroad the 
matter. It seems difiicult to blame the 
man for doing what he thonght must tend 
to the honour of his Healer; thongh, no 
doubt, it would have been better if he had 
humbly obeyed. And yet it was to be ex- 
pected that the knowledge of our Lord's 
mighty works would be published by others. 
In this particular instance the effect of this 
man's conduct was probably unexpected by 
himself; for it led to the withdrawal ot 
Christ from Capernaum. The crowds who 
were attracted to him by the fame of his 
miracles would have hampered him, so that 
he could not have exercised his ministry; 
for even in the desert places they sought 
him out, and came to him from every 
quarter. 

It should be noticed here that this 
first chapter of St. Mark embraces, in a 
very condensed form, about twelve months 
of our Lord's public ministry, from his bap- 
tism by John. And it is a record of un- 
interrupted progress. The time had not then 
cnme for the opposition of the scribes and 
Pharisees and Herodians to show itself. It 
was, no doubt, wisely ordained that his 
gospel should take root and lay hold of the 
hearts and consciences of men, as it must 
have done in tlie minds of the Galilseans 
more especially, before it had to encounter 
the envy and malice of those who ultimately 
would bring bim to his orosa. 



HOMILETIC& 

7er. l.—The beginning of the gospel. " The beginning of the gosiiel of Jeros Christ 
ihe Son of God." The writers of the first four books of the New Testament are called 
evangelists, because they gathered up, put into writing, and published to tha world th* 
accounts of the Lord Jesus which were current among the first Christians, and which 
were constantly repeated by the first preachers of our religion. They did this under 
the guidance of the Holy Spirit, and their treatises come to us with Divine authority. 
Not only is the record credible ; it is such that it claims our attention, and. demands 
and justifies our faith. Of these four evangelists, Mark is one— doubtless the " John 
whose surname was Mark "—of whom we read in the Book of the Acts that his family 
resided in Jerusalem, and that he himself was a fellow-labourer with the Apostle Paul 
Tt has generally been held that Mark was especially under the influence and euidanc« 



OH. I. :— 45.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. » 

of Peter. The opening sentence of his Gospel is brief, striking, and fvill of mekning 
and of Divine truth. 

L Observe the biokifioanoe of the begixkino of the gospel. Matthew and Luke 
begin their narratives with a relation of the circumstances of the birth of our Lord ; 
John commences with the pre-existence of the Word ; Mark, whose treatise is the 
shortest, opens with the inauguration of our Lord's ministry. This second Gospel 
begins with Christ's baptism, and closes with his ascension. " The beginning " suggest! 
the time when the gospel was not. Before the gospel was the Law. " The Law and the 
prophets," said Jesus, "were until John; since that time the kingdom of God is 
preached." What a different world it must have been to live in when there was no 
gospel ! — at least in the full, the Christian, meaning of that term. " The beginning " 
suggests & foretold and appointed time. It was in the fulness of the time that the pro- 
mised Messiah appeared, at the conjunction of national and of universal history foreseen 
by the Omniscient and indicated in prophecy. Accordingly tlie sacred historian at 
once appeals to the writings of Malachi and Isaiah to show the real continuity of sacred 
history. Nothing of God's appointment occurs haphazard ; he sees the end from the 
beginning. " The beginning " points on to the completion. " Better," says the wise mac 
"is the end of a thing than the beginning;" yet the beginning is necessary to the end 
It was so with the earthly ministry of Christ. It grew in solemnity and spiritual powei 
as it approached its period ; yet the earlier stages were preparatory for those which 
followed, and indispensable. That Christ's ministry dated — according to apostolic 
teaching — from the baptism of John, is apparent from Peter's language upon the occa- 
sion of the choice of a twelfth apostle, from his discourse before Cornelius, and from 
Paul's discourse at Antioch of Pisidia. 

II. Observe the significance of the gospel — the term by which the substance of the 
Christian record is here designated. The meaning, generally speaking, of the term is 
" good news," " glad, welcome tidings." But the Christian use of the term — which has 
absorbed all the meaning attaching to this glorious word — is special. The gospel is the 
designation of the facts and doctrines of Ohristianity. We look for these facts and 
doctrines in the writings of Mark and of the other three evangelists. The gospel was 
spoken in words, e.g. as here. The gospel was embodied in deeds and sufferings, e.g. in 
this record of Mark, the gospel of power. The gospel came from Ood, who alone was 
able to impart the blessings it promised. The gospel came to men — sinful, needy, 
helpless ; who, without a gospel, must have remained in wretchedness. The gospel 
proclaimed pardon for sin, peace for the conscience, renewal for the whole nature, guid- 
ance and strength for the spiritual career, salvation, and life eternal. 

III. Observe the signipicanoe of the appellations here applied to him who is 
the Author, the Theme, the Substance of the gospel. 1. He is. denominated Jestis — 
the name he bore as a human being, suggestive, therefore, of his humanity, yet in 
itself implying that he was the Salvation, the Help, of Jehovah. 2. He is denomi- 
nated Christ — an official name, denoting his anointing and appointment by God to the 
discharge of the Messianic offices, as the Prophet, Priest, and King of men. (Note that 
the combined name, Jesus Christ, does not occur elsewhere in the first three Gospels.) 
3. He is denominated the Son of Ood — a designation which impresses upon us his 
divinity and authority. Whereas Matthew opens his Gospel by showing that Jesus is 
the Son of David, a fact of special interest to the Hebrews, Mark takes a higher flight. 
These three appellations together present us with a full, delightful, instructive, and in- 
spiriting representation of our Saviour's nature and mediatorial work and qualifications. 

Apfucation. 1. You need this gospel. 2. This gospel is iufficient for you, 3. This 
gospel is adapted to yon. 4. This gospel alone can bless you. 5. This gospel is 
offered to you. 

Vers. 2 — 8. — The ministry of the forerunner. This evangelist enters upon his 
treatise with no further preface than is to be found in the first verse. He has to tell 
the good news concerning Jesus Christ, the Son of God. And he begins his narrative 
at once, with an account of the ministry of that grand, heroic prophet, whose great 
distinction it was to be the herald of the Messiah, and whose greatness was in nothing 
more apparent than in thi» — he was willing to be superseded by his Lord, and to b# 
lost in him : " He must increase, but I must decrease." In these verses we have — 



10 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. i. 1—45. 

I. A GLIMPSE OF THE FORERUNNER'S PERSON AND CHARACTER. 1. He WaS a pritst. 

This we learn from St. Luke's narrative of his parentage and birth. John owed some- 
thing of the respect and acceptance he met with to this fact. Yet his ministry was not 
sacerdotal, though hia education and his associations must all have fitted him to testify 
to " the Lamb of God, who taketh away the sin of the world." 2. He was a prophet. 
As Christ himself bare witness, " a prophet, yea, and more than a prophet." He spoke 
forth the mind of God. He did not sacrifice for the people or reason with them ; he 
declared to them the message he had received from heaven. 3. He was an ascetic in 
the wilderness. In his dress and mode of life he resembled Elijah the Tishbite. He 
lived in the wilderness of Judsea, and in the wilder parts of the valley of the Jordan. 
• His raiment was of cloth woven froih coarse camel's hair; his food was that of a child 
of the desert, "locusts and wild honey." He wore no soft raiment; he was no reed 
shaken by the wind. Independent alike of the luxuries of life and of the approval of 
his fellow-men, he lived apart. 4. He was a fearless, faithful pi-eacher. He did not ask 
— Is this message what the people wish to hear ? but — Is this the word of the living 
GM? When the Divine commission was entrusted to him, no 'power on earth could 
prevent him from fulfilling it. 

IL A BTATBMENT THAT HIS MINISTRY WAS PBOPHETIOALLT FORETOLD. Mark qUOteS 

from Malachi, the last of the prophets, " Behold, I will send my messenger, and he will 
prepare my way before me." He quotes from Isaiah, " The voice of him that crieth in 
the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a highway 
for our God." The forerunner was himself conscious of this ; for, disclaiming Mea- 
siahship, he claimed to be the voice of the King's herald. Jesus, too, made the same 
assertion, " If ye will believe it, this is Elijah, which was to come." All was ordered 
and predicted beforehand by the wisdom of the Most Hioih. 

TIL A VIEW OF HIS REMARKABLE SPIRITUAL MINISTRY. John did no miraolcs. But 
he spoke with a Divine authority ; and he exercised an influence which was felt through- 
out the whole nation, and which was an historical and recognized fact. The elements 
of his ministry were these : 1. The prediction that the kingdom of God, or of heaven, 
was at hand. 2. An appeal to repentance, based upon the approach of the new kingdom. 
3. The administration of a rite symbolical of spiritual purification. 

IV. An INSIGHT INTO THE REMARKABLE RESULTS OF THIS MINISTRY. 1. A general 

and profound impressinn was produced. 2. The most sinful classes shared in this moral 
awakening. 3. The religious leaders of the community were led to interest themselves 
in his message. 4. The political rulers of the land came to some extent under his 
influence. 5. The ardent and religious youth were at once attracted and awed by the 
presence and ministry of the prophet. The choice spirits of the generation rising up, 
the flower of the Hebrew youth, became his disciples. 6. There resulted a widespread 
- conscience of sin, and a hope and desire for a great Saviour. 

V. A DESCRIPTION OP HIS GREAT OFFICE AND FUNCTION. Above all, John was the 
forerunner and the herald of the Messianic King, even Jesus. Even before he met his 
cousin, before he administered baptism to him, he bore witness concerning him. He 
witnessed : 1. To his personal superiority, speaking of him as " One mightier than I." 
2. And to his ministerial superiority ; for while John's baptism was one with water 
unto repentance, that of Jesus was " with the Holy Spirit and with fire." Events 
proved the truth of this testimony. 

Application. To receive the witness of John is to acknowledge the Messiahship o( 
Jesus, to yield heart and life to the Saviour, seeking through him the forgiveness of 
sins, the renewal of the heart, and the consecration of the whole being. 

Vers. 9 — 11. — The baptism of Christ. As this evangelist commences his treatise 
with what he terms " the beginning of the gospel of Jesus (Jhrlst," it is natural that 
our Lord should first be introduced by him as devoted to his ministry of benevolence 
in the rite of baptism ; for this incident in our Saviour's life is justly held to have 
inaugurated his public work. What a hold the event has taken upon the Christian mind 
may be seen from the vast number of pictures in which the religious artists of all 
Christian countries have depicted the baptism. A striking scene for a painter, and a 
delightful theme for the preacher I 

I. The baptism of our Saviour exhibits his relation to the roEKBUNUEB. Tb« 



CH. 1. 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MAEK. 11 

ministry of the herald preceded that of the King. Jesus was yet in the seclusion of 
Nazareth when John was attracting multitudes of all classes, and from all parts of th« 
land, to his teaching and baptism in the Jordan valley. When Jesus came to John U 
Bcumed, to ordinary judgments, that the less came to the greater, the obscure to the 
famous. But it was not so. To all around the relation between the two was unknown. 
Nevertheless, to the two it was clear enough. The forerunner knew that his mission 
was temporary and introductory, and that " the coming One " should eclipse his light aa 
the sun extinguishes the bright morning star. Hence the reluctance of the Baptist to do 
anything which might seem to militate against the just dignity of the Being in whom he 
recognized the Messiah. " I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to 
me?" This was tlie Person whose shoe's latchet he had declared himself unworthy to 
unloose. A slave would untie the thong of his master's sandals and bear them in his 
hand ; John deemed even such an office too honourable for himself to discharge for the 
anointed King of mankind. It was not only in the presence of Jesus that John felt 
thus ; the constant conviction of his mind was this, " I must decrease, but he must 
increase." But the witness was not all on one side. Jesus also bore testimony to John. 
In the very act of submitting to the baptism of the prophet, he acknowledged that 
prophet's greatness and ratified' his claims. And he, in express words, testified to 
John's unique position, as predicted by the ancient prophets, and of the man himself 
and bis character and work declared, " Of men born of women there hath not arisen • 
greater than John the Baptist." 

n. The baptism of our Saviour exhibits his belation to the human baob. There 
seems to be no way of explaining and justifying this hisitorical fact except by admitting 
that Jesus was specially the representative man. In endeavouring to explain, to account 
for, the baptism of our Divine Saviour, we are met with a serious diiBculty. The 
baptism of John was unto repentance and with a view to the remission of sins. Men 
came, and were invited to come, to receive the symbol of a cleansing which, being 
spiritual, could only be wrought by a spiritual process. The publicans, harlots, and 
soldiers, whose conscience accused them of sin, in coming to John's baptism, confessed 
their wrong doing and ill desert, and professed their desire, by repentance and reforma- 
tion, to escape from the trammels of evil and to live a holier life. They were warned 
that mere feeling, mere conformity, mere profession, mere water baptism, were ill insuf- 
ficient, and, if alone, worthless ; and they were directed to bring forth fruit meet for 
repentance. Now, in the case of such persons, and, we may add, in the case of all the 
members of a sinful, guilty race, a moral purification was and is indispensably neces- 
sary. But what reason, what appropriateness, what meaning, could there be in the 
reception of a baptism such as this by the sinless Saviour of the world, the holy and 
faultless and beloved Son of God ? What need had he to confess and to ask pardon for 
sin ? He had no sin to confess, no repentance to work out. If he required no spiritual 
purifying, to what purpose should he undergo the rite of lustration ? The only answer 
seems to be that Jesus did this, not as a personal, but as an official and representative 
act. The circumstances of Christ's life and death are not to be understood unless we 
bear in mind that he acted and suffered as the second Adam, as the federal head and 
representative of humanity, as the Son of man. So regarded, we can to some extent 
understand the answer of our Lord to the remonstrance of the baptizer. It became him, 
as our Mediator, " to fulfil all righteousness." He had mixed with the sinful population ; 
he was to live among and to minister unto the victims of sin ; he was to be betrayed into 
the hand of sinners; he was to be numbered, in his death, with the transgressors; 
he was, in a word, made sin for us, though he knew no sin. As, then, he had in infancy 
been circumcised, though there was no sinful' nature to be put away; as he was to be 
put to death as a malefactor, though no fault was found in him ; so he was baptized, 
though he had personally no need of purification, no sins to wash away. He was our 
Bepresentative in his birth and ministry, in his death and burial, and, none the less, 
in his baptism by John in Jordan. 

III. The baptism of our Saviour exhibits His eblatioh to the Divine Father. 
At the commencement of the ministry of Jesus it was appropriate that an attestation 
of his mission should be given from above — ^not only for his own sake, but rather for the 
sake, first of J6hn, and then of those to whom in consequence John should bear witness. 
Thus the forerunner was able to declare, " i hav«> seen, and have l:«rne witness that 



13 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. [oh. i. 1— 4& 

this Ib the Son of God." There were probably no spectators of our Lord's baptism, and 
we are indebted to John himself for the record of what happened and of what becam« 
the accepted tradition among the early Christians. 1. Observe what was seen. It was as 
Jesus went np out of the river, and whilst he was praying, that the marvellous sign 
was given. 'I'he heavens were rent asunder and opened, indicating the interest taljen 
in the Redeemer's career by the great God of heaven himself, and the Spirit, in the 
form and with the swift, gentle, hovering movement of a dove, descended upon Jesus. 
How beautiful an emblem of the Divine power of the ministry which was thus inau- 
gurated, and solemnly, sacredly blessed from above ! Surely it is significant that Christ 
should be represented as the Lamb of God, and the Holy Spirit as the Dove from heaven. 
/^ lesson as to the gentleness and grace characteristic of Christ's gospel. 2. Observe, 
further, what was heard. Language proceeded Irom the opened heavens, indicative of 
ihe Divine approval and complacency. Notice (1) the statement of relation and 
dignity, " Thou art my beloved Son ; " and (2) the statement of satisfaction and appro- 
bation, " In thee I am well pleased." 

Application. 1. Learn hence the Divine dignity of EmmanueL 2. And, at the 
same time, his humility and condescension. 3. Let this marvellous combination of 
all mediatorial qualifications in the person of Christ encourage your faith in him and 
your devotion to his cause. 

. Vers. 12, 13. — The temptation of Christ. The portal by which our Lord entered 
upon his earthly ministry Las two pillars — the baptism and the temptation. In his 
baptism the Saviour was visibly and audibly approved by God the Father. In his 
temptation he was manifestly put to the test by the power of evil. Consecration and 
probation were thus the two elements in the Redeemer's inauguration, by which he 
was dedicated to the earthly ministry of humiliation, obedience, and benevolence. 
Mark's narrative of the temptation is brief, but suggestive. 

I. The evangelist notes the DrviHE impulse which led Jesus to the place appointed 
for this spiritual encounter. The same Spirit who had just descended upon him like a 
dove now drove him forth, as with the impulse of a lion, as upon the wings of an 
eagle, to endure the great probation. The reason of this is to be found in the Divine 
intention that the Son of man should partake, not only in our human nature, but in our 
human experience. He did not shrink even from so keen a contest as that which 
awaited him. Led, driven, by the Spirit, the Divine Christ met his foe at the appointed 
spot, as the champion of humanity, in single combat, to submit to the fiercest assaults 
of Satan. 

n. In the fewest words ii described the scene of the temptation. We oftei; 
encounter the tempter in the crowded streets and in the thronged assembly. Yet those 
who, like the monks of Egypt, have fled to the desert to escape his assaults and elude 
his wiles, have ever found their error. No place is secure from spiritual conflict or from 
sinful suggestion. But our great Leader chose to wrestle with the adversary alone, 
without the countenance of human virtue or the sympathy of human friendship to 
assist him. This was challenging the foe to do his worst. They met face to face. 
The only companions of Christ in the desert solitude were those wild beasts, whose 
presence emphasizes the awful loneliness of the spot. 

in. The tempteb is mentioned by name. Satan was the foe with whom the 
Saviour engaged in this spiritual conflict. The tempter was brought into immediate 
Contact with the Holy Being upon whom he exercised all his devices in vain. In 
ordinary cases the enemy of souls employs his emissaries, perhaps supernatural, cer- 
tainly in many cases human. Scripture teaches us that our adversary is " as a roaring 
lion, going about seeking whom he may devour." We, as Christians, should not be 
ignorant of his devices. Sometimes he is transformed, as it were, into an angel of 
light. But let us not be deceived ; the temptation betrays whence it comes, however 
it may be disguised by subtlety and craft. 

IV. The evangelist records the pebiod of our Lord's temptation. It lasted for forty 
days—* period agreeing with the term of very memorable events in the life of our Lord's 
illustrious predecessors, Moses and Elijah. A prolonged probation, repeated assaults 
raiiety of spiritual warfare, and a decisive issue, — all were rendered possible by the pro- 
'i-aoted period to which this desert seclusion was extended. The several temptations 



ran. 1. 1—45.1 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. MAEK. IS 



whict occupied this term are recorded in detail by the other evangelists, Matthew and 
Luke. 1. A temptation appealing to ordinary bodily wants. 2. A temptation appeal- 
ing to spiritual pride. 3. A temptation appealing to ambition and the love of power. 

V. St. Mark implies, what the other evangelists explicitly record, our Savioub's 
viOTORT. 1. It was gained by a holy character. The prince of this world came, and 
had nothing in him. 2. By a resolute and determined opposition. " Resist the devil, 
and he will flee from you." 3. By the use of the weapons of Scripture. If the devil 
quoted the Word, as he can for his purposes, Christ had ready the appropriate reply, 
couched in the words of inspiration. 4. It was a complete victory; for the tempter 
was foiled at every point. 5. Yet it was a victory which did not preserve the assailed 
from a renewal of attack. The devil left him for a season, only again to return to dc 
his worst and again and finally to fail. 

VL The period of conflict and resistance was succeeded by angelio ihnistrationb. 
The Son of God was encompassed by the services of these messengers from heaven, 
from his birth to his agony, and from his agony to his resurrection and ascension. How 
natural that those beings who minister to those who shall be heirs of salvation should 
minister to him who is salvation's Author and Giver! And it is instructive to find that, 
as the agency of temptation was not a human agency, so the ministrations which 
followed were not human ministrations. In what way the angels tended their Lord 
and did him service, we are not told; whether, as poetic fancy lias feigned, by spreading 
for him a table in the wilderness, or by soothing his spirit by their sympathy as he 
emerged from the scene of unparalleled conflict and unparalleled victory. 

Practical lessons. 1. Let every man expect temptatiou ; it is the common lot, 
from which the Sou of man himself was not exempt. 2. If temptation does not come 
in one form it will come in another ; the tempter adapts himself to age and sex, tem- 
perament and education, position and character. 8. Let the Christian, when tempted, 
remember that he has the sympathy and may look for the succour of the High Priest, 
who was tempted as we are, though without sin. 4. Let the Saviour's mode of meeting 
and resisting the tempter be prayerfully pondered and copied ; the Scriptures furnish 
the Christian's armoury, " The sword of the Spirit is the Word of God." 

Vers. 14, 15. — The Divine Preacher. Christ was known as a Prophet before h« was 
manifested as the Priest and the King of humanity. He came preaching. In these 
verses is related the fact of a ministry in Galilee. The occasion was the cessation of 
John's ministry; the place, that northern province which had been foretold as the 
scene of the Messiah's labours, and in which he had passed the years of his youth. We 
have here put upon record the substance of the Saviour's preaching. 

I. Christ was a Pebacheb. This fact seems to imply three things. 1. That Jesus 
regarded men as intelligent, responsible heinge. He did not seek to awe or terrify 
them by portents. He (Ud not attempt to cajole them by complying with their sinful 
tendencies and prejudices. He did not appeal to superstition. He treated men as 
beings having an understanding to be convinced, a heart to be affected, a moral 
nature rendering them susceptible to Divine motives and capable of willing obedience. 
2. That Jesus had confidence in his message. It was not with that assumption of 
authority which disguises conscious weakness ; it was not with the hesitation which 
betrays suspicion of the weakness of the cause ; it was with the confidence of one who 
speaks forth words of truth and soberness, — that the great Teacher spoke. 3. That 
Jesus had the assurance that his message would be accepted. His was not a fruitless 
enterprise. He came with a Divine commission, which should not, could not, be frustrated. 
Hia words should not pass away ; all should be fulfilled. And Christ's gospel is still 
to be promulgated in the same manner, in the same spirit. Christ's ministers are 
called upon to preach-^to preach Christ crucified — to preach, whether men wiU hear or 
forbear. The religion of our Saviour is one which appeals to what is best and purest 
in human nature enlightened by the Spirit of God. 

IL Chbist^ as a Fbgacheb, hade an announcement. 1. An appointed time for a 
Divine visitation had now arrived. "Known unto God are all lus works from the 
foundation of the world." There is a season for every step in the Divine procedure. 
That the advent of the Messiah, and the setting up of a spiritual kingdom, and the 
bringing in of an everlasting righteousness, were all foreseen and foretold, we are dis- 



U THE GOSPEL ACCORDIKG TO ST. MARK. [oh. i. 1—46. 

tinctly assured. This, the period of Christ's ministry, was " in the fulness of the time." 
2. The kingdom of God was at hand. Not that the Most High had abdicated his 
rightful throne ; but he had long suffered the rebellion of men, and had not interfered 
with the tyrant who had usurped dominion. The evils of this unjust tyranny had now 
been made apparent. It was time, according to the counsels of God, that rightful 
authority should be asserted and re-established. Little as the Prophet of Nazareth 
eeemed, to ordinary eyes, the Prince who should defeat the foe of God and man, this 
was the character in which he came to earth, the work and warfare he came to accom- 
plish. 3. Christ preached the gospel of God. Good news for mankind : an amnesty 
for rebels, the favour of the Divine Sovereign, peace between heaven and earth, salva- 
tion for sinners, and eternal life for the dead, — such was the theme of tliis Messianic 
proclamation. In preaching the gospel our Lord could not but preach himself, for ha 
not only brought tlie gospel — he was the gospel. 

IIL Cheist addkbssed to men an exhobtation — A SUMMONS. A preacher has not 
only truth to state, good news to proclaim, but he has counsel to offer, a requirement 
to make. As here succinctly recorded, the preaching of Christ enjoined upon men two 
precepts. 1. They were summoned to repentance. This is a universal condition of 
entering into the benefits of Christ's kingdom. This change of heart, of thought, of 
purpose, is a change indispensable to the highest privileges. It is the preparation 
of spirit which, on the Divine side, is regeneration. " Except a man be born again 
[afresh], he cannot see the kingdom of God." The condition of repentance is one binding 
through all time. There are flagrant and notorious sinners, who must be brought to 
penitence and contrition before they can receive the forgiveness which God has pro- 
mised and which Christ has secured. There are unspiritual professors of Christianity, 
who have the form of godliness without the power, who must be led to see the sandy 
foundation upon which they build before they can seek and find their foundation 
upon the Eock of Ages. There are backsliders, who have gone back religiously, who 
have lost their first love, and have ceased to do their first works, who must repent 
before they can enjoy the pleasures and privileges of religion. Cliristianity makes no 
compromise with sin, has no flattery for sinners. Her voice rings through the wilder- 
ness and the city, and her demand is this — Repent! 2. They were summoned to 
ielief of the gospel. ITiis is a condition which respects the relation and attitude of the 
mind towards God. Those who credit God's promise alone can experience and enjoy 
its fulfilment. Faith is ever represented in Scripture as the means of appropriating 
what has been provided by Divine grace. A condition this both honourable to God 
and spiritually profitable to the believer. Faith is the Divine path to acceptance and 
pardon, to life and immortality. Christ demanded and deserved faith. 

Application. 'ITiis is a gospel for sinners. It is they who need a gospel, sunk as 
they are in sin, exposed as they are to corjdemnation and destruction. This is a gospel 
for you. Whoever you are, you need it ; and, in your heart of hearts, you are well 
aware that it is so. God sent his Son that you might be saved. Christ gave himself 
for you. Unto you is the word of salvation sent. Christ has suffered that you might 
escape, has died that you might live. In him there is for you pardon for the past and 
strength for the present and hope for the future. " Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and thou shalt be saved." This is a gospel from Ood. Only he could send news 
adapted to the case of sinners, and he has sent such news. Here is the expression of 
his deepest sympathy, his tenderest solicitude, his most fatherly love. Coming from 
him, the gospel cannot be an illusion ; it may be trusted. It is the wisdom of God 
and the power of God unto salvation. Yet, what is this gospel to those who believe 
not ? Good news to those who reject it is all the same as bad news. There is every 
reason, every motive, for believing it. Christ will be glorified, God will be rejoiced, 
angels will sympathize and sing with gladness, and you will be saved. The gospel' 
is worthy of belief in itself, and it is exactly and perfectly adapted to you. Believe it 
and believe it now 1 

Ttff. 16 — 20. — Fishers of mvn. It was an incident of great moment in th^ hist/t^ 
of Christianity and of the world — this, the calling by our Lord Jesus of his followers 
and apostles. Christ did not make many converts ; but the few he did make made 
many, so that, in selecting and appointing them, he was sowing the seed of a great 



oa. 1. 1—46.] THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. MARK. li 

and eternal harvest. He probably called these four more than once — first during the 
ministry of the forerunner, again as in the text, and a third time when he com- 
missioned them formally to act as his apostles. 

I. Observe who the men were who were called. 1. Their position in life ; they 
were from the industrial classes. Not only did the Son of God choose himself to be 
born and brought up among the laborious and comparatively poor, he selected his 
immediate attendants, his personal friends, the proqiulgators of his religion, from the 
same rat^k of life. He togk the form of a servant ; he was known as " the carpenter's 
Eon ; " it was asked concerning him, " Whence hath this man learning ? " Luke indeed 
was a physician, and Paul a echolar, but the twelve seem to have been of lowly con- 
dition and surroundings. 2, Their occupation; they were fishermen. Theirs was, 
no doubt, a common calling among the dwellers by the shores of the Galilean lake. 
There may have been some moral qualities, such as reverence and simplicity, which 
fitted these men for their new calling and life. 3. In relationship they were united 
by family ties ; for these four disciples were two paii's of brothers. Simon and 
Andrew, and likewise James and John, were not only called together, but seein to have 
been associated together in an evangelistic ministry, when our Lord sent his disciples 
forth " two and two." Natural kindred and affection were thus sanctified by com- 
munity in Christian calling and service. The two pairs were friends, comrades, and 
associates in labour. 4. They were, at all events in some instances, specially pre- 
pared for this calling. Certainly some and probably all of these four were previously 
disciples of John the Baptist, who, in their hearing, had witnessed to Jesus as the 
Messiah. Jesus thus honoured his forerunner by receiving disciples from his training. 

n. Regard the call here related. 1. The Caller was the Divine Christ. An 
inestimable privilege to hear from those lips a gracious summons such as this ! It is 
a sacred responsibility to hear the voice of Christ speak to ourselves with words of 
invitation, command, or commission. 2. The manner of the call deserves attention ; 
it was with authority. Simple and few were the words, but they were the words of 
One whose utterances carried with them their own authority — an authority acknow- 
ledged at once by the conscience of those to whom it was addnssed. 3. The import 
of the call was most momentous — " Follow me 1 " This call seems to have been 
addressed to these men on more occasions than one. They were directed to follow 
Jesus that they might listen to his teaching and observe his mighty works, that they 
might be qualified for the solemn commission which was to be entrusted to them upon 
the Saviour's ascension. 

III. Eemark the promise given in connection with the call. These Galilean fisher- 
men should become " fishers of men." Our Saviour here takes advantage of the deep 
resemblances between natural processes and human activities on the one hand, and 
spiritual realities on the other. The sea in which Christian ministers are called to toil 
is this world, is human society, with all its uncertainties, vicissitudes, and dangers. 
The fish they seek are human souls, oftentimes hard to find and to catch. The net 
which they let downiat the Divine command is the gospel, fitted to include and to 
bring to safety all souls of men. The skill and patience and vigilance of the fisher- 
men may well be studied and imitated by those who watch and labour for souls. To 
enclose within the net is to bring souls within the limits of the privileges and motives, 
the laws and hopes of the gospel. To land what is taken is to bring the rescued 
safely into the eternal security of heaven. 

IV. The RESPONSE TO THE CALL is deserving of our observation. 1. There was 
cheerful compliance. No objection, no hesitation, no condition, not even an inquiry ; 
but willing, contented obedience to a summons felt to be authoritative and binding. 
2. This compliance was immediate. So should all respond whom Christ iuvites to 
come after him. Not a moment should be lost in choosing a lot so honourable, so 
desirable, so happy. 3. It was self-sacrificing. They left their nets, their kindred, 
their occupation, readily giving up all in order that they might follow Jesus. It was 
• condition which the Master now and again imposed, to prove the sincerity of hia 
people's love, devotion, and zeal. 

RiAOTiOAL LESSONS. 1. For preachers and teachers of the gospel. Eemember what 
is the vocation with which you are called. Let this be the acknowledged eno you set 
before you — to be fishers of men, to gain souls. 2. For hearers of the gospel. 



1« THE GOSPEL ACCOKDINQ TO ST. MABK. [ch. 1. 1— 46. 

Hemember tliat Christ has called you and is calling yon. The burden of his appeal is 
this — " Come ye after me ! " And, vvben saved, seek that you may be the means of 
saving others. 3. For those who, hearing the voice of the Lord Christ, are disposed to 
obey his call. Bear in mind that he demands a complete surrender, that he will not 
be satisfied unless the heart is dedicated to him, unless, with the heart, all that we have 
is yielded to his service. There is sure to be something in the way of obeying the 
Divine and heavenly call. Tou will, like the fishermen of Galilee, have something to 
give up in I'ollowing Christ. Be prepared for this, and count the cost. But, for your 
soul's sake and for the sake of your salvation, let nothing hinder you from faith and 
consecration. " Count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Chriit 
Jesus our Lord." 

Vers. 21, 22. — Ohriifi authority in teaching. This passage informs us of three 
circumstances connected with our Lord's early Galilean ministry. 1. It was exercised 
largely in Capernaum, a populous and busy town on the western shore of the Lake of 
Galilee. This fact exhibits Christ's resolve to mix with the people and to seek their 
enlightenment and welfare. 2. It was exercised specially on the sabbath days. In 
this Christ practically asserted his own principle, " The sabbath was made for man." 
Although a day of physical rest, it was stamped, by the Lord's action, as a day for 
spiritual activity and influence. 3. It was frequently exercised in the synagogues. 
These were not, indeed, of Mosaic institution, but had sprung up since the Captivity, 
and were espscially connected with the professional labours of the scribes. They were 
a sign that the Hebrews cultivated an intellectual religion. The practice of regular 
religious instruction was sanctioned by the great Teacher, when he attended the syna- 
gogues, conformed to their usages, and took .advantage of the assembling of congre- 
gations in them to exercise his ministry of teaching. 

I. ChBIST fulfilled his 8PIBITUAL MINISTET AMONG MEN LABGELT BY TEACHING. 

1. This was a recognition of man's intelligent, rational nature. Our Lord did not 
appeal so much to men's fears as to their reason, their gratitude, their love. Instruc- 
tion is the debt which every generation owes to its successor, and which the wise owe 
to the ignorant. The more the ministers of Christianity appeal to the intelligence of 
their hearers, the more do they follow the example of their Master. 2. It was an 
assertion of his own office. He claimed to be " the Light of the world." And this was 
in virtue of his very nature. He was " the Word of God," uttering the thought, 
expressing the mind, of God. There is something deeply affecting and truly encourag- 
ing in this representation of the incarnate Son of God, going about teaching the 
ignorant, the poor, the uncared for. 3. It was a revelation of Christ's own character. 
What condescension, gentleness, sympathy, were manifest in the quiet, patient manner 
in which the Lord frequented these lowly edifices and taught those simple congregationg I 

n. Christ's teaching was becognized as authobitative. 1. In this it con- 
trasted with the teaching of the scribes, who were the acknowledged and professional 
instructors in religion of the peopln of Israel But they were expositors of the sacred 
books ; they repeated and enforced the traditions of the elders. There was little or 
nothing original in their lessons; whereas Christ spoke from his own mind and heart, 
and acknowledged no master, no superior. 2. There was authority in our Lord's 
presence and manner. From the impression which his teaching made upon strangers, 
from their recorded testimony, it is clear that there was a Divine dignity in his aspect 
and his speech ; " Never man spake like this man." 3. There was authority in the 
substance of his teaching. Truth has an authority of its own, an authority which is 
often, when questioned by the lips, confessed in the heart. Our Lord's revelation! 
of the Father, his expositions of the spiritual nature of religion and morality, hi§ 
insight mfco human nature, his predictions of the future, — ail alike impressed his hearers 
with a sense of liis special, unique authority. 4. This quality in our Lord's teaching 
was confessed by the conscience of men. It was not that the people were simply awed 
by his manner and language. What was best in their nature did homage to him. 
They could aot question his wisdom, his justice, his insight, his compassion. 

III. Chbist's adthobitativb teaching pboduoed a peofoukd impeesbioh. Thia 
is described as astonishment, amazement. The novelty of the style, the tone, the 
matter, of our Lord's teaching, to some extent accounts lur this. The unprecedented 



OB. 1. 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINQ TO ST. MARK. 17 

power of his discourse was, however, the chief cause of this general wonder. There 
were occasions when astonishment led to repugnance, and the people would fain shun 
the presence of One so awful ; but there were instances in whicb astonishment glowed 
into admiration and kindled into faith. And this last is the proper and intended 
result. If we are to have a Teacher, let us welcome One who speaks with authority ; if 
we are to have a Saviour, who so fit as One mighty to save ? if we are to submit to a 
Lord, a King, may it be One whose right it is to reign I 

Ver. 22. — " Saving authority." St. Mark's Gospel has been characterized as the Gospel 
for the Eomans, as the Gospel of Power, as the Gospel of the Resurrection. The 
symbol denoting this second evangelist is the lion. There has always been a feeling 
that the dignity and majesty, the might and victory, of Emmanuel are in an especial 
manner set before the reader in this one of the four Gospels. Certainly the first 
chapter strikes the key-note of this strain. Jesus appears as the mysterious Lord, 
who with authority summons fishermen to forsake their nets and follow him; who 
teaches with authority in the synagogues, and awakens the amazement of his hearers ; 
who with authority commands the unclean spirits, and they obey him ; whose authority 
rebukes the fever and heals the leprosy ; who by the magnetism of his power and love 
gathers the people from every quarter into his gracious presence, to hear his authorita- 
tive voice, and to receive a thousand blessings from his beneficent and powerful hands. 
In one word, he appears before us, at the very outset of his ministry, as " One that had 
authority." 

I. How Christ's authokitt was assekted. That we may understand that Christ 
claims authority, we must refer to the gospel narrative, in which his words are 
recorded, his character delineated, and his ministry related. Does he assert authority ? 
Is he such a Being that his claims demand attention ? Was his authority for a season 
only, or was it intended to subsist through all time and in eternity ? Was his an 
authority local in its range, or universal as the presence of mankind on earth? That 
Christ possessed and exercised authority during his earthly ministry admits of no 
dispute or question. Satan himself confessed it; for Jesus spurned his assumptions, 
resisted his temptations, and sent him who claimed the lordship of the earth defeated 
and uncrowned from his holy and authoritative presence. Angels recognized it ; for 
they came to minister to his wants, and stood in countless legions ready, at a word, 
to rescue and to honour him. Demons felt it, and quailed beneath his glance, did 
homage to his supremacy, and fled at his rebuke. Nature knew it ; and the winds 
were hushed and the sea was calmed at his authoritative word, bread multiplied in his 
hand, and water at his bidding turned to wine, trees withered at his breath, the very 
grave gave up its dead at his command, and the gentle air floated his gracious form to 
heaven. His enemies were conscious of his superiority; for they were abashed and 
silenced by his reasoning, they fell backward at his look. Men generally acknowledged 
him to be other and higher than themselves ; " Never man," said the officers sent to 
apprehend him — " never man spake like this man ; " Pilate and Pilate's wife were under 
the mysterious spell of his Divine authority ; and the Roman centurion was constrained 
to exclaim, " Truly this was the Son of God ! " His friends were sensible that he was 
io them more than a friend; at his summons they forsook their callings and their 
homes, they attempted impossibilities with confidence, they consecrated their powers 
and tliey hazarded their lives for the mission to which he called them. But he had 
greater witness than that of man. The works which he performed, they testified to 
him. The seal of God was set upon his actions. The voice of God honoured the Holy 
One and Just ; heaven itself was opened, and from the excellent glory came the attesta- 
tion and the approval of the Most High, " This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased! " and there was added the demand which sanctions the authority of Emmanuel 
over universal man, " Hear ye him 1 " The Jews sometimes felt that Jesus of Nazareth 
was laying claim to a special and unrivalled authority. His bold and thorough 
cleansing of the temple is a case in point. How came he to take upon himself so 
remarkable a function as this ? Who was he that he should do what none of the great 
officials ventured upon ? We cannot wonder that " the chief priests and the elders of 
the people came unto him as he was teaching, and said. By what authority doest thou 
these things, and who gave theb this authority ? " The only explanation was that 

ST. MARK. O 



18 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. l 1—46. 

Jesug was lord of the temple because he was the Son of God. And this lordship h« 
asserted when he predicted the destruction of the material sanctuary, and when he, 
using it as a symbol of his body, foretold the rebuilding of the temple of God in thre« 
short days. Another case in point is his assumption of the Divine prerogativ* of 
pardoning sin. When Jesus publicly assured the believing paralytic that his sini 
were forgiven, this language aroused the indignation of the scribes and Pharisees. 
" This man blasphemeth I Who can forgive sins but God only ? " The only reply 
of our Saviour to these insinuations was the performance of a miracle, that, as he 
phrased it, " they might know that the Son of man had power on earth to forgive sins." 
II. Upon what is Ghbist'b authobitt based ? It is not all authority which the 
enlightened and the free, the honourable and the just, can regard with reverence. Much 
that bears the name may fairly be treated as usurpation. And even just authority may 
deserve only a partial reverence ; it may be admitted, but admitted with reserve. 
Authority is of different kinds, for it rests on different bases. The authority of the 
tyrant over his subjects, of the conqueror over the vanquished, rests on force and fear; 
the authority of the priest over the devotee rests on superstition and assumption ; but 
the authority of the teacher over the scholar is the authority of wisdom, and that of the 
parent over the child is the authority of care and love. There is authority which li 
natural, and authority which is conventional. Some authority it is virtue to recognize ; 
other authority it is baseness and dishonour not to resist. Anthoiity is excellent and 
admirable when there is a right to command, when there is an obligation to submit 
and to obey. To understand aright the authority of the Lord Jesus, we must divest 
our minds of their habitual notions of civil authority. Government is not only right, 
it is necessary, it is ord^ned of God. But it has regard only to human actions. It is 
not the business of the civil ruler to influence men's beliefs upon science, or philosophy, 
or religion, but to induce them to industry, independence, order, and peaceableness. 
And the sanctions governors employ are not so much moral as external and physical. Fine, 
imprisonment, death, — these are their weapons. Occasionally rewards, in the shape of 
distinctions and honours, may be added, but the system is mainly one of penalty, A 
submission to Christ's authority is nothing if it is not willing, cheerful, cordial. Too 
often human authority is asserted with harshness, is acknowledged with slavishness. 
None of our Redeemer's subjects bow the knee whilst the heart is unyielded, offer the 
homage of the voice whilst the spirit is in rebellion. Men may do this under some 
influences ; but let them not be deceived ; it is the authority of men to which they bow, 
not that of Christ ! By virtue of what quality, of what possession, had Jesus Christ 
authority ? For us there is one great and all-sufficient answer — He was the Son of 
Ood. It was upon this ground that he based his own claims. " I and my Father," 
said he, " are one." " Say ye of him whom the Father hath sanctified and sent into 
the world. Thou blasphemest ! because I said, I am the Son of God ? " " The works 
which My Father hath given me to do, bear witness of me that the Father hath sent 
me." In fact, Christ so often and so plainly asserted his unique authority that he 
came to refuse any further explanations or formal claims. He answered inquiry by 
taquiry, and boldly declared, " Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things.' 
Truth has authority over man's understanding, and Christ's words, his declarations 
and revelations, have the authority of truth. He claimed to have told them the truth 
which he had heard of God. Our nature is framed to recognize and to rest in truth ; 
and, since Christ is " the Truth," he is exactly adapted to our mental necessities and 
desires, to afford them full and final satisfaction. Christ wields the authority attach- 
ing to a holy and benevolerd character. The human heart always renders homage to 
goodness, though there_ may be motives which prevent that homage being manifested 
and expressed. We instinctively honour and reverence those whom we feel to be 
better than ourselves. Now, in the case of our Saviour, it was Divine, incarnate good- 
ness which appeared before men and moved among them. A perfect man, he went 
about doing good ; and, both by his pure and gentle character, and by his unselfish, 
compassionate life, he commanded the reverence and constrained the allegiance of 
men. An authority this far nobler and worthier than that derived from a splendid 
retinue and a glittering throne, a mighty army and a sounding name. The con- 
science of the Christian acknowledges the claims of the sinless Emmanuel. Th« 
heart confesses the unrivalled authority oJ' his tender pity, his unselfish love. Power 



OH. L 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. 1» 

apart from righteousness, enkindles resentment and arouses resistance. But goodnes* 
and benevolence, with the resources of Omnipotence at their command, summon our 
hearts to a willing surrender and our lives to a glad obedience. Our will, our whole 
nature, acknowledge the authority of the Saviour's law. When he was upon eartli 
his disciples obeyed unquestioningly the mandates they could not always understand, 
and undertook with alacrity service for which they felt themselves utterly unqualified. 
And each awakened and enlightened hearer of the gospel gives utterance to his fore- 
most and earnest desire in the words of the trembling rabbi of Tarsus, " Lord, what 
wilt thou have me to do?" When once we know ourselves and him, we feel that none 
other has the right to our loyalty, our love, our devotion. When we hear his voice, it 
carries with it its own authority to our heart. 

IIL Over whom Christ's authority extends. The answer to this question is 
suggested by what has been already said regarding the instruments, so to speak, of the 
dominion of Jesus Christ. If truth and righteousness, love and sacrifice — spiritual 
influence, in a word — be the source of his authority, we feel at once that his reign is not 
primarily and chiefly one over actions and observances. It is far more deep-seated and 
efficient, far more adapted to the moral nature of man and the moral authority of God. 
Christ's authority is over the spiritual nature of man, and it is supported hy 
apiritwd sanctions. Not so much what men du, as what they are, and why they act, 
and how they feel, is of interest to the Lord of hearts. His appeal is to what is intel- 
lectual, to what is moral, in man. It is not his aim to induce men to wear one uniform, 
to utter one cry, but rather to share one spirit — his own, to live one life — that of God. 
He designs to bring every thought into captivity unto obedience to Jesus Christ. Yet 
it is important to remember that, constituted as man is, it is impossible that he should 
acknowledge an authority over his conscience and heart which will have no sway over 
the actions and habits of his life. The individual life will be cast into the mould of 
Christ's mind and will. Society will own practically the rightful and controlling gway 
of Jesus. " All power is given unto him." 

IV. The advantages which Christ's authority secures. Is it to be desired that 
the authority of the Saviour should be generally and indeed universally acknowledged ? 
What are the fruits of obedience ? what the influences of his reign ? Are they such 
that we may look forward with hope and prayer to the submission and subjection of 
mankind to him whom we " call Master and Lord " ? When the authority of the 
Saviour has been acknowledged by the soul, and when he is habitually exercising this 
authority over the whole nature, the results are most blessed. Happiness is not in 
wilfulness and unbridled licence, but in subjection to a Law, holy, approved, and 
willingly accepted. This is true liberty, when the soul finds an authority it can bow 
before and obey with the harmony of all its faculties. Christ's is the perfect law of 
liberty, and where this prevails and reigns there is peace and joy ; for there freedom 
and obedience are one, yoked together by spiritual and most welcome bonds. The 
widespread and universal acknowledgment of the Eedeemer's authority is the one 
hope for the world's future. No thoughtful man can look forward to a universal 
empire of force, to the prevalence of a supreme military authority. What, then, is to 
put an end to wars and fightings amongst men ? They are not for ever to afSict and 
curse the world. It is only in the reign of righteousness and benevolence that the 
dreams of poets shall be realized, the forecastings of prophets fulfilled, and the prayers 
of saints shall be answered. " In the Name of Jesus every knee shall bow, and every 
tongue shall confess that he is Lord, to the glory of God the Father." 

V. How THIS authority op Christ affects those who heab the oosfsIa, To 
some the authority of the Eedeemer may be an unwelcome theme. They would rather 
hear of his grace than of his dominion. Yet it is well to see and feel that each is 
essential to the other in a perfect and Divine Saviour. Instruction, to he satisfactory, 
must be authoritative. Consolation comes most efiectually from him who wields the 
■ceptre of dominion, and who is able to rebuke and to master all our foes and to 
sanctify all our trials. Many hearers of the gospel in these days think little of the 
rightful and supreme authority of the Lord Christ. Preachers and writers of religious 
books are accustomed to lay great stress upon the love of the Redeemer, and to spend 
their energies in inducing sinful, weak, needy hearts to respond to Christ's love, and to 
accept his salvation. And this is quite right. But it is not right to overlook the just 



i;0 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. MARK. [oh, i. 1—45. 

claim of Christ upon the faith and obedience of men, to keep out of sight the truth that 
men have no right to disbelieve and disobey the Son of God. No doubt it is for our 
interest and our happiness to be Christians. It is also our sin and our shame if wo ar« 
not Christians. There have been parents among the poor who have thought that they 
were doing the teachers in Sunday schools a favour in sending their children to receive 
religious instruction ; and this notion has arisen from the extreme and benevolent 
desire of teachers to bring the young into their classes. And in like manner it seem* 
that there are many persons who think that they are quite at liberty to receive the 
Saviour or to reject him ; that if they welcome the gospel and seek the fellowship of a 
Christian Church they will be bestowing an important favour upon those who present 
to them the invitations of the gospel. But, as the child renders no favour in doing 
his father's will, as the poor man renders no favour in accepting the bounty of his 
benefactor, as the subject renders no favour in obeying his country's laws, so the 
sinner, in listening to the gospel, obeying its summons and submitting to the Son of 
God, is far from rendering a favour. H.^ is receiving a gift in his abject poverty ; he 
ia passing from the prison doors into light and liberty ; he is acknowledging the just 
authority of an omnipotent Friend — a Saviour, not only gracious, but supreme. Divine ! 

Vers. 23 — 28. — Christ's authority over spirits. After a condensed narrative of the 
events introductory to our Lord's ministry, Mark proceeds to relate, in circumstantial 
detail, miracles performed in Capernaum and the neighbourhood, forming a cycle of the 
greatest importance ; for by these miracles the interest of the population of Galilee 
was excited, whilst the hostility of the scribes and Pharisees was gradually aroused. 
Mark's is the Gospel of Power — his emblem is the lion. He tells the story of Christ's 
miraculous ministry with marvellous vigour and minuteness. The first miracle he 
records is the dispossession of a demon, impure and violent, yet unable to resist the 
authority of the Lord of the universe. This is well put in the forefront of the battle. 

I. Christ's authority is acknowledgbd by the spirit. 1. Not willingly, but of 
constraint. The demon recognizes, in the great Healer and Master, the " Holy One of 
God," i.e. the Messiah. Shrinking from his presence — anxious to avoid the encounter — 
the evil spirit nevertheless cowers before the Lord. When multitudes of the race which 
Jesus came to save kiiew him not, neither confessed his rightful claim, this demon was 
compelled to cry, " I know thee who thou art I " Happy omen for humanity — the 
foe of God and man recognizes the irresistible Warrior and Conqueror 1 2. There is an 
anticipation of the issue of the conflict, " Art thou come to destroy us? " What pre- 
science is here I Scribes and Pharisees, Sadducees and Herodians, Jews and Romans, 
persuade themselves that they can destroy the Son of man. The demons know that 
the Son of man is their Destroyer 1 It is a just description of the Saviour's work — he 
comes to "destroy the works of the devil," to vanquish the foe, to cancel the sin, to 
release the sinner, to restore the captive of Satan to the liberty of the servant of the 
Lord. 

n. Christ's authority is asserted and exercised by himself. Salvation involves 
antagonism : the bondman can only be released by the defeat of the tyrant; the strong 
man must be bound that the spoil may be recovered. The Lord Jesus had met 
with and vanquished the prince of evil ; he was now to contend with his servants. 
Accordingly, Christ, who rebuked the winds and the waves — elements producing discord 
in nature — rebukes also the evil and unclean spirit. It is a witness that the soul of 
man is not the fit and divinely ordered home and dwelling of the agents of the power 
of evil. Silence 1 Hence I Begone 1 — such is the bidding of Heaven to the emissaries 
of hell found encroaching upon the domain which is not theirs. 

in. Christ's authority is practically shown and proved. The unclean spirit is 
reluctant to quit his hold upon his prey. Satan cannot see his subjects liberated and 
his empire wane without resistance and resentment. But there is no withstanding the 
power of Emmanuel The struggle is apparent in the convulsions with which the frame 
of the possessed is torn, and in the cry of anguish which is forced from his lips. But 
there is only one issue possible. The demon quails beneath the Master's eye, shud- 
ders at the Master's voice, and yields. Oh, happy omen of a great salvation 1 How 
often is this illustration of Christ's delivering power to be repeated in the Divine 
ministry, and through the dispensation of redemption and of grace I 



OB. 1. 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. MARK. XI 

rV, Cheist'b adthoeitt 18 ADMITTED WITH AMAZEMENT. The Tendering of tke 
revisers is full of meaning and vivacity: "What is this? a new teaching!" or, as 
others read, " A new doctrine with authority 1 " The point is that miracle and 
doctrine are justly regarded as one and the same. The listeners to his discourses felt 
the authority of his words ; the spectators of his miracles felt the authority of his 
works. We distinguish between the two, but Christ's contemporaries evidently saw 
the identity more clearly than the diversity. From his teaching they learned that the 
authority of his miracles was that of a wise and holy Being; from his beneficent 
miracles they inferred that all his Divine lessons were fraught with a heavenly energy, 
•nd proceeded from the mind of God. Their minds were evidently incited to inquiry, 
to consideration, to reflection. Who will not bow before an authority so just and so 
Divine as this ? 

v. Christ's authobitt became the theme of widesprbad intebbst aisd fame. 
Mark puts this dispossession of the demoniac forward as the first great miracle of this 
cycle, and represents it as the means of diffusing throughout Galilee an interest in the 
ministry of our Lord. Jesus thus became known as a Teacher, as a Saviour, as a Being 
of compassion and grace. Tidings of such a Prophet, of such a Benefactor, could not be 
other than a gospel to Israel and to mankind. What sacred and grateful and tender 
associations would mingle with the people's memories and thoughts and expectations 
regarding Jesus of Nazareth 1 

Application. 1. Behold a picture of the power of Satan and of sin over the nature of 
man. 2. Behold a proof of the authority of Christ, when he enters upon a struggle 
with the power of darkness dwelling in human spirits. 3. Learn a lesson of encourage- 
ment as to the personal and universal results of the great moral conflict of the world. 

Vers. 29 — 31. — Ohriet't domestic ministry. Wherever Jesus went and amongst 
whomsoever, he took with him a heart sensitive to the appeal of human need, suffering, 
and sin ; he took with him a hand open to give, stretched out to help and deliver. In 
city and country, among Jews and foreigners, with high and low, in the society of 
men, women, and children, he was always the same — the Helper, the Comforter, the 
Healer, the JPriend of man. For the brief but pictorial and tender narrative in these 
verses we are doubtless indebted to the memory of the grateful Peter, himself a 
witness of the miracle, and one who profited by it in his own family and household. 

I. The disciples soon beap the eewabd op theie obedience and self-sacbitiob. 
flow readily had they responded to the Master's call, " Follow me " 1 How readily 
had they left their boats and fishing-nets, their daily occupations and their gains! So 
they had come into close relations with Jesus ; so he became a guest in Simon's 
house. This led to the miracle here recorded, in which the Lord more than recompensed 
them for any loss they might have incurred. Christ often calls upon us for some self- 
denial and sacrifice ; but he never does other than reward a hundredfold, even in this 
time, those who obey. 

n. PeTEE LEAENS a LEB80N OP HIS MaSTEB's POWEE AND WILLINGNESS TO SAVE. 

We know enough of Simon to understand that his nature was very receptive of im- 
pressions, very responsive to sympathy. What a lesson for him was this — which the 
Saviour vouchsafed to teach him so early in his discipleship — of the compassion and 
grace of his Lord ! And what a preparation for the apostolate, yet so far in the future I 
First impressions are often the strongest. And we know that of all the twelve Peter 
was, in the course of the Lord's ministry, the first to confess his Divine dignity and 
Messiahship. Surely this was the maturity of the seed now sown at Capernaum. 

III. ChBIST PEOVES his sympathy WITH HOME SUFFEBINGS, AND BLESSES HOME LIFE. 

His ministry was indeed chiefly fulfilled in public; yet in the homes of Simon, of 
Levi, of Lazarus, he proved his interest in the domestic life of his friends. He enten d 
into family feeling, and consecrated family life. It was sometimes said to him, " He 
whom thou lovest is sick." It was an appeal to which he was never indifferent 
Christ is ever mindful of our family cares and anxieties, sorrows and joys. Let him 
"abide with us," and he will lighten our dwellings when they are clouded with 
trouble and with grief. When, like Simon's household, we " tell him " of the need 
»nd sorrow of those we love, his help is near. 

IV. Chbist bxbboisbs his Divine power to banish disease. The action of ou7 



12 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAUK. [on. 1. 1—45 

Lord in performing this miracle deserves attention. He does not stand at a distanca 
and utter words of exorcism, banishing the fever with an authoritative rebuke. Quit* 
the reverse, he takes the sufferer by the hand and raises her up. An illustration of our 
Saviour's personal ministry, of the way in which he has ever come into contact with 
individual cases of need, of his tender and yet authoritative manner. It is not tha 
religion of Christ, it is Christ himself who saves. And he ever saves by stretching 
forth the hand of help, and raising, elevating, the suppliant and penitent from tha 
prostration and helplessness of sin. As the fever left this suffering woman, so ali 
spiritual malady is banished at the bidding of a mighty, gracious Saviour. 

V. Affectionate gkatitudb pbgmptb to pbksonal service and ministeation. If 
our Lord made this house his home in Capernaum, Peter's mother-in-law must have 
had many opportunities of showing her thankfulness and love. Like many other 
devoted women, she took pleasure in showing how highly she honoured and how 
gratefully she loved her Lord. It is a law of moral life that those who are aided, 
healed, and pardoned shall love him to whom they owe so much ; and shall show their 
love by grateful ministrations. They may not have the opportunity of ministering to 
Christ in the body ; but the principle he propounds is this, " Inasmuch as ye did it 
unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye did it unto me." 

Pbactical lessons. 1. Let us, like Simon, welcome Christ into our houses, our 
homes. 2. Let us, like this household, tell the Saviour of those members of the family 
who have special need of him. 3. Let us place all confidence in Christ's power and 
willingness to bless. 4, Let us, healed and pardoned by Christ's grace, take every 
opportunity of showina; our gratitude, by engaging in his service ; and, by ministering 
to his pecple, let us minister to him. 

Vers. 32 — 34. — The Healer of multitudes. It was the hallowed evening of a 
memorable day. The Lord Jesus had taught in the synagogue, consecrating the 
sabbath by worship and by spiritual instruction, and creating in the popular mmd an 
impression of his unique authority. He had cast out the demon from a wretched 
sufferer; he had healed Simon's wife's mother of a raging fever; — all these instances 
of his power were related through the dwellings of Capernaum, and the popular 
excitement was great. No wonder that at sunset, when the sabbath was over, and it 
was lawful to do so, the multitude sought out the sick and maimed among their 
kindred and companions, and the miserable demoniacs; brought them to the house of 
Simon, where Jesus was staying ; and entreated the compassion and the succour of the 
Prophet of Nazareth. 

I. In the sufferers brought to Jesus we have a kepeesentation of the widespread 
AND various ills THAT AFFLICT MANKIND. If all the diseased and mentally afidicted 
of any town were brought together to one spot, what a distressing scene would be 
exhibited ! When the sick and the demoniacs of Capernaum were gathered together 
on that sabbath evening, they may be said to have exemplified the state of our sin- 
stricken humanity. To him who looks below the surface, this human race, apart from 
Christ, offers a spectacle with which no hospital, no pest-house, could compare. Moral 
disorders, Satanic influences, display themselves in a thousand forms, each having ita 
own loathsomeness, its own anguish, its own curse. " The whole head is sick, and 
the whole heart faint," etc. Fever, leprosy, palsy, possession, — each may indicate 
some special aspect of sin. 

n. In the conduct of those who brought the sufferers to Christ we have a repbesbn- 
TATION OT THE BENEVOLENT MINISTRATIONS OF THE Church. There Were those who 
had neither strength, knowledge, nor courage to come of themselves to Christ ; their 
pitying and thoughtful friends led or carried them into his sacred presence. So the 
Church, which cannot of itself save the world, may nevertheless bring the multitudes 
unto Christ, may, in a sense, bring Christ to the multitude. An honourable vocation 
this — to lead the morally disordered and distressed into the presence of the Divine 
Healer, of him who said, " The whole need not a physician, but those who are sick. 
I am come not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance." Some by preaching, 
some by private ministrations, some by example, and some by precept, — all in the sanie 
spirit of compassion for perishing souls, may lead sinners to the Redeemer. 

HL In the multitude we discern a forecast and earnest of the approach o» 



0H.L1— 46.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 21 

•IN-STRIOKBN HUMANiTT TO THE Savioub. What a sight — "all the city gathered 
together at the door " of Jesus! Men are learning the powerlessness of every other 
helper, the hopelessness of every other refuge and confidence. Heathenism and 
Mohammedanism are proving the futility of their claims ; infidelity and atheism are 
showing that they can render no real service to mankind. At the same time, men are 
learning that, whilst there is salvation in no other, there is salvation in him. And 
they shall come, flocking like doves to his windows, like pilgrims from the east and 
from the west to his shrine, until this vast humanity shall gather into th« presence, 
implore the aid, and know the power of the Divine Redeemer. 

IV. In the cures effected we have an exemplification of thb actual powbb of 
THE Saviottk to heal AND BLESS. The evangelist does not here dwell upon details, 
but he mention* two great classes of patients, the diseased and the demoniacs. Over 
sufferers in mind and body the Lord Jesus displayed his healing authority and grace. 
There was no case beyond his power. The faith of the applicants was rewarded, the 
report of their friends was justified, the authority of the Saviour was exemplified, the 
fame of his ministry was confirmed and extended. What happy households were to 
be found in Capernaum that night, which had long known pain, anxiety, and 
despondency ! An encouragement surely, to all afiBicted by the bondage and the curse 
of sin, to apply to Jesus for relief, for forgiveness, and for blessing. It does not matter 
what form your spiritual need and suffering have assumed; it does not matter for 
what length of time you have been the slave of sin ; if you come to Christ you shall 
surely learn that " he is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him." 
The purpose of our Saviour's advent and medi ttion includes all cases of sin and need. 
The power of the Redeemer is unlimited, lae compassion of Jesus is unexhausted. 
As of old, " he has compassion on the multitudes." The promises of our Lord are 
large enough to include every case. " Come unto me, all ye," etc. 

Vers. 35 — 39. — Prayer and vmrk. We are told concerning our Divine Lord, that " it 
behoved him in all thiugs to be made like unto his brethren." This indeed is implied 
in his designation, " Son of man." Our nature is both contemplative and active ; 
the life of a religious man is distinguished alike by devout meditation and communion 
with God, and by consecrated and energetic labour in God's service. It was the same 
with our great Leader. The passage before us presents the Lord Jesus in both these 
aspects, both in prayer and in work. 

I. Christ's fbayeb. It is recorded that, at several crises in our Saviour's ministry, 
he prayed. 1. As to the character of Christ's prayers, we know that they were unlike 
ours in that they could not contain confession, contrition, and repentance ; and they 
were like ours in containing thanksgivings, and also as expressing filial communion 
and uttering supplication. 2, As to the occasion of Christ's prayers, it is the fact that 
special mention is made of our Lord's appeals to the Father, in connection with the 
more solemn and significant acts of his ministry. So here, it was in the midst of 
publicity, of widespread interest, of strenuous labours, that Jesus prayed. 3. The 
time chosen is remarkable. Very early in the morning, before the stir and movement 
of daily life began, the early, waking, morning hour was consecrated to fellowship with 
the Father. 4. The scene of this prayer is observable. Jesus sought seclusion ; he 
retired to a desert place. It is possible and it is desirable to pray in the assemblies of 
saints, and to pray in the crowded thoroughfares, to him who seeth in secret. Yet 
there is appropriateness in retirement and seclusion for special supplications in seasons 
of special need. The prayer offered on this occasion could not be put upon record, for 
it was offered in solitude. We know from the " intercessory prayer " recorded by John 
how fervently our Lord could pray. On this occasion he must have sought strength 
for the Galilean ministry, and a blessing upon the people, who were more ready to 
behold his miracles and to profit by them than they were to imbibe his spirit and 
receive his teaching. 

IL Christ's work. The prayer occupied the early morning, but the day was to be 
spent in toil. Our Lord's example gives no countenance to the practice of those who 
deem the beginning and the end of religion to consist in devotions. Prayer fits for work, 
and work necessitates prayer. 1. Christ's labours were suggested by men's needs and 
ttttreatie*. What ha had done had stirred up hope within the breasts of others, and 



M THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. [oh. L 1—45. 

" all men sought for him." Not always from the highest motives, yet with a faith and 
•arnestness creditable to the suppliants, men sought Christ's help. 2. Christ's labours 
were regarded by him as the fulfilment ef Divine purpose. " Therefore to this end 
eame I forth." He did the will of the Father ; this was his meat and drink. It gives 
dignity and happiness to our toil when we can regard it as the work which the Father 
has given us to do. 3. Christ's labours were prompted by a universal and untiring 
lenevolenee. There were " the next towns " to be visited ; there was " all Galilee " to 
be evangelized. Only a large heart could take a survey so compreiiensive, and cherish 
a compassion so vast. It was enough for him that sin and misery abounded ; he had 
come " to seek and to save that which was lost." 4. Christ's works were adapted to the 
many-sided nature amd to the multiform needs of men. Men were ignorant; he must 
teach them. Men were hopeless ; he must cheer them with good tidings. Men were 
sick and suffering ; he must relieve and heal them. Men were subject to Satanic sway ; 
he must set them free. Men were sinful ; he must pardon, cleanse, renew them. 

III. The connection between peayeb and woek. 1. It is a divinely appointed 
connection. There are those who would have Christians confine themselves to prayer, 
who think that to attempt to work for the Lord is the same as taking matters out of 
his hands, who tell us that the Lord will carry out his counsels without our help. 
That God can do so we believe, but that he will do so is contrary to all his Word. 
On the other hand, there are those who sneer at prayer as unreasonable and useless, 
and who preach the gospel of work— of prayerless work — of work without any 
reference to him who gives the power and who assigns the aim of labour. The Scrip- 
tures direct ns to conjoin the two. Christ gives us in his own person an example of 
the harmonious conjunction of both. 2. By prayer may be discovered the exact work 
which Providence entrusts to «s. There is no better prayer for the beginning of the day 
than this, " Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? " You may not clearly see what 
is the way of service in which the Lord would have you walk. There may open up 
before you two paths, and you may be uncertain which is that selected for you. In 
seeking to decide such questions, it is riglit to make use of your reason, and to take 
counsel of wise friends. Yet, whilst using human means, it is necessary to seek Divine 
guidance. " Commit thy way unto the Lord." A voice shall be heard saying, " This 
is the way ; walk ye in it." Not by magic or miracle, but by clear indications of 
providence, the answer is given from above. 3. By prayer is gained encouragement and 
strength for work. The magnitude of the service may make us more conscious of the 
feebleness and ignorance of the servant. Our heart may sink within us as we con- 
template our helplessness. But prayer can make the weakest strong. By prayer the 
impossible becomes the practicable. Prayer makes us feel that the power of Omnipo- 
tence is at our back. The fainting spirit is refreshed by communion with Heaven. 
The feeble arm is nerved for what seemed an unequal fight. The Holy Spirit — the 
Comforter, the Helper — is bestowed upon the suppliant, and his strength is no more 
his own, but God's. Then he exclaims, "I can do all things through Christ that 
■trengtheneth me." 

Application. 1. Let the hearers of the gospel remember that the work, the suffer- 
ing, and the prayers of Christ were all for their salvation. 2. Let them imitate the 
spirit and conduct of those of, whom we read that they sought Jesus: "All men seek 
for thee." If you wish to know the counsels of God, the preaching of Jesus will declare 
them to you. If you wish to experience the saving grace of God, you may through 
Christ find it for yourself. 3. Let the spirit of the Lord Jesus — his prayerfulness and 
hifl untiring zeal — serve as a model to every servant of his. Like him we must pray 
with sincerity, if like him we would work with diUgence. 

Ver. 37. — Seeking Jesus. " All are seeking thee." It is man's nature to seek. Men 
•re seeking many things. Some things they seek and find, other things they seek in 
vain, whilst there are things they seek, first to find and then to lose again. The 
Impulses of our constitution respond to the appeals made from without. There is a mys- 
terious, ^cr«o«ai attraction which renders some men the object of the quest of their 
fellows. But none has ever so been sought as was and is the Lord Jesus. Men, when 
spiritually awakened, attracted by the promises of the gospel and influenced by ths 
Holy Spirit, seek for Christ, and, when they find him, find all things in him. 



OH. I. 1—45.] THE GaSPBL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, 2S 

I. What in men leads them to seek Cheist ? There are many motives inducing 
to this inquiry and endeavour, just as when Jesus was on earth. 1. Curiosity leads 
men to seek him. During our Lord's ministry, especially the earlier ministry ic 
Galilee, there occurred, now and again, a rush to Jesus. Crowds followed him even 
into the deserts and the mountains. They came from far and near. And not only the 
populace, but the leaders of the people, were curious to see the Prophet of Nazareth ; and 
Pharisees invited him to dine with them, and asked their friends to meet him. The 
novelty of Christianity no longier acts amongst our population ; hut in regions where 
the gospel is for the first time preached, this motive operates, and many " inquirers " are 
drawn, simply by their desire fur some new thing, to seek a knowledge of the Saviour. 
2. Admiration leads men to seek him. Even sinful men confess the beauty of 
holiness, and the young and ardent and aspiring leel the marvellous attraction of a 
character with which no other can be compared. There is so much of meanness and 
selfishness in humanity, that the presence upon earth of one morally noble and perfectly 
benevolent charms some choice and fervent souls, and draws them to our Lord. 3. 
Need and suffering lead men to seek him. When Jesus was on earth there came to 
him the hungry to be ied, the sick to be healed, the suffering to be relieved, the 
ignorant to be taught, the anxious to secure his interposition on behalf of their friends 
and comrades. Human want is perennial ; and there are wants which the world can 
never supply, hearts the world can never fill. Where Jesus is known as the Dispenser 
of Divine compassion and bounty to the souls of men, men will be drawn to him. 

" Far and wide, though all unknowing. 
Pants for thee each mortal breast ; 
Human tears for thee are flowing. 
Human hearts in thee would rest." 

■4. Bin and a sense of ill desert and need of pardon lead men to seek him. Sinners, 
who were repelled from the formal and self-righteous, were attracted to the gracious and 
compassionate Redeemer. Often from his lips issued the merciful and authori- 
tative words, " Thy sins be forgiven thee ! " Sin has not ceased ; its burden and its 
curse are still felt. And there is none but Christ who has power upon earth to forgive 
sins. No wonder that men come to him. In him the sinner meets with the pity of a 
tender heart and the authority of a Divine power. 

IL What in Christ leads men to seek him ? 1. Foremost must be placed the 
fact that he seeks them. He came to seek and to save the lost. Had he not first come forth 
upon this quest, never would the needy and sinful children of men have gone forth to meet 
him. If " we love him because he first loved us," we have sought him because he first 
sought us. 2. Eis invitations and promises. He has both bidden men seek his help, 
and has assured them that they shall not seek in vain. " Come unto me " is his invi- 
tation ; and the assurance is added, " Ye shall find rest unto your souls." 3. His power 
to respond to their appeals, and to satisfy their wants. They who seek and find not 
are discouraged from further quest. It is never thus with those who apply to Jesus. 
Here the words hold good, " Seek, and ye shall find." 4. His benevolent dispositiur, 
renders it easy and congenial for those who seek good gifts to seek them here at tht 
hands of Jesus ; for in seeking him, the suppliant is seeking the gifts of liis hands 
as well as the love of his heart. And our need and urgency are exceeded by his readi- 
ness to confer all real blessings. 

Application. How should men seek Christ f 1. Sincerely and seriously. The 
sincere soul will seek, not his merely, but himself. 2. In faith, not as doubting 
whether he may now he found, but as assured of his spiritual nearness. 3. Seasonably, 
which is as much as to say, at once. " Now is the accepted time." We need him now, 
therefore we should seek him now. 4. Perseveringly, " watching daily at his gates." 
It is a life-long quest, and, though he be foimd to-day, none the less must he be sought 
to-morrow. The " seeking " must be continued, until we see him as he is. 

Vers. 40 — 45. — J%e leper healed. Among the many miracles wrought by the Divine 
Physician upon the bodies and minds of suffering mankind, the evangelists have 
selected certain as types of the Saviour's spiritual work, as well as illustrations of his 
Vienefic«nt ministry. Every class of sufferers seems to represent some special aspect of 



E6 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. l 1—46. 

sin and need, and every recorded miracle seems to convey some special lesson eoncernlng 
the Healer's grace and power. Let this narrative be thus regarded, and we find here— 
L A SYMBOL OF HUMAN BDf AND MiSEBT. Leprosy was evidently so regarded among 
the Jews, and upon Divine authority, as is clear from the detailed directions given in 
Leviticus for its treatment by the priests. A loathsome, spreading, and generally 
incurable disease, leprosy was regarded with universal repugnance and disgust, and leperi 
were excluded from ordinary human society and banished from ordinary human dwell- 
ings. This disease, therefore, has always been regarded as emblematical of sin, which 
lays hold of man's moral nature, cripples and disables it, spreads to every department 
of his being, and is by human means altogether incurable. It renders the subject of it 
unfit for the society of holy beings, and unworthy of a place in the Church of th« 
living God. 

II. The conduct of this leper is an example ow believino application to Chmst. 
We observe : 1. Approach to the Saviour. Though lepers were not permitted to come 
into the neighbourhood of their fellow-men, this man drew near to Jesus, with the 
boldness inspired by necessity and hope. 2. There was reverence. He knelt, he fell 
an his face, he worshipped the Master ; thus evincing his sense of inferiority and need, 
and his conviction of Christ's authority. 3. There was faith ; for his language implies 
this, " Thou canst make me clean." Not perfect faith, but sincere and in accordance 
with what he had heard of the great Healer. 4. There was entreaty. He besought 
Jesus, as one who felt that here was his only hope, " Here I live, or hero I die." 

III. The record describes Chbist'b power to save. The unusual fulness of the 
narrative gives us an insight into the movements and operations of Divine mercy. 1. 
Our Lord's action is traced to compassion, which stirred within his Divine heart — the 
source of all our salvation, the ground of all our hope. 2. Conta,ct with the sufferer 
was the means and the symbol of healing. What Naaman expected Elisha to do to 
him, that Jesus did to this sufferer — laid his hands upon the place, and recovered the 
leper. How often is our Saviour represented as thus condescendingly and compassion- 
ately coming into personal contact with the wretched and sinful ! It is the spiritual 
touch of the Redeemer that heals the sinner's maladies and banishes his woes. 3. 
Jesus exercises his authority, utters his will, pronounces the sentence of release, " I 
will ; be thou clean 1 " What simplicity, majesty, authority, in the Saviour's language ! 
It is thus that he addresses every believing suppliant, that he rewards the faith of 
every lowly applicant. No voice but that Divjne voice can give this assurance and 
pronounce this sentence of liberty. 4. The healing is effected by him who is Lord of 
nature. No failure attended the Saviour's ministry of compassion. The leper's doubt, 
if he had any, was as to Christ's willingness, not as to his power. The result proved 
that there was no deficiency in either. The leprosy departed, and the man was 
deansed. Christ's is ever a full and complete salvation ; for he is " mighty to save." 

IV. Thb Savioub here sanctions the open expression of qratitudb. In 
bidding the cleansed leper go to the priest and present the customary offering, Jesus 
not only magnified the Law and conformed to custom, he also approved a gratefiU spirit, 
and commended the public acknowledgment of Divine mercy. It is well that we 
should " pay our vows unto the Most High," that we should " bring an offering, and 
come into his courts." He is the God who " healeth all our diseases," and every signal 
interposition on our behalf ought to be gratefully and publicly acknowledged. 

V. We remark in this narrative the working of Air impulse to oblbbrate amongst 
MEN the merot OF GoD. Our Lord had reasons for enjoining silence upon this healed 
leper.' Yet he would not be displeased with the grateful and benevolent spirit which 
led him to publish and blaze abroad the matter. Every Christian must exclaim, " The 
Lord hath done great things for me, whereof I am glad 1 " " Oh, taste and see that the 
Lord is good 1 " 

VI. We see the issue of this miracle in the inoreasiho fame ow Chbibt and the 
increasing number of applicants to him for relief and help. The tidings of this 
marvellous cure awakened such public attention to Christ's power and grace that ha 
could not for a season fulfil his ministry in the crowded towns, but retired to secluded 
spots, where, however, he might well be sought and found by those who were drawn te 
h5m, not by an idle curiosity, but by a conviction of his power and grace, and bjr the 
urgency of conscious need. 



OH. 1. 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACOORWNG TO ST. MARK. 27 

Ver. 41. — " Moved with, compa.ision." There is something in human nature which 
draws men towards the great, the powerful, the prosperous — an impulse not altogethet 
good. And there is something which attracts men towards the good and pure — a holy 
and admirable impulse. But there is yet another tendency, which impels souls towards 
the needy, the sorrowful, the sinful; and this is all Divine. For " God has gladness for 
those who are glad, and pity for those who are sad." "We see this last-named impulse, 
in all its beauty and power, in the character and the ministry of Emmanuel. 

I. The impulse of compassion within the soul op Jesus. 1. Observe what excited 
this emotion ; it was ever the too familiar spectacle of human want and suffering, 
trouble and sin. Passio leads to compassio. Moving about among the people and 
accessible to all comers, Jesus could not but meet with innumerable oases of human 
misery, fitted to excite feelings of profoundest pity. The helpless babe, the untaught 
and neglected multitude, the powerless paralytic, the loathsome leper, the foaming 
lunatic, the furious demoniac, the crippled beggar, the blind, the deaf, the dumb, the 
bereaved widow, the mourning sister, the sinful woman, the dying thief, — all these 
alike were the objects of Christ's commiseration and sympathy. 2. Ponder the emotion 
itself. To some minds it seems that to attribute such feeling to Deity derogates from 
the dignity of God. But Christianity reveals to us something nobler, and worthier of 
our worship and our love, than an impassive and impersonal Law presiding over the 
destinies of the universe. If the Old Testament represents in words the long-suffering 
and tender mercy of Jehovah, in the New Testament God in Christ lives among men, 
susceptible to all their wants and woes, touched with a feeling of their infirmities. If 
the Old Testament astonishes us by the declaration concerning God, " In all their 
afHictions he was afflicted," the New Testament depicts one "moved with compassion," 
who asserts, " He that hath seen me hath seen the Father." 

II. The pkactical bxpsession of compassion. Sentiment is divinely implanted in 
the human breast ; but it is implanted as the root from which actions and habits 
corresponding with it are designed to grow. Those have been well denounced by the 
licet — 

"Who, nursed in mealy-mouthed philanthropies, 
Divorce the feeling from her mate, the deed." 

Compassion is represented in the text as a principle of action. The Lord Jesus did 
feel, he did sigh over, human sorrows, and groan over human unbelief, and weep over 
human ingratitude. But his feelings did not evaporate thus ; they acted as the motive- 
power to deeds of charity and of helpfulness. When " moved with compassion," Jesus 
"stretched forth his hand," and healed, saved, and blessed the object of his gracious 
commiseration. He was not only tender to feel, he was mighty to save. The very 
i»ames by which he is known are a monument of his practical compassion — he is the 
Bedeemer and the Saviour of mankind. 

HI. The human response to the Divine compassion op Cheist. A quality so 
beautiful in itself and so benio;nant in its operation cannot but exercise a mighty power 
over the whole nature of those for whose benefit it is displayed. Accordingly, we find 
that our Lord's pity has exercised such a power in two directions. 1. Christ's com- 
passion becomes the spring of a new moral life in the hearts of his people. When Jesus 
brings to a soul gladness and peace, can it be matter of wonder that gratitude, love, 
and devotion become principles of a new nature, a new life ? What more natural ? 
" The love of Christ constraineth us." 2. Christ's compassion becomes the inspiration 
and the example of the compassion of his Church. It is not enough to admire ; we are 
called to copy. Compassion is a " note " of the Christian life, a feeling to be cherished, 
a habit to be formed. Thus our Lord has introduced among men a new standard of 
virtue and a new type of character. If the influence of such parables as the Prodigal 
Son and the Good Samaritan has been great, what must have been the influence 
exei cised by the incarnation and the sacrifice of Christ ? The function and office of the 
redeemed Church of Emmanuel is, being moved with compassion, to minister unto 
mankind, and to bring the weary, the suffering, and the sinful unto him who never 
breaks the bruised reed nor quenches smoking flax. 



28 THE GOSPKL ACCOEDmG TO ST. MARK. [oh. i. 1— 4& 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Ver. 1. — " The heginning of the gospel." Very simple and natuial. There Is hardly 
any preface. The narrator seems impatient to get into the very heart of his subject. 
This should ever be the instinct of the preacher. Ingenuously, yet ■with perfect 
inductive force, he shows that Christianity claims respect and acceptance as being 
connecteii with the highest aspirations aud purest sentiments of morality. 

I. The subject stated. " The gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God." This title, 
if title it ought to be called, is verj' full and felicitous. It is Jesus wlio is the great 
subject of the " gospel." The latter is used here in a transitional sense, i.e. not simply 
of " good news," or " glad tidings," but rather of " account," " history," of the great facta 
of salvation. 1. The gospel concerns a great Personality. His name, which was to be " as 
ointment poured forth," is twofold. Jesus is his ordinary human name ; his official dignity 
is indicated by the term " Christ " or " the Christ," i.e. the Anointed. As Messiah, he 
occupied relations more than human, and therefore the addendum (supported by pre- 
ponderating manuscript authority), " the Son of God." The Hope of Israel was, if pro- 
phetic language is subject to leasonable canons of interpretation, more than a saint or a 
seer ; he was partaker of the Divine nature as truly as of the human, and thus fitted to 
mediate between the Father aud his alienated children. 2. The existence and graduai 
manifestation of this Person are of great and gladsome consequence to the world. It is 
worth while to know what he was, did, and suffered, as thereby may be discovered the 
meaning and the method of salvation. For this reason the account of them is preserved 
and commended to men. 

II. Under what aspect it is regarded. As something coming into existence, 
beginning to be, in time. We are invited, so to speak, to consider how it grew. The 
greatest religions have not been sudden inventions. Christianity is no exception to the 
rule. The interest of the mind is excited by the prospect of tracing the genesis of so 
great and so remarkable a phenomenon, as one might seek to follow a river to its source, 
or speculate as to the origin of a world. One knows, must know, more about the nature 
of a thing when it is thus studied. But it would be easy to lose one's self in curious 
conjecture, in myth and legend of the prehistoric past, without any extension of actual 
knowledge. In the various ways in which the evangelists account for or trace out the 
origin of the gospel, there is always a use more or less apparent. In practical subjects 
speculative researches usually turn out to be aberrations. But Mark, who is the most 
realistic in his tendency of any of the New Testament writers, save perhaps James, 
contents himself with indicating proximate origins, but in such a way as to su^o-est in 
the strongest possible way the supernatural as the only possible explanation°or key. 
1. It was foretold. The coming of this Person was the chief burden of prophecy. He 
was the Hope of the ages. The many statements of the prophets are, however, passed 
over by Mark in favour of two, one being introductory (ver. 2) and the other of chief 
importance (ver. 3). It is said, " in Isaiah the prophet," because the attention of the 
writer went through and beyond the first quotation, which is from Malachi, and riveted 
itsell upon the second, from Isaiah. That such words should have been spoken so Ion" 
ago was a proof of the Divine character of Christ's mission. 2. Moral preparation w(Z 
needed for it. John the Baptist's work was a preparatory one, upon the heart and 
conscience. As a whole it is termed, from its chief rite, " the baptism " of John • and 
its end was repentance. 3. The personal preparation of its great subject was also essential. 
His fulfilling of the Law in John's baptism, and his inward spiritual endowment and 
illumination, ensuring moral victory, spiritual maturity, and the fulness of the Messianic 
consciousness, are therefore described. All these are a \'ery small portion of the whole 
gospel as given by Mark ; he passes with light, firm touch over each, and then launches 
his readers upon the great river of Christ's doings and sayings, issuing inevitably as he 
ever hints and suggests, in the tragedy of Golgotha. The fulness and intensity of the 
narrative sensibly increase as the great catastrophe is approached, and the end throws 
its light back upon the faintest and most obscure " beginning." M. 

Vera 4r—8.-'The ministry of John. L Of what rr consisted. In each Gospel th« 



Th. 1. 1— 45.J THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 29 

descriptions are very general, and look as if they had been foreshortened in order to give 
due prominence to the gospel narrative that had to follow. Yet a fairly complete 
impression may be received of his main doctrines and rules of discipline. Generally in 
his ministry there are four elements discoverable. 1. Exhortation. A direct appeal to 
the moral sense, the chief note of which was "Repent." It is a sharp word often 
repeated, refinement upon it being likely only to dull its edge. It meant, primarily, " to 
think after another," then " to change one's mind or opinion," the faculty addressed being 
that of moral reflection (nous). Accordingly we read of repentance " unto acknowledg- 
ment of the truth " (2 Tim. ii. 25), " toward God " (Acts xx. 21), " from dead works " 
(Heb. vi. 1), and " unto life " (Acts xi. 18), or " unto salvation " (2 Cor. vii. 10). 
The two last expressions correspond with that of Mark, " unto remission of sins." The 
idea involved is intellectual as well as moral, thought being exercised as well as feeling. 
The mind is to be twisted back upon itself ; spiritual resolution is demanded according 
to new principles. " Take a right view of sin — your sin — and quit it." John thus 
prepared men for Christ by making them prepare themselves, casting down every 
imagination and every high thing that stood in the way the coming King was to nse 
for his glorious " progress." 2. Ceremony. There was but one rite — baptism ; not 
created for the occasion, but simply adopted out of the multiform ceremonial of Judaism. 
Its use is explained by its symbolic suggestiveness of the spiritual change John sought 
to produce. The physical purifying set Ibrth the spiritual, and was ineffectual without 
it. 3. Example. He himself was what he desired others to be. His habitat — the 
wilderness — was a protest against the corruption of the cities, and indeed of the whole 
social fabric. He dwelt apart, as being thus better able to seek God and serve him. 
His personality, too, was eloquent of the same truth. With clothing the coarsest 
and least comfortable, and food the simplest and cheapest, he maintained a strong, 
free, independent life, consecrated in Nazarite-like vows to God. 4. Prophecy. Not 
only a backward but also a forward look was iniplied in his teaching. It was by virtue 
of the coming of Another that all these moral acts were to be rendered valid and 
effectual. The atonement of Christ, as a prospective thing, is therefore the key-stone 
of all John's preaching. Not the baptism, the ascetic life, not even the "repentance," 
was in itself a saving principle. These only availed as they brought men to him who 
baptized not with water but with the Holy Spirit. His whole ministry did not confer, 
but simply prepared for, " the remission of sins." 

II. Its kelativb bignificance. It was, therefore, not of absolute or independent 
value, but only auxiliary to the advent of Christ. He stood midway between the Law 
and the Gospel. In this light, his recognition of the " Lamb of God, which taketh away 
the gin cf the world " is at once the linking on of his ministry to Christ's, and its 
consummation and disappearance in it. 

III. Its results. Not substantive or permanent. A deep effect was produced 
upon Jewish life, but it did not last. Yet, in many instances, notably within the circle 
of the apostles, it was the preliminary stage, the " strait gate and narrow way," into 
the Divine life which Jesus brought. John's message exerted a far-reaching influence, 
thrilled the nation in all its classes and tribes, and then died away in ever fainter 
echoes, amidst the returning indifference or spiritual opposition to the Truth. It was 
not, therefore, useless ; rather in the highest sense was it effectual only as it succeeded 
in making itself unnecessary for the further progress of those who received it. " He 
must increase, but I must decrease." — M. 

Ver. 8. — John's baptism and Christ's. I. The grand heligiotjb need or man is puei- 
PIOATION. The existence of so many ceremonial religions is a presumption in favour of 
this. They all speak of offences in man which require expiation. But the knowledge of 
the true character of sin is revealed by the Law (liom. iii. 19). Sin itself, of course, exists 
anterior to the knowledge of the Law of Moses, because of the " law of God written 
upon the heart." In Ps. xiv. the universal depravity of the Jews of the age in which 
the psalmist wrote is very absolutely declared ; and St. Paul, in Eom. iii. 10, etc., 
quotes it freely, in proof that Jews as well as Gentiles are under the power of sin. " As 
his argument is at this point addressed particularly to the Jew, he reasons, not from 
the sense of sin or the voice of conscience, but from the Scriptures, whose authority the 
Jew acknowledged. The Jew would, of course, admit the inference as to the state oi 



30 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. i. 1—45. 

the Gentile world " (Perowne). The first aim, therefore, of every real religion must bo 
the removal of sin, because : 1. The sense of guilt estranges man from God, Under this 
feeling of alienation the heart hardens, and the tendency is to cast off the authority of 
all Divine sanctions. 2. Indwelling sin corrupts and perverts the moral nature. The 
vision of God is obscured, and as he is the Fountain of moral obligation and perception, 
moral distinctions become uncertain and confused. Bight and truth are not desired 
for their ov?n sakes ; there is no genuine enthusiasm for them. On the contrary, the 
heart is already biased and bribed on behalf of evil. " Evil, be thou my good/', 
expresses the final stage to which the corruption of the heart may attain ; and : 3. Sinfvl 
habit and inherited tendency enfeeble the mil. This moral weakness may coexist with 
the clearest perceptions of right and wrong (Rom vii. 14 — 19). 

II. Religious ministeies are to be tested by thbib powbe to effect this. 1. R 
is the general pretension which they make in common. There may be supernatural 
evidences, etc., to recommend them, but the practical ground upon which they base 
their claim to reception is really that, in some way or other, they can settle the question 
of sin between man and God. To judge them upon this point is not, therefore, to do 
them an injustice. 2. The standard is common and within human experience. In the 
measure in which they wean man from sin and reconcile him to the Divine Being, 
they prove their ability to make good their pretension. A religion whose followers 
have low moral ideas, or are not in the habit of practising what they profess, must be 
discredited as a moral power. 3. There are various respects in which this purifying 
power may show itself : (1) Spiritual rest. This arises from a sense of forgiveness and of 
reconciliation with God. In other words, when the consciousness of guilt is removed 
and the sanctions of righteousness have been honoured, the soul is satisfied and loses its 
fear and dislike to God, trusting, and in time loving, him. (2) Moral inspiration. If 
sin has truly been overcome, and the relations of the soul with God are satisfactory, 
there will be hopefulness and vigour in the discharge of duty, resignation and patience 
in suffering, and a disposition to do good. (3) Change of character and conduct. He 
who did evil and delighted in it will then find his joy in righteousness and holiness. 
There will he manifest " the fruits of the Spirit," and there wUl be " no fellowship with 
the unfruitful works of darkness." 

in. How THE SUPEBIOEITY OF THE ChBISTIAN EBLIGION DJ THIB EESPECT IB TO BE 

explained. 1. Because it i«os spiritual and not ceremonial. John anticipated the 
explanation in his prophecy concerning Christ. He was not, like himself, to baptize 
with water, but with the Holy Spirit. Now, John's baptism was most significant, 
perhaps the most significant of the rites of the ceremonial law. Enforced by his moral 
earnestness, it also exercised a powerful spiritual effect. But it did not produce that 
which he preached, viz. repentance, in any inward and enduring manner. It was only 
indirectly spiritual. Duty was powerfully suggested by the symbol, and, where spiritual 
influence was at woik, in many instances a moral change was produced. But there 
was, so to speak, no command over that spiritual influence, no ensuring its operation 
upon the heart. What was needed was something that would go directly to the heart, 
and renew the moral nature. It is only in the communication of greater spiritual 
power than existed before that this can take place. A strong moral nature like John's 
was felt whilst it appealed to men, but, when its immediate influence was withdrawn, 
the impulses and emotions to which it gave rise died down again. Christ, on the other 
band, furnished moral power in the communication of truth under vital and vivid 
representations. From the fulness of his own spiritual life also there was a constant 
overflowing of grace and strength. He spake as never man spake ; his authority was 
felt ; his example inspired. It was the meaning and spirit of everything he revealed. 
The conscience was strengthened, and the moral nature filled with new light and life. 
" Lord, to whom shall we go 1 thon hast the words of eternal life. And we have believed 
and know that thon art the Holy One of God " (John vi. 68). 2. Because it was th« 
communication of Divine life and power. He " baptized with the Holy Ghost." An 
awful and mysterious expression. The Spirit of God was set free by the atoning work 
«f the Saviour to operate upon the heart and conscience of man. By pnrifyin" the 
outward man John sought to impress men with the sense of their spiritual impurity 
and theii need of forgiveness and inward cleansing. But only Christ could give purity 
of heart. B» gave life j he inspired. The inwwd man was renewed, " created after 



8H. 1. 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. MARK. 31 

God, in righteousnesB and true holiness." " I can do all things through Ohriit which 
Btreugtheneth me."— M. 

Ters. 9 — 11. — The laptism of Jam. One of many proofs of the wide influence ol 
the Baptiit'a ministry. He came from Nazareth of Galilee. The multitudinous baptism 
of John was a fit occasion and background for the special and peculiar baptism of Jesus. 
The awakened national conscience represented for the nonce the general confession of 
sin by the individuals of mankind saved through the gospel. Christ's baptism was — 

L A FULKLMBNT OF LEaAi. BiGHTEOUSNESs. It was One ccremouy of the Law taken 
as representative of the spirit and essence of the whole ceremonial system. Inasmuch 
as it involved a confession of sin, he by undergoing it (1) humiliated himself ; and 
(2) identified himself with the sinful nature of the race. Whilst condemning in Ms pure 
spirit the sin of man, he yet takes his place with sinners, as one with them in theii 
penalty and their hope. 

IL A FULFILMENT OF SPIBITUAL coHBOionsNESS. 1. Through plenary reception tf the 
Holy Spirit. This was the same Spirit in which he had already been living, but given now 
" without measure." Inspiration ensues upon conscious acts of obedience and righteous- 
ness ; true spiritual baptism is given to those who submit willingly to the positive require- 
ments of God's Law. This was (1) the completion of the Divine-human consciousness ; 
and (2) the communion of God and man, of heaven and earth. The (violently and 
suddenly) rent heaven symbolized this. 2. Thrortgh Divine attestation. It was a voice 
to John, but much more to Jesus himself. Through this experience he realized that the 
attitude he had assumed, and the career upon which he was about to enter, were 
approved of his Father. The favour and acceptance therein declared were alio, by 
implication, a recognition of his perfect personal purity. It was not as a sinner that 
he submitted to baptism, but as the sinner's Friend and intending Saviour. — M. 

Ver*. 12, 13. — The temptation. Great moral problems are suggested by the tempta- 
tion. Mark does not describe the nature of it, but leaves the imagination and cognate 
experience of his readers to fill up the spaces, or, having a difierent object from the other 
evangelists, he, supposing the details furnished by them well known, contents himself 
with an epitome. But it is an epitome of a very vivid and pregnant kind. The salient 
points alluded to by him are — 

I. The PEBDisposrcfG cause of it. The temptation, singularly enough, follows 
" straightway " upon the baptism, in such a way as to establish the fact of a close con- 
nection between the two events ; and that Spirit which crowned with its descent the 
act of obedience is the direct cause of Christ's being tempted. Is not this inconsistent 
with what we learn of QcA from the Bible ? He is not, we are told, tempted of evil, 
" neither tempteth he any man." 1. It was necessary to the purpose of Chrisfa coming 
into the world that he should be tempted. As a portion, therefore, of his mediatorial 
experience and perfecting, it was quite fitting that the Spirit, through whom he had 
come, should lead him forward to each chief point of trial in his career. It is con- 
ceivable that one should approach evil from the side of an evil heart already predisposed 
to yield. But it belongs to the virtue of Christ's position as one tempted that he was 
led into it by the Spirit. It was — ^to translate a part of the meaning of this into familiar 
speech — ^it was " from the highest motives " that he submitted to temptation. 2. It 
was not the Spirit thai tempted him, hut it wa$ through being in the condition induced 
by the indwelling of the Spirit that he became exposed to temptation in its most terrible 
forms. It is only as being in a higher spiritual state than that to which one's circum- 
stances correspond that they can be truly said to tempt him. The greatest temptations 
are revealed in the highest spiritual experience, even as darkness by light. We can 
never appreciate the power of Satan until we look at him from a state of holiness and 
deTout illumination. 

n. Thb aoent of it, Mark uses the peculiar word "Satan," instead of "the 
devil," as in the other Gospels. The choice of this term may have been deter- 
mined by a desire to emphasize the special character of the devil as " the adversary " 
whom he was to overthrow, or simply by an instinctive sense that thereby the person- 
ality, and the identification of that personality with the historic Satanic principle 
•f reVelation, would be made clearer. It was with no secondary being that Jtnut 



82 THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO 8T. MARK. [oh. i. 1— 45, 

wrestleil, but with the prince of darkness himself. In such an encounter the conflict 
must neeHs be a duel, and even then was it determined beforehand in favour of the Son 
of God. Bat the allurements employed were necessarily of the most subtle and grandly 
representative character. It was a final trial of strength, upon which the future of 
salvation depended. 

III. The associations or rr. The forty days in the wilderness reminded men cf 
tne similar fasts of JMoses and Elijah. The wild leasts may have been an unconscious 
reproduction of the conditions of the Paradisaic temptation. The society of the wilder- 
ness was I'f the most contrastive and representative character: the Spirit — Satan ; wild 
beasts — angels. As to the " wild beasts" (peculiar to Mark), Plumptre says, "In our 
Lord's time these might include the panther, the bear, the wolf, the hyena, possibly 
che lion." The implied thought is partly that their presence added to the terrors of the 
temptation, partly that in his being protected from them there was the fulfilment of 
the promise in the very psalm which furnished the tempter with his chief weapon, 
that the true child of God should trample underfoot "the lion and the adder," the 
" young lion and the dragon " (Ps. xci. 13). De Wette considers this to be " a mere 
pictorial embellishment." Lange holds that Christ's attitude " is a sovereign and 
peaceful one towards the beasts : they dare not hurt the Lord of creation, nor do they 
flee before him. Jesus takes away the curse also from the irrational creation (Eom. 
viii.)." As to the angels, we are not to regard them as assisting him in his conflict with 
Satan, but succouring him in his exhaustion after it. He holds his court, as it were, 
on the very battle-field. In token of his victory, heaven pours itself forth in iti 
fairest and best on the spot that but a little before was the ante-chamber of hell. — M. 

Ver». 16 — 20. — The call of the disciples ; or, worh and higher work. I. The 

ORDINABT WOBK OP MEN AND THE EXTRAORDINABY ABB (HBEB) PUT IN THE SAME 

LLNB. It is no small presumption in favour of Christ's divinity that he chose 
common men — workmen — for his intimate disciples. What link could there be 
between the transcendent task of the apostleship and that mean calling in which they 
were engaged? He alone saw a connection, and not a merely fanciful one. He 
indicated ic and proceeded upon it. The idea was familiar to the prophets (e.g. Jer. 
xvi. 16), and to Greek literature (as in the ' Dialogues of Lucian,' etc.), but not in the 
same application. The resemblance he suggested is broad and deep. It was while 
they were working that he called them. What a practical, spiritual gain for all toilers 
is this revelation ! 

IL They ake shaeplt distingitishbd and absolutely separated. As connected 
by analogy, it is implied that they are separated in fact. Not by confounding the 
sacred with the secular calling is either benefited. That they are not the same is 
shown by : 1. A difference of object. " For men." The means must therefore be 
different, and the entire method. Luke uses a word meaning " to catch alive." The 
fishers of men were not to snare them, but to win them to something worthy of them ; 
and not for selfish ends, but throufjh love and Divine good will. So interpreted, how 
grand is this vocation! 2l. A distinct call. Christ asks — bids them "come after" 
him. Were there any previous inner witnessings which this endorsed and strength- 
ened ? This call was no simply picturesque or accidental occurrence ; it was an 
essential condition of their assumption of apostolic service. The difference between 
their new duties and their old ones was so profound that only a distinct inward voice 
could warrant the transition from the one to the other. Clirist spoke to the heart as well 
as to the ear, and his word was a determining one. 3. Altered circumstances. He 
would take them away for a time from the associations of the fish-net. They would 
have to cease looking at life as " making a living." As God's workmen, they would 
be his dependents. They would have to live by faith, that they might walk by faith. 
4. Special preparation. " I will make." What they had done or learned would not 
qualify them for what they were to do. He alone could teach them the new craft ; 
and only as they drank in his spirit could they hope to succeed in it. 

ni. To PASS FROM THE ONE TO THE OTHER 18 ONLY POSSIBLE THEOUQH OBEDIENCE, 

BELF-sACEiFicB, AND CLOSER FELLOWSHIP WITH Cheist. Even as he oalls them their 
preparation and discipline commence. It was a sharp trial, but salutary and wise. 
1. Obedience. They were to go at once if at all, without question, and finally,? 2, 



OH. L 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 3£ 

Self-sacrifice. This was begun by " leaving all and following " Christ, as Peter 
phrased it. The will of the flesh, " the will to live," the whole self-life, — had to be 
renounced. 3. But their life would be a fellowship with the Master. This would 
compensate for every toil and trial. But it would also necessitate continual exercise ol 
sympathy, spiritual Insight, and resolute fidelity. — M. 

Vers. 21 — 28.— 3f%« authority of Jesus. A note of Christ's work as a whole, which 
occasioned remark amongst bis conteraporariea. Not so much what he did, as how. A 
grandeur of nature and manner. Nothing is so difficult to define as authority, espe- 
cially when it is a personal attribute. 

I. How IT SHOWED ITSELF. 1. From the outset of his career. The Capernaum 
synagogue, where his boyhood had been passed, did not daunt him. The ordinary cir- 
cumstances, which tend to dwarf even great men, did not detract from his greatness. 
2. It showed itself especially in two directions, viz. teaching and spiritual healing. 
(1) Teaching. " He taught — spake — as one having authority." An indefinable yet 
absolute difference existed in this respect between him and the customary teachers of 
the people. They went back upon prescription and tradition, the sentences of the 
rabbis, the legal interpretations received in the schools. They would refer back to 
some great name, or some generally acknowledged opinion, as a lawyer collects his 
instances ; but their own opinion was seldom or never forthcoming ; if it was, it was 
tentative, unoriginal, and uninfluential. Now, Christ had quite a different tone. He 
referred to the sentences of the Jewish schools only to condemn them, and he did nut 
hesitate to range himself alone against all the weight of tradition. " Te have heard 
that it hath been said, . . . but / say unto you ; " " Verily, verily, / say unto you ; " 
" Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away." (2) Action. 
Look at this special case, the man with the unclean spurit. He shows mastery from 
the very first. His word is a command, and there is no flinching or compromise. 
Nor is the order despised ; he said, and it was done. 3. It gave a character to Ms 
entire work. "What is this? a new teaching! with authority he commandeth 
even the unclean spirits, and they obey him ; " or, " A new teaching with authority 
(or power) ! He commandeth," etc. In the whole round of duties, and undertakings 
connected with his mission, it is observable, and its effect is to draw attention and to 
impress. 

II. To WHAT IT WAS DUB. This was the problem which presented itself, which 
was meant to present itself, to the men of his day. That it was no accident of 
manner or any mere assumption of superiority is shown by its results. And the 
general bearing of Christ was meekness itself. It was due to nature rather than 
ofSce, to personal relation with God. 1. To absolute spiritual insight. He saw and 
knew what be was speaking about in its ground and essence. It was therefore 
unnecessary for him to sit at any man's feet, or to borrow wisdom of any teacher. 2. 
To absolute trust in moral power. This arose from his identifying himself with it. 
He did not only speak about truth ; he was " the Way, the Truth, and the Life." " I 
and my Father are one." The display of superior physical strength did not appall 
him, nor was he discouraged by suffering or death. 

IIL What it abqtteo. 1. Eis divinity. This " unknown quantity " in Christ was 
«s unmistakable as it was immeasurable. Out of the depth and fulness of his own 
spiritual life he must have spoken. The Divine element is therefore aa inevitable 
inference. " Never man spake like this man." 2. Eis power to save. " Even the 
unclean spirits " obeyed Mm. It is the moral or subjective side of temptation on 
which the real weakness of man exists ; and just there Christ is omnipotent. He can 
cure the sick soul and restore moral tone and energy. And his words are an unerring 
guidance and discipline for the soul : " Lord, to whom can we go? Thou hast the words 
of eternal life."— M. 

Vers. 40—45. — The leper's petition. L The gbnebal work of Christ, whew it is 
KHOWN, BNCOUBAOBS THE MOST FORLORN AND DESPERATE. (Cf. ver. 39.) The nature of 
leprosy and the law concerning it.' 

II. Sincere faith, even when imperfect, ever meets with the simpatht and 
BXLP OF Chbist. "If thou wilt, thou canst." He believed in his power, b"t wa» 

ST. HARE. '- 



8i THE GOSPEL ACUOKDIJS'G TO t>T, MaKK. [ch. i. 1—45 

uncertain as to his willingness. The spirit of the Saviour was therefore concealed from 
him. Yet Christ answered his prayer. (There is no evidence that the leper identified 
the will with the power.) 

III. Christ's method or restoeation is adapted to the special uoral condition 
OF the subject of his mercy. It was his sympathy and willingness that had to be 
demonstrated to the poor leper. This is done by the assurance, " I will ; " and the 
touch (braving ceremonial defilement and physical repugnance). So, in saving men 
from their sins, their defects of character and experience are met by special revelations 
and mercies. A complete and perfect faith in Christ is the evidence and guarantee cf 
perfect salvation. 

IV. Special exferienoeb of Divinb grace do not free from lesser duties, sut 
rather increase their oblioation. The Law was to be honoured. Civil au4 
religious obligations were enjoined. There was a public use in the rules that were 
imposed, and it was well they should be observed. 

V. Mercy may be received without its obligations being fully bbalized ob 
OBSERVED. The leper was cured, but not perfectly. He had not learned the obedience 
of faith. His inattention to Christ's request created a serious inconvenience and 
hindrance in prosecuting the work of salvation amongst others. Those who have 
received benefits from Christ should attend implicitly to all that he enjoins. " Ye are 
my friends, if ye do the things which I command you " (John xv. 14). The spiritual 
blessings of Christ are dependent on perfect subjection to his will. — M. 

Ver. 24. — Christ and the demons. I. The feelings the question betrayed. 1. 
A sense of inevitable relation. His presence at once discovers them ; there is no escape 
when he is near. Their true character is more strongly and unmistakably manifested, 
as darkness is revealed by light. A positive sense of relation to his person and work is 
called forth. How far may this have been a witness within themselves personally — in 
their own individual consciousness ? how far a merely constitutional instinct ? how &r 
due to connection with the personality of the possessed ? That it was beyond their own 
control is evident. They were unwilling witnesses to his power, and their obedience 
was not due to loyalty or attachment. So whenever the truth is manifested, it 
addresses an instinct in intelligent nature which cannot be wholly indifferent to it. 2. 
Conscious unlikeness and antagonism. Being what they were, they could not acquiesce 
in what he was or did. His presence was judgment and torture to them. They had 
the keenest perception of his purity and sinlessness, without being attracted by it ; on 
the contrary, their opposition was only the more excited and extreme. The opposition 
was that of bell and heaven in their essential principles. 3. Fear and apprehension. 
A moral awe and dread attended the consciousness of such holiness, the awe which 
moral authority inspires. It is akin to what is felt towards G-od. But there was also 
"a fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation." Their empire was not 
only in jeopardy, it was already doomed. And they must stand or fall together. 
" Art thou come to destroy ust" How ? By dismissing them to Hades. " But even in 
Hades Christ does not leave their empire to the demons. Thus it was by the destruc- 
tion of their empire generally. Certainly it was by dismissing them to the Gehenna 
of torment (according to which the expression in Matt. [viii. 29], the Hades of tor- 
ment, is to be explained) " (Meyer). In this the sinner is one with the demon. 

n. The answer rr implied. The possessed one who asked the question knew it 
had but one answer. Christ had nothing whatever to do with the demons, and they 
had nothing whatever to do with him. They had nothing to do with him : 1, As events 
and representatives of evU. At a later date he could say, " The prince of the world 
cometh : and he hath nothing in me " (John xiv. 30). None had ever convinced him 
of eviL So from the mouth of the demons themselves was the great calumny, after- 
wards so diligently promulgated, " He hath Beelzebub, and. By the prince of the devili 
casteth he out the devils " (ch. iii. 22), answered by anticipation. There is no key 
that will unlock the mystery of his devoted life save that of simplicity of purpose 
and infinite love. 2. Ai moral heings. There was the clearest knowledge of hii 
character and dignity. " The demons who were in those possessed seem to have 
percuifed sooner than the rest who Jesus was (yea, sooner even than most of the men 
u!i'.h whom he walked at that time) " (Bengel). " The Holy One vf Ood " (cf. Ps. xvLf 



mi. 1—46.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. M 

wM Christ's " concealed designation," a Messianic identification which implied spiritual 
insight or knowledge (John vi. 69 ; x. 36 ; Rev. iii. 7). Knowledge without love. 
How fruitless ! They knew him as the Holy One of God, but not as their Saviour. 
Belief and obedience, but no salvation I So near, yet so far 1 How was this ? (1) 
Because there was no inward loving acceptance of him as their moral Ruler. (2) This 
was probably due to the utter corruptiun of their moral nature. They had become 
wholly evil, even whilst they perceived the uselessness and misery of sin. They 
knew the good, but had lost the power to will it. Even to this may any moral heing 
come who continues in sin, or rather continues out of Christ, There is no tenderness in 
Christ's tone to the demons, only rebuke. A day is coming when the blasphemer, the 
hypocrite, the liar too, will be silenced. It is from such a fate that Christ would 
save us whilst yet it might be said of us, " And this is life eternal, that they should 
know thee, the only true QoA, and him whom thou didst send, even Jesua Christ " 
(John xviL 3). — M. 

Ver. 28. — " The region . . . round about." I. Thb position of the Chttboh. 1. Centre 
of the world's life. (1) This by virtue of what she is, the principles of righteousness which 
she inculcates and practises. These " doctrines of the cross " are keys to the chambers 
of power and authority. They are the true solution of the mysteries of human life. 
Questions of biography or of history, of individual lives or of eras, can only be under- 
stood from their underlying and determining spiritual principles — the relations of man 
to the Divine. Because of this connection of righteousness with the laws of the universe. 
Christian faith and virtue are the conditions of true possession and influence, whether 
in the region of the material or that of the spiritual. The beatitudes illustrate thia 
truth. Only to the central principle does the world yield up its wealth. Herein, too, 
lies the reason of the Church's responsibility and stewardship. She holds what she has, 
not for herself alone, but for others. Her power is a moral one, as being guardian of 
the best interests of man. (2) This by virtue of her relation to Christ. He is the 
Oeatre of humanity, and in him all things are created and sustained. It is, however, 
only through doctrines and belief that vital connection with him is maintained. Being, 
■o to speak, " in Christ," she is his representative in proportion to her faithfulness 
And vitality. It is as constituted of individual members, each believing in Christ and 
living in him, that this character belongs to her, and not from any mystic corporate 
prerogative. What is true, therefore, of the Church, is so because, in the first instance, 
it is true of individual believers. Christ himself is the great attractive force of the 
Church ; " I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me." (3) This by virtue of her 
present circumstances. Although not of the world, she is in it, sent into it, and kept 
there. The great reason of her institution is that she may influence — evangelize — her 
neighbourhood. For a season in the midst of the world, as Christ was in its midst, she 
is to radiate forth light and life upon mankind. The minster, "of the whole city 
centre," is typical of the spiritual temple in the midst of world-life. 2. A moving 
■ctntre. Wherever our Saviour went he carried on his work in " the region round about," 
• and " they came to him from every quarter " (ver. 45). In the same manner must it be 
with his followers. Like him, they must go about continually doing good. Christian 
work is not exclusively associated with a special place or building, a sacred day or an 
ofiicial service ; it is inseparable from the individual personality of the believer, and 
must constantly proceed wherever he is. 3. A multiplying centre. The powers of the 
individual believer increase and multiply. His command of new truths, and attain- 
ment of fresh spiritual life, add to his facilities and capacities for usefulness. And 
«Yery person added to the faith is a new evangelist, with a sphere and fitness of his 
own. It is the glory of Christianity thus to propagate itself. The " Society of Jesus " 
was described as " a sword, with the handle at Rome and the point everywhere." The 
ideal this represents is only realized in the spiritual society of Jesus — the Church 
«Hved through his blood, and in all her members, loyal and loving, carrying out the 
great commission, " Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to the whole 
creation " (ch. xvi. 15). 

II. The field of the Chcboh. 1. Always at hand. The sphere of the Christian is 
.deacribed from himself as a centre. He can never escape it or be destitute of it. He 
.ought to be always ready and furnished for his work, however poor or ignorant he in«y 



36 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. MARK. [oh. l 1—45. 

be ; for " our sufficiency is of God." " Of whom are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God ii 
made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption." Even 
the one talent is given for use and service. Men often lose themselves in vague 
dreams and extensive ideas. For this reason it may be, as Bishop Butler suggests, 
that we are first told to " love our neighbour " — a duty which develops into many graces. 
It is a bad sign when the immediate neighbourhood, the family, the servants, the 
friends, etc., of a professing Christian, are neglected. 2, rractically infinite. It is 
undefined save at its centre. Bach region is a centre to others. The pressure of spiritual 
responsibility is as constant and necessary to the Christian's soul as that of the 
atmosphere in relation to his body. The ever-increasing and widening vistas of 
possible usefulness are occasions of inspiration and ennoblement to the earnest worker. 
3. Constantly varied. New subjects of Christian solicitude present themselves, new 
adaptations of spiritual truth and agency. The adaptability, capacity, and sympathy 
of the Christian ought to be continually developing. And when " the region round 
about " has received its due labour and attention and prayer, there is ever some 
"region beyond" whither the hastening feet of the Saviour have ahready made a 
way. — M. 

Ver. 35. — The history of a prayer of Christ. I. Its immediatb occasion. 1. To he 
fon/nd in connection with his work. It was incessant. Fresh claims upon his atten- 
tion and compassion were continually being made. Only the day before "all the 
city " had been " gathered together at the door." The exercise of his healing power 
was • drain upon his emotional and spiritual nature, and the fatigue of the work, 
which lasted from morning to night, must have been a severe tax upon the delicate 
organization of the Saviour. He needed rest. 2. To be found in the excitement 
attaching to it. He was at the beginning of his ministry, and it was full of novelty 
and unoeitainty. As the supernatural power of Christ displayed itself, the people 
began to broach ideas of a temporal sovereignty. A profound impression was produced 
upon the public mind, and vast crowds attended him wherever he moved. The 
corruption and depravity of the human mind, too, must have become increasingly 
manifest to him. The problem of salvation never could have seemed more distressing 
or difficult. And, in the midst of his occupation, the contrary currents of worldly 
thought and human ambition must have been felt by him. 

II. Its cltimatb ebason. The circumstances of fatigue and excitement in 
themselves would not account for the anxiety displayed by Christ to secure oppor- 
tunity for devotion ; it is as associated with his unique personality and aim that they 
acquire significance. For it is only as arising from personal longing and necessity, that 
such a departure from the scene of his labours can be understood. We are not to 
suppose that it was done for an example; the whole proceeding would thereby be 
rendered too artificial and self-conscious. And yet the action itself was exemplary in 
the highest degree. Its value as a pattern for our imitation consists in its very 
absence of self-consciousness. We cannot help asking, " What was the place held by 
prayer in his spiritual life?" "How was the practice of devotion related to the 
inward needs-be of his nature ?" It was not simply a reaction of overwrought feeling 
or an instinctive craving for emotional relief and variation. By his entire spiritual 
constitution he was intimately related to the Father. The filial bond was infinitely 
strong, tender, and intense. His true life was twofold — a giving forth of himself to man, 
and receiving from God ; the latter was necessary to the efficiency of the former. He 
said, " I can of mine own self do nothing," and therefore he ever sought communion 
With his unseen Father: 1. For restoration of spiritual power. 2. To maintain th* 
delation of his feeling and purpose. 3, For comfort and encouragement. 

III. How IT WAS pbbpabed fob. There is a climax in the text ; an impression is 
thereby conveyed of inward trouble, leading to painstaking effort, which results in final 
relief and comfort. 1. He sought the Father early. " Very early, in the midst of the 
night," is the literal force of the words. His first impulse toward heavenly communion 
was obeyed. The thoughts which had kept the night wakeful were not corrupted by 
the new associations of another day. Are the first impressions of our minds on awak- 
ing Divine or human ? of heaven or of earth ? Do we earnestly seek to know first of 
ftU God's will, and strive to realize his presence ? He who so prepares for the work and 



CH. 1. 1— 45.J THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 3? 



intercourse of the day will not be overtaken or surprised by evil. Better lose a littla 
Bleep than the restful commnnion of the Father. 2. His departure was secret. Tkere 
was no consulting with flesh and blood. There are inward promptings and voices 
concerning which no earthly advice should be asked. It is possible that " Simon and 
they that were with him " were not a little disconcerted and annoyed that they had to 
seek for him ; but even their presence would have been a hindrance. The solemn yet 
fascinating individualism of true prayer is not realized as it might be. Secret prayer 
it thp background of earnest and real common prayer. In this matter we have not 
only the example but the injunction of Christ (Matt. vi. 6). 3. Not only the actual 
presence of men hut human associations were avoided. " He departed into a desert 
place." Such a situation, as formerly the weird solitudes of the Quaritanian Desert, 
harmonized with his spiritual mood. Wide upland spaces, far withdrawn, broupiht him 
nearer to the Unseen and Eternal, afforded larger views, spiritual as well as physical, 
And favoured the ideality and inwarduess that are essential to a great spirit. 

" The silence that ia in the starry sky, 
The sleep that is among tlie lonely bills," 

were an anodyne to his fretted and troubled heart ; in nature he met God. Such a 
spot could only have been found at a distance, and this is further implied by the 
circumstance of the others following after him, and their message, " All are seeking 
thee." Lessons : (1) Opportunities for secret prayer will be prized and even created by 
devout minds. (2) If the purest and grandest moral Being the world has seen needed such 
communion with his Father, how much more such as wet (3) Ood must be sought dili- 
gently, and before all else, if he is to he sought effectually. (4) How difficult <^ access and 
realization is the oratory of the soul, where devotion may be free from earthliness, con' 
tinuous and uninterrupted I — M. 

Vers. 14, 15. — 2%e ministry of mercy. Our text reminds us of the significant fact 
that Jesus began his ministry in Galilee, and not in Jerusalem, as the Jews might have 
expected of their Messiah. In the city where the sacred temple stood there was far 
less of the earnestness and simplicity which our Lord sought for than among the 
rural peasants and fishermen. Hence his work was begun and was largely continued 
in a district which was poor and despised. This, however, was only in harmony with 
much that we know of God's methods ; for " his ways are not as our ways." As the 
Creator of all things, he has placed some of the most beautiful products of nature in 
obscure spots. We find them in secluded dells, or in the depths of the earth and sea, 
or they are hidden under the curl of a leaf, or buried in a pool among the rocks. Some 
of the noblest Christians are to be found in quiet spheres of which the world knows 
notliing ; and some of the highest work has been done for our Lord in obscure villages, 
or in lands out of the range of tours and trades. Besides this, the selection of 
Galilee as the earliest scene of our Lord's ministry was an indication of its nature. It 
was a tacit rebuke to the carnal expectations current among the people concerning their 
Messiah ; and, in giving an opportunity to the degraded and despised provincials, it 
showed that he had come " to seek and save that which was lost." Several significant 
facts respecting his ministry are sugo;ested by the text, namely — 

I. This ministry followed upon a time of terrible temptation. The verse 
immediately preceding this puts in vivid contrast temptation in solitude and ministry 
in public. Loneliness of spirit is a fit preparation for publicity of life ; and our Lord, 
who was in all points made like unto his brethren, deigned to share this experi- 
ence. Joseph was a solitary prisoner before he became a ruling prince. Moses passed 
from the gplendoura of Egypt to the quietude of Midian before he became a leader and 
lawgiver. David was a persecuted exile before he was ready for enthronement. Paul 
was three years in Arabia before he was the apostle to the Gentiles. Our Lord spoke 
of such inward preparation for outward work when he said to his disciples, " What I 
tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light ; and what ye hear in the ear, that preach 
ye upon the housetops." Public work is only safe when preceded by private prayer. 
True teaching can only come from those who are first taught of God. Without personal 
experience of inward struggles and victories, we shall never speak to others with 



38 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. i. 1—46 

power or sympathy. But if we would get the benefit of solitude, if we would 
BChieve victory over self and sin in our own hour of temptation, we must be like our 
Lord, who was baptized before he was tempted, who was filled with the Holy Spirit 
before he fought with the evil spirit. Then out of such an experience we can speak 
lovingly and helpfully to others. 

II. This ministbt succeeded the bilbnoinq of John. Our text very pointedly 
■uggests that the public appearance of the Lord occurred immediately after the ending 
and completion of the Baptist's work. The words are significant : " After that John 
was cast into prison, Jesus came." God will never let his work fall to the ground. 
If one noble witness to the truth is removed, another springs up in his place. If 
persecution silences one voice, another at once takes up the testimony. So when the 
disciples of John were most helpless and disheartened, and were beginning to scatter, 
suddenly the Lord of life stepped down into their midst, and rallying them round about 
himself, proved that he could do far more towards the victory than any fabled Achilles 
among his Greeks. Therefore let us reflect that when we or our fellow-workers fail 
or are removed, God can raise up others to accomplish his purpose ; and let us cheer 
ourselves with the thought that when heart and flesh fail he himself will appear 
amongst us. It was " when John was cast into prison " that " Jesus came." 

III. This ministry struck the ket-noth of mbkct. We must remember that our 
Lord came forth amongst the people as one humanly and divinely great, endued with 
power beyond all others. Yet by that wonderful self-restraint which always Charac- 
terized him (Matt. xxvi. 53 ; John xviii. 36) he brought no immediate retribution on 
those who were foes both of God and man. Herod, for example, by his imprisonment 
of John, had done a wrong against conscience and against God, as well as against that 
faithful servant of the Most High. But Christ raised no revolt against the tyrant, 
which would have hurled him from the throne he desecrated ; nor did he threaten or 
curse him and his followers. He canie preaching " the gospel," proclaiming the glad 
tidings, calling upon all — ay, even Herod himself — to repent and believe, and so 
receive salvation. This was the key-note of his ministry, and was beard throughoTit 
it, even to its last chord; for on the cross he prayed, "Father, forgive them; for tluy 
know not what they do." 

IV. This ministbt peoolaimbd the BSTABLisHMHifT OF A. EiNODOM. " The time is 
fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand." The long waiting for deliverance was 
over. God, in the person of his Son, had come to establish a kingdom, in which the 
Divine love and power and will would be revealed as never before. The forerunner 
had been making the way straight, and now the King had come and was ready to rule 
over all who would welcome him. This kingliness of Christ is one of the special 
characteristics of the revelation given to us through Mark. Matthew presents the 
Messiah wko fulfilled ancient predictions; Luke describes the Son of man in his 
pitifiilness and graciousness ; John proclaims the Divine Word, who was in the 
beginning with QtoA, and who himself was God ; but Mark, instructed possibly by 
Peter, who dwells so much on the kingdom in his Epistles, begins by announcing " th« 
kingdom of God is at hand." Christ shall reign for ever, over all nations and kindreds 
and tongues ; and each one of ns is invited to bow to his sceptre and submit ourselves 
to his gracious rule, that ours may be the bliss of those who shouted " Hosanna I " and 
not the curse of those who cried " Crucify him 1 " To ent»r that kingdom we are 
wiled upon to " repent and believe the gospel ; " to ohange our minds and ways, to 
turn from sin to God, from self to Christ, and to trust and follow him in whom the glad 
tidings are incarnate. — A. B. 

Vers. 16, 17. — Chritfi call to busy men. Simon and Andrew were just beginning 
their day's work by casting their net into the sea, and at that critical moment, when, if 
•ver, delay would seem excusable, Christ called them to follow him. But he had already 
won their hearts, and they were only waiting for such a summons to come, " and strait- 
way they forsook their nets, and followed him." In their daily work these fishermen 
had acquired devotion, patience, and enterprise, which were now to be consecrated to 
nobler service, when, as fishers of men, they would gather spoil from the restless, 
dreary sea of human life. A call coming to men in the midst of their dailj business 
reminds us of the following truths : — 



CH. L 1—55.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 30 

I. That hokest wobk fits fob hioheb ditties. Those who are indolent in the 
world are not of great use in the Church. If men are not fit for ordinary work, they 
leldom are fit for Christ's service. Our Lord does not call the indolent aesthetes, who 
would gaze on a lily for hours in a languid rapture, but he summons men with capacity, 
■•If-rule, vigour, and tact. God has ever chosen such. If he would have a lawgiver, he 
calls one who is as diligent among the sheepfolds in Midian as he had been in the schools 
of Egypt. If he would tell the world of his future kingdom he inspires a statesman like 
Daniel, who already has upon him the cares of a great empire. If he would speak 
burning words to his people, he summons to his service the herdman who drives his 
cattle home in the gloaming down the hillside of Tekoa. So here, Christ calls Matthew 
from the receipt of custom, and these four fishers from their boats. In the daily plod, 
in the monotonous round of life, above the whirr of human trafSo, a voice speaks, 
saying, " Come ye after me." 

II. That dignity and blessiko abb to be rovrsD vs dailt toil. Toil, once a ocrsa, 
has been transformed by Christ Jesus into work which is a source of blessing to tha 
world. In nature we can only regain a wilderness to order and beauty by unremitting 
toil; and only by long labour do we repossess ourselves of rule. The exquisite flowers in 
the hothouse are signs of human skill as well as of God's gift The rich harvest-fields, 
which whisper of abundance, are nature's response to work. Wherever idleness ia 
supreme, fertile lands become the lairs of wild beasts, and man, who was appointed to 
regal right, starves amid profusion. Besides, work is good for society, as it was good 
for those disciples to be thrown together so as to share perils and successes, for thus 
mutual love and confidence arose. Society is most compact and stable when built upon 
a foundation of industry — every class recognizing its dependence on another, as stones 
in the living temple. That home is the happiest, too, in which self-indulgence is a 
stranger, and where mutual sympathy is felt in the efforts of all. 

III. That in obdinabt occupations we hat bealize the pbesenob of Chbist. 
His sympathy with the busy none can question. He himself spent more time in 
ordinary work than in public teaching. He gave his presence to his disciples (both 
before his resurrection and after it) when they were on the lake working for a living. 
StUl he is to be found, not in the dreams of the mystics or in the cell of the hermit, so 
much as in the heart of him who must be busy with the world's work and yet prays 
to be free from its spirit. Conscious of his nearness, we shall not do our work care- 
lessly ; we shall not lower the standard set before us in his Word ; we shall never 
■brink from rebuking wrong-doing, even when it is customary; and there will be 
constant joy within our heaits amidst all turmoil, so that we can say, " I will bless the 
Lord at all times : his praise shall continually be in my mouth." Beware of going 
steadily on with work without any thought of Christ, as if self was your king and the 
world your home. You may prosper so greatly that others will envy your skill and 
" good luck ; " but the day of reckoning will surely come ; the law of retribution will 
not sleep. Reaping only what you have sown, your largest gain will prove your 
deepest loss. 

IV. That Christ is callino all to loftieb service. It is necessary to labour for 
the supply of physical wants, but there are other and higher responsibilities resting 
upon us as parents, employers, teachers, and friends. With wonderful condescension 
our Lord describes the nature of his service, by figures drawn from the scenes with 
which his hearers were most familiar. If people followed him for the sake of the bread 
which perisheth, he spoke to them of the " Bread of life ; " and if a woman was drawing 
water at the weU, he spoke to her of " living water." He led the Magians to him by 
" a star ; " and taught these fishermen by their fishing, telling them that hereafter they 
should " catch men," not, indeed, for death, but for life. This was a beautiful image 
for all time. The sea represents the wide world, which seems dark and deep as we 
stand on the fringe of its mystery, wonderingly. The fish are emblematic of those lost 
to the sight of some in the higher world, as they wander amid oozy weeds an«l 
treacherous rocks. The net pictures the truths and warnings of the gospel, which lay 
hold on men, and, gathering them together, raise them into a new element, in which 
they can only live when they have a new life. As " fishers of men," we want patience 
and hope, for we know little or nothing of the result of the toil as yet. We only know 
that the net is cast, but the draught is not yet counted upon the shore. It ia ours to 



10 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MARK, [oh. i. 1— 4& 

" mend " the net, to have it well in hand, to cast it in a likely place, and then to wait 
and watch and pray. Quote Keble's hymn beginning — 

"The livelong night we've toiled in vaint 
But at thy gracious word 
I will let down the net again : 
Do thou thy will, O Lord." 

A.B. 

Ter. 29. — 77ie home and the synagogue. This passage, which gives an account of a 
sabbath spent in Capernaum, shows us the manner in which many unmentioned 
sabbaths were spent by our Lord and his disciples. Whithersoever Jesus went w« 
should follow him, translating into modern habits the principles which underlay hia 
actions. Consider— 

I. The stnaqooub which Jebub entekbd. Its worship, unlike that of the temple, 
was not specially ordained by the Mosaic code. It was the outcome of earlier and more 
habitual devotions, to which the tents of the patriarchs had not been strangers. Side by 
fide with the ornate, national ritual that enshrined the spiritual truths which, as the 
Epistle to the Hebrews tells us, were fulfilled in the work of Jesus Christ, this more 
homely worship continued. Its form sometimes varied, yet it constantly ministered to 
the reUgious instruction of the people, and expressed their devotional feeling. In such 
services our Lord from his childhood took part, and his apostles used them for the 
propagation of Christian truth amongst their fellow-countrymen. As the synagogue 
represented the abiding religious worship of the people, we will consider what it was to 
our Lord and his disciples. 1. It was a place of worship. It is noteworthy that, so 
far at we know, Jesus Christ never neglected the ordinary worship in which the people 
united. If any might have found an excuse for doing so, it certainly was he. Self- 
sufficient in the fulness of his Divine life, he required no help from such extraneous 
means. With his spiritual insiaht he could see the formalism and unreality of many 
about him, and knew the terrible extent to which false teaching misrepresented the 
character and the ways of God. But he did not turn from the synagogue with contempt, 
nor did he make the place a scene of theological strife. He himself, the Sinless One, was 
present there amongst a sinful people, and he devoutly joined with them in prayer and 
praise. The remembrance of this should serve as a rebuke to those who, in our day, 
neglect the sanctuary. Their spirituality may be such that they can meditate profitably in 
their home or in the fields ; their intelligence may be so great that no human teacher can 
help them ; yet they do not surely compare with him who was the wisest Teacher and lived 
the loftiest life the world has ever known, and yet went into the synagogue every 
sabbath day, " as his custom was." 2. It was a place for teaching. During the service 
of the synagogue an opportunity was given to any worshipper present to speak a few 
words on the interpretation of the Scriptures (Acts xiii. 15). Of this liberty the 
apostles often availed themselves. In this they followed their Lord. It is stated in 
ver. 21 that Jesus " taught " on this sabbath, and we do not wonder that the people 
I' were astonished at his teaching." He showed the spiritual significance of the events 
in Old Testament history, which were too often merely subjects of national boasting. 
He drew his illustrations, not from rabbinical books, but from the lake and the fields, 
from the housewife's employments and the merchant's trading. And as he spoke the 
weary found rest, the eager seekers had a revelation of God, the anxious lost their 
burdens, and a hush came over the assembly as if the peace of heaven was brooding 
there. _ 3. It was a place of comfort. Help and deliverance came even to the poor 
demoniac, whose obscene ravings and hideous shrieks disturbed the worship and,inter- 
rupted the teaching that day. He found that the synagogue was " the house of God 
and the gate of heaven " to his enslaved spirit. So has many a man, possessed by nn, 
had deliverance wrought for him where Jesus is. The disciples also knew that 
comfort was to be found in worship. Hence Simon Peter was there, although he had 
illneu at home such as would detain many a Christian from public worship. ° What to 
•ome would be an excuse was to him a call to the house of God, as the place of rest for 
anxious hearts. There songs of praise may lilt us up as on angels' wings, and Christian 
teaching may prove as the Bread of life to our hungering hearts. 

II. The home which Jesus blessed — "the house of Simon and Andraw," 



OH. 1. 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. H 

These two brethren appear to have removed from Bethsaida, possibly because of mar- 
riage connection with the place or for their convenience as fishermen. 1. It was a homt 
with ordinary associations. There was nothing special or distinctive about it or about 
others which our Lord frequented, and in which he did some of his mightiest deeds and 
spoke some of his most weighty words. His presence gave sanctity to doiLestic asso- 
ciations from the time of his first miracle (John ii. 2) to the hour when he made himself 
known in the home of Emmaus (Luke xxiv. 29). We are not to sever ourselves from 
them— «ven Peter did not (ver. 30 ; 1 Cor. ix. 5) — but should rather seek to recognize 
and welcome Jesus amidst them. It is a happy thing when there is family peace and 
love such as seem to have prevailed in this home. A " wife's mother" would occupy a 
difficult and delicate position, but such had been her wisdom and gentleness, her sym- 
pathy and constancy, that she had now the love of all, and therefore, directly Jesus 
entered the home, her illness and need of help prompted the urgent and united prayer 
he so gladly answered 2. It was a home in lowly life. A fisherman's house — not the 
stately palace of a Herod. In contrast with our Lord's humility and graciousness, how 
paltry seems the ambition of those who would make any sacrifice to get a stately estab- 
lishment or to push their way into higher social circles 1 A palace often hidei from the 
world aching hearts and wasted lives, while a cottage may be the home where love and 
peace are constant, because Jesus is in the midst. 3. It was a home significant of 
higher fdlowship. The Christian Church sprang rather from the homes of the people 
than from the temple at Jerusalem. If it had onginated in the temple, sacramentalism 
would have found more justification than it does in the New Testament. But the 
temple was not frequented by the great Teacher to the extent we might have expected. 
His Church met in the homes of Capernaum and Bethany. The relations between his 
disciples were to be those of brothers and sisters, bound together, not by law, but by 
love. Let us, then, try to make the Church a home, and thence the voice of our 
gracious Master will speak with effectual power to a weary world, saying, "Come unto 
me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." — A. B. 

Vers. 32, 33. — Christ the Healer. The healing of Peter's wife's mother, following on 
the cure of the demoniac in the synagogue, aroused the whole city of Capernaum. 
Believing that what this good Physician could do for one he could do for all, crowds 
of suppliants gathered around our Lord on the evening of the sabbath day. In this 
incident we see — 

I. The obaciousness of the Saviour. 1. His accessibility. Whether in the syna- 
gogue or in the house, whether in the glow of noonday or in the cool of eventide, he was 
always ready to meet a case of need where there was faith and expectancy. He was 
not like a popular physician, with whom the patient makes a previous appointment, 
in whose ante-chamber he waits till exhausted, and whose fee cripples his means. At 
any time, " without money and without price," Christ would heal the sick. He is " the 
same yesterday, to-day, and for ever." Even though the shadows of life's evening are 
falling around the sin-sick soul, it is not too late to offer the prayer, " Je^us, Master, 
have mercy upon me ! " 2. His consideration. His varied methods of cure showed 
his readinesa to meet the special circumstances of each. Thus, he took Peter's wife's 
mother "by the hand," perhaps because she was delirious and could not understand 
his words, or because she was weak and needed the confidence which that expectant 
hand-grasp would give. Similarly, he touched the eyes of the blind, and his disciples 
took the cripple by the hand (Acts iii. 7). Christ still adapts himself to men's 
peculiar necessities. To some a word of promise inspires hope, in others a word of 
warning awakens thought. A sermon may arouse to penitence, a mother's love may 
win to Christ, a grief may make serious, or a joy may bring a man on his knees in 
thankfulness. Happy is it when, in all of these or in any of these, Christ appears 
to the 80uL 3. His sympathy. This was of the essence of his work. Matthew here 
appropriately applies to him the words of the prophet, " Himself took our infirmities 
and bare our sicknesses;" by which we understand that there was nothing per- 
functory or mechanical in his healing work. He felt isv&cj case, and came in living 
contact with the soul he cured. His touch was not merely physical, it was an out- 
going of souL Hence he "sighed" when he cured the blind; he "felt virtue" going 
out of th« hem of his garment ; he " wept " and " groaned " at the grave of Lazarus ; 



tt THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MAEK. [oh. i. l—i\ 

and all this was not because the effort was great, but because the effort was needed. 
In harmony with this we read in ver. 41 that, when the leper came, Jesus being 
"moved with compassion, put forth his hand, and touched him." He did this although 
he knew that it involved him in ceremonial defilement ; but he was willing to make 
the leper clean, even by contracting uncleanness himself. In that we have a sign of 
what St. Paul meant when he said, " He was made sin for us, who knew no sin, that 
we might be made the righteousness of God in him." 

IL The eagerness of the suppliants. She who was ill of fever In Peter's house 
could not plead for herself, and therefore others interceded for her, and not in vain. 
Encouraged by this, parents brought their children, sons their mothers, and " they 
brought unto him all that were diseased." 1. Some were physically diseased. Laid asida 
from activity, a burden instead of a support to others, suffering pain which made days 
and nights wearisome, invalids would be thankful to those who bore them in their strong 
arms to Jesus' feet. We may do the like for our sufferers, and if restoration to health is 
not given, serenity of heart will be. The voice of Christ will be heard amidst the storm 
of their trouble, saying, " It is I ; be not afraid." Blessed by his presence, if they recover 
they will go back to the world as those who have been on the borders of heaven, or if they 
enter the dark valley, he will fulfil the promise, " I will come again, and receive you 
to myself" 2. Some had spiritual disorders. It was sin which lay at the root of all 
suffering. Christ came to put it away by the sacrifice of himself. By his removal of 
the effects he gave a sign of the removal of the cause. If we have those dear to us who 
are tied and bound by the chain of their sins, let us bring them to Jesus, earnestly, 
tenderly, patiently, hopefully. Those who through drink seem demon-possessed, those 
feverish with anxiety, those so morally stained that men of good repute avoid them ag 
though they were leprous, — may all find hope and help in Christ. 3. Some felt their 
own need of blessing. They did not wait for others to bring them. The leper, for 
example, of his own accord came kneeling to Jesus, feeling that he could make him 
clean. The Law could only separate the leper from others and pronovmce him clean 
after restoration ; but Christ had purifying power, such as the Law never had. Similarly 
now, outward restrictions may check wrong-doing ; the moral influence of friends may 
restrain us, and vows and resolves may prove of service ; but the heart is only turned 
from sin when God answers the prayer, " Create within me a clean heart." It is just 
short of that acknowledgment and cry that many halt, though others have done for 
them all that they can ; and Jesus waits for faith and prayer that he may say, " I 
will; be thou clean."— A. B. 

Vers._ I7-8. — Olad tiding$. I. They abb the itulfilment op lono hofes. Human 
nature is ideal ; it is a creature of wishes and of hopes, and made for enjoyment. The 
love of the_ living God is at the root of all our instincts. Faith is our expression of the 
sense of this. It begets hope amidst suffering and sorrow, sustains the soul in patience. 
God seeking man, man in turn seeking God, — this is the secret life of Scripture and of 
history. History is sacred because it is the reflection of the vast spiritual struggle of 
man to apprehend God, of God to apprehend his creature. " I will not let thee go 
except thou bless me I " is the cry of man. " I am found of them that seek me 1 " is the 
answer of God. 

n. Hope dies down dj sin and mibert, and can only be beuotbd in bbpbht- 
ANOE. Pessimism and despondence spring from unfaithfulness. Men are not living the 
life which begets hope. Palestine was depressed, conquered and unhappy. John pro- 
poses no political change, but a moral change. Man can endure outward ills, and seek 
for their removal, if the hearts are only happy. The inward emancipation, the 
" remission of sins," is what we all need. No other " franchise " will really do much for 
tu without this. In order to have the kingdom of God, there must be an energy in the 
soul to grasp it. The nerveless hand cannot raise the food to the lips. " In older to 
possess God, we must have something that is capable of possessing God." The pussi- 
Ulity of repentance is itself glad tidings, virtually including all others. 

in. SeEIOUSNBSS and 80LEMN1TT THE PROPER MOOD OP EXPECTATION. 1. Thii 

typified in the ascetic character of the Baptist. Thought and self-denial, prayer and 
fasting, low living and lofty aspiration, — this is the ground from which the fairest 
dower* of joy spring. Not upon any soil barren of thought are they found. 2. In tha 



CB. 1. 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCOfiDINa TO ST. MARK. 49 

rite of baptism. It expressed the new will of the people— decision, renunciation of 
the old, the putting on of the white dress of purity in preparation for the Bridegroom. 
The confession of sin and the mercy of God are coincident. 3. In the attitude 
of reverent waiting. A mighty One is at hand. The mission of the Baptist was in 
itself incomplete. The symbolism of his apparel and way of life had a significance 
behind it. So had the outward baptism of water. To this mood the gospel would 
ever bring us. Bevelation is inexhaustible. The secrets of history in the nation and 
the individual have not been all told. Every day is a new day, every morrow will bring 
its gladness to the soul that believes. — J 

Vers. 9 — 13. — The consecration of Jesus. L The good oi" ocbtoil Honoured by 
his submission to baptism. This is an example. Custom is the sacred link between past 
and present. Old customs, sacred rites, should be kept up ; only abandoned when they 
no longer teach truth, but more falsehood than truth. Bebellion against custom for 
rebellion's sake is vicious individualism. Compliance with the beauty of order is the 
mark of a loyal and loving spirit. 

n. The 8TUB0L is fbeoioub, not fob itb fobm, bxtt its oohtents. We speak of 
a " beautiful word," but it is the thought conveyed by it that shines. So of a " sacred 
rite ;" but the one sacred thing is the spiritual belief signified, the real union of the soul 
with God. Upon the meek spirit the gentleness of Heaven descends. The " meekness 
and gentleness " of Christ is the grace of the lowly and obedient heart. The delight 
of God is in those human traits which resemble and reflect Jesus. 

III. Teial follows consecbatioh. The Spirit of God is given to prepare for service ; 
and the call to this is not long delayed. All trial is for good. There is no needleM 
tooueut of the spirit in God's school. Only in conflict do we really learn reality. 

"When the fight begins within himself, 
A man's worth something. God stoops o'er his head, 
Batan looks up between his feet. Both try. 
He's left himself in the middle ; the soul wakes 
And grows. Prolong that battle through his life I 
Never leave growing till the life to come I " 

Solitude Is a necessary element in trial. (See Bobertson's sermon on the ' Lonelfnest 
of Christ.') Life is a drama on which angels and demons look with intensest interest. 
Evil is ever near ; succour never far off. — J. 

Vers. 16 — 20. — Call of disciples. I. Callhto ueans sepabation. We cannot 
prove any calling without separation. The merchant must separate himself from the 
easy-chair and the book, the student from society, the soldier from home. One main 
object is enough for most men. Few can properly pursue the ministry and business at 
the same time. 

XL The oallino implies a calleb. Not our fancy, whim, passion, but Divine wilL 
To some that will is made known clearly and directly; they cannot mistake. To 
some not so directly. But need any mistake, if they make it a rule to be ever fulfilling 
the duty of the moment? It is a mistake to think too much on the point. True 
thought is God realizing himself in us. True action is God willing to do in and 
through us. Never resist a pure impulse ; never turn from a voice that speaks to what 
is disinterested in you. 

IIL To TAKE TO A HIQHEB WAT OF LIFE ALWAYS MEANS THE GIVINQ UP OF A LOWEB. 

God confounds our avarice by his generosity. We cling to all we can hold ; want to 
keep incompatible things — to be learned but not poor ; to have as much of the world 
as possible, yet not be worldly ; to live in self-indulgence, yet earn the reputation oi 
saints. But God teaches us that our surrenders are no less profitable than our seeming 
gains. The provincial fisher becomes the apostle to the world. The things that are 
unseen are more than all that are seen. — J. 

Vers. 21 — 28. — Soid-emancipation, I. Bondage of body and soul oub natubaIi 
uoNDiTioN. We are fettered and distressed in our fetters. Disease is a bond ; habitual 



44 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. i. 1—45 

Ideas of one kind or another are bonds to every man. The mystery of evil possession 
we cannot fathom ; what we know is that our imagination is a tyrant. " Fixed ideas " 
harshly govern us, irritate our passions. We long for freedom, yet cannot shake them ofiF. 
II. This ebstraint must be put an end to by Divine power. A tyrannous 
idea of sin or sorrow will only yield to a larger and stronger idea — to a new fact. A 
bad temper only to be driven out by the " expulsive force of a new affection." All 
conversion means this. The darkness is the absence of light, and the tyranny of dark 
beings is the absence of light in the soul. When we see and believe that the living 
God means our freedom by the truth, the fetters of the mind fall away. What was 
real in one way in connection with the local pers nal aotiyity of Jesus, is universally true 
of the activity of God in the soul. Truth is one Ji all its forms : the truths of science, ot 
morals, of art, of health. Reverently let us recognize a 1 as works of God Incarnate, 
having authority over unclean spirits. — J. 

Vers. 29 — 34. — T!)e progress of health. I. It is identical with the peogbbbs op 
Christianity. For Christianity is the embodiment of the wisdom of the physician, 
the power of the Creator, the compassion of the God. These wonders are really revela- 
tions of law. Were the will of God the only factor In the case, we could hardly 
imagine how suffering could be. But there is our will also. The truth, so far as we 
may conjecture, seems to be that in the nature of things evil cannot be as a rule over- 
come without the co-operation of the individual free-will. On the other hand, without 
the operation of the living love of God, any removal of ill seems inconceivable. 

II. Christianity will not admit any questionable aid in this work. No 
recognition of evil powers, of compliments or testimonials from them. Christian work 
is vitiated when it courts bad alliances. Better to go on single-handed than in fellow- 
ship with those whose aims are not ours. One voice out of time spoils the chorus. 
One detected interest paralyzes the nerve of benevolent enterprise. Suffer not the 
demon of policy to speak in our councils. — J. 

Vers. 40 — 45. — The leper. I. For the worst evils there re A remedy. If not 
always in the physical, yet ever in the spiritual sphere. They are cured in effect when 
they are balanced by some weight of good in the soul. 

II. It is half-way to the remedy to know where it lies. The leper knew, 
and was not ashamed to seek it at the right quarter. Many know who or what will 
do them gxid, but are too proud to ask or ashamed to own their need. 

HI. Christ is the all-helpful One. This is ever the representation of him. 
He wills, God wills, our recovery and our health. Do we then will it ? It is an 
essential condition that we should. 

IV. True uenevolesce and true gratitude are unostentatious. Christ is the 
example of the former ; it is questionable whether the leper is the true type of the 
latter. He will not obey the word of his Deliverer. He cannot suppress the desire 
to talk. To prate about others' goodness may really spring from egotistic motives. It 
is pleasant to be the hero of a tale. Though the leper's conduct is not to be seriously 
blamed, it illustrates a certain frivolity of mind. And the lesson is taught that "stiU 
waters run deep," and thankfulness is best cultivated in silence. — J. 

Vers. 1—8.— The leginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ. " The gospel " is a revelation 
of the Divine love ; the " beginning " of it is therefore hidden in the depths of the eternal 
love of God. The whole gospel was buried, the end from the beginning, in the Divine 
purpose ; and it was contained seminally in the first promise. Every Divine promise 
is equal to the event. But the manifestation of the gospel in time, or the historic 
" beginning of the gospel," is the theme of this prologue. Thought of within the 
limits of history, the " beginning " is a preparation. The messenger is sent to " prepare 
the way of the Lord." This preparation is twofold— historical and personal. 

I. The historical preparation is a preparation for the announcement of thk 
GOSPEL. The historic preparation must be traced from the moment when the first 
gentle word of promise mingled, half unheard, with the first words of judgment and 
condemnation, forwards to that moment in which "the time" was "fulfilled" and the 
ivard was heard, " The kingdom of God is at hand. Repent, and believe in tfie gospel." 



BH. tl— 46.] THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO tjl. MARK. 45 

The true disciple, always a listener and a learner, whose eyes are not holden, and who 
is not " slow of heart to believe," will gladly learn that " from Moses and from all the 
prophets, the things concerning" his Lord may be " interpreted; " and he will search "in 
all the Scriptures" for the hidden or open references to him. The preparation by the 
prophets was not the mere utterance of the word, " Make ye ready the way of the Lord, 
make his paths straight." Their denunciations of sin, their preaching of righteousness, 
their promises of forgiveness to a repentant Israel, their assurances of a restored 
prosperity rising into the delineation of a kingdom of holiness and peace, were ele- 
ments of preparation. And the unique history of the holy nation, " beginning at 
Moses," and the concurrent histories of surrounding kingdoms, were parts of the 
same great preparation. And even before Moses, Abraham, through all the gloomy 
mist and the confusion of wild times, saw a day of peace and gladness and health, and, 
with largeness of heart and noble unselfishness, " rejoiced to see it," though he knew his 
sun would long have set ere that bright day arose. Yea, " he saw it and was glad," and 
by his testimomy against idolatry, by his avowal of the one true and living God, and 
by his sacrifice and obedience, he helped to " prepare the way," as did every seer and 
believer and righteous man, each in his measure, as far back as Abel. Thus " all the 
prophets and the Law prophesied until John," in whom the historic preparation was 
completed. He, than whom there had not " arisen a greater," cried, " Bepent ye ; for the 
kingdom of heaven is at hand." So we humbly trace the Divine preparation by means 
of prophets and seers and righteous men, and also by a Divine overruling of the 
works of the wicked. The voice of the herald being ever sounded, if not ever heard, 
" Prepare ye the way of the Lord." But the gospel, which came to men by a prepared 
way, must be received by men in a prepared spirit. 

IL The personal pbefabation is a fbefabation fob the receftiok of the oospEik 
The external, historical preparation terminated in a word, a cry, a gracious preaching, 
" the voice of one " to whom " the Word of God came." Amid the dreary waste of the 
wilderness, where the signs of natural convulsion typified the needed moral upheaving, 
this man, rugged in speech as in dress, of few but earnest words, his tongue a burning 
flame, his fingers wetted for baptizing with the cooling waters of the brook, lifted up his 
voice and cried aloud his one message. It was a clear and definite cry, contained in 
the one word, " Bepent." This was his one great demand of the ungodly around him. 
It is the one word now to be uttered in the hearing of all who have not entered the 
heavenly kingdom. It is the word which follows the awakening judgment, and pre- 
cedes the comforting gospel. 1. Bepentance, a change of mind leading to a change of 
life, follows upon reflection, and the deep Spirit-wrought conviction of the sinfulness 
and wrong of the past. St. Paul describes it as " toward God." No two words could 
better describe it. If the heart, the thoughts, the steps, have been toward evil, in 
repentance they turn " toward God." 2. Bepentance is declared by confession of sins, 
a voluntary acknowledgment that the deeds of the past life have been evil. Of that 
past it is an open repudiation ; it is a self-condemnation. 3. Bepentance is attested 
by the beginning of a new life, by " the fruit worthy of repentance." 4. Repentance is 
sealed in baptism. This is a profession, a promise and pledge, of entering uj.on a new 
path. It is also the authorized seal and surety or earnest of the blessing the repentant 
one seeks. It is not that blessing, but it is the pledge and seal of it. Baptism is " unto 
repentance;" repentance is " unto remission of sins." When baptism is the true sign 
of the one, it is the certain pledge of the other ; but it is not to be confounded with 
either, nor with the baptism of the Holy Spirit, which a mightier One will impart. 
Baptism does not bestow remission of sins or the baptism of fire, but it pledges the 
bestowment of both. So does John " prepare the way " for his Lord. (1) Let every one 
who is living in sin hear the authoritative cry, " Repent ye ; " and know that if the 
fire of the Spirit bum not up repented sins as chaff, it will bum into the conscieniia 
with its unquenchable flame. (2) And let every truly repentant one know that the 
outer sign is the indubitable pledge of admission into " the kingdom of God," and of 
participation in all the blessings of that kingdom. It is the seal of the Christian 
covenant. Then in him the gospel has had its true beginning. (3) The next duty for the 
repentant one, for which he by repentance is truly prepared, is to " believe the gospel," 
when he shall be baptized " with the Holy Ghost." But for this John must give place 
to Jesus, for whom he prepares the way in the hearts of his people. The preparation 



46 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. l i— 45. 



then, without and within, is complete. This is the true " beginning of the gospel oi 
J«8UB Christ." It is begun historically ; it is begun personally. — G. 

Vers. 9 — 13. — The official preparation. "The beginning of the gospel of Jesns 
Christ " embraces yet another element. The preparation of " the way " of the Lord is 
followed by the preparation of the Lord himself. This we must name — The 
preparation of the Messiah, the Christ. 

I. The first step in this preparation is the assumption op the human natube. 
"The Word became flesh." " It behoved him," who " took hold of the seed of Abraham," 
with a view to raise it up, " to be made like unto " them whom he would call " his 
brethren." And " since they are sharers of flesh and blood, he also himself in like manner 
partook of the same." Never will the world exhaust the mystery of the Incarnation. 
No event in human history can equal the grandeur or significance of this. " He was 
made man " is a greater truth than " he suffered and was buried." It was an infinitely 
greater condescension to become man than to pass through the lowly shades of human 
history. The humble home, the toilsome endurance, the poverty, the suffering, — all 
fall below "Jesus was bom in Bethlehem." This event is the most stupendous of 
all events in the history of the human race. 

IT. The second step in this preparation is the passinq through the lowly con- 
ditions OF THE HUMAN LIFE. The words of the ninth verse turn our thoughts back to 
silent days of preparation going forward in the house of the carpenter at Nazareth of 
Galilee, wherein he passed into and passed through and honoured all the stages of 
human life from infancy to manhood, and where he sanctified the condition of helpless 
weakness, of ignorance, of submission, of toil, and of honest labour ; sanctified the 
home and the workshop, and the relationships and intercourse of common village life ; 
exalted the lowly lot, and thereby every lot. This was another element of that like- 
ness to " his brethren " which it behoved him to assume. During this period the glory 
of his person was shrouded. Men had not yet been permitted to behold " the glory as of 
the only begotten from the Father," in which he was unlike his brethren. Yet he dwelt 
among men,' the Incarnate Word, "full of grace and truth," though not yet "made 
manifest to Israel." In that tabernacle the true Sliechinah was hidden. " He was in 
the world, and the world knew him not." A few who, with Simeon, " were looking for 
the redemption of Jerusalem," by prophetic intuition, saw in him the salvation 
" prepared before the face of all people ; a light for revelation to the Gentiles, and the 
glory of thy people Israel." In Nazareth " he was subject unto " father and mother, 
the honoured mother keeping " all the sayings in her heart " that concerned him. 

III. A third step in this preparation is the submittinq to all T im; oedinances 
OF BIOHTE0UBNE88. Bighteousuess does not consist in an attendance upon ordinances, 
but consists not without it. John, who probably knew the character of Jesus better 
than any saving only Mary, hesitates when he presents himself for baptism ; he even 
" hinders him " with the words, " ' I have need to be baptized of thee,' so much better art 
tiiou, so much higher ; and yet ' oomest thou to me ?' " He who though " separated from 
sinners," had daily mingled with them ; who had submitted to every ordinance of the 
Lord for man's sake, " was circumcised the eighth day," was presented in the temple, that 
they might " do concerning him after the custom of the Law ; " who at twelve years of 
age, and doubtless in succeeding years, " went up after the custom of the feast," would 
now " fulfil " this " righteousness" also. He passed through all in fellowship with the 
sinful, and for sinful ones, paying his tribute of duteous attendance on the Divine 
ordinance, leaving here " an example " that we should do as he had done. As one has 
said, " He who now comes to this baptism is not a sinner, but a righteous man who 
needs neither repentance nor pardon. It is he who for us fulfils all righteousness 
who, bom of a woman and made under the Law which was given to the unrighteous' 
has already hitherto observed and performed all the commandments of the Lord to 
Israel, and for that very reason now subjects himself to that baptism which was 
nrdained of God as the concluding commandment of the old covenant, through which 
•-< the transition to the new." ' 

f V. The fourth step in this preparation is the public and official desiqnatiom Of 

• Btier, ' Werds of the Lord Jesus,' vol i. p. 30. 



CH. 1 1—46.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 47 

Messiah. Tes, truly the transition j for now is the manifestation to Israel to be made, 
Bud the open, authoritative designation of him " who from the foundation of the world " 
had been in Heaven's counsels designated. When so suitable a time as when fulfilling 
all lighteousness? Then, "coming up out of the water, he" — and, as we learn from St. 
John, the Baptist also—" saw the heavens rent asunder, and the Spirit as a dove descend- 
ing upon him ;" while a voice from heaven proclaims to him, and proclaims through him 
to all, " Thou art my beloved Son." Now is " Jesus of Nazareth anointed with the 
Holy Ghost and with power," officially called and set apart. Now the mystery of the 
Divine Name, in the historical development to the world of the triunity of the God- 
head, is more fully than ever before disclosed. John, having seen, bears his " witness 
that this is the Son of God." Presently his works also will bear witness of him, that 
the Father hath sent him. 

V. But meanwhile a yet further step in this preparation is needed. " To this and was 
the Son of God manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil." Therefore 
must he be tempted or the dbvtl. The devil is man's great adversary, Satan. All evil 
embodies itself in him. The Redeemer of men must taste — drink — this bitter cup ; to 
a pure nature perhaps of all the bitterest. Full forty days he must needs fast in the 
wilderness. Oh, the buffetings of those days, of which three examples stand out 
prominently before na; when, lol he is so bowed down that angels are sent to 
" minister to him." Then, "having been made perfect, he became unto all them thai 
obey him the Author of eternal salvation." 

From all may be learnt : 1. The perfectness of his human nature, with its 
experiences, its sympathy, and its example. 2. His perfect Divine nature. 3. His 
perfect fitness to be the Mediator, the Comforter, the Saviour of the world. — G. 

Vers. 14 — 20. — The fishers of men. An interval of time elapses, the incidents of 
which, momentous in the great history, are recorded in the other Gospels, e.g. John's 
testimony to the Lamb of God (John i. 19 — 34), the gathering of the first disciples 
(Jolin i. 35 — 51), the marriage at Cana (John ii. 1 — 12), the cleansing of the temple 
(John ii. 13 — 25), the conversation with Nicodemus (John iii. 1 — 21). "Now after 
that John was delivered up, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the gospel of God, 
and sayiitg. The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand : repent ye, and 
believe in the gospel." Truly a "beginning" is made. "All things are now ready;" 
and the Master himself cries aloud with his own voice, " Come." Oh, wondrous grace 1 
The Divine call to the Divine feast ! God calling men to himself, to receive mercy, bless- 
ing, life 1 Ever since and to the end will both " the Spirit and the bride say. Come." 
Israel, " if thou hadst known in this day, even thou 1 " Simon and Andrew, James and 
John, already called to be disciples, but still pursuing, as should every disciple, their 
daily industry, are now called to be apostles, to forsake home, father, nets, avocations, 
and gain, to follow the young Rabbi with obedient steps and imitetive carefulness, 
that he may " make " them " to become " (without which making of the Master none 
can become) " fishers of men." In this incident may be seen : 1. The greatness of this 
calling. 2, Its imperative demand. 3. An illustrious example of obedience. 

I. Thb obbatness of this calling is not to be exaggerated. To " catch men " — by 
no trick, but by the Word of the Lord and by the aid of the Lord, who brings fishes 
to the nets of toilers on the sea — is to bring them up out of the deep wide sea, the 
world, into Christ's net, the Church^ that they proving good may be gathered intu 
vessels. It is to draw men from evil, to teach them heavenly truth, soul-renewing 
and saving truth, to guide them into the paths of peace, to encourage asid help them 
in the maintenance of righteousnew, to bind in bonds of brotherhood, to incite to 
holy charity, to build them up i& knowledge and doctrine, and so to fit them for 
useful service on earth and for iho felicities of the heavenly life on high. Oh, sacrod 
calling I Haw immeasurably above all callings ' How honourable the work I How 
honoured the msn 1 — honoured, not by the distinctions that may be gained, but by the 
work itself. This toil is heavenly, often most heavenly when most hard, most fruitful 
when most despised and apparently least successful, as was that of the great Master. 

IL For all time, and for the instruction of all apostles and servants who must, " for 
the kingdom of God's salse," forsake all and follow him, this simple incident, told in 
half a score lines, is ample. The impeeativb demand is heard in the deep conscience, 



48 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch.i.1— 45 

In the warm, pitiful sympathy of the obedient disciple, ready to lay down life and all 
for the Master's sake and in his cause ; it is a call coming, not from the lips, but from 
the wretched, sinful lives of the wicked in the world around, or from the wilds o( 
heathen darkness, superstition, and loss afar off ; from the Church that is quick to dis- 
cern the signs of fitness, tender in feeling the claims of the needy, and watchful to behold 
the favouring conjunction of circumstances. But the call, " Follow me," never comes 
from the lips of Jesus by way of the attractive position amongst men, of emolument, 
ease, or honour. If the words are heard thence proceeding, they are simulated. Let him 
who so hears beware 1 The true call is imperative. It cannot be relaxed even for the 
sake of " friends at home." Nay, others must bury the " dead father " rather than 
the solemn " Follow me " be unheeded. 

III. To illustrate this, the quick obediencs here so illustbiouslt exemplified ii 
definitely expressed. " They left their nets • . . they left their father Zebedee in the 
boat with the hired servants." For ever they left must be tie true test of sincere 
devotion. If men leave a broken net for a whole one, and only to catch fishes, the world 
which has read this story knows the deceit, and does not acknowledge the Divine calL 
Generally the Church is pure. The earthly gain is not great ; the burden is heavy. 
Who follow this Master must cleave to his doctrine, and struggle to defend it, and baar 
the painfulness of maintaining the faith in presence of many di£Sculties and rude sug- 
gestions of doubt, and the severe treatment of men who do not intend to be cruel and 
wicked, but who severely try the hearts of humble believing servants with " doubtful 
disputations." But the servant must stand by the Master; ah, and stand by his cause 
when he is not near ; stand by it when it seems to be failing, as well as when it seems 
likely to prevail. The true fitness to be a " fisher of men " is to " leave all ; " for most 
truly here the Master saith, " Whosoever he be of you that renounceth not all that he 
hath, he cannot be," in the truest and best sense, " a fisher of men." How cheering to 
these fishers must have been the prophetic testimony of the great ingatherings wliich 
rewarded the letting down the net " on the right side of the ship 1 " Yet how much 
harder then to leave that net 1 — Q. 

Vers. 21 — 39. — The illustrative example of Chrisfs work. No sooner is tht 
great work begun than a strikingly illustrative example of its true character and 
beneficent power is presented. It was in Capernaum, which, so far from being " exalted 
unto heaven," would hear the curse, " Thou shalt go down unto Hades." And it was 
" the sabbath day ; " therefore of a surety " he straightway . . . entered into the syna- 
gogue." Now, in his " Father's house," he is doing the great work he came to do, 
" to bear witness of the truth." Here are all Divine things — the Lord's day, the Lord's 
house, the Lord's Son, the Lord's Word. Truly " the kingdom of G(>d " is come. 
It is a typical example. Here we learn that Christ's work is : 1. A work of teaching. 
2. A conquest of the evil spirit. 3. A healing of human infirmities and sufferings. 
This threefold work finds its ample and beautiful illustration here. 

I. In the synagogue he taught. This is his chief, perhaps his greatest, work. 
His kingdom he will rule with truth ; with truth he will wrest its alienated portions 
from the usurper. This is his one weapon of antagonism against all evils. He him- 
self is " the Truth." His was no second-hand, derived truth. He was a perpetual 
spring of new truth— an authority in all matters of truth. "Truth is in Jesus," and 
this his manner would betoken. Well might the hearers stand " astonished." Christ 
calmly spoke truth — the truth. This was ever his sword. By it the heart is pierced ; 
men are convicted " in respect of sin " by it ; the truth brings peace, for it brings the 
knowledge of salvation; the truth reveals the way of life;i tlie truth unveils the 
future. All truth he taught. " Out of his mouth proceedeth a sharp sword, that with 
it he should smite the nations." The wise soldiers of the cross to-day preach the Word ; 
the wise servants scatter truth, for it is the only seed from which the kingdom d 
heaven will grow. 

II. Following hard upon the utterance of truth is conflict with the bpibit of 
Bva, which, being a spirit of error, truth disturbs. Then the great conflict is seen. 
The " unclean spirit " has nothing in common with Jesus, the pure One, as is declared in 
" What hare we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth ? " No ; these are mutually 
ixclusive, mutually destructive. The spirit of evil is revealed. L It is an " unclean " 



OH. 1. 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. id 

spirit. 2. It is a spirit of antagonism to truth. 3. It is a malignant spirit, " tearing " 
its victim till hs cries aloud. 4. Till Jesus speaks, it dominates over the entire life of 
its victim. 5. But in his presence it is a conquered spirit. " With authority he com- 
mandeth even the unclean spirits, and they obey him." There is no power, in earth or 
in Hades, above him. Christ's word then, now, and always, casts out the evil spirit. 

III. But men suffer many pains and sorrows. Ignorance, folly, mistake, sin, — all com- 
bine to expose the tender flesh to injury. It is the holy mission of the Son of man lo 
HEAL H0MAN INFIRMITIES, to dry Up the fouut of human sorrow, to wipe the tears from 
human faces. The prostrate mother-in-law of his chief apostle is named to him as he 
leaves the synagogue, " and he came and took her by the hand, and raised her up ; and 
the fever left her, and she ministered unto them." He has shown his relation to truth as 
its Fountain, to the evil spirit as its Conqueror, to disease as its Healer. Lo 1 the Keed 
of his presence and work is demonstrated. The cool of the day affords suitable time, 
and " they bring unto him all that were sick, and those that were possessed with devils." 
Of them, " he healed many that were sick with divers diseases, and cast out many devils." 
Oh, gracious visitation 1 Well might " all the. city be gathered together at the door." 
What a holy excitement 1 What a day of grace ! This but typifies the healing power oi 
his word and doctrine. At once we learn that Christ stands opposed to human suffering. 
But disease is the natural consequence of broken law. It is the just retribution follow- 
ing disobedience. Is Christ opposed to law ? No, he heals disease and casts out devils, 
as he commanded his disciples to do ; 1. By his word and spirit bringing men to 
obedience to law. 2. By the sick being brought in penitent faith to him, when the 
moral end of the sickness is truly answered. 3. By ministrations of that charity which 
Christian teaching awakwis and sustains. 4. By his own Divine word of blessing, upon 
the efforts of men to learn and keep the laws of nature, which are his laws. Thus 
"the gospel of Jesus Christ "begins. For its end we wait. The seed-corn is cast into the 
eaith. The harvest will follow. — G. 

Vers. 40 — 45. — The cleansing of the leper. The work and wonders of the previous 
day created so great an excitement that he early rose, " a great while before day," 
for calmness and the refreshment of solitude and prayer, and finding " a desert place," 
he there " prayed." hallowed ground 1 Simon and his companions follow, and find- 
ing him, say, " All are seeking thee." But he " came forth to preach," therefore he would 
go " elsewhere," and the marvellous account given is, " He went into their synagogues 
throughout all Galilee, preaching and casting out devils." In the course of his tour 
" there cometh to him " one of the many in whose bodily infirmity preachers and 
teachers have always seen the type of the spiritual sickness ; " there cometh to him a 
leper." Ho is alone, for the multitude avoid him. Attention must not be diverted 
frum these two — the sufferer and his Saviour. 

I. The supfbebb and his appeal. Leprosy is thus described : " The most terrible of 
all maladies, a living death, a poisoning of the springs, a corrupting of all the humours, 
of life ; a dissolution little by little of the whole body, so that one limb after another 
actually decayed and fell away. The Jews called it ' the finger of God.' " They 
knew no cure for it. His " beseeching " cry is heard as he draws near, and ere he falls, 
kneeling, where so many afterwards knelt, at the feet of Jesus. He has heard of the 
fame of the Rabbi, for it has spread afar. With piteous words he cries, " If thou wilt, 
thou canst make me clean." What an inversion of this is much of the faith of to-day ! 
The goodness of Jesus all acknowledge, but many deny his power to heal. This man 
knew only what had been reported to him — the power. He had not yet gazed into the 
tender eyes that beamed upon him. He had not yet heard the calm and gentle voice 
tliat breathed the tenderest love of the tenderest of all souls. But he will hear it. He 
had not felt the pressure of that hand of power ; but, strange to say, he on whom no 
friendly hand has rested for long, will feel its healing touch. It needed not the cry to 
pierce to the heart of the great Healer; the sight was enough. But the words " thou 
canst " denote a faith which indicates the needed preparation. But the appealing " If," 
and "If thou wilt !" Oh, if all depended upon that alone, how many more would be healeil ' 
Once it was said " If thou canst ; " when the quick reply, " If thou canst," both rebulted 
the doubt (pardonable under the circumstances) and threw back upon the questioner the 
sens* of weakness. Here is no doubt of the power ; but " wilt " thou? So the unclean , 

tiT. MARK. * 



eO THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. i. 1— 4& 

corrupt, slow-dying sufferer appeals to the Lord of life, and love, and power. It if not 
wrong to say " If thou wilt." It is a lower form of " Thy will be done." 

II. The humble cry turns us from the sufferer to the Saviour, to learn his com- 
passion, to see his touch, to hear his word of power, and to witness its instant effect. 
1. Jesus was "moved with compassion." What had not the world to hope from 
that " compassion " 1 What may it not still hope from it 1 We could hope much from 
compassion such as many good souls would show; but what from his compassion 1 
What depth ; what tenderness ; what yearning ; and what power I Happy he who com- 
mits himself to the compassion of Christ. 2. With quickness "he stretched forth his 
hand, and touched him." There was comfort in that, for all others fled from him. But it 
was a touch of acceptance and assurance, having many moral lessons. " I do not despise 
thee." His touch had compassion in it, perhaps more than power, though " power" went 
forth from him when others touched even his garments. 3. The true power, however, 
is in the word, " Be thou made clean." It is a command to that body and to disease. The 
disease, Christ's servant of judgment, obeys : " the leprosy departed from him ; " and 
the body obeys, putting on its new robes of health, the flesh as of a little child — " he was 
made clean." Can faith desire more? He who would learn to have faith must stand 
near and see, and let the " works bear witness." Faith is God's gift, like the dew of the 
morning, as silently, as wondrously given. Again let it be said, if men would have faith 
they must come to the Word ; the air is full of blessing when the word of Christ ii 
vibrating in it ; and it will distil as the dew upon the chill, sad heart How great a 
miracle I yet typical of " greater works " yet to be done. It is easier to say to the body, 
' ' Be thou made clean, " than to say it to the soul. But now a command, having within it 
a touch of sternness, " He strictly charged him, . . . Say nothing to any man : but go 
thy way, show thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing the things which Moses 
commanded, for a testimony unto them. " Alas ! even gratitude could not conquer joy. 
His new life, his whole fl.esh, forbade silence, and he "began to publish it much." It 
was almost excusable, yet not entirely. For Christ's words must be obeyed at all cost. 
The Lord's ways are best, as is here proved. Disobedience brings its inconvenience 
The cities suffered by the man's error. Ah, every city suffers by every man's error 
Jesus could not " openly enter ; " he must hide " in desert places." But " they came t« 
him from every quarter." 

Thus may all afflicted in body or soul learn : 1. To offer their cry to him, who, even 
if they err in their methods, will not despise their prayer. 2. That Chiist willeth to 
heal all, and is able. 8. That his compassion is never unmoved in presence of human 
woe. 4. That the humble appeal to him will surely meet with a helpful response. 5. 
That the best return is to suppress their own inclination, and, even with crushed feel- 
ings, obey his minutest word ; for so is his purpose best answered. — G. 

Vers. 1 — 8. Parallel passages : Matt. iii. 1 — 12 ; Luke iii. 1 — 18. The ministry oj 
John the Baptist. I. The beginning of St. Mask's memoir. 1. 2%e commencement. 
It is a remarkable circumstance and a curious coincidence that the first words of this 
Gospel are an echo of Peter's confession. In that confession, as recorded by St. Matthew, 
Peter expresses his belief in the very remarkable words, " Thou art the Christ, the Sim 
of the living Ood," In nearly the same words St. Mark commences his narrative : 
" The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of Ood. 2. Difference of con- 
struction. 1'he words of this first verse may be taken (1) as the title of the entire 
book ; or (2) in construction with the following verse, " The beginning of the gospel 
of Jesus Christ, the Sun of God, was as it is written in the prophets ;" or (3) even in 
connection with the fourth verse, the second and third being parenthetic ; that is, " The 
beginning of the gospel . . . was John baptizing." 3. Omissions. After a brief but 
indispensable introduction, touching the ministry of the Baptist, the evangelist hurries 
on to his concise but clear and comprehensive narrative of our Lord's public life, begin- 
ning with his baptism by John. He passes over the four events of the Saviour's 
•hildhood — the circumcision and presentation in the temple, which are recorded by 
St. Luke, as also the visit of the Magi and the flight into Egypt, mentioned by 
St. Matthew. He passes over the only recorded incident of his early days — the one 
erent which constituted the dividing line between his childhood and youth, when, st 
ttia second appearance in the temple, he disputed with the doctors, and in connection 



CH. 1. 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 51 

with which ve haye his first recorded utterances, " How is it that ye sought me ? wist 
yo not that I must be about my Father's business ? " St. Mark also omits the lineage 
of our Lord, by which St. Matthew connects him with the seed of Abraham according 
to the flesh, and likewise that other genealogy, which St. Luke traces still higher up, 
connecting him with Adam and so with humanity itself, including Gentile as well as 
Jew. Li the whole four Gospels there is only one single verse descriptive of our Lord'* 
childhood, which reads as follows : — " The child grew and waxed strong in spirit, filled 
with wisdom [or rather, 'waxed strong, becoming filled with wisdom'] : and the grace of 
God was upon him ; " while one other verse contains the record of his youth, " Jesus 
increased [rather, 'advanced*] in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man." 
All we know for certain of our Lord's life, up to the time of his manifestation to Israel, 
may be summed up in the few following facts : — Dutifulaess to his earthly parents in 
childhood ; diligence in business as a carpenter, like his fellow-men, in youth and early 
manhood ; devotion to his heavenly Father all through his childhood, youth, and man- 
hood — from his earliest to his latest breath. St. Mark overleaps all the preceding 
period, and makes our Lord's entrance on ministerial life the starting-point of his 
Gospel. It is as though, impatient of delay, he hastened onward to the mighty issue, 
•nd acted on the well-known principle — 

" But to the grand event he speeds his course. 
And bears his readers with resistless force 
Into the midst of things." 

4. Praetical observations. (1) Long, laborious preparation is needed for the life-work, 
when that work is to be a noble one, and that life a real success. It was thus with 
Moses ; it was thus with Jesus ; it was so with Luther and other reformers ; it ha^ 
been so all down the centuries with the men who have blessed the world and benefited 
their race. (3) The example of our Lord dignifies honest industry and ennobles daily 
toil. (3) A spurious sentimentalisni, like the apocryphal Gospels, is apt to busy itself 
Eiore with the childhood and youth than with the manhood and ministry of the 
Saviour. 

II. The gospel. 1. Meaning of the term. The original word rendered " gospel," or 
" good news," meant in Homeric times a reward given to the bearer of good news, or » 
sacrifice offered on account of good news ; but in gospel days it signified the good news 
itself. 2. Its embodiment. This good news centres in a Saviour whose proper name is 
"Jesus" — indicating the nature of his work, "for he will save his people from their sins;" 
his ofBcial title is " Christ " — the Messiah, or Anointed One, promised to the fathers, and 
thus solemnly inaugurated in the high functions, prophetical, priestly, and kingly, 
which he was called to discharge ; while his designation of " Son of God" implies his two- 
fold qualification, namely, dignity of nature and possession of power for the accom- 
plishment of the great redemption, God's remedy for sin. The good news is inseparable 
from the person of the Savioui- — at once human and Divine, from the works he did, 
from the truths he taught, and from the sufferings he endured ; and thus it is embodied 
in him. 3. Its extent. Its range is most extensive, including salvation for the lost, 
life for the dead, grace for the guilty, pardon for the penitent, bread of life for the 
hungry, and living water for the thirsty soul. Good news 1 no wonder the evangelist is 
in a hurry to make known such good news. 4. Its essence. The essence of the 
gcTspel may be expressed in a few sentences; its sum and substance may be compressed 
into the compass of a few short statements of Scripture ; yea, the whole is contained in 
that single Scripture, " It is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Jesus 
Christ came into the world to save sinners ; " or in that other Scripture, " The blood of 
Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin ; " or in that third Scripture, " The gift 
of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord." 6. Its epithets. The epithets 
applied to it are instructive, as indicating some of its many features. It ia " the gospel 
of peace," for its contents proclaim " peace on earth and good will towards men," as well 
as " glory to God in the highest." It is called " the gospel of salvation," because it saves as 
well as sanctifies. It is styled "the glorious gospel," from its glorious influences — enlight- 
ening the understanding, purifying the heart, renewing the will, regenerating the soul, 
aanctifying the whole man — body, soul, and spirit ; while at the same time it elevates 
the mind to God and heaven and eternal things. It is " the everlasting gospel." for it is 



B2 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. MARK. ["H. 1. 1—45 

still the same, though change and alteration are the very essence of this world; il 
remains the same amid all the ups and downs of time ; and its blessed results ars 
durable as eternity itself. It is " the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of Gud," for he is the 
Alpha and Omega of it ; he is the Source from which all its benefits and blessings flow ; 
he is the Guide to the ways and means by which we become partakers of the same. 
Whether, therefore, we consider it as the gospel of God, or the gospel of his grace, or the 
gospel of peace, or the gospel of salvation, or the glorious gospel, or the everlasting 
gospel, or the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, it justifies its claim to be ihe 
"godspell,"or glad message, or good news, which the name implies. 6. Its effects. Good 
news, then, is the subject to which the evangelist, at the very outset, calls our attention. 
Good news I Oh, how the heart beats in the prospect of good news 1 How the pulse 
throbs in expectation of good news ! How many a heart beats wildly when the post- 
man's knock comes to the door 1 How many a bright eye becomes still brighter when 
the precious little letter, which brings good news from friends abroad or friends at 
home, is put into the hand ! Now, the best news that ever fell on the ear, or met the 
eye, or gladdened the heart, of mortal man, is this gospel of the Son of God. It has 
quickened many a dead soul ; it has gladdened many a sad heart ; it has filled many 
a drooping spirit with joy unspeakable ; it has led many a pilgrim of earth onward and 
upward to the glories of heaven. 

III. Union op the Old and New Testament ScBrpTUBES. In vers. 2, 3, the evan- 
rrelist binds together as in one volume, and unites with better than clasps of gold, the 
bid Testament and the New. He brings into closest connection the canon of the former 
with that of the latter. They are, indeed, the twin lips of one and the same Divine 
oracle. Accordingly, he bridges over the chasm of four hundred years between the last 
prophet of the Old Testament and the first prophet, or rather precursor of the Saviour, 
in the New. The ministry of John and the mission of the Saviour had beeu expressly 
foretold by the prophets Isaiah and Malachi — the prediction of the former was primary, 
that of the latter secondary and subordinate. Consequently, treating Malachi's as 
prefatory and introductory, announcing the messenger and his function, he fixes 
attention mainly on that of Isaiah, as containing the message itself, and the actual 
ministry with which the furerunner was charged. The name of Malachi is tb««fore 
omitted, for the correct reading, as given by the critical editors is, no doubt, "in 
Isaiah the prophet." 

IV. The voice the prophet heard. The prophet Isaiah, as we may picture 
his position, is looking away, with straining eyes, into the distant future of his people; 
he is listening, with outstretched neck and ears eagerly attentive, for any intimation of 
their redemption ; but in vain. No vision is granted, no promise vouchsafed. He does 
not, however, despair ; he keeps looking and listening and longing for something to 
strengthen his faith or encourage his hope. All is hushed around, and again he listens 
with bated breath ; but hark ! at length he hears a sound. It is a voice away in a 
distant desert land ; it is waking the echoes of the wilderness. " It is the voice of one 
crying." It is just a voice, and seemingly nothing more — not unlike that bird of which 
the poet writes — 

" Shall I call thee bird, 

Or but a wandering voice? . . . 
Thrice welcome, darling of the spring I 

Even yet tliou art to mo 
No bird ; but an invisible thing, 

A voice, a mystery." 

We matt not confound John with the voice, as those who translate the expression ol 
the prophet, " a voice crying ; " but understand the voice as his chief characteristic or 
main peculiarity, as in secular authors we read of the strength of Hercules, the virtuo 
of Scipio, the wisdom of Lselius, or as when Cicero in a disparaging sense afifinns that, 
on the removal of Catiline, he had nothing to fear from the drowsiness of Lentulns oi 
the corpulence of Cassius, or the mad rashness of Cethegus. 

V. DiBTRioT OF John's ministry. Kings, when setting out to visit the remote pro- 
vlncM of their kingdoms, were usually preceded by heralds to announce their approach 
and i^neers to prepare the way — removing obstacles, clearing away impedimenta, and 
so making rough places smooth; bridging streams, filling up valleys, levelling hill% 



UH. L 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 



and 80 causing a straight, direct road to take the place of a circuitous and devious 
route. Some preparation like this was made for Alexander the Great when he marched 
to the Indus, and more so still for Semiiamis in her progress through Media and Persia. 
Likewise in Vespasian's march to Galilee a detachment was appointed "to make the 
road even and straight, and, if it were anywhere rough and hard to be passed over, to 
plane it, and to cut down the woods that hindered their march." The necessity for 
such preparatory measures would be increased in a desert district without roads, or 
with roads so had as to be almost impassable. When Jehovah restored the Hebrew 
exiles from Babylon to their own land, the region through which they had to pass was 
dreary and desolate, and in some places pathless. To the preparation of a way through 
the difficulties of such a district for the returning Hebrew exiles, with the great kin^ 
at their head, the words of the prophet primarily referred. This, like other great events 
in the cycle of Jewish history, was, no doubt, typical of that moral waste in which the 
people were when Jehovah came again for their redemption in the person of Messiah. 
Very appropriately, therefore, did John choose for the scene of his ministry the wilder- 
ness of Judasa. This comprehended the eastern slope of the hills from Jerusalem and 
Hebron, down the Jordan valley to the western shore of the Dead Sea and the banks 
of Jordan — a wild region, in many places rough, rugged, and rocky, with sparse, if any, 
population, some spots of pasture-ground, and few or no trees. Here it was that the 
Baptist made his appearance {iy^yero) — " comes forth " (vapaylpeTai, St. Matthew). A 
difficult work awaits him in preparing Messiah's way : humble and contrite ones are to 
be elevated ; proud and lofty spirits to be brought low ; the crooked ways of crafty 
men to be made straight ; rough, untutored natures to be softened; and moral obstaclef 
of every kind to be removed, in order that, the way being thus prepared, the march of 
Priuce Messiah might be unhindered. 

VI. DiSTDiGuisHiNO BITE OF THK Baptist's MINI8TBT. 1. Prosdyte baptism. In 
connection with the ceremonial law of the Jews, there were " divers washings." Such 
baptisms or ablutions were practised by them from the earliest period of their polity. 
Originally appointed by Divine authority, they were incorporated as part and parcel of 
the national religion. Their design was an important one, for they were intended to 
serve as symbols of that purity which was required in all true worshippers of Jehovah. 
On the eve of the giving of the Law to Israel, and of that people's gracious admission 
into covenant with God, a great national assembly took place — the various Hebrew 
tribes spreading over the desert and round the base of Sinai, the Lord directed Moses, 
saying, "Go unto the people, and sanctify them to-day and to-morrow, and let them 
wash their clothes, and be ready against the third day : for the third day the Lord will 
come down in the sight of all the people upon Mount Sinai ; " while, in consequence 
of and in obedience to this direction, " Moses went down from the mount unto the 
people, and sanctified the people; and they washed their clothes." Further, when 
strangers from among the surrounding nations embraced the Jews' religion, they were 
washed as well as circumcised ; and that washing was called " baptizing unto Moses," or 
proselyte baptism. This rite, notwithstanding the assertion of some to the contrary, 
appears to have existed before our Saviour's time, and to be evidently implied in 
several passages of the New Testament. It was, moreover, a rite which sprang 
naturally out of the opinion commonly current among the Jews that all mankind were 
in an unclean condition, and so incapable of admission into the covenant of Israel, 
unless and until they were baptized or washed, in token of being purified from 
their state of moral uncleanness. 2. Position of John's baptism. But what, it ia 
necessary to inquire, was the position occupied by the baptism of John? What 
was its relation to other similar ablutions? In reply we answer that the baptism 
of John was neither proselyte baptism on the one hand, nor Christian baptism on the 
other. It was nut proselyte baptism, for that was administered only to proselytes, that 
is to say, converts to the Jewish faith, whereas John baptized Jews ; and thi» alone 
will account for the misgiving and alarm which the baptism of John caused to the 
Jewish authorities. Hence the question of the Pharisees, as recorded in John i. 25, 
" Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither that prophet?" 
The prophet referred to, it may be remarked in passing, was probably Jeremiah, whose 
revivescence as a forerunner of Messiah the Jews expected, believing, according to an 
old legend, that he would restore, or reveal the hiding-place of, the ark of the covenant 



M THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. MARK. [oh. i. 1—45 

the tabernacle, and the altar of incense, which he had hid in Fisgah, at wliAtever timt 
Gk)d should gather his people together. The Pharisees could have readily understood 
the baptism of Gentile proselytes into the Jewish faith, and such bnptism by John 
could have produced no uneasiness and caused no alarm. Instead of occasioning pain, 
it would have given them pleasure, as the admission of converts into the Jewish Church 
by such baptism would have contributed to their own epclesiastical importance, and 
tended to augment the numerical power of their party. But the disquieting circum- 
stance about it was that it was Jews whom John baptized ; and what were they 
to make of that? What were these zealots for Judaism to think of the adminis- 
tration to Jews of a rite which had only been administered to Gentile proselytes ; and 
the administration of which was either the formal introduction into a new faith or the 
first inauguration of a new dispensation ? It was this that aroused their fears and 
excited their apprehensions. They saw clearly that John's baptism was the dawn of a 
new dispensation — a dispensation destined, as they rightly suspected, to subvert in a 
certain sense, or at least supersede, the old. In their alarm they accordingly ask, " II 
thou art not that Christ himself, who, we are taught to believe, will inaugurate a new 
dispensation ; nor Elias, his forerunner ; nor that prophet, be it Jeremiah or some other 
of the old prophets who shall reappear on earth at Messiah's advent ; — why baptizest 
thou then, seeing it is not Gentile converts to Judaism, but Jews themselves, that are 
admitted to your baptism ?" John's baptism, then, was not proselyte baptism. Neither 
was it Christian baptism, as we learn from Acts xix. at the beginning, where certain 
disciples at Ephesus, who had been baptized into John's baptism, were rebaptized into 
the name of the Lord Jesus. ' ' Unto what then were ye baptized ? " asks Paul. ' ' And 
they said, Unto John's baptism. Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the 
baptism of repentance, sa.ying unto the people, that they should believe on him which 
should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus. When they heard this, they were 
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus." With this agrees the sentiment of an ancient 
Greek Father, the purport of which is that John's baptism was more than Jewish 
baptism, for it involved repentance as well as water baptism ; it was less than Christian, 
for it was not with the Spirit, as Christ's was. 

VII. Doctrine preached by the Baptist. The doctrine he preached was the 
doctrine of repentance for the remission of sins. He called their sins to mind, sum- 
moning them to confession and contrition ; while this proper sense of, and sorrow for, 
sin showed them their need of a Saviour and prepared them for his salvation. In 
token of repentance commenced and to be continued, and of the power of him whose reign 
was now beginning, to cleanse the truly penitent from all sin, he baptized them with 
water unto repentance. Thus, while John proclaimed the advent of the new dispen- 
sation, he prepared for it and prefaced it by a most appropriate and significant rit& 
On this Theophylact comments as follows : — " But whither did this preaching of repent- 
ance lead ? To the forgiveness of sins, that is, to the baptism of Chriat which had the 
forgivenes* of sins." 

VIII. Dress of thb Baptist. Everything was in perfect keeping with the strange 
surroundings of the Baptist His dress, his diet, and his discourse were all in har- 
mony with the desert where he ministered. His dress was neither gorgeous nor gay 
like that of a kjng's herald; it was of the coarsest and roughest kind. His garment 
was made of cloth of rudest texture, woven out of camel's hair ; he was girded not with 
the rick linen or highly ornamented girdle of the Oriental, but with a cincture ol 
untanned hide, like the prophets* raiment of early times ; just such as Elijah wore, and 
such as Zechariah speaks of when he refers to the rough garment as the proper pro- 
phetic costume, and as such assumed by false prophets in order to deceive. 

IX. DiST OF THE Baptist. His diet was as plain as his dress. His food waa 
not sumptuous, but of the simplest sort ; scarce sufficient to keep soul and body 
together — ^the honey of the wild bee, which he found in the fissure of the rock or clefts 
of trees, and the locusts of the wilderness. The honey was not that which exuded 
frwn trees, but the veritable product of wild bees ; nor were the locusts the sweet pod« 
of the locust tree, but the real locusts still used for food by the Bedouin of the desert. 
" H« also," says Thomson in ' The Land and the Book,' " dwelt in the desert where 
such food was and is still used ; and therefore the text states the simple truth. His 
•rdinary 'meat' was dried locusts — probably fried in butter and mixed with honey, as 



CH. L 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 6S 

is still frequently done. The honey, too, was the article made by bees. . . . Wild 
lioney is still gathered in large quantities from trees in the wilderness, and from rocka 
in the wadies, just where the Baptist sojourned, and where he came preaching tha 
doctrine of repentance." 

X. DisoouKSB OF THE BAPTIST TO THIS COMINO CROWDS. 1. Audieuce addressed. 
The persons who went out to John's ministry are described by St. Luke as crowds 
cr multitudes (Dx^oOt ^^^ they are distinguished by Sf. Matthew as comprehending 
two component parts, or two contending sects, namely, Pharisees and Sadducees, that 
together made up the main body of the nation. To the Gentiles, for whom St. Luke 
wrote, the distinction would have little meaning and no interest; to the Hebrew 
Christians, for whom St. Matthew wrote, it would convey the fact that the crowds that 
flocked to the Baptist's ministry were made up of the two religious sects of Judaism 
promiscuously. In his audience were Judaeans and Jerusalemites — people from the 
country and the capital ; and dwellers in all the region round about the Jordan 
(Treplxmpos), Samaritans, Galileans, Ferseans, and Gaulonites. 2. His discourse denunci- 
atory. His discourse breathed the spirit of a reformer and evinced the power of a 
reformer. He denounced most scathingly the ritualistic Pharisee and the rationalistic 
Sadducee — traditioiiist and scripturist alike ; high and low, rich and poor. He spiirtd 
the shortcomings of no class, the iniquities of no rank, and the sins of no individual. 
The plea of ancient privilege and of pious ancestors he treated with scorn, telling such 
as resorted to those refuges that God could, and would if necessary, raise up children 
to Abraham out of the stones that lay scattered through the valley, or the shingle that 
strewed the strand of the Jordan, or those huge boulders — those memorial stones which 
Joshua had set up near the bank of that historic river. This expression, by the way, 
though apparently harsh, may allude to Isa. li. 1, 3, "Look unto the rock whence 
ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye are digged. Look unto Abraham 
your father, and unto Sarah that bare you." 3. Sis discourse menacing. He threat- 
ened the vengeance of heaven on all who refused to repent and return to God. The 
woodman's axe was already brandished to fell the trees that continued barren. The 
axe was brought into unpleasant proximity to such trees — not to the branches merely, 
but was laid to the very root ; in fact, lies at it (Keirai). The fatal blow was ready to 
be struck at any moment. In view of anger so imminent, he urges all to flee from the 
wrath to come — to repent, and not only profess, but prove, their repentance real by 
fruits answerable to such profession ; " If tlien (olv) you are as anxious as you seem to 
•;scape that storm of future wrath, bring forth fruit suitable to genuine penitence." 
4. His discourse effective. The various classes that had resorted to his ministry were 
roused to a sense of danger. The terror of the alarmed multitudes took shape in the 
question, " What, then, shall we do ? " Just as on the day of Pentecost, the men of 
Israel, pricked to the heart, addressed themselves to Peter and the rest of the apostles, 
asking, " Men and brethren, what sliall we do?" And just as the Philippian jailor, in 
his wild alarm, trembling and falling down before Paul and Silas, cried out, " Sirs, 
what must I do to be saved ? " 5. Directions to different classes. The reply in this 
case inculcated a lesson of charity and sympathy — the person who had two tunics or 
under garments (xiT&i/es), besides his outer garment (J/tdTior), was to impart to the poor 
starveling who had not even one. So with food of all forms and every kind (Pp^imra), 
as well as raiment. Such were the directions addressed to the multitudes (ix^") > 
while the difference between these directions and those addressed to the two following 
classes deserves notice. To the former (the multitudes) he said, " Do good ; " to the 
latter (publicans and soldiers) he said, "Abstain from evil;" to the one the direction 
is positive, to the other negative. To the former he said, " Learn to do well ; " and to 
the latter, " Cease to do evil." The publicans again, who were looked on as trading 
on their country's degradation, he forbade to continue their unjust exactions and 
dishonest dealings ; while the soldiers on their march (a-TpaTfv6iievot), whether those of 
Antipas marching against his father-in-law Aretas, or otherwise, he commanded, in 
reply to their numerous and earnest inquiries (JmiediTav imperf.), to forbear extortions 
either by threats or false accusations — neither to concuss the poor by the former, nor 
force money out of the pockets of the rich by the latter : also to be content with their 

ages (i^myioa; literally, boiled fish, rations, soldier^ P^V)- 

XI. PoRiiAii ANNOUNCBMBKT OF MESSIAH. By this time the crowds assembled 



S6 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. i. 1—45. 

round the Baptist were on the tiptoe of expectation. At this period expectations of 
some great deliverer were rife hotb in Gentile lands and among Jewish people. It is 
not strange, then, that the multitudes who had listened to the instructions of the Baptist 
reasoned within themselves whether haply John himself were the Christ. He had 
already, it may be presumed, given a definite answer to the priests and Levites deputed 
by the Sanhedrin to ascertain his claims. But now he feels called on to make a more 
public announcement. 1. Transition. All along he never once lost sight of his office 
as harbinger or herald {Kiipiaaav) calling attention to the coming One. Yet gradually 
the office of herald was merging in that of the evangelist; hence the employment of 
tiiiryE^'fe'ro in the parallel passage of Luke, at the eigliteenth verse. Ever more and 
more John seeks to turn attention from himself to Jesus, to whom he acknowledges 
himself as inferior in rank as in office. The meanest slave that brought his master's 
sandals, or stooped down in lowliness to undo the latchet that bound them, stood to the 
mightiest earthly master in a higher relation than John to Jesus ; while the work of 
the latter was proportionately superior. 2. Huperiority. The one administered the 
symbol, the other the thing signified ; the one baptized with water, the other with the 
Spirit; the one was a hght as of a lamp (M^x^O kindled by, and reflecting, a borrowed 
light, the other was that central source of light ("("Ss) ; the one was the morning star, 
soon to wane, and wishing to wane, before the other, who was the sun hinmelf going 
forth in his strength, 

" Where is the love the Baptist taught, 
The soul unswerving and the fearless tongue f 

The much-enduring wisdom, sought 
By lonely prayer the haunted rooks among ? 
Who counts it gain 
His light should wane, 
8o the whole world to Jesus throng!" 

J. J. G. 

Vers, 9 — 11. Parallel passages : Matt. iii. 13 — 17 ; Luke iii. 21 — 23. The baptism 
of our Lord. 1. Difficulty. There is something singular, to say the least, in the 
baptism of our Lord. In that solemn inauguration of the Saviour, as he entered on 
his public ministry, a difficulty is encountered. That difficulty respects the significance 
of the rite in relation to the spotless Son of God. Water, when applied to the person 
or used in the way of ablution, is employed as an element of cleansing. But the idea 
of cleansing necessarily carries along with it the notion of defilement. The thought of 
pollution, from whatever source derived, or in whatever way contracted, or in whatever 
it may consist, is inseparably connected with it. Cleansing has as its natural and 
necessary correlative uncleanness either expressed or implied. 

II. Inapplicable to our Lord. Yet the Saviour was not only holy, harmless, and 
undefiled in life ; but at his birth and in the very nature of his humanity, he was free 
from every taint and unsullied by the least stain of sin, as it is written, " Therefore 
also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God," or 
more literally, " Therefore also that which is born of thee, being holy, shall be called the 
Son of God." It is probable that the Baptist felt at once the awkwardness of his own 
position, and the incongruity of administering to One so perfectly pure and undefiled a 
rite which, as the symbol of cleansing, implied a previous condition or natural state of 
impurity and defilement. 

III. The Baptist's eeluctanoe. la view of the circumstance just mentioned, as 
well as of the overwhelming superiority of the Divine applicant, John expressed such 
extreme lothness to administer the rile. Nay more, that reluctance took the form of 
a somewhat firm refusal : " But John," we read, " forbad him, saying, I have need to be 
baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?" The imperfect 5ieK<$AuEi> may imply the 
eommencement, that is, began to prevent, or be used de conatu of tte endeavour to 
prevent, while the prepositional element imports activity and earnestness in the effort. 
It was only after a remonstrance on the part of the Saviour, and after he had pointed 
out to John the propriety of the course, that the Baptist yielded. The reason alleged 
by our Lord, while it was sufficient to overcome the scruples of the Baptist, is service- 
able to us in inquiring into the nature oi &e ordinaiiice then administsred. True, that 



CH. 1. 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 67 



reason is expressed in somewhat general terms, as follows : — " Thus it becometh ua 
to fulfil all righteousness ; " but wherein this righteousness consisted, and how it was 
fulfilled, we proceed briefiy to investigate. 

IV. Pbiesthood op Christ. It will be borne in mind that our Lord, though a 
priest after the order of Melchisedec, and superior to that of Aaron, was nevertheless 
the great Antitype of the Aaronic priesthood. The priest of the Aaronio order was 
typical of the great High Priest of our profession. The rites of consecration in the ont 
case may, therefore, be regarded as helpful in elucidating the mode of inauguration in 
the other, 

V. Cbkemonial or consecration. At the ceremonial of consecrating the A»ronic 
priest, there was (1) anointing with oil, and (2) washing with water. The oil was 
emblematical of the Spirit, the water of separation from all that would unfit for the 
•ervice of the Holy One; the anointing with oil signified the bestowal of the needful 
endowments, the washing with water the impartation of the necessary moral qualities ; 
the one has reference to the gifts, the other to the graces, required for the proper and 
efBcient discharge of the priestly functions. It was thus with the type, while, in the 
case of the Antitype, the figure was realized in the fact ; the sign gave place to the thing 
signified. In other words, the unction of the Spirit took the place of the anointing witi 
oil ; the washing with water, which in reference to the ]>vitical priest denoted tbi 
necessity for purity in the service of God, and entire separation from anything that 
would defile, implied, in relation to the Redeemer, the actual possession of that purity 
in its highest perfection, and of that separation from all possibility of defiling or con- 
taminating infiuence. 

VI. Refebence to priestlt chaeacteb. 1. Accordingly, the baptism of our Lord 
had respect to the priestly character he sustained, not to any human imperfection 
that required to be repented of, or impurity that needed to be removed ; so that the 
righteousness which it behoved to fulfil was conformity to the rite of priestly conse- 
cration ; while the type merged in the antitype, and the figure gave place to fact. He 
was now about thirty years of age (the Levitical period) when he began (apxiiueros') 
h's ministry. 2. Another explanation solves the difiSculty by giving prominence to 
the representative character of Christ. He came as the representative of a pec pie 
guilty in God's sight, and morally unclean; and as he afterwards bore their sins in 
his own body on the tree in order to expiate their guilt, so now he was baptized 
vicariously because of their uncleanness, in token of his purpose to purge away their 
filth. " He was baptized," not as though in need of it himself, but on behalf of the 
human race ; and such is the opinion of Justin Martyr. He was made in the like- 
ness of sinful flesh — made sin for us, and so numbered with and treated as a trans- 
gressor. 3. Other explanations of the matter, still less probable, have been given, as 
for example (1) that it was the perfection and proof of humility ; and (2) that it was 
for the purpose of being made manifest to the people, and that in presence of so great 
a concourse the Baptist might bear testimony to his Messiahship ; which appears to be 
the view of Theophylact. 

VII. The peesencb op the Trinity. At the baptism of our Lord the three 
Persons of the blessed Trinity were present or represented. The voice of the eternal 
Father came ringing down out of the cleaving heavens as they were rending asunder ; 
the Holy Spirit in dove-like form descended ; the beloved Son was the subject of the 
former, and the recipient of the latter. Thus Father, Son, and Holy Spirit inaugurated 
ilie Christian dispensation at its commencement ; Father, Son, and Holy Spirit impart 
the grace and bestow the blessings of this dispensation during its continuance ; while 
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit shall share the glory at its close. And so in the beautiful 
wordi of the Te Deum — 

"The holy Church throughout all the world doth aoknowledge thee ; 
The Father of an infinite majesty ; 
Thine honourable, true, and only Son ; 
Also the Holy Ghost, the Comforter." 

VIIL Theebfold testimony. Thrics during our Lord's public ministry • to1c» 
from heaven testified to his Messiahship- once at his baptism as just noticed ; once on 
(.he Mount of Transfiguration ; and once during Passion week, in tbe courts of th^ 



58 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, [ch. i. 1—46 



temple, as we read in the Gospel of St. John, xiL 28, " Father, glorify thy nama. Then 
came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again." 

IX. Triple record. Again this acknowledgment of the Father puts honour on the 
Divine Woril, for, from the three leading divisions of it — the Law, the Prophets, and 
the Psalms — that acknowledgment is taken. The words, " Thou art my Son," are taken 
from the second Psalm ; from Genesis, the first book of the Law, xxiL 28, we have the 
expression, " My beloved Son ; " while in the Prophets, namely, Isa. xliL 1, we find the 
remaining clause, " In whom I am well pleased." 

X. CuAKOE IN THE Baptist's pREACHiNO. The Galilean valley and the Jndasan 
desert were far separate. Though closely allied by kinship, and more closely still by 
oneness of spirit, John and Jesus had grown up apart ; their first actual contact was at 
the baptism of the latter. Personal acquaintance there had been none ; or if there had, 
it did not contribute to the Baptist's recognition of his Messiah. Either by a conver- 
sation of which we have no record, or by direct revelation immediately before the 
baptism, the important fact was made known to the Baptist. Be this as it may, one 
very remarkable effect resulted from, it. The style, and indeed the subject, of the 
Baptist underwent an entire change. Previously his manner had been denunciatory ; 
subsequently it became conciliatory. Before he had borrowed his imagery from the 
harsh features of the surrounding desert — the rude rocks, the poisonous vipers, the 
barren tree ; or from the rough ways and works of agrioulttiral life, such as may have 
existed on the verge of the wilderness — the threshing-floor, the winnowing implement, 
and the worthless chaff. But now he tempers and softens his mode of speech with 
figures from the sanctuary and its service — the lamb slain, the sin sacrifice, and the 
expiation. We hear no more of viperous broods — vipers themselves and sprung from 
vipers; no more of fruitless trees, fit only for the fire; no more of atones taking 
the place of sons, that is, of ahanim becoming hanim ; no more of the sifting and 
separating process by which the good grain would be garnered and the worthless 
residue gathered into heaps for burning. On the other hand, we read of the Lamb 
as the Sin-bearer, and salvation as the blessedness secured ; in other words, we 
have the blessed truth first uttered by the Baptist's lips, " Behold, the Lamb of 
God, which taketh away the sin of the world ! " The legal has given place to the 
evangelical. The first phase — equally needful and equally useful, it is true — of the 
Baptist's preaching is exhibited by the synoptists; the second — softer, sweeter, and 
.superior in tone and tendency — by the penman of the fourth Gospel, the evangelist and 
beloved apostle John. 

XI. The Baptist's function threefold. The commission of the Baptist embraced 
three functions : 1. Herald-like, he was to prepare the way for the coming King by 
calling men to repentance. 2. He administered, on their full confession (i(ono\oyaiiiei/oi 
equivalent to making a' clean breast of it), the rite which served as a pledge that their 
conviction of sin was real and their service sincere — that, in fact, they wished to act in 
conformity with such a direction as that of the prophet, " Wash you, make you clean, put 
away the evil of your doings from before my eyes." In all this, however, they might 
merely have an eye to the penal consequences of sin, and to that sweeping storm of coming 
wrath to which sin exposed them ; and thus proceed no further than legal repentance. 
3. But a yet higher office was to announce the kingdom of heaven as come down on 
earth, and point to the advent of its King ; in other words, to direct the eye of faith to 
Messiah as the great Sin-sacrifice and the only Saviour. Repentance alone, especially 
of the legal kind referred to, could not merit the remission of sins ; neither could 
baptism, nor yet the combination of both together : the real meritorious cause was the 
atoning sacrifice of the Son of God— the Lamb slain ; while faith, that faith from which 
true evangelical repentance is never separate, was the link of union between the toul of 
the penitent and his Saviour. Thus John virtually preached faith as well as repent- 
ance; for his repentance-baptism derived its whole meaning and validity from 
faith in Christ. Evangelical repentance commences with Christ, the cross. Calvary, 
and is " the tear in the eye of faith " directed thereto, for, looking to him whom wf 
have pierced, we mourn. Of this we have tolerably plain proof in the words of St. 
Paul (Acts xix. 4), " Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of repent- 
ance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him which should come afte, 
him, that is, in Christ Jesus." — J. J. Q. 



OH. 1. 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. SI 

Vers. 12, 13. Parallel passages : Matt. iv. 1 — 11 ; Luke iv. 1 — 13. — The temptation, 
I. The reality op the temptation. The above passage of St. Mark, and tha 
parallel passages of the other Gospels, contain the record of one of the most remarkable 
transactions in the Word of God. It records the temptation of the Son of God. It 
describes not a fiction but a fact — not a phantom scene, such as a poet's fancy delights 
to paint, nor a daydream that merely passed through the imagination of the Saviour, 
but a literal and historical reality. The whole is a narrative of a mysterious yet 
actual event. It is Satan, personally, that acts the part of the tempter ; it is the 
Saviour, personally, who is tempted; it is the Word of God that is the armoury 
furnishing the celestial weapons by which the temptation is resisted and the tempter 
foiled. 

II. The fact of the temptation and its important bkaeings. 1. l'ro(^ o/ 
iU reality. That the event here recorded was an actual fact, a real transaction, is 
proved by the different expressions employed by the evangelists. Thus, St. Luke says 
he " was led by the Spirit ; " St. Matthew, that he " was lea up of the Spirit ; " and St. 
Mark, that " the Spirit driveth him into the wilderness." Similarly Ezekiel, among 
the captives on the banks of the Chebar, says of himself, " The Spirit lifted me up, and 
took me away;" so Philip was caught away by the Spirit of the Lord; so also John 
was " in the Spirit on the Lord's day." 2. The Saviour's first conflict. The temptation 
was our Lord's first conflict with that enemy whom he came to contend with and to 
conquer. It was at the same time the last part of his preparation for his work and 
warfare. It made him aware of the dangerous devices of the adversary ; of the 
mistakes that would certainly mar, and of the mismanagement which might possibly 
make his undertaking miscarry. His person, his work, his deportmeut, were all 
concerned. In his person identified with the human as well as the Divine, he was 
debarred from using the resources of the latter to raise him above the common wants 
and sinless weaknesses of the former ; and in remembrance thereof he says, " Man 
shall not live by bread alone." Self-abnegation, not self-gratification, was the law of his 
life. In his work he behoved to stand aloof from the ways of the world, eschewing the 
plans and plots, and all those many means of questionable character, by which men have 
struggled for dominion and grasped at glory. The spirit of his work was non-coa- 
formity to this world ; the nature of his kingdom was spiritual, not of this world ; the 
way to reach it was self-sacrifice ; the crown was to be gained, but only by the cross. 
In his deportment there was to be no ostentatious display of close kinship with the 
eternal Father, no proud presuming on that high relationship, no capricious exercise 
of Divine power. In due time he would be " declared " the Son of God with power. 
Accordingly he repels this assault with the strong language of intense abhorrence, if not 
indignation, sayinj;, " Thou shalt not tempt out and out (l/orefptJo-eis) [to an extreme 
altogether intolerable] the Lord thy God." 3. The weapon he wielded. Once and 
again, moreover, the lesson of his childhood — the section of the Jewish Law that was 
written on the frontlet and thus familiar to every Hebrew youth — he called to his 
timely aid, and held up to the tempter as the old standing Scripture (yeypmrTcu, equivalent 
to " it stands written "), the ever-abiding truth never to be departed from. 4. The key 
to the narrative. The key to the entire narrative is contained in the words of the Epistle 
to the Hebrews, iv. 15, " We have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the 
feeling of our infirmities ; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without 
!>in ; " and again in the same Epistle, iL 18, " For in that he himself hath suffered 
being tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted." Prom these Scriptures 
we learn that the design of Christ's mission to mankind was twofold ; it was not only 
to make an expiation for our sins by his death, but to be a perfect example for our 
imitation in his life. He was tempted, therefore, in order that he might be an example 
to us when called to encounter temptation. He was tempted, moreover, in order that 
he might be able to sympathize with and succour us when tried and tempted ; as th* 
poet ^ beautifully as well as truly said of him — 

" Touched with a sympathy within. 
He knows our feeble frame ; 
He knows what sore temptations mean. 
For he has felt the same. 



60 HE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. i. 1— «l 

ThPT) let our humble faith addrew 

Hid meroy and his power, 
We bhall obtain delivering grace 

In every trying hour. " 

5. Fm-ewarnei. In the conflict of the Saviour with Satan, as narrated in the Gospels, 
we have the prototype of, and precedent for, the perfect believer, showing us what 
manner of adversary we have to contend with, how he fights, how he is resisted, how 
he is overcome ; showing lis also the arena on which we have to maintain the struggle, 
what weapons we must wield, how certain our victory will be when we use those 
weapons aright, as well as the true source of conquest and of triumph, on which we are 
to depend. Now, there is much truth in the old proverb, " Forewarned is forearmed ; " 
and if this be true of coniiicts where carnal weapons are employed, it is also true of that 
spiritual conflict which every Christian has to carry on with the great enemy of God 
and of goodness — of the soul and of salvation. Accordingly, the passage under con- 
sideration warns us of the adversary and of his devices, that we may not be ignorant of 
them; of the boldness of his assaults and the mode of his attacks ; of what he did in a 
green tree ; and of how much more powerful the fire of his temptation may be expected 
to be in a dry ; of his repeated attacks on him of whom we read, " The prince of this 
world Cometh, and hath nothing in me." How much more severe and repeated attacks 
of this great adversary may be expected by us, in whom a wicked heart within and a 
wicked world without combine to render temptation successful I For who among us 
has not felt the truth of the sentiment— 

" A wicked heart anrl wicked world, 
With Satan are combined ; 
Eacli acts a too successful part 
111 harassing my mind " ? 

6. Forearmed. Further, the lesson of the passage arms us with weapons of resistance 
and defence, which, if used duly, diligently, and dutifully, will enable us to resist the 
devil and force him to flee from us. It implies, moreover, the important duty incum- 
bent on every Christian to guard against all appearance of evil, to check the first risings 
of evil in the heart, to resist the first suggestions of the evil one, to watch and pray, and 
apply God's Word, that we may not enter into temptation. And all this the more, that 
Satan's onsets are so daring and his designs so murderous ; his arguments so specious 
and his schemes of ruin so subtle ; his plan being our enslavement to himself and sin, 
while his purpose is to pay us the hard-earned wages of transgression. " What fruit 
had ye then," asks the apostle, " in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? for the 
end of those things is death." 

III. The forms of the temptation in general. 1. Striking similarity. There is 
a remarkable and instructive similarity between the temptation of the first and that of 
the second Adam ; and also a vast dissimilarity. The similarity consists in the means and 
manner of the temptation ; but a world-wide difference is presented in the result. There 
are three powerful principles of human nature, of which Satan takes advantage, and to 
which he adapts his temptations. These principles are " the lust of the flesh, the lust of 
the eyes, and the pride of life " spoken of in Scripture. These have been called this 
world's Trinity. By means of these Satan tempted the first Adam, and succeeded ; by 
the same means he attempted to ensnare the second Adam and failed. In tempting' the 
first Adam he plied him with the lust of the flesh ; for the tree of knowledge of good 
and evil, of which God had forbidden man to eat, was good for food, and so fitted to 
gratify the lust of the fiesh and lead to the indulgence of carnal appetite. He tried him 
by the lust of the eyes ; for the forbidden tree was pleasant to the eyes, and so adapted 
to gratify their lust and produce covetousness. He tried him by the pride of life; for 
it was a tree to be desired to make one wise— to make man as 0-od, knowing good* and 
evil, and so suited to the pride of life, prompting and fostering pride of heart. In all 
this Satan succeeded. He knew the baits to lay, and when and how to lay them. 
Besides, the first Adam was of the earth, earthy, and we, alas ! have all borne his imat^e ' 
for " as by one man sin entered into the worid, and death by sin, so death has passed 
upon all men for that all have sinned." Now, as Satan had been so successful with the 
first Adam, it is not to be wondered at that he should try the same mode of proceduro 



8H. 1. 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MAEK. 61 

in framing his temptation for the second Adam. Accordingly, he tries him first by th« 
lust of the flesh, tempting him to change stones into bread, and so moving him to th« 
indulgence of appetite. Next he tries him by the pride of life, tempting him to throw 
himself down from the temple's pinnacle, and so, in sight of the inhabitants of the holy 
city, to prove his deity and show forth his glory, employing the upbearing protection of 
glorious angelic hosts. Thus Satan does his best to move the Saviour to the sin oi pride. 
Once more he tries him by the lust of the eyes, exhibiting to his vision a panoramic 
view of all the kingdoms of the world, or showing them to him stretched out before his 
eyes in widespread perspective. He offers him all these and all their glory, and so he 
endeavours to move him to covetousness. We have here followed the order in which the 
temptations occur in St. Matthew's narrative. 2. Dissimilarity of sequel. All Satan's 
temptations were in vain as regarded our Lord. The first Adam fell in Eden, a garden 
the fairest and loveliest ever planted on earth ; the second Adam overcame triumphantly 
on the bleak and dreary wild. A paradise of earthly glory was lost by the first ; the 
paradise of Gbd was secured for us by the second. 3. Special adaptations. But not 
only did these temptations of our Lord correspond to the three forms of temptatiun 
which brought death into our world and all our woe ; they correspond to the three 
portions of man's composite nature, that is to say, body, soul, and spirit. The bodv 
needs bread to satisfy its natural cravings, and the temptation is to procure it inde 
pendently of Providence. The soul is also appetitive, though in a different direction, 
and in its outlook contemplates a wide sweep and vast dominion ; the temptation is to 
secure all this at a single bound, overleaping the wearisome way of suffering and self- 
sacrifice. The middle place between the purely carnal and the purely spiritual is this 
visual illusion. The spirit rules in man over body and soul, and so liability to pride 
opens the way to temptation ; and here the temptation is to put to the test his eternal 
Sonship, and to prove by one splendid miracle the truth of his Messianic claims. Thus the 
appeal was to appetite, to avarice or aggrandizement, and to ambition ; in other words, 
to poverty, power, and pride ; — following, as we do here, the order of St. Luke's Gospel. 
4. Reason of this difference of arrangement. But why is this difference of arrangement 
between St. Luke and St. Matthew, the former reversing the relative position of the 
second and the third temptations as recorded by the latter ? Why change the order ? 
Mill's solution is, perhaps, the right one ; at all events, it is very plausible and very 
probable. It is to the effect that while the flesh is the first avenue of assault in all 
men, the tempter varies his tactics in the case of the other two, and in accordance with 
the difference of temperament, leading some by the way of pride to ambition, but others, 
in reverse order, along the road of ambition to pride. 

IV. The features that distinguish each temptation in paetiottlab. 1. Indi- 
vidual traits of the first temptation. The exact gist of the first temptation is, "If thou 
art the Son of God, exercise thy lordship ; if the Son of God, prove thy possession of 
that power ; if the Son of God, what profit is there in this Sonship? What good will 
this birthright do you ? " Now, a compliance with the suggestions of the tempter would 
have been practical denial of that very Sonship and virtual distrust of the Divine Father- 
hood. While we do not and cannot dispense with bread, we must depend on God 
as Israel of old waited for the word that brought them food. This is in strict accord 
with the training of the Saviour's childhood as shadowed forth in that portion of 
Deuteronomy, namely, vi. 4 — 9, that formed the frontlet already mentioned, and in 
entire harmony with his own teaching in the sermon on the mount, where he says, 
" For your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things." The evil 
one — at once Satan the adversary, and Diabolos the accuser — now puts forth all his 
power. The temptation had doubtless continued all those forty days of fasting 
(Teipa^ti/iEvai, present participle implying such continuance), but now it culminated. 
(1) The scene suitable for Satan's purpose. The scene of this first temptation is placed 
by some at Quarantana, but by others it is transferred to Sinai. The former is much 
the more probable. And so the scene was a district of country that lay eastward of 
Jerusalem, overlooking the valley of the Jordan, and not far from the place where Jesus 
had been baptized by John in the waters of that river. It was very wild and very 
dreary and very desolate. This much might be inferred from the name of " wilderness " 
by which it was designated, but especially from the additional circumstance supplied 
by St. Mark, that he was there " with the wild beasts," which laired, no doubt, in ths 



62 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO BT. MARK. [cH, 1. 1—46 

thick brushwood along the banks, or among the oaves of the neighbouring hills. la 
addition, therefore, to the natural horrors of the place, were those wild beasts with 
hungry jaws and glaring eyes and frightful cries, just waiting to seize him as their prey. 
Few, if any, human feet had trod this particular portion of that wild ; no human 
habitation stood there; no village, or town, or city was to be found in its immediate 
vicinage. Consequently no supply of the necessaries of life was obtainable there ; no food, 
no refreshment of any kind, was to be had there. Take in connection with all thii 
that our Lord had fasted forty days and forty nights, and we must admit that such a 
place and such a time and such circumstances were the best possible for the success of 
such a temptation as that with which Satan first plied the Saviour. (2) Possibilitiet, No 
doubt it was easy for him who was " declared the Son of God " with power, who could 
multiply a few loaves and fishes into food for multitudes, who could transform the water- 
pots of Cana into vessels of wine, to turn the loaf-like stones of the wilderness into actual 
loaves (fipTii) of wholesome bread. Further, it was but natxvral for him to do so when he 
was suffering such severe privation, when pained with the pangs of want, when distressed 
by hunger,which, as the old saying has it, " will break through stone walls." Moreover, was 
it not right to do this when no other way of relief appeared accessible, and when ordinary 
means of sustenance were out of reach ? Not so, however. (3) Things ever so plausible 
not therefore proper. A thing may be ever so plausible in the eyes of man, and yet not 
proper in the sight of God. Notwithstanding all the plausibility of Satan's suggestion, 
had the Saviour yielded he would have been forestalling the providence of God ; shown 
distrust in the provisions of that providence ; renounced the exercise of patience ; doubted 
the resources of that heavenly Father who had commissioned the voracious raven to 
bring flesh to his prophet, who long before had supplied his people's wants without their 
sowing or reaping, and that in a wilderness and for forty years, raining down bread 
from heaven every morning throughout that period round the camp of Israel. Still 
more, he would have been renouncing that abnegation of self — that poverty, humility, 
suffering, and sorrow, which were all, and more, included in the conditions of the cove- 
nant. He would have put aside the bitter cup of suffering without raising it to his lipg, 
much less draining it to the dregs. He would have faltered at the first step, and bo 
defeated the whole undertaking. Interests of greatest moment were at stake : the life 
or death of millions was in the balance ; the weal or woe of countless human beings was 
depending on the decision of that moment ; souls immortal were to be saved or sacrificed 
by the action of that hour. (4) The Saviour victorious. Angels, we doubt not, looked 
to see the issue, perhaps in terrible suspense ; but it lasted not an instant. The conflict 
in this case is scarcely commenced, wlien the Son of God comes off the conqueror ahd 
Satan is repelled. The sword of the Spirit was the instrument of victory. The tempter 
is reminded that man is not dependent on bread alone ; there are many other things 
called into existence by God for human food, and everything so appointed, be it root, 
or fruit, or berry, or tuber, or plant, or acorn, will, by the Divine blessing, serve the 
end. Besides, while the body is still craving and saying, " Give, give," there is another 
p«rt of man, which must be supplied with spiritual nourishment, and which it is death 
to neglect. The soul lacks spiritual food. It feeds on the hidden and heavenly manna. 
(5) Practical use of this first temptation, (o) To see the subtlety of Satan's inares. We 
may now look at the practical bearing of this first temptation expressed in the words, 
" Speak a word of power in order that these stones may become bread or loaves — speak 
them by a word of power into bread ; " though Xya with the subjunctive is not for 
the infinitive after tM in the sense of command, but as Stolz translates, " Sprich ein 
Machtwort damit diese Steine Brod werden." If we reflect on the antecedents and the 
accompaniments of this temptation, we cannot conceive of anything more specious. The 
time was that moment when he began to be an hungered ; when the sinless cravings of 
appetite began to be felt ; when, in instructive parallelism with Moses at the promulgation 
of the Law from Sinai, and with Klias at its restoration on Carmel, the Saviour at the 
fulfilment of the Law and the introduction of the gospel fasted forty days and forty 
nights. By entering In this manner on the activities of his great mediatorial work, he 
teaches us, by the way, the importance of retiring for fasting, meditation, and prayer 
before commencing any very important duty in the service of God. The time was thus 
well chosen; for when the Saviour, being subject to all the sinless infirmities of 
humanity, began to feel the gnawings of hunger, just then Satan, who is as vigilant as 



m. V 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 63 



he is malignant and murderous, took advantage of the moment at which appetite, after 
being so long whetted, had become keenest, and urged the change of stones into bread 
to meet tha wants of nature. But the place as well as the time appeared to second the 
speciousness and seeming propriety of this suggestion. It was just such a place as that 
of which the Psalmist says, " They -wBudered in a wilderness in a solitary way . , 
Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them." Nothing eatable could be obtained ; 
no esculent of any kind was to be met with. The circumstances also added to the 
speciousness of Satan's suggestion, and seemed to render the working of a miracle as proper 
as it was plausible. The Saviour had been declared and openly acknowledged as the 
Son of God, He is alone in a desert, hungry, without any possibility of supply, and 
yet " the Son of GJod with power." In such a case it was natural enough and reasonable 
enough to all human seeming for Satan to say, " If you really possess the power, why not 
exert it at a time when it is so much needed, and in a place where it is so indispensable, 
no suitable supply being otherwise procurable ? If the Son of God, and in want, why 
not utter a creative word and relieve that want ? If invested with sufficient ability, 
why not speak an omnifio word and display that ability ? If capable, why not work a 
miracle when it is so necessary, and when there can be nothing wrong in the act ; for to 
turn stones into loaves of bread is in itself no more amiss than to turn water into wine ? " 
Thus tempted Satan. Thus by plausible and powerful reasonings he backed his temp- 
tations. (6) To shun those snares is the next practical use to be made of this temptation. 
However specious and subtle, it is our interest as well as our duty to shun them ; and 
the more specious and subtle they are, the more needful it is to be on our guard against 
them. Oh, how subtle the tempter is 1 He takes advantage of our circumstances, he 
takes occasion from our wants, he adapts his assaults to our weaknesses. The poor and 
needy he tempts to discontent, sometimes even to dishonesty. Are you poor? Then, 
says Satan, scruple not to supply the necessities of nature. Are you unable to rise in the 
world by fair means ? Then use foul. Are you in low circumstances ? Then try the 
tricks of trade. Are you necessitous ? Then employ dishonesty in your dealings, or 
resort to fraud in some shape, or even have recourse to force. Are you given to appe- 
tite ? Then Satan will tempt to excess in food, or drink, or both. " Use the world," says 
God. " Abuse it," says Satan. " Be temperate in all things," says God. " Never mind," 
says Satan, " live while live you can, ' eat, drink, and be merry, for to-morrow you die.' " 
His temptations too, as we have seen, are most plausible. He often seems to be urging 
us to what is good and proper, or even to what tends to promote the glory and honour 
of God. But the more plausible a temptation is, and the more appearance of good there 
is in it, the more dangerous generally it is, and the more destructive it may prove. In 
the temptation we are considering, had the Son of God yielded, and by miracle turned 
stones into bread, however justifiable the act at first sight appears, besides betraying 
distrust in Providence and disregard of the Divine will, he would have failed in the 
exercise of submission, and so in setting an example to his followers. God will have his 
children, when they are in want, to wait on him and wait for him ; Satan tempts them 
to do neither. God assures his people that he is merciful and gracious — that he knows 
OUT &ame, and will supply our wants in his own good time and way ; Satan tempts to 
hard thoughts of God, and to doubt or distrust his paternal care. God witnesseth with 
uur spirits that we are his children, just as he had done to the eternal Son ; Satan strives 
to weaken that testimony, and tempts us to question our sonship. God tells us that 
afflictions not only consist with, but come from, his fatherly hand, for " whom he loveth 
he ohaateneth ; " Satan tempts us to regard them as evidences that God has forgotten or 
forsaken us. (c) Scripture is the sword of the Spirit we miist wield. Now consider the 
Saviour's reply to this first temptation. He might have met the tempter with a positive 
declaration, " I am the Son of God." He might have asserted his lordship over him. 
He might have subdued him instantly by Almighty power. But in so doing he would 
only have left ns an exhibition of omnipotence to astonish us, not an example to attract 
us. On the contrary, he takes away the ground of the temptation by appealing to the 
Divine Word. His answer was, " It is written [stands written], Man shall not live by 
bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God," or more 
simply, as in St. Luke, '' by every word of God." Thus he put honour on the Divine 
Word, and at the same time put into our hand a weapon of greatest power for oui 
individual defence. He shows, moreover, that, though man ordinarily lives by bread. 



M THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. l 1— 4& 

yet that any word proceeding out of the mouth of God, anything created by God's word 
and by that same word commanded to be used for food, will serve the purpose. " He 
cut either," says Bishop Hall in his ' Contemplations,' " sustain without bread, as he did 
Moses and Elias ; or with a miraculous bread, as the Israelites with mauna ; or send 
ordinary means miraculously, as food to his prophet by the ravens ; or miraculously 
multiply ordinary means, as the meal and oil to the Sareptan widow." Christ, therefore, 
needed not to turn stones into bread ; he only needed to trust in his heavenly Father for a 
seasonable and suitable supply. Hence we learn that, while bread is the staff of life, 
God's blessing is the staff of bread. We may want bread, and yet be nourished by some 
other means ; we may have bread, and not be satisfied. In our greatest abundance we 
must not think of living without God ; in our greatest indigence we must learn to live 
upon God. Ordinary means of succour and support may faU or be cut off; the fig tree 
may not blossom, nor fruit be in the vines ; the labour of the olive may fail, and the 
fields yield no meat ; yet are we to rejoice in the Lord and joy in the God of our salva- 
tion, (d) Spiritual life needs nourishment suited to it. Bread, by the Divine blessing, 
sapports the life of the body ; but there is a higher style of life that needs for its 
sustenance more than bread, and which bread alone cannot maintain. There is the 
life of the soul, the life of the immortal spirit ; that spiritual life depends for support 
on every word of God. " Thy words were found," says the prophet, " and I did eat them ; 
and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart ; " and Job says, " I have 
esteemed the words of his mouth more than my necessary food ; " while the Saviour 
himself says, in reference to the same life, " My meat is to do the will of him that sent 
me, and to finish his work." And if we would live this truer, higher, nobler life, we 
" must all eat the same spiritual meat," feeding on the Word of God and following the 
will of God. 

2. ITie special character of the second temptation. This second temptation is an 
appeal to avarice or aggrandizement or oovetousness. As Moses saw the land of 
promise from the top of Pisgah, so Satan brings the Saviour to " an exceeding high 
mountain." A mountain is still pointed out as the mount of the temptation. Its name 
is Quarantana, and its height nearly two thousand feet. " It is distinguished," says 
Kitto, " for its sere and desolate aspect even in this gloomy region of savage and dreary 
sights." From its summit Satan shows him " all the kingdoms of the world and the 
glory of them. Whether by "world" is to be understood the Holy Land, then divided into 
several petty principalities ; or the Roman empire, comprising many conquered kingdoms 
as its provinces ; or the world in its widest sense, we stop not to inquire. Neither do we 
attempt to explain what power of optics commanded such a prospect, or how the horizon 
widened and widened till the world, with its political divisions as well as physical 
features, spread out, before tlie two solitary spectators on yon mountain-top, like an 
unfolded chart; or how especially all this was accomplished in a moment or second 
(literally, point) of time. The Scripture states the fact, and we believe it ; the how of it 
m are not curious to discover, nor do we think it necessary to define. Some think the 
whole subjective ; we take the whole to be objective. Milton, it is true, speaks of the 
specular tnount, and amplifies the scene descried from it, as a poet and a scholar ; and 
} et there is good reason to believe that his realistic interpretation is in accordance with 
the Scripture representation, as he sings — 

"Here thou behold'at 
Assyria, and her empire's ancient bounds, 
Araxes and the Caspian lake; thence on 
As far as Indus east, Euphrates wobt. 
And oft beyond, to south the Persian bay, 
And iuaccesalble, the Arabian drouth." 

(1) Attempt^ to realize the stupendous sfedacle. The imaginings of the poet had their 
foundations in fact. Looking to the right, they saw the cities and counti ies peopled by 
the numerous children of the East— the once powerful empire of Persia, the equally 
powerful and still more ancient Babylonia, the distant India, and the remote Chinese. 
Looking northward, they saw the nomadic hordes of Soythia stretching far away towards 
the frozen arctic regions. Westward they saw the many provinces conquered by Roman 
valour and then subject to Roman rule, the sunny shores and isles of Greece, the unalga- 



OH. L 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAHJi. 65 

mated races that peopled the Italian peninsula, the savage tribes of Germany, the 
gallant men of GaiU, and the far-off inhabitaats of Britain. Southward they saw the 
unconquered Arabs, the polished Egyptians, the sunburnt dwellers of Ethiopia, the 
Lybians bordering on the desert, and other sable sons of Africa. " AH these shall be 
yours at once, and without an effort on your part, if you fall down and worship me, or 
rather do homage before me." (2) Satan's title. What claim, we may well ask, had 
Batan on these kingdoms? What right dared he to assert over them? His claim was 
that of usurped dominion, for it is only by usurpation and for a little space that he is 
god of this world. No doubt he affirms, " It has been entrusted to me ; " and he is called 
" the prince of this world," and " the prince of the power of the air." His right is only, 
aowever, that which sinful men have given him — that of slaves to a tyrant master — 
conceded to him by those whom he leads captive at his will. " Those myriad idolaters 
are mine," he said. " Those unbelieving Jews are mine. Those sinners of every tribe. 
And race, and name are mine ; they are of their father the devil, and my bidding they 
are prompt and prepared to do." Thus spake, we may conceive, the usurper. Thank God 1 
his usurpation will one day end, his works shall be destroyed, he himself for ever bruised 
aivi his power broken. But he presumed to add, " To thee will I give this power and 
aU the jflory of them." (3) His disingenuousness. He showed the fair side of all. He 
kept away in the background the foul ways and sinful means by which kingdoms often 
have been won, the bloody battles, the cruel massacres, the wicked plots, the diplomatic 
flchemes, by which crowns have been gained ; the cares that attend them, the anxieties 
that perplex them, the thorns that line them, for often " uneasy rests the head that 
wears a crown." All this Satan is ready to give. But why act so disingenuously? 
Why not state the drawbacks ? Ah 1 this is never Satan's way. He shows the best 
,part of the picture ; the darker background he keeps out of view. He exhibits the 
fascinations of sin ; he conceals its bitterness. He recounts its pleasures, not its pains ; 
its seductions, not its sorrows ; its allurements, not its sufferings and its sadness. 
Besides, his promises are lies. He never keeps his word ; he never means to do so ; he 
never performs his promise. (4) The Saviour's indignant rejection of Satan's offer. No 
wonder the Saviour, wearied of Satan's intrusions, of his impertinence, of his insolence, 
of his insults as well as assaults, repels him rudely, saying, " Get thee behind me, Satan ; 
for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve." 
(5) Satan's dupes and dependants. Satan is, no doubt, a mighty prince ; his hosts are 
the world-rulers of the darkness of this age, his bait the love of power. The world- 
milers (^KoaitoKpdTopes), the Pharaohs, the Herods, the Caesars, snatched at that bait, 
accepting the evil one as their master. And so he tempts the Saviour too, as though he 
said, " Why not be a king like other kings ? Let your kingdom be of this world ; I 
•object not to its being the greatest and the mightiest ; otherwise I will oppose thee." 
Thus far Satan. But the Holy One again repels the evil one by Scripture. Again he 
Appeals to the lesson of his childhood — the words of the frontlet, recognizing the 
allegiance due to God. (6) Practical lesson from the second temptation. Satan is still 
lavish in his offers and liberal in pressing them on all. He offers the world, its praises, 
its profits, its pleasures ; but he must have a quid pro quo, a full equivalent. He insists 
on your making a return for his favours, on your reciprocating his benefactions. He 
wants you to worship him. He will have you sacrifice your soul in his service. Disguise 
it as he may, he will have nothing else and will accept nothing less. Satan is proverbially 
good to his own ; but that goodness is only seeming, and even in its seeming short. Tlie 
way of duty is the way of safety. For though evil triumphed for a time, though the day 
of its downfall were far distant or not to be dreamt of, though there were no such thing as 
retribution, and though no period of redress appeared likely ; still to be guided by the 
Divine Word, to imitate the Saviour, and to render allegiance to Qoi alone, will be found 
in the end the happiest, the wisest, and the best. 

3. Nature of the third temptation. It is an appeal to ambition or piide. Borne, huw- 
«ver, are of opinion that this is a temptation to an experiment in order to test whether 
the Divine presence or the Divine protection pertained to Sonship, rather than a tempta- 
tion to an effort in order to gain power and popularity with the people. In favour of this 
Tiew is the history from which the tempter is answered. The people had called in 
question the Divine presence, saying, " Is the Lord among us or not ? They required a 
supernatural proof to assure them of it. Similar conduct on the part of the Savioui- to 

ST. HABE. ' 



66 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. 1. 1— 4a 



that of Israel on the occasion referred to would have been sinful distrust. Here, as aff er 
wards, he could have biddeu to his side legions of angels ; but in either case he foibura 
Obedient trust in God and determined opposition to Satan were the principles that 
guided the conduct of the Saviour, and that ultimately gaiued the day. (1) The acmt 
of Satan's subtlety. The pinnacle or battlement of the temple was, doubtless, the royal 
portico built by Herod and " overhanging the ravine of the Kedron." It stood on the 
very edge of the precipice and towered up to an immense height. From the top of thia 
giddy eminence Josephus tells us that no eye could see the bottom. " Cast thyself down," 
said Satan, " and the Jews, who are on the look-out for a temporal prince, will take you 
at once, and make you their king, and render ready homage to thy sceptre. Cast thy- 
self down, and other nations, who are all expecting some great potentate to appear in 
order to usher in an age of unexampled blessing, will all make common cause with 
them, and form one united and world-wide empire. Thus Jew and Gentile, in happy 
harmony, shall bind the diadem of royalty round thy brow, and so crown thee Lord and 
ruler of all. In any case," says Satan, " and whatever be the result, you lose nothing by 
the experiment. You run no risk by the attempt ; for is it not written, ' He shall give his 
angels charge over thee to keep thee ' ? " (2) Suppression of Scripture. Ah ! here is the 
masterpiece of the evil one. Here we see how he can adapt himself to the exigencioa 
of every case. Here we see his skill in imitation. Here, after the example of the 
Saviour, he appeals to Scripture. " What," says an old divine quaintly, almost quizzi- 
cally — " what is this I see? Satan himself, with a Bible under his arm and a text in his 
mouth." But then he misquotes by suppressing part of the sentence, and so altering 
the sense of the whole. Undoubtedly God had promised, " He shall give his angels charge 
over thee to keep thee in all thy ways ; " but this latter clause Satan found it convenient 
to omit. Thereby we are taught that the way of duty is the way of safety ; wisdom's 
ways are ways of pleasantness and paths of peace. When we walk in these ways God has 
promised to keep us safe. Off them we jeopardize ourselves every hour. " Not so," sayi 
Satan. " Go where you like, walk as you like, take my word for it, you are safe." Thus 
Satan misquotes, misinterprets, and misapplies. Thus he said to our first parents, in 
direct contravention of God's word, " Ye shall not surely die." Thus was he " a liar and 
a murderer from the beginning." Thus he continues to lead men blindfold to the brow 
of the precipice, and bids them cast themselves down, telling them there is no danger, 
and assuring them of safety. Thus he plunges men in misery. Thus he brings them 
to perdition. Thus he sinks them in the deep abyss. (3) Eis tactics are still the same. 
" Cast yourself down," he says to some ; " sin is an easy and safe descent. The way of 
virtue is hard and uphill ; don't trouble yourself about it. Cast yourself down, wallow 
in your beloved lust, take your fill of your besetting sin ; God is too merciful to mind 
it, or at least to punish it. Cast yourself down before the god of gold, like Israel before 
the golden calf, that you may be elevated in worldly rank and he exalted among thy 
fellows." Again, to children of God he says, " Cast yourselves down. The gospel mystery 
of sanctification is slow work and a roundabout way: try penances, fastings, macera- 
tions, pilgrimages, will-worship, and thus expedite it. Perhaps he waxes bolder and 
says to another, " You are a child of grace : once In grace always in grace ; you may 
indulge in sin with impunity, or that grace may abound, or that God may get glory 
and you more grace by repentance. Cast yourself down ; the sin you dread is a trifle — is 
it not a little one ? " These are only a few specimens of Satan's subtle snares and mani- 
fold devices. To those in high places he whispers, " Cast yourselves down. Place is 
before principle ; expediency rather than consistency." To otiiers again, "Cast yourselves 
down. Become slaves to luxury, or sensuality, or vice ; your means warrant it, the 
circumstances justify it. Cast yourselves down. Thousands do worse, while few do 
better, and it will be all the same in the end." (4) The third repulse. That pinnacle 
was a high place, and high places are slippery places; they are difficult places ; they are 
dangerous places. Comparing this temptation with the former, we are reminded of the 
wise man's words, " Give me neither poverty nor riches." Our Lord's reply repulsed Satan 
in this quarter also. It was, " Thou shalt not tempt piterally, out and mU, or to an 
extreme] the Lord thy God." You are not to run unbidden into danger ; you are not 
to run against the thick bosses of Jehovah's buckler ; you are not to pray, " Lead me 
not into tomptation," and then dash into it ; you are not to venture into a perilous 
position, where neither necessity, nor Providence, nor duty calls you : you aie not t«. 



CH, 1. 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, 6' 

plead the covenant of God while you disregard its conditions; you are not to appro* 
priate promises that in no way apply to your character or conduct. 

Concluding remarks. 1. The battle of life is largely a battle f(rr daily bread. In 
far northern regions it is extremely difficult; in the tropics it is exceedingly easy. li 
has been well remarked that neither extreme has conduced much to the world's progress; 
it is for the most part the dwellers in the temperate zones, where labour for the support 
of life is only ordinarily difficult — equally removed from the extremes of severity and 
facility, that have helped onward the march of civilization, of science, of art ; in a 
word, human improvement and human culture. 2. As we are to watch as well as pray 
to avoid temptation, so we are to labour as well as pray for daily bread — labouring ai 
if all depended on our work, praying as though work formed no factor in the process. 
3. The first temptation tended to carnal appetite and distrust of Providence ; the last, 
[o ambition and proud presumption on the Father's protection. The first presupposes 
want ; the last, abundance. The first teaches a lesson to the poor ; the last,' to the rich. 
And just as the wilderness was suitable to the first, so the world-famed city was a 
proper place for the last ; for Jerusalem was the glory of Palestine, the pride of all the 
land, while " the temple was the glory of Jerusalem, the pinnacle the highest point of 
the temple." 4. Observe the extremes in Satan's temptations — the first was to despair 
and to distrust in Providence ; the last, to pride and presumption. The tenor of the 
final suggestion was, " Cast thyself down. If thou art supported by his providence, thou 
wilt be sustained by his protection. Cast thyself down. When people see thee fling 
thyself from the high precipice and receive no hurt, all men will then own thy God- 
head and acknowledge thy Divine commission. Jerusalem and the Jews will acknow- 
ledge it and admit thou art more than man — even ' the Messenger of the covenant,' 
coming suddenly and sublimely to his temple. The work of Messiahship shall be 
facilitated and shortened ; while every one will be at once convinced of thy claims. 
Besides, when, or where, or how, could a better opportunity be had for declaring publicly 
and powerfully thy glory and thy Godhead, thy dignity and design ? " And yet the 
arch-tempter was signally foiled and the Saviour gloriously victorious. He bruised 
Satan's head ; and in Christ and through Christ we — even we shall, by Divine grace, 
be enabled to bruise Satan, and that speedily, under our feet. 5. Satan, having com- 
pleted every temptation, that is, every typical form of temptation, as though all tempta- 
tions are resolvable into one of the three, "departed from him," but only for a season, or 
rather until an opportunity (&XP' Ktupov), that is to say, until another opportunity should 
occur or some new opportunity present itself, either by way of suffering or situation- 
negative endurance or positive enticement. 6. Angels ministered to him. The necessity 
for this arose from the desert district in which he found himself. The statement in St. 
Mark's narrative that " he was with the wild beasts" is generally understood to imply 
that the region was wild in the extreme, desolate, and full of terrors, like Virgil's " Vitam 
in sylvis inter deserta ferarum lustra domosque traho ; " may it not rather, or also, assign 
a reason for the ministering of angels mentioned in the next clause, as rendered abso- 
lutely necessary from the total absence of all human help and distance from all the 
resources of civilized life ? 

Intebval. Between the temptation, according to St. Mark's brief record, and our 
Lord's Galilean ministry many things had taken place, as we learn from the evangelist 
John. Into that interval a Jud^ean ministry of rather uncertain duration and of much 
importance must be interjected. We are dependent entirely on the fourth Gospel for 
the narrative of that ministry. But, though unrecorded by the synoptists, it is never- 
theless implied and referred to by them. 

Connecting lines. In the intervening period the following circumstances transpired : 
— 1. The testimony of the Baptist to Jesus, already referred to ; the adhesion of two of 
John's disciples to Jesus, Andrew bringing his brother Simon to him ; our Lord's return 
to Galilee, where Philip findeth Nathanael and bringeth him to Jesus ; the marriage 
in Cana. 2. Our Lord's first Passover at Jerusalem as the Son of God, the Messiah 
promised to the fathers, together with the expulsion of the traders ; his discourse with 
Nicodemus, who came to him by night ; his leaving Jerusalem, but remaining some 
time longer in Judsea ; further, a final testimony of the Baptist ; his setting out for 
Galilee after John's imprisonment ; his discourse with the woman of Samaria at Jacob's 
well, near Sychar, as he passed through Samaria on his way to Galilee ; his return to Cana 



68 THE GOSPEL AUUuKUiNU TO BX. MAKK. [en. :. i— ia. 



»nd cure of the nobleman's son at Capernaum ; his rejection at Nazareth and settled 
abode at Capernaum. — J. J. G. 

Vers. 14, 15. Parallel passages: Matt. iv. 17; Luke iv. 14, 15. — The QalUmn 

ministry. L HiB pbeachins began in Galilee. Though our Lord's public ministry 

may be regarded as having commenced at that Passover at Jerusalem to which 

reference has been already made, yet his public appearance as a preacher was in 

Galilee. The place, the date, the subject are all distinctly marked by St. Peter in the 

tenth chapter of the Acts, at the thirty-seventh verse, as we read, " That word which God 

sent unto the children of Israel, preaching the gospel [jood tidings] of peace by Jesus 

Christ (he is Lord of all) — that saying ye yourselves know, which was published 

throughout all Judaea, beginning from Galilee, after the laptism which John preached." 

H. A FATOTJRABLE FIELD. Now Commence our Lord's labours among the towns 

and Tillages of Galilee — a sphere of operation of the most promising kind at that 

period. Of the four provinces of Palestine in the time of Roman rule, while Judsea 

was south, Samaria central, and Persea east, Galilee was in the north. Originally it 

comprehended only a limited circle or circuit, as the name Oalil imports, round Kedesh- 

Naphtali, including the twenty towns which Solomon gave to Hiram, but it grew into 

much larger dimensions till it included the four northern tribes, Asher and Naphtali, 

Zebulun, and Issachar, embracing an oblong twenty-five miles from north to south 

and twenty-seven from east to west. It was divided into Lower and Upper Galilee ; 

the former district consisted mainly of the plain of Bsdraelon or Jezreel, and the latter, 

containing the district between the Upper Jordan and Phoenicia, was called Galilee of 

the Gentiles because of its mixed population — Greeks, Arabs, Phoenicians, as well as 

Jews. This northern province of the Holy Land in the days of our Lord was studded 

with towns and even cities, had a thriving population, and abounded in hives of busy 

industry. Speaking of our Lord selecting this district as the scene of bis labours, the 

late Dean Stanley says, " It was no retired mountain-lake by whose shore he took up 

his abode, such as might have attracted the Eastern sage or Western hermit. It wall to 

the Boman Palestine almost what the manufacturing districts are to England. Nowhere, 

except in the capital itself, could he have found such a sphere for his works and words 

of mercy." The husbandman that tilled the fields, the merchantman that traded in 

the towns or villages, the fisherman that plied his craft on the waters of the lake, and 

labourers standing in the market-place, — all these and many such abounded in this 

populous region ; and while easily accessible, and willing to wait on our Lord's ministry, 

they were more free from prejudice — less bigoted and less exclusive than their brethren 

of the southern province. 

III. The distbiot pointed out in prophecy. Ancient prophecy had marked this 
re^onout as that where gospel light would shine most brightly. These northern tribes, 
Zebulun and Naphtali, had soonest sunk into idolatry through the influence of theu 
idolatrous neighbours, the Phcenicians, on the west, and had suifered sorest from Assyrian 
invaders from the east, most of them having been carried captive by Tiglath-pileser and 
their land repeopled in large part by strangers. The prophet, however, in order to con- 
sole and in some measure compensate, foretold a good time coming in Isa. ix. 1, 2, which 
rightly rendered reads thus : " There shall not hereafter be darkness in the land which was 
distressed ; as in the former time he brought to shame the land of Zebulun and the land 
01 Naphtali, so in the time to come he bringeth it to honour, even the tract by the sea 
[tA the western shore], the other side of Jordan [the eastern side], Galilee of the 
nations \i,e. district north of the sea]. The people that walked in darkness have seen 
a great light : they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the 
light shined." Thus henceforth the scene of the Saviour*! ministry liea by the Jordu, 
the Iiake of Gennesaret, and in Galilee of the Gentiles — 

" What went ye out to see 

O'er the rude sandy lea. 
Where stately Jordan flows by many a palm, 

Or where Gennesaret's wave 

Delights the flowers to lave 
That o'er her western dlope breathe airs of balnif 



n. n. 1—45.2 THE GOSPEL ACCORDIN(J TO ST. MARK. « 

" Here may we sit and dream 

Over the heavenly theme, 
Till to onr souls the former days return ; 

Till on the grassy bed, 

Where thousands once he fed, 
The vroi'ld's incarnate Maker we diecern." 

ly. Thb subjects op oub Savioub's preaching. The precursor had been 
imprisoned in the castle of Machserus, some nine miles east of the Dead Sea, in the 
district of Pertea ; but the Prophet himself takes up the work. Thus it ever is. God 
buries his workmen, but carries on his work. The great theme of the Baptist, as we 
have seen, was repentance and correspondent reformation, yet vnth faith implied. The 
theme of repentance was resumed by Jesus, but with the other doctrine of faith not 
implicitly but explicitly taught. The doctrine of faith now comes into prominence— 
the doctrine of faith, and that not merely bare credence or simple assent to the good 
news, but faith in— reliance on the gospel as the great and only means of safety and 
■alvation. He proclaims, moreover, the advent of Messiah's reign. That critical epoch 
had now come ; that greatest era in all human history had arrived. 

V. DiFFEBENOB IN THE USE OP TWO SYNONYMOUS TEEMS. The kingdom Is usuallj 
called by St. Matthew the " kingdom of heaven," and not " kingdom of God," lest the 
latter expression might confirm the Jews, for whom in the first instance the evangeUst 
wrote, in their erroneous apprehension of it as a great kingdom of a worldly and temporal 
kind, as by a Hebrew idiom the name " God " is joined to anything excessively great or 
extremely grand ; thus, we read of the " river of God," of " the cedars of God," and other 
similar expressions. By St. Luke, on the other hand, it is called the " kingdom of God " 
and not the " kingdom of heaven," lest the Gentiles, for whom this evangelist specially 
wrote, should misapprehend the expression as countenancing local divinities, as they 
were accustomed to gods and goddesses of different localities or quarters of the universe, 
such as Naiads, Nereids, Dryads, Hamadryads ; gods of the ocean and of rivers ; deities 
of the ethereal and infernal regions. This kingdom had been foreshadowed by Daniel 
in his vision of the great world-powers. — J. J. G. 

Vers. 16—20. Parallel passages : Matt. iv. 18—22 ; Luke ▼. 1—11.— The call of the 
first four disciples. I. Fbevious and less formal call. Our Lord now calls to his 
side the first four disciples — Andrew and John, Peter and James. With the former 
pair he had already made acquaintance when they were disciples of John the Baptist. 
The account which St. John in his Gospel gives of the matter is complementary, and 
throws light on it, enabling us to understand more clearly how it was that these two 
brethren showed such alacrity and readiness in now obeying the Saviour's more/ormal 
call, and in following him. Andrew was one of the two disciples whose attention the 
Baptist directed to Jesus as " the Lamb of God," and John was in all probability the 
other, though, with his usual reserve, he does not name himself in the narrative. These 
two were privileged to spend a day with Christ, by special invitation, from ten o'clock 
in the morning, if we adopt the modem reckoning ; otherwise from four p.m. Andrew 
was the means of bringing his brother Simon Peter to Christ, and John may have 
rendered the same signal service to his brother James. In the interval between the 
first and this more formal call, these disciples had returned to their daily duties, biding 
their time till the Master would require their more special and active services. 

IL The missionary spirit op Andrew. The Christian spirit is in its very nature 
missionary. As soon as Andrew, with whom in one sense the Christian Church begins, 
got good for his own soul, he wished to share it with others ; soon as he found Christ 
for himself, he set about makinc; him known to others. His charity, too, begins at home, 
for he does not rest satisfied with the great discovery he had been favoured with, nor 
does he selfishly keep it to himself, he immediately goes in quest of his own brother, ta 
communicate to him the good news. But though charity in his case began at home, it 
did not confine itself to such narrow domestic limits. On two other occasions we find 
Andrew similarly employed in bringing persons to Christ. It wad he that brought the 
lad with the five barley loaves and the two small fishes to Christ, as we read in 
John vi. 8. Not only so ; it was Andrew who, in company with his townsman Philip^ 
introduced to the Saviour those Greeks who, having come up to worship at the ieaat. 



70 THE GOSPEL ACCORDxNG TO ST. MARK. [oh. i. 1—45. 

expressed their earnest wish for that interview, saying, " Sir, we would see JesuB." And 
now that Andrew, in the fulness of his brotherly affection, had brought Peter to Christ, 
Andrew and Peter were bound together ever after, in a dearer, because a double, bond ot 
bi'otherhood. Here is an example worthy of imitation, and that not only by the 
brethren of the same family, but by dwellers in the same neighbourhood and members 
of the same community, who may have shared with us in the amusements of childhood 
or the employments of youth, or who still walk side by side with us in manhood on the 
journey of life. Nay, as far as in us lies, by proxy, if not in person, we must seek to be 
instrumental in bringing our fellow-creatures of every name and clime to the foot of the 
r,Tos«, and in thus winning the world for Christ. 

III. The EMPI.0TMENT OF THESE DISCIPLES. While Andrew and Peter were brothers 
aid joint-occupants of the same dwelling — as we learn from ver. 29, owing to St. 
Mark's attentionjto minute details — we are informed by St. Luke that James and John 
were partners in trade {Koivavai), i.e. in a sort of fishing firm, with Simon, and so sharers 
in the general profits of the little company. They were also fellow-workers, for they 
are called, some verses earlier in the same chapter, sharers in the work (jt.sr6xois). 
Diligence in business, whatever our employment mav be, is an important duty, and one 
which God is sure to acknowledge and bless ; while Satan is ever ready to find mischief 
for idle hands to do. Moses was keeping the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the priust 
of Midian, when the angel of the Lord, appearing unto him in that bush that burned 
with fire and yet was not consumed, sent him to bring forth the children of Israel out 
of Egypt. Gideon was threshing wheat by the wine-press, to hide it, when he was 
summoned to save Israel from the hand of the Midianites. Saul was making search for 
the lost asses of his father, when he was taken by Samuel and anointed with oil to be 
captain over the Lord's inheritance. David was tending a few sheep in the wilderness, 
when God called him to the high office of shepherd of his people Israel. Elisha was 
" ploughing with twelve yoke of oxen before him, and he with the twelith," when Elijah 
cast his mantle upon him in token of his becoming his assistant and successor in the 
prophetic office. 

IV. The PLACE of theib work. 1. Name of the lake. " The Lake of Gtennesaret," as St. 
Luke accurately calls this sheet of water so famous in sacred story, is termed " the Sea ot 
Galilee " by St. Matthew and St. Mark, " the Sea of Tiberias " also by St. John, and in 
theOld Testament "the Sea of Chinnereth," i.e. harp-like in shape, of which "Gennesaret" 
may be a corruption, if the latter word be not derived from two Hebrew words meaning 
" gardens of princes " (ganne sarim) or "garden of Sharon" (gan sharon) ; while it gets the 
designation " of Galilee " from the province in which it is situated and that of " Tiberias " 
from the Roman emperor Tiberius, in compliment to whom the town Tiberias was so 
named by Herod Antipas, its founder. Prom this, too, comes the modern name by which 
the lake is sometimes named 5aAr-o^ra5arji2/eA. 2. The shape and size of the lake. We 
have already referred to its shape as resembling a harp. It is somewhat oval, and very 
like a pear in form ; while its length is twelve miles and a quarter by six and three 
quarters in breadth at its widest part. The depression of the lake is remarkable^ 
between six hundred and seven hundred feet below the level of the Mediterranean Sea. 
Its waters, reflecting the blue of the sky above, are clear, transparent, and sweet to 
the taste ; while all sorts of fish, largely contributed by the numerous streams that enter 
ii, abound therein. 3. Scenery and surroundings. The margin of the lake is 
surrounded by a level beach, here covered with smooth sand or small shells, there strewn 
with coarser shingle, and discernible as a white line encompassing the lake. This 
beach (luyiiAis), so often mentioned in the Gospels, while laved on one side by the 
bright waters of the lake, is fringed on the other side in many parts by shrubs and 
oleanders with their rosy-red blossoms. From this shore-line rise gradually in most 
places the surrounding hills, though to no considerable height, with brown outline but 
ever-varying tints ; while away in the distance are seen in white lines along the sky 
the snowy peaks of Hermon ; also on the eastern side the undulating table-lands com- 
mencing in Gaulonitis run southward from Csesaiea Philippi down to the Tarmuck, and 
onward through Perea. But coming close to the lake and commencing at Kerak, we 
proceed northward to the hot springs, near to which extend the ruins of Tiberias now 
Tabariyeh. This was the noble city where once "the Jewish pontiff fixed his throne,'' 
•nd where the Sanhedrin was establishea vhere, moreover, existed for three centuries 



m. L 1—45.] THE GuSPEL ACCUKDING TO ST. MARK. 7i 

he metropolis and university of Judaism. Near this place are steep rocks and a moiUi> 
ain approaching the water's edge. Further north we reach Mugdala, now a miserablt 
rillage called Mej'ld, where Mary Magdalene had I er home. It is situated at th« 
lonthern extremity of the plain of Geimesaret, now called El Ohuweir, "the littlt 
dollow." Here aaain the mountains recede, and this jilain on the north-western shore 
Df the lake is formed ; its extent is two miles and a half long and one mile broad- It 
ia now covered with brushwood and some patches of corn, though once so celebrated 
for fertility and beauty. The description of it by Jose| hue has been often quoted ; it 
8 as follows : — " One may call this place the ambition ot nature, when it forces those 
plants that are naturally enemies to one another to agree together, it is a happy 
contention of the seasons, as if every one of them laid claim to this country ; for it not 
"ally nourishes different sorts of autumnal fruits beyond man's expectation, but 
; reserves them a great while. It supplies man with its principal fruits, with grapes and 
figs continually during ten months of the year, and the rest of the fruits, as they 
become ripe together, through the whole year; for besides the good temperature of the 
air, it is watered from a most fertile fountain." The abundant waters that irrigate this 
plain proceed from a large round liasin of antique structure, called Ain-el-Medawara, or 
Round Fountain; or according to others, from the fountain called Ain-et-Tabiga. At 
the other or northern extremity of the plain are the ruins of Khan Minyeh, marking, 
perhaps, the site of ancient Chinnereth, but wrongly identifieii by some with Capernaum. 
Olose to this is the Fountain of the Fig Tree, called Ain-et-Tin, with its rather indifferent 
vater ; and a quarter of an hour further in the same direction brings us to the little bay 
tind great spring of Tabiga, supposed, as we have seen, by some to be that of which 
Josephus speaks as watering the plain of Gennesaret. A mile and a half further 
northward we find the ruins of Tell Hum, rightly identified, as we think, with the 
ancient Capernaum, Kefr-na-hum being changed into Tell Hum by abridging the 
termination into lium, and substituting for Ki-fr, a village, Tdl, a heap, when a heap 
of rubbish was all that remained of it. If Tell Hum be in reality Capernaum, then 
Kerazek, two miles and a half from the lake, and about two miles north from Tell 
Hum, is Chorazin. Two miles further onward bring us to mounds and heaps of 
stones called Abu Zany, at the northern mouth of the Jordan, identified by the author 
of the ' Land and the Book ' with Bethsaida of Galilee — the native place of Andrew 
and Peter and Philip ; while on the opposite bank are ruins which the same writer 
considers to be Bethsaida Julias. With the east side of the lake we have less to do, 
and the very few sputs on that side of any importance have less interest for us. There 
is the very fertile and well-watered plain of Butaiha along the north-east shore of the 
lake, which bears a close resemblance to the plain of Gennesaret on the north-west shore 
There are besides the ruins of Khersa, the ancient Gergesa, on the left bank of the Wady 
Semakh ; the remains of Gamala, on a hill near the Wady Fik ; and the ruins of Um 
Keis, the ancient Gadara, a long way southward. 4. State of matters at present. In the 
days of our Lord and his disciples the fisheries yielded a profitable revenue, while one, 
perhaps two, of the villages on its shores, viz. Western and Eastern Bethsaida, " house 
of fish," got their names therefrom. The white sails of vessels, amoimting to some 
thousands, were seen in its waters, from the ship of war or merchantman down to the 
fishing-smack or pleasure-boat. Its surface was astir with life and energy and joy. 
Now a single miserable bark is all that furrows its waves, and even that is sometimes 
difiBoult to procure. The noise and bustle and activities of numerous villages and 
towns are hushed in unbroken silence. 5. The sacredness of this district. Here 
indeed is holy ground. " Five little towns," says Renan, "of which humanity will speak 
for ever as mncTi as of Rome and of Athens, were, at the time of our Lord, scattered 
over the space that extends from the village of Mejdel to Tell Hum ; " the towns he 
refers to are Magdala, Dalmanutha, Capernaum, Bethsaida, and Chorazin. Elsewhere 
he says, " We hpvea fifth Gospel, lacerated, but still legible (la^^r^,maislisible encore)," 
in the harmony of the gospel narrative with the places therein de.sciibed. It was here 
Jesus called his first disciples ; it was here he entered into a ship, and sat in the sea; 
it was here from its deck he taught the pressing crowds that lined the shore ; it wai 
here he walked upon the waters ; it was here he stilled the storm ; it was here, after 
his resurrection, he was known to the disciples by the great draught of fishes ; it was 
here he directed them to bring of the fish thus caught and "come atd dine." " What," 



72 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. i. 1—45. 

says Dr. Thomson in ' The Land and the Book,' " can be more interesting ? A quiet 
ramble along the head of this sacred sea ! The blessed feet of Emmanuel have hallowed 
every acre, and the eye of Divine love has gazed a thousand times upon this fair 
expanse of lake and land. Oh ! it is surpassingly beautiful at this evening hour. Those 
western hills stretch their lengthening shadows over it, as loving mothers drop the 
gauzy curtains round the cradle of their sleeping babes. Cold must be theJieart that 
throbs not with unwonted emotion. Son of God and Saviour of the world! with thee 
my thankful spirit seeks communion here on the threshold of thine earthly home." 
Still more beautiful and touching are the verses of the sainted McCheyne on the sea of 
Galilee, of which, though so well known, we venture to cite the three following : — 

" How pleasant to me thy deep blue wave 
Sea of Galilee! 
For the glorious One who came to save 
Hath often stood by thee. 

" Graceful around thee the mountains meet, 
Thou calm reposing sea; 
But ah, far more ! the beautiful feet 
Of Jesus walked o'er thee. 

" Saviour! gone to God's right hand! 
Yet the same Saviour still, 
Graved on thy heart is this lovely strand 
And every fragrant hill." 

V. Manner of theik work and actual enqaobment when called. Simon and 
Andrew were actually engaged in fishing when the Master called them; James and 
John were mending, or rather preparing (KaTapTifoi-Ta!), their nets. Here we are taught 
the right use and proper economy of time. When not actually engaged in the labours 
of our calling we may do much in preparing for it, either taking necessary rest and 
refreshment for our bodies, and so acquiring vigour by repose, or in getting our appa- 
ratus or equipments of whatever kind in readiness for the resumption of labour. 
Different] kinds of nets. Three kinds of nets were used by the Gsdilean fishermen. 
There was the SUrvof, the most general name for any kind of net, and derived from 
Si«M, I cast, a word akin to SiVkos, a quoit. It is sometimes used figuratively in the 
LXX., as iravi's is in the Pauline Epistle in the New Testament. Nets of this sort John 
and James were repairing when they were summoned by the Saviour. There was the 
aii^cpkri(TTpm, from ifi-^i, around, and /SaAXii, I cast — the casting-net spreading out in a 
circle when cast into the water, and sinking by weights attached. From its circular 
shape it enclosed whatever lay below it. There was also the o-ay^iT?, from o-axTu, aiaaya, 
I load, which was a sweep-net of wide reach, and included a wide extent of sea. Hence it 
is used, according to Trench, in a parable, " wherein our Lord is setting forth the wide 
reach and all-embracing character of his future kingdom," and where neither of the 
other two words would have suited as well or at all. 

VI. Ready and unreserved compllance. No sooner had our Lord said, " Hither, 
after me," as the original words literally mean, than these four brethren, James and 
John, as well as Simon and Andrew, at once obeyed the summons. St. Mark's words 
here are very expressive — they went away or off oehind Mm— and imply the complete- 
ness with which they separated themselves from previous connections and severed 
themselves from past pursuits, as also the entire devotion with which they joined their 
new Master and commenced their new calling. They do not seem to have entered into 
any worldly calculations as to their present maintenance or future prospects, or to have 
counted the cost of the sacrifice they were called to make; neither did they consult 
with flesh and blood, or take into account considerations such as carnal policy is apt 
to suggest. They left all at once and for ever. What if their boats and nets were 
comparatively of small value or little worth in the estimate of the rich ? Still to 
these fishermen the sacrifice was great, for it involved their worldly all. 

VII. The goodness of the Master. Hardly, if ever, does Christ give us a precept 
that he does not add a promise to encourage us to, and help us in, the performance. If 
he bids us come to him, however weary and worn, sad and suffering and sorrowful we 



CH. I. 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 73 

may be, he promises to give us rest ; if he bids us take his yoke upon us, he assures us it 
■will be light; if he bids us seek, he promises we shall find; if he urges us to ask, he 
promises we shall receive ; if he presses us to knock, he pledges his word that it shall 
be opened to us ; and so of all the rest. Thus it is here, when he summons them 
to forsake their humble occupation of fishermen, he gives them the appropriate and 
characteristic promise to make them " fishers of men." 

VIII. Instructive incident. True religion, instead of cutting the ties of kinship, 
as a rule consecrates them. Times of persecution, indeed, may separate us from the 
nearest relatives arid dearest friends ; for, unless we love Christ more than the nearest 
and dearest, we are unworthy of him. Still, such cases are exceptional. Here a 
beautiful circumstance is brought to our notice by St. Mark. John and James, when 
leaving their father Zebedee to follow their Master, were not forgetful of the claims of 
filial piety and natural affection. They did not leave their aged father helpless, but 
with " the hired servants." Prom this the obvious inference is that he would be still 
enabled to continue his ordinary business, and pursue his usual avocation as heretofore. 

IX. Interesting inference. There is good reason to infer that, for his station in 
life, Zebedee was, as it is called, well to do. If not rich, he was not positively poor. 
He was in the happy mean which the wise man sought when he said, " Give me 
neither poverty nor riches ; feed me with food convenient for me: lest I be full and 
deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord ? or lest I be poor and steal, and take the name of 
my God in vain." The boats and nets and hired servants bespeak the possession 
of at least a competence for one in his humble position yet honest walk in life. — 
J. J. G. 

Veni. 21 — 28. Parallel passage: Luke iv. 31 — 37. — The heading of a demoniac in 
{he synagogue of Capernaum, I. Synaqoqtte service. It was the sabbath, and our Lord 
was teaching in the synagogue of Capernaum. The service of the synagogue wag 
simple. In addition to the prayers, there was the reading of the Divine Word. First 
came the Parashah, or lesson of the Law ; then followed the Haphtardh, or prophetical 
section. Hence we read, in the account of our Lord standing up to read in the syna- 
gogue of Nazareth, that the roll of the Prophet Isaiah was further given him 
(ineiiBri), that is, in addition to the lesson of the Law already read, he was handed the 
prophetical section, to be read as the second lesson. Any competent person might he 
invited by the ruler of the synagogue or elders to discharge this duty, and afterwards 
address "a word of exhortation to the people," as in Acts xiii. 15. 

II. OuB Lord's observance of the sabbath. Our Lord honoured the Lord's day, 
the house of God, and the ordinance of preaching which God has appointed for the 
instruction and edification of his people, as also for the explanation and enforeement 
of his Holy Word. 

III. His mode of teaching. He was teaching, and, as we are told, " with authority, 
and not as the scribes." His method of teaching differed from theirs. Instead of 
appealing to precedents or citing the traditions of ancient rabbis, our Lord taught with 
independence, originality, and freshness, enforcing what he taught by his own 
authority. The matter of his teaching also differed from theirs. Instead of subtle, 
useless distinctions, almost evanescent differences, and trifiins puerilities, he expounded 
the great things of God — his kingdom, grace, and glory. Still more than the mode of 
teaching or the truth taught was the manifestation of power in proof of, or at least 
accompanying, his teaching. The power by which he confirmed, and the evidence 
which he adduced in attestation of the truth, was something new and strange and 
unequalled. Hence the subsequent question, " What new teaching with respect to 
power ? " or, " What new and powerful teaching is this ? " for so we must read with the 
critical editors rather than with tliC received text, " What thing is this? What new 
doctrine is this? for with authority commandeth he even the unclean spirits;" because 
" with authority " would regularly be if' or /ler' i^ma'ua, rather than kot* ^(avrfav. 
His teaching was accompanied with a novel exercise of power, not merely over the 
minds of men, but over beings of another race and belonging to a different sphere, even 
the spirits of evil. For one discharging the office of teacher to exercise such authority, 
•nd to put forth such power in commanding, coercing, and controlling such spiritual 
agencies, was unprecedented, and naturally enough led to the inquiry or exclamation 



T4 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, [ch. i. 1—46. 

we are considering. It may be observed that in some copies of the Italic Version the 
" and " in the clause " and tot as the scribes " is omitted, but erroneously, for the copula- 
tive is used of things different rather than of opposites. In case of things not merely 
different, but opposite or contrary, the omission of the copula is admissible, as in 
the next chapter at ver. 27, " The sabbath was made for man, [and] not man for the 
sabbath," though the English Version inserts " and," and Tregelles reads the clause 
with Kttt. On this occasion, then, of our Lord's teaching in the synagogue, the healing 
of the demoniac was effected. 

IV. Reality of bbmoniaoal possession. The subject of demoniacal possession has 
been so fully and i'i'e>|uently discussed that little remains to be said on it. Certain it 
is that, to any unprejudiced reader of the Gospels, such possession must appear an 
undeniable reality. This man in the power (iv) of an unclean spirit addresses Jesus, 

What have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth ? " literally, " What is 

immon [^Kaivir understood] to us and to you ? " In ch. v. Jesus commands the unclean 

jirit to come out of the man ; and in the Gospel of St. Matthew (viii. 32) ho suffers 

he demons to go away into the herd of swine. There can be no reasonable denial, 

then, of the actual personality of these evil spirits. Their presence and personality are 

distinctly and decidedly recngnized in such Scriptures as those just mentioned. 

V. Natukb of this possession. The poor demoniac had, it would seem, a sort of 
double consciousness. His own will was dominated by a superior internal agent, who 
held him in terrible thrall. There was the human personality of the man possessed, as 
in the case of the Gadarene demoniac, who, when he had descried Jesus afar ofif, ran 
and worshipped him ; there was the demoniac personality, or personality of the evil 
spirit, at the same time, which, employing the instrumentality of the inan's organs of 
speech, cried with a loud voice, " I adjure tliee by God, that thou torment me not." 
'.^his possession was not disease, nor was it madness; it was not physical alone, nor 
mental alone ; it was net corporeal merely, nor spiritual merely ; but a strange and 
shocking combination of both. 

VI. Why was demoniac possession confined to cub Saviour's time of bojoubn 
ON EARTH ? The most perplexing question perhaps in relation to this matter is. Why 
was it that such possession occurred just at the time of our Lord's ministry on earth — 
apparently neither before nor since? Several answers have been given to it, such aa 
the prevalence of certain diseases, whether bodily or spiritual, at particular periods of 
the world's history; the climactic pitch which moral disintegration and social disorgan- 
ization had reached at the time of Christ's appearance on earth ; the check given to 
such possession by the introduction of Christianity ; our ignorance of cases of the kind 
that may still exist. There may be an element of truth in each of these ; still they are 
each and all inadequate as an answer to the difficult question propounded, and we must 
seek for a more satisfactory solution in some other direction. 

VII. Satan's power. The discrowned archangel, called now Didbolos the accuser, 
again Satan the adversary, is the acknowledged head of these daimonia or daimones. 
He is still, as we have seen in connection with the temptation, the prince of the power 
of the air, and the prince of this world to a lamentable extent. His knowledge is 
immense, yet ho is not omniscient; his power is enormous, yet he is not almighty; 
his presence is little short of ubiquitous — " going to and fro in the earth, and walking up 
and down in it" — yet he is not omnipresent; his resources for evil and for injury are 
amazing, yet they are not absolute. Happily, he is limited to some extent and restricted 
in some ways ; he is not by any means infinite. 

VIII. An imitator. With all his knowledge and power and resources, he is only an 
imitator at the best, and a destroyer at the worst. What God made he marred, as far 
as permitted to do so ; what the Saviour does, he imitates. Accordingly, when the Son 
of God became incarnate, Satan or his subject-demons became incarnate too — at least, 
to the extent of entering and taking possession of the bodies of men. Again, when the 
dispensation became distinctly spiritual — when, after the Saviour's ascension, the 
.Spirit was sent down — Satan confined himself also more to spiritual influences; that is 
to say, such influences as he still exercises over the spirits and minds of men. 

IX. Recognition and coNrEssiON of the Saviour by Satan's subjects. It need 
he no matter of surprise that, in person or by proxy, he is here found in the house o( 
God, for such has been his practice from days of old. In the ancient time, when tha 



CH. 1. 1— 45.J THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK 



sons of God came together and presented themselves before the Lord, Patan came among 
them and put in an appearance too. Nqr can it be reasonably doubted that he con- 
tinues his custom of frequenting the place of religious assemblies still. To the present 
hour he is sometimes with the preacher in the pulpit, sometimes with the hearer in the 
pew, though in neither case to help, but, whetiier with preacher or auditor, to 
hinder and to hurt. So in the instance before us. 

X. The Saviour's refusal of such acknowledgment. His acknowledgment of 
the Saviour is sternly wbuked. " Be muzzled (cjn/iM-riTi) and come out of him ! " was our-- 
Lord's indignant command. The acknowledgment, we therefore conclude, was either 
■ihe expression of fawning fear, or rather an effort of fiendish malice to compromise the 
Saviour's charact«r, as though in league with Satanic power and the spirits of evil. If 
so, our Lord's acceptance of such acknowledgment would have tended to discredit his 
mission and to damage his work. Demons knew him, for Satan, their chief, had followed 
him on his mission of mercy to man. He had dogged his steps as if to find out his true 
relationship — if indeed he was the Son of God — and to foil and frustrate, as far as 
practicable, his redemptive work. He had encountered him in the wilderness, and by 
his own defeat had leaint with certainty that he was in truth the Holy One of God. 

XI. A KNOWLEDGE THAT IS NOT SAVING. Though demons knew and confessed the 
Son of God, they had nothing to do with him, so that they could truly s£^y, " What have 
we to do with thee ? " Sad thought ! These lost ones had nothing to expect at his 
hand but further, fuller, and final destruction. Alas ! that any should know Christ as 
these evil spirits, acknowledge him, and yet have neither part nor lot in the matter ! 
There is a knowledge that does not save, for it lodges in the head and never touches 
the heart ; it makes itself known by profession, but never manifests itself in practice. 
There is a faith that only genders fear, but never gains forgiveness nor goes the length 
of favour ; for devils believe and tremble. Blessed be God for the truth which, brought 
home to the understanding and heart and conscience by the Holy Spirit, saves the soul : 
" This is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, 
whom thou hast sent " I 

XII. Satan and his servants evermore evil. The unclean spirit was coerced 
into obedience. When reluctantly compelled to obey, he resolved to work all the 
mischief possible. He tore or convulsed (arapiiav) the man, " threw him (^^I'l'av) in the 
midst," as Luke informs us, but yet i ad no more that he could do, for he was obliged 
to come out without doing him any real or permanent bodily injury (jm/Sii' ffKdtf/av). 
" It is much easier," says an old divine, " to keep him (Satan) out than to cast him 
out." And now heaven had acknowledged the Messiah ; hell, as we have just seen, had 
to own him ; while it remained for earth to confess its King. — J. J. 0. 

Vers. 29 — 34. Parallel passages : Matt, viii 14 — 17 ; Luke iv. 38 — tl. — The cure of 
Peter's wife's mother and others. I. Fever of a virulent type. That St. Peter was 
a married man appears not only from this mention of his mother-in-law, but also from 
the reference of St. Paul (1 Cor. ix. 5), "Have we not power to lead about a sister, a 
wife, as well as other apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas?" But, 
near and dear as Peter was to the Saviour, he was not exempted from the common lot ; 
his home was visited with sickness. Nor was it a mere slight indisposition. Fever of 
almost any type is a painful, wasting, and distressing malady. The present attack was 
one of no little severity, for St. Luke, a physician by profession, and so capable of 
accurate diagnosis, calls it a great or violent fever (iruper^i neyiKv% "Anon they tell 
him of her." The persons who did so may have been Peter and Andrew, who had come 
to reside at Capernaum, and who, as St. Mark with his usual particularity here informs 
us, were joint-occupants of one house after they had removed from Bethsaida (" place of 
fishing "), their native place. Or it may have been the domestics ; or rather, perhaps, 
the subject is left indeterminate. In any case, it was the right thing to do. At any 
time of sickness, and whatever be the nature of the disease, we should first go to God, 
then to the physician ; fir.st have recourse to prayer, then to the use of means. Similar 
in spirit is the injunction, " Is any sick among you ? let him call for the elders of the 
Church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the 
Lord." 

II. The mode of curb. The cure was another manifestation of Divine power, ai 



76 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MARK. [«»• ^ 1— *» 

well as of human sympathy, on the part of our Lord. There are several graphic tnuchef 
of a very interesting kind, especially in the description of the cure, by St. Mark. Our 
Lord approached the sufferer (itpoinKSiiy) ; St. Luke interjects the additional detail that 
he stood over her (IrtrTis 4itiva') ; he raised her up (fjyetpiv) ; he took hold of her by the 
hand (cpar^vat rqs x^'P^^ avT7)s), We cannot fail to be struck with the tenderness and 
compassion and sympathy of our blessed Lord with the poor sufferer. A word from 
him would have been quite as effectual. He did indeed rebuke the disease {irtrl/irirt), 
but he did not stop there. Had he done so, there would have been apparently less of 
human interest, less of tender sensibility, and altogether less of that afiectionats fellow- 
feeling that so touches the heart of suffering humanity, 

III. The effectal nature of the cube. It was immediate. He had no sooner 
taken her by the hand than the fever left her. The cure was miraculous ; not that the 
disease was incurable, or past the power of ordinary physicians, but from the manner 
of the cure — a touch of the hand, and its immediacy : " Immediately the fever left her." 
Still more, she was relieved of, or rather saved from, the prostration, often extreme, in 
consequence of fever. Her convalescence was instantaneous. No weary weeks ol 
waiting for returning strength, no administering of restoratives to the exhausted frame, 
no slow or gradually perceptible increase of physical energy ; at once, immediately, she 
arose and engaged in her usual routine of liousehold duties. 

IV. The duty of devotino oub renewed health and eestobed stbenoth to 
God's bebvice. She ministered unto them ; that is, to Ohrist and his disciples. This 
is the great end and the sanctified use of af&iction. When the visitation is removed, we 
are to employ ourselves with renewed zeal in the Divine service. We are to make 
some suitable return for the mercy experienced, and show our gratitude for the benefit 
bestowed. " Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits : who forgiveth 
all thine iniquities ; who healeth all thy diseases ; who redeemeth thy life from destruc- 
tion ; who crowneth thee with loving-kindness and tender mercies." — J. J. G. 

Vers. 32—39. Parallel passages : Matt. viii. 16, 17 ; iv. 23 — 25 ; Luke Iv. 40—44.— 
A Physician for hoth body and soul. I. Cubes of diseased persons and demoniacs. 1. 
The time specified. It was now evening, and the sun had just set ; and so the sabbath 
— for it was the sabbath day, as we know from ver. 21 — was considered past. The 
people now felt at liberty, without encroaching on the sacred rest of that holy day, 
to bring their sick for healing. Another reason is assigned by some for delaying 
till evening, to the effect that the noontide heat was then over and the cool of 
evening come, and so the infirm could be brought with less risk and more convenience. 
A moUey group of invalids. There was a general turn-out of the townspeople, so 
that the whole city seemed gathered together to the door of the dwelling, while they 
had brought with them all that were diseased and demoniac. What a motley multi- 
tude must have been there 1 The consumptive were there, with pak face or hectic 
flush ; victims of incurable cancer were there ; persons with the burning heat and the 
parched lips, or in the very delirium, of fever, were there ; the palsied, the dropsical, 
the epileptic were there ; patients having diseases of the heart, of the lungs, of the 
head, of the spine were there ; the lame, the dumb, the blind, were there. Some were 
able to walk, some were on crutches, some were mounted on asses, and some carried 
on pallets by friends or neighbours. Demoniacs, too, were there, whether those 
whose souls were subject to demoniacal influence, like the " damsel possessed with a 
spirit of divination," of whom we read in Acts xvi. 16 ; or those whose bodies were 
inhabited by evil spirits ; or those, as was generally the case, whose souls and bodies 
were both under the fearful control of the evil one. 2. The number cured. "He 
healed many that were sick," says St. Mark. Why not all? Theophylaot answers 
the question by supposing that " he healed ' many ' instead of ' all,' for the all were 
many ; " but this would seem to require an article before itoaaoSii, and also one before 
kokBi txovTos, viz. the many that were diseHScd. Perhaps we may understand it of the 
limitation of time, that is to say, he healed all that there was time for, as it was already 
eventide when the process began ; or perhaps we may suppose the restriction occasioned 
by the absence in some cases of the conditions of cure, just as we read of a certain 
place (oh. vi. 6) that " he could there do no mighty work." The parallel passage* of 
the other two synoptic Gospels seem to favour the first explanation, as in St. Matthew 



OH. 1. 1—45.] THK GOSPEL ACOOKDING TO ST. MARK. 7T 



we read that he " healed all that were sick,' and in St. Luke that " he laid hig handi 
on every one of them and healed them." 3. .Prohibition of demoniac testimony. Ha 
had already rebuked an unclean spirit that volunteered his unwelcome testimony. He 
forbids their speaking at all, because they knew him — not as the margin has it, " to say 
that they knew him," which woul 1 require \4yttv instead of Ka\f7v — for one reason, 
lest he should appear to be in collusion with them, and lest countenance should thus 
be given to the calumny of the Pharisees, and also lest, if believed when happening to 
speak truly, they might be more readily credited when uttering the most fatal false- 
hoods. 4. Origin and history of the name. The history of the name demons is some- 
what curious, and as follows : — Aai/io»' — derived from Safinay, skilful, and so implying 
superior knowledge, or from Scda, I dispense, as if able to distribute destinies, and so 
superior in power — was at first nearly synonymous with Beds, except that the latter 
signified a particular god or person ; while the former meant rather a deity with respect 
to power; then an inferior deity, or semi-god, an agency intermediate between God and 
man ; in plural, departed spirits of the good, and so tutelary deities or lares ; next, 
any departed spirits or manes. In the New Testament the term signifies, not the 
spirits of the departed, but those evil spirits or fallen an<^els " who kept not their first 
estate," who are distinguished from the elect angels, and of whom we read that " God 
spared not the angels that sinned." They are subject to Satan, but, like him, they can 
only act by permission of God, and in their operations they can neither contravene the 
laws of nature nor interfere with human freedom and responsibility. Powerful for evil 
as they undoubtedly are, leading men captive or working on the children of disobedience, 
they, like th^ir head, have only such power over man as men themselves consent to or 
concede them. Hence Augustine says truly, " Consentientes tenet, non invitos cogit." 
Further, the violation of the rule of neuters plural being constructed with verbs singular 
in iiStiaay, comes under the first of the two following exceptions, that is, when neuters 
imply persons, as riKn, magistrates, and so individuality or pluraUty of persons is 
signified; or in case of inanimate objects, when individuality or plurality of parts i^ 
signified. 5. Devotion of spirit. To extraordinary diligence in business our Lord added 
singular devotion of spirit. After a fatiguing day in the synagogue, then with the sick 
who in such numbers resorted unto him, he at dawn of day next morning retires for 
secret devotion and spiritual communion with his heavenly Father. At daybreak, or 
" when it was day," as St. Luke expresses it, or more exactly, according to St. Mark, 
' early, while it was quite in the night " (npul tvnxov \lav) — at that early hour, inter- 
mediate between night and day, before the light of day has fully dawned or the darkness 
of the night quite departed — he withdrew to some lone and barren spot in one of the 
ravines or mountains, or under some sheltering rock in the district of Capernaum, to be 
alone with God. There he continued in prayer (rpoaitix^ro, imperfect). How beauti- 
fully our Lord instructs us by his tiractice as well as his precept to enter our closet and 
shut to the door, and pray to our Father in secret 1 He further shows us the necessity 
of prayer to maintain the life of the soul and obtain the help of heaven, to prepare us 
for our daily duties and for faithful diligence in the discharge of those duties. At 
the same time he commends the early morning for this exercise of devotion, when the 
feelings are fresh, the spirits in the fittest frame, and the mind free from the distractions 
so common in the after-part of the day. 6. Interruption. But, early as was our 
Lord's matin-hour, he was not secure from interruption. The people (ix^oi, crowds) 
sought him, as St. Luke informs us, while Peter and his companions, as St. Mark tells 
us, with characteristic impetuosity and affectionate eagerness pursued him — actually 
pursued him, as though he had fled away and escaped from them. The word Karttlalar 
is literally " hunted down" or " for; " that is, they pursued him closely, followed hard upon 
his tracks. But it is occasionally used in a good sense, as here ; thus it is used in the 
Septuagint Version of Ps. xxiii. 6, "Surely goodness and mercy shall follow (koto- 
sr»{€i) me." 

n. ClBOUiT THROUGH Galilee. 1. Evangelistic towr. Peter and those with him were 
evidently proud of their Master's great and increasing popularity, for when they had 
found him they tell him gladly, perhaps with somewhat of exaggeration, " All men 
seek for thee ; " or, as in St. Luke, " were earnestly seeking (^irif^roui') him, and tried 
to detain him (Karetxoi')." They evidently wished to keep to themselves or to the city 
of their habitation a monopoly of their Lord's services. But he, unmoved by praise, 



i8 THE GOSPEL ACCORDIKG TO ST. MARK. [cu. i. 1—45 

uninfluenced by popularity, disabuses their minds of tbeir narrowness in selfishly 
seeking to localize him in Capernaum, city though it was, calmly informing them of 
his purpose to itinerate throughout the villages or country towns of that then populous" 
district. At once he puts his plan into execution, assuring them that the great object 
of his mission was not merely to plant the gospel in one spot or one solitary district, 
but to propagate it in all placfS, far off as well as near — " for therefore came I forth." 
This last expression is restricted by some to his coming out of the city of Capernaum, or 
out of the house, or out into the desert place, on the ground that, if the reference was to 
the general object of his mission, the verb would be simply e\ii\vBa, not the compound 
which occurs here, or rather that vapct, or avh, or 4k toS 0eoB, would be employed, as in 
several passages of St. John's Gospel (e.g. viii. 42 ; xiii. 3 ; xvii. 8), to convey that mean- 
ing. The expression is, nu doubt, somewhat indefinite, perhaps purposely indefinite, and so 
susceptible of either a more general or more specific sense ; but by comparing the cor- 
responding passage in St. Luke (i.e. " because unto this have I been sent ") we are shut 
up to the larger and higher and inclusive sense. The whole of the sentence is more 
fully expressed by St. Luke, and is to the effect, " because to the rest of the cities also 
I must declare the glad tidings of the kingdom of God." Accordingly, in pursuance 
of his great object, he went forth " and came preaching into their synagogues, into the 
whole of Galilee, and casting out the demons," as the words (in the critical editions) are 
literally rendered. The number of such synagogues and the extent of the enterprise 
may be estimated from the statement of Josephus in relation to the great number of 
towns and villages with which Galilee was studded, and the exceeding populousness 
of the Galilean provinces in the days of our Lord. He writes (' Bel. Jud.,' iii. :i, 2), 
" Moreover, the cities lie here very thick ; and the very many villages there are here 
are everywhere so full of people, by the richness of their soil, that the very least ot 
them contain about fifteen tiiousand inhabitants." 2. An important variant. We 
may not, however, dismiss this part of the subject without drawing attention to a very 
interesting and important various reading which, on the authority of codices N, B, 
C, L, Q, R, and of tlie Syriao and Coptic versions, substitutes 'lovSalas for ra\i\alas, as 
the Judaean ministiy of our Lord, which is, no doubt, assumed and implied by tha 
synoptists, is nowhere else expressly mentioned by them. — J. J, G. 

Vers. 40 — 45. Parallel passages : Matt. viii. 2 — 4 ; Luke v. 12 — 16. — Tlie cure of 
a leper. I. The disease of lepbost eepresbnts the disease of sin. Of all the 
diseases that have found their way into this world in consequence of sin, and which 
have aflBicted the human race, there is, perhaps, none more dreadful than that of 
leprosy. It was peculiar to Egypt, and native in that country, but passed into Palestine, 
and prevailed over Syria and Arabia also^ It was common among the Jews, as we learn 
from several passages of Scripture, thus, in the Gospel according to St. Luke we read, 
" Many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the prophet." The Hebrew name 
isaraath is from a root which means to strike, smite, also to roughen ; and thus it may 
mean either a stroke or a rough swelling ; while the English name of leprosy, coming 
from the Greek A^po, and that from \4ms, a scale, signifies " the scaly disease." The 
two sure signs of leprosy were the whitening (where it reached) of the usually dark hair 
of the Oriental, and the deepening of the disease below the skin. It was usually deno- 
minated pega, stroke, or hannega, the stroke or wound ; this implied that it was directly 
inflicted by and immediately proceeded from the hand of God ; it was also always 
considered as a punishment for sin. It need scarcely be added that it was a disease ot 
the most virulent kind, and was a striking embl m of sin. 1. It was hereditary ; so with 
sin. That leprosy was hereditary, we may infer from the punishment of Gehazi, 
concerning which it is written, " The leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee 
and unto thy seed, for ever." So also we read of Davi.i's imprecation of leprosy on 
the descendants of Joab, on account of his murdering Abner, saying, " Let there not 
fail from the house of Joab one that hath an issue or is a leper." In like manner, 
the leprosy of sin hai been inherited from the first parents of our race, and has con- 
tinued hereditary throughout every succeeding generation. This remains true, whether 
we hold the doctrine of immediate and antecedent or mediate and consequent imputation 
in reference to the guilt of Adam's first sin ; that is to say, whether we hold with th« 
generality of the Reformed Churches that, in consequence of Adam having beer th« 



OH. I. 1—45.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAUK. 79 

covenant head and representative of his descendants, the guilt or punisliabloness of 
his first sin was incurred by them, antecedently to their own actual transgressions 
and that the corruption of tliefr nature was the first part of that punishment — which 
is knowa as the ductrine of antenatal forfeiture ; or whether we agree with Flacaeug 
and the New England root theory, which, denying the doctrine just stated, affirms 
that, while Adam was punished for his own sin, his descendants are not punishable 
fur it, but derive from him corrupt natures by ordinary generation, and so, sinning 
after his example, are punished for their own sin, their progenitor's sin being thus 
punished " mediately through, and consequently to, their own sin in compliance with 
his example." Even this modified view refers the origin of man's sin to the natural 
descent from Adam, the organic root, so that, as the sap of a tree passes from the root 
along the trunk and through the branches and on to the smallest twigs, inherited 
corruption or derived inherent depravity is traceable, not as a penal consequence of 
Adam's sin, but a natural consequence of generation by or descent from him. Even on 
this low ground, according to which the imputation of Adam's first sin is denied, it is 
admitted that original sin is the inherent hereditary corruption of nature or depravity 
derived from Arlam, just as leprosy, its sorrowful but striking symbol, was hereditary 
to the fourth generation at least. An exceptional view, it must be acknowledged, was 
held by Pelagius and his followers, who denied that man's moral character had suffered 
any injury from the Pall, or that men were born with less ability to do the will of God 
or discharge their duty to him than Adam ; and by consequence denied the necessity 
of Divine grace or any special Divine agency, except indeed to enable men to perform 
more easily what they could accomplish, though less easily, without it, being thus 
capable of and by themselves of attaining to a perfectly holy life. Such doctrines, 
bemg evidently -opposed to the whole scope and many plain statements of Scripture, 
vveie condemned by the Council of Ephesua, a.d. 431, having been vigorously combated 
and confuted by Augustine till his death in the preceding year, a.d. 430 ; and thence- 
forth they disappear till after the Reformation, when they were revived by the Socinians. 
But even the semi-I'elagians admitted original sin to the extent, at least, that man's 
moral nature is more or less corrupted by the Fall, and by consequence stands in need 
of special Divine assistance. Two facts in connection with the introduction of sin, or 
the entrance of moral evil, into our world are undeniable : one is the painful fact that 
the leprous taint of sin is found more or less on every human being; the other is 
equally unquestionable, namely, that man at his creation could not have had that 
taint, for a polluted creature could not have proceeded from the hands of a pure and 
holy God. The truth of revelation, then, remains unassailable, when it teaches that 
man, by disobedience to his Maker, introduced sin, and by sin destroyed himself. 2 
3'Ae leprosy was (according to some authorities) /i?o)/m% contagioits ; so is sin. It has 
not only passed, as already intimated, by inheritance from generation to generation, but 
it passes by contagion from one individual to another individual, or to a number of 
in<lividual8, for one sinner destroys much good. It spreads from family to family, from 
house to house, from one homestead to another, yea, from country to country ; for " evil 
communications corrupt good manners." In its transmission through the generations 
from the Fall to the Flood, it propagated itself so rapidly, and spread so fast and so far 
that its violence became uncontrollable, and nothing could check or stay its virulence ; 
the only remedy that remained was to sweep away and swallow up in the waters of the 
Deluge that race of moral invalids, tainted as they were with this inveterate and deadly 
distemper. And even the waters of the Flood were powerless to cleanse from this moral 
corruption, or to wash away the stain of this sin-leprosy. Again, soon after this great 
catastrophe the taint of this old leprosy exhibited unmistakable symptoms, breaking 
out afresh, and reappearing even in the head of that privileged family which the ark 
bad saved ; for Noah, we read, having planted a vineyard, " drank of the wine, and 
was drunken ; and he was uncovered within his tent." We are aware that the con- 
tagious nature of leprosy is disputed by some, but we prefer the view commonly held 
on the subject. 3. Leprosy rvas small at its first appearance ; so, too, is sin. Leprosy 
commenced with a rising in the skin of the flesh, or a single bright spot. It was so small 
nt the beginning as to be barely perceptible. A few specks or reddish spots on the skin 
wer« all thatappeared at the outset. These spots became more numerous ; they grew larger, 
bleaching the hairs that came in their way ; they overspread the body, crusting it with 



80 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. [ch. l 1—46. 

leprons scurf or shining scales ; tores and swellings ensued. For a long time it seemed 
only cutaneous. But it did not stop with the skin ; it penetrated deep down. It ate its 
way to the bones, it attacked the joints, it reached the marrow. The blood is corrupt, 
portions of the extremities mortify and drop off, a wasting away supervenes, till the 
peer leper, mutilated and disfigured, presents a shocking sight — a hideous spectacle, 
when dissolution at last brings him to a welcome grave. How dreadful was all this I 
And yet how like the leprosy of sin I It also is little in its beginnings, but it makes 
gradual, sometimes rapid, progress. Ko one has become entirely vile all at once. At the 
first appearance of the leprosy of sin in childhood, it is a mere spot — a small speck. The 
beginning may be some slight evasion of parental authority, some trifling act of dis- 
obedience ; or it may be some small departure from strict truth ; or it may be, perhaps, 
a petty act of pilfering, an insignificant iostance of dishonesty; or it may be a little 
outburst of childish passion. It appears so small a matter that the indulgent parent or 
guardian overlooks it as unworthy of notice — at all events, undeserving of punishment j 
or the kind friend laughs at it as a mere cliildisb trick. But ohl let it never be for- 
gotten that that trifling disobedience, or small flb, or petty theft, or little ebullition of 
passion is the first breaking out of a spiritual leprosy — the first manifestation of the 
plague-spot of sin. And who can set limits or bounds to a seemingly small trans- 
gression, once it has been repeated and repeated until it has grown into a habit ? Who can 
tell where that single sin will end? Who can check its onward progress ? What can 
resist its downward sweep when, like the rushing of the roaring torrent, or with more 
than the impetuosity of the mighty waterfall, it overbears and overcomes all resistance, 
hurrying its hapless victim downward to perdition? 4. Leprosy separated those afflicted 
with it from society ; so does sin. As might be reasonably expected, leprosy, from its 
loathsomeness, the ceremonial uncleanness which it produced, as well as its infectious 
nature (if rightly judged to be so), excluded from society and rendered its victims 
a terror to all who saw or met or came near them. Thus we read in Lev. xiii. 45, 
" The leper in whom the plague is, his clothes shall be rent, and his head bare, and 
he shall put a covering upon his upper lip, and shall cry, Tame, tame, Unclean, 
unclean." Here there are four unmistakable signs, which, when combined, served 
as a sufficient deterrent to any wayfarer or unwary person that might through igno- 
rance or inadvertence approach the leprous person, and thereby catch infection, or at 
least contract ceremonial defilement. The bare head, with locks dishevelled ; the 
garment rent from the neck to the waist; the beard, man's ornament, covered in token 
of grief ; — were the ordinary signs of mourning for the dead or any great calamity ; 
while the bandaged chin, and muffled lips uttering in doleful accents the melancholy 
cry, " Unclean, unclean ! " was a warning which the most unwary passers-by were 
not likely to neglect at the time or ever after to forget. But it is further added, 
" He shall dwell alone ; without the camp shall his habitation be." Prom other 
passages of the Word of God, we learn that they were not only separated from inter- 
course with others, but dwelt in a separate house, companied together, and were cut ofi 
entirely from the house of God. What a dreadfully deserted condition I Their nearest 
relatives shunned them, their dearest friends dreaded them, the tendeiest ties were 
sundered by this loathsome disease of leprosy. Their touch was feared and fled from, 
for it was the touch of contagion; their company was shunned, for it imparted 
uncleanness and defilement ; their very breath was dreaded as the pestilence, for it was 
the breath of diseaso and death. Here, in all this, is a sad symbol of sin. It separates 
between^ us and our God ; it excludes us from his presence and privileges, from his 
friendship and family ; it shuts us out from the society of his saints, from their 
benefits and blessedness ; and, unless cleansed in God's own way, it will shut us out 
at last finally and for ever from his heavenly temple, for " without are dogs, and 
sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and 
maketh a lie." When King Uzziah became leprous in the house of the Lord, " the 
priests thrust him out from thence, yea, himself hasted also to go out, because the Lord 
had smitten him." If we could suppose the possibility of an unrenewed sinner being 
admitted into heaven — if for a moment we might suppose the occurrence of a thing 
impossible, for the unclean shall never enter there — would not the pure spirits of that 
upper sanctuary rush upon that unholy one with deepest indignation, thrusting him 
out at ont» from thence, and hurling him over the high battlements of heaven ? Ye^ 



OH. 1.1— :15.| THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MAEK, 81 

would not such a one himself, Uzziah-like, haste to get away from so pure a place, 
and to escape from such holy companionship ? for heaven would not be heaven, and 
could not be heaven, to an unregenerate soul. How terrible the sinner's condition, 
shunned as he is by the saintly, dreaded as he is by the pure and holy, separated 
from fellowship and communion with God on earth, shut out from the enjoyment and 
glory of God in heaven, secluded from all that is holy and happy both here and 
hereafter, and last of all and worst of all, shut up with the spirits of the lost — shut 
up with the filthy, the fearful, the unbelieving and abominable ; shut up with the 
devil and his angels ; shut up with companions in misery, whose very companionship, 
apart altogether from " the worm that dieth not and the fire that is unquenchable," 
would be in itself a hell ! 5. Leprosy was incurable hy huTnan power ; sin is so like- 
wise. The disease of leprosy, as we have seen, proceeded immediately from the 
hand of God, and so it was the hand of God alone that could remove it. No human 
power, no means that man might use, no medicines of any kind could avail aught, 
either for the relief or removal of this fatal malady. This will, perhaps, account for 
the circumstance of St. Matthew giving such prominence to our Lord's cure of the 
leper by recording thai; miracle first. The first miracle publicly performed by our 
Lord was the changing of water into wine, as we read, " This beginning of miracles 
did Jesus in Cana of Galilee." But St. Matthew, writing immediately for the Jews, 
records this miracle of our Lord's curing the leprosy first : though not first in the 
order of time, he gives it the precedence notwithstanding, because it was best calcu- 
lated to impress his countrymen with the possession by Jesus of Divine power, and so 
of a Divine commission, since it was their fixed belief that none but God could effect 
a cure. Hence the King of Israel said, " Am I God, to kill and to make alive, that 
this man doth send unto me to recover a man of his leprosy ? " In like manner the 
miracle which St. Luke, writing for the Gentiles, records first, was the cure of a 
demoniac, which proved the power of Jesus over those demons or deities which the 
Gentiles worshipped. Hence, too, as may be observed in passing, it is that because 
the word demon was equivocal in its meaning among the Gentiles — sometimes denoting 
a good and sometimes an evil spirit — St. Luke restricts the meaning to the latter by 
the epithet " unclean " (Sucaddprov) ; but St. Matthew never so employs it, and does not 
need to employ it, as the term had only the one sense of evil spirit among the Jews. 
Now, it is the same with the disease of sin. It never gets cured of itself ; no mortal 
man can recover himself from it ; no human being can restore the individual suffering 
from its pollution ; no created power can heal this leprosy of the soul. God alone can 
deliver from this spiritual disease ; the blood of Christ alone can cleanse from its 
defilement. 

II. The cleansing of leprosy eepbesbnts the forgiveness of sin. There is a 
remarkable and instructive contrast between the cleansing of a leper, recorded in the 
Old Testament, and the cleansing of the leper mentioned in the Gospels. That con- 
trast holds both between the respective applicants and the different means of cure 
adopted. Naaman's conduct — for his is the case referred to — presents a true picture of 
the natural heart proud and unhumbled. Had he been commanded to do some great 
thing, he would have readily complied ; but the process prescribed by the prophet was 
too simple, the mode of cure too easy, and Naaman too proud to descend to it. He 
became wroth, and went away. The leper in the passage before us is determined to 
dare or die ; he defies the law of limitation which prohibited his approach or address to 
his fellow-men, and restricted him within certain bounds to prevent his contact with 
the living; thus, breaking through the eordcm sanitaire, he makes his way to 
Jesus. Again, the prophet in the former case prescribed certain means, saying, " Go 
and wash in Jordan seven times." Here Jesus simply .speaks the leper into health. 
1. The respectful application of the leper to owr Lord. This is clearly seen when we 
combine the expressions in the different narratives. St. Matthew states generally that 
he worshipped him (■!rpo(reKirei). The word employed, coming from a root which means 
to kiss, kiss the hand to, as a mark of respect and homage, conveys the idea of obeisance 
or reverence to one greatly superior. St. Mark furtherinfcrms us that he/eU on his knees 
to him (yovvirfT&v') ; while from St. Luke we learn that, in his extremity and earnest 
entreaty, he fell on his face prostrate before him (jreffiii' ^xl irp6aairov). With like 
humility, reverence, and earnestness must we come to Jesus. Like the leper, we must 

ST. MARK. o 



82 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. i. 1— 4& 



come in humility, feeling that we are nothing and that Christ is all. We must come 
in earnest, feeling the desperate nature of our disease and our hopeless, perishing, and 
lost condition without him. The lepers of Samaria ventured at all hazards to fall into 
the host of the Syrians, " If they save us ahve, we shall live ; and if they kill us, we 
shall but die." We must also with like reverence and decision approach. It was an 
act of profound homage, as to a superior, on the part of the leper, not yet perhaps of 
worship in the higher sense as to a Divine being; but we, with superior knowledge of 
his claims, must acknowledge him as our Lord, worship him as our Messiah, bow in 
homage at his feet, and embrace him as our Saviour. Thus approaching him as lowly 
penitents, humble suppliants, and polluted transgressors, we, too, shall experience his 
power, and realize the preoiousness of his salvation. 2. The reception of the leper 
by our Lord. St. Luke, with his customary medical exactness, tells us that this was 
a leper of no common kind, but one afflicted with the worst type of the disease, 
the sorest stage of it — he was full of leprosy (irx^prjs Aeirpoi). St. Mark, again, 
makes us acquainted with our Lord's deep feeling of compassion for this poor sufferer 
(a-irAayxytireels). "He stretched out his hand to him and touched him." By that 
touch he inspired the man with confidence, who believed in his power to cleanse, but 
doubted his willingness to risk contagion or ceremonial defilement ; by that touch he 
proved himself " Lord of the Law," and exempt from its ritualistic restrictions ; by that 
touch he broke through the ceremonialism which had usurped the place of true religion 
among the degenerate Jews of that time ; by that touch, perhaps, he gave a sensible 
sign that healing virtue had already proceeded from him, and that the leper was 
virtually cleansed ; by that touch he showed, as if by symbol, that he himself was 
made in the likeness of sinful flesh, and yet remained unsoiled by sin. 3. The response 
of our Lord to the application of the leper. The application of the leper shows (1) the 
prevalent opinion about this malady, that it was not a mere disease, but a defilement ; 
and therefore he speaks of cleansing (KaBapia-ai) rather than cure. But (2) the applica- 
tion implies faith in the Saviour's power. He did not question the Saviour's ability, he 
only doubted his willingness to exercise that ability on his behalf. He did not say, 
" If thou canst," but " If thou wilt, thou canst." The form of conditional sentence by 
which the leper expresses his mind of the matter is that of probable contingency {ictv 
with the subjunctive), and so not a mere supposition. This unquestioning faith in 
Christ's power was laith of no ordinary kind; it was faith in his power as something 
move than human. This leper was painfully conscious of his disease ; he knew that 
the " finger of God " had touched him ; he must have been convinced that no earthly 
power could cleanse or cure him, and therefore, when he confessed his belief in Jesus' 
power to effect it, he must have attributed to him vastly more than human potency — in 
a word, not less than power Divine. The term of address, Ki5pie, is more than respect 
— it is belief in his Messiahship. True, he doubted the will ; he feared, and no 
wonder, lest the foulness of his disease, its loathsomeness, its extremely disgusting 
nature, its thorough repulsiveness, might act as a deterrent, and prevent the much- 
desired relief. But no, Jesus meets him on his own ground ; he responds to him in 
his own chosen terms ; he employs in reply the very words. And thus, by his hand 
outstretched in kindness, by the touch of tenderness, by the look of compassion, and 
now by the words he uses, and the tone, perhaps, in which he utters them, he at once 
reassures the sufferer, and at once and for ever removes his suffering. The leper had 
said, " If thou wilt ; " Jesus replies, " I will." The leper had said, " Thou canst cleanse 
me ; " Jesus responds, " Be cleansed." He spake the word, and healed him ; he gave 
the command, and the leper was cleansed. The scales fell off, the swellings subsided, 
the sores were healed, the unnatural whiteness gave place to the hue of health, his skin 
became fresh as that of a chubby child. The words of Ambrose (3) have been often 
repeated ; they are worth remembering, and are as follows :— " Vblo dicit propter Phutinum j 
imperat propter Arium ; tangit propter Manichxum ; " " Photinus held Christ to be a 
mere man ; Arius maintained his inequality with the Father ; and Manioh»us asserted 
he was only a phantom without human flesh, i. Relation of this to ourselves. In 
coming to Christ we must (Ij) have faith in his power. All we can expect from an 
earthly physician is that, with his knowleilge of the healing art, he will do the best 
he can ; that he will exert his medical skill to the utmost ; that he will leave nc means 
•r medicinei unapplied. But, with all his skilfulness and integrity of purpose and 



DH. 1.1— 45,] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 83 

earnest desire to effecJ a cure, the appliances may be unavailing, the utmost exertionj 
unsuccessful, and the disease may pruve fatal. The soul's leprosy is beyond the powei 
of any earthly physician ; it baiHes all human skill, and, if uncured, it ends in eternal 
death. We bless God there is one, though only one, Physician in heaven above or 
earth beneath that has power to cleanse and cure. In coming for cure we must 
(2) acknowledge our dependence on his sovereign will. We have n9 claim on him, 
nothing to recommend us to him, no merit to plead ; we must refer ail to his will, 
depend wholly on his mercy, trust his unlimited grace, cast ourselves at his feet, 
saying with the leper, " If thou wilt, thou canst." But (3) no one ever applied to 
him in this way whose application was in vain ; no one ever came to him humbly 
and sincerely that was sent away uncured ; no one ever came to him for cleansing 
that went unblest away. " Him that cometh unto me I will in no wise cast out." 
Once more, (4) while at the first we refer everything to the will of the Phy- 
sician, we must ever after in everything yield obedience to that will and follow his 
directions, however mysterious or humbling they may be, whatever self-denial or 
self-sacrifice they may require. " See thou say nothing to any man ; but go thy way, 
show thyself to the priest ; " such is the direction given to the leper, now cleansed and 
cured. It has been well said, in reference to our Lord sending the leper to the priest, 
that "though as Ood he had just showed himself above the Law, yet as man he 
came io fulfil the Law." But why command him "to say nothing to any man"? 
To teach the avoidance of boasting and of ambition to his followers, according to Chry- 
sostom ; lest the crowd, attracted by and astonished at his miracles merely, should not 
allow sufficient opportunity for teaching, according to Beza; lest the report of the 
miracle might outrun him, and the priest, through ill will or envy, refuse to pronounce 
him cleansed, according to Grotius and others ; other reasons have been assigned, e.g. 
the avoidance of tumult and excitement, or the subordinate place of miracles in his 
ministry ; it was rather to lose no time in conversation about the cure, but to regard it 
of prime importance and claiming first attention to get his cleansing attested by the 
priest and to prove his gratitude by works rather than words, presenting the ofiering 
enjoined in the Law recorded in Lev. xiv. 4 — 10. " The customary salutations were 
formal and tedious, as they are now, particularly among Druses and other non-Christian 
sects, and consumed much valuable time. . . . Another propensity an Oriental can 
scarcely resist, no matter how urgent his business, is, that if he meets an acquaintance, 
he must stop and make an endless number of inquiries, and answer as many." But (5) 
the testimony desired was official proof of the reality of the man's cleansing by tlie 
scrutiny and certificate of the priest ; or it was to prove the Saviour's reverence for the 
Law ; or perhaps even for a testimony against the people, because of unbelief in not 
acknowledging his Messiahship, notwithstanding all his mighty works. 

Lessonp. 1. No bodily disease is one-millionth part so terrible in its ravages as sin, of 
which leprosy is such a special and striking type ; none so dreadful in its results, or 
so destructive in its consequences. It darkens that spirit in man that once refiected so 
purely and perfectly the image of the Creator ; it defiles the fountain-head of thought 
and feeling ; it destroys the health and happiness of the soul. 2. Our Lord is able to 
deliver from this disease and save from sin. This miracle, as a sort of acted parable, 
plainly and impressively teaches this. He spake the omnific word that cleansed the 
leper though the exercise of his volition was all that was needed, for he had already 
touched him, to show, perhaps, that the foul disease was gone. He is as willing as he 
is able, he is as ready as he is powerful, his love being great as his power. He is more 
willing to heal than we are to seek and accept the blessing. 3. He is not only willing, 
but waiting to bestow on us present and immediate blessings. Present pardon and 
polity and peace, immediate grace and instant loving-kindness, instantaneous spiritual 
he&lth, as well as future everlasting happiness, are among the boons which he stands 
waiting to confer. 4. Present application is our duty as well as our privilege. The 
present is his accepted time ; he is willing to receive us now, he is waiting to cleanse 
us now, he is ready to bless us now. Present opportunities may not return, present 
impressions may be effaced and never renewed ; his spirit will not always strive, hii 
salvation will not be offered evermore. — J. J. G. 



84 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. n. 1— 2a 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTEB n. 



Vet. 1. — The first sentence of this verse is 
better rendered thus : And when he entered 
again (EiVexeiy wdMy) into Capernaum after 
some days; literally, a/tercZo^s (Si' ^l^epwj'). It 
is probable that a considerable interval had 
taken place since the events recorded in the 
former chapter. It was noised that he was 
in the house (Srt els oTk6v iarl) ; or, if the 
in be regarded as recitative, t( was noised, 
Se i$ in the hotue, at home, in his usual 
place of residence at Capernaum. 

Ver. 2. — Many were gathered together, so 
that there was no longer room for them (So-re 
;UT)KtTi x''P^^''% ^0, not even about the door. 
The description is very graphic. The house 
could not contain them, and even its court- 
yard and approaches were inconveniently 
thronged. This is one of the many ex- 
amples of minute observation of details, so 
observable in St. Mark's Gospel. And he 
preached (i\d\ei) — more literally, was speak- 
ing — ^the word unto them. This little sen- 
tence indicates the great object of his 
ministry. The exercise of miraculous power 
was subordinated to this; the miracles being 
simply designed to fix the attention upon 
the Teacher as One sent from God. 

Vers. 3, 4. — And they come, bringing unto 
him a man sick of the palsy, borne of four. 
Here again the minuteness of detail is very 
observable. It is also interesting to notice 
how the three writers of the synoptic 
Gospels supplement and illustrate one 
another. St. Matthew gives the outline, 
St. Mark and St. Luke fill up the picture. 
St. Luke (v. 18) tells us how they sought 
means to bring the paralytic into Christ's 
presence. They carried bun on his bed up 
the flight of steps outside the house, and 
reaching to the roof; and then both St. 
Mark and St. Luke tell us how, having first 
removed a portion of the tiling and broken 
up the roof, they then let him down through 
the opening thus made into the midst before 
JeBUs. The chamber into which he was thus 
abruptly lowered was most probably what 
is elsewhere called the " upper chamber," 
a large central room, convenient for the 
purpose of addressing both those who filled 
it and also the crowd that thronged the 
outer court below. 

Ver. 5. — Son, thy sins be forgiven thee j 
literally, thy sins are forgiven. The word 
" son " is in the Greek the more endearing 
word (tc/cj/ok) " child." St. Luke uses the 
word " man." St. Matthew adds the words 
" Be of good cheer." It is here to be care- 
fully observed that the spiritual gift, the 
gift of forgiveness, is first conveyed; and 



we must also notice the authoritative eha' 
racter of the address, "Thy sins are for- 
given." Bede observes here that our Lord 
first forgives his sins, that he might show 
him that his suffering was ultimately due 
to sin. Bede also says that he was borne of 
four, to show that a man is carried onwards 
by four graces to the assured hope of heal- 
ing, namely, by prudence, and courage, and 
righteousness, and temperance. Jesus seeing 
their faith. Some of the Fathers, as Jerome 
and Ambrose, think that this faith was in 
the bearers of the sick man, and in them 
only. But there is nothing in the words to 
limit them in this way. Indeed, it would 
seem far more natural to suppose that the 
paralytic must have been a consenting 
party. He must have approved of all that 
they did, otherwise we can hardly suppose 
that it would have been done. We may 
therefore more reasonably conclude, with 
St. Chrysostom, that it was alike their faith 
and his that our Lord crowned with his 
blessing. Thy sins are forgiven. These 
words of our Lord were not a mere wish 
only ; they were this sick man's sentence of 
absolution. They were far more than the 
word of absolution which Christ's ambas- 
sadors are authorized to deliver to all those 
who " truly repent and imfeignedly believe." 
For Christ could read the heart, which they 
cannot do. And therefore his sentence is 
absolute, and not conditional only. It is 
not the announcement of a qualified gift, 
but the assertion of an undoubted fact. In 
his own name, and by his own inherent 
power, he there and then forgives the man 
his sins. 

Veis. 6, 7.— The words. Why doth this 
man thus speak blasphemies \ in accordance 
with the altered reading (fi\arr<(,riii.ei for 
$\a(rpi!ilj.tas), should stand thus: Why doth 
this man thus speak 1 he bhisphemeth. It is 
evident that the scribes, who were secretly 
amongst themselves finding fault with our 
Lord's words, understood that, by the use ol 
these words, our Lord was assuming to him- 
self a Divine attribute. And if he had been 
a mere man; if he had not really been, as he 
assumed to be, Divine, the only begotten Son 
of the Father, — then no doubt they would 
have been right in supposing that he blas- 
phemed. But their error was that they oonld 
not perceive in him the glory of the only 
begott;eu Son. The light was shining in 
the darkness, and the darkness apprehended 
it not. 

Vers. 8 — 11. — It does not dearly appear 
whether these niurmurers communicated 
their thoughts audibly to one another. At 
all events, their words were evidently not 



OH. n. 1—28.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST, MABK. 



8S 



heard beyond themselves. But JesuB per- 
ceived in his spirit their reasonings, iie 
knew their thoughts, not by communication 
from another, as the prophets of old had 
things made known to them by revelation, 
bnt by his own Spirit pervading and pene- 
trating all things. From this the Chris- 
tian Fathers, against the Arians, infer the 
divinity of Christ, that he inspected the 
heart, which it is the prerogative of God 
alone to do. St. Chrysostom says, " Be- 
hold the evidences of the divinity of 
Christ. Observe that he knows the very 
secrets of your heart." Nor did Christ 
only perceive their thoughts. He per- 
ceived also the direction in which these 
thoughts were moving. Their feeling was 
no doubt this : "It is an easy thing to claim 
the power of forgiving sin, since this is a 
power which cannot be challenged by any 
outward sign." Now, it is to this form of un- 
belief that the next words of our Lord are 
the answer. It is as though he said, " You 
accuse me of blasphemy. You say that I 
am usurping the attributes of God when I 
claim the power of forgiving sin. You ask 
for the evidence that I really possess this 
power; and you say it is an easy thing 
to lay claim to a power which penetrates 
the spiritual world, and which is therefore 
beyond the reach of material proof. Be it 
BO. I will now furnish that evidence. I 
will prove, by what I am now about to work 
upon the body, that what I have just said 
is effectual upon the spirit. I have just 
said to this paralytic, 'Thy sins are for- 
given.' Yon challenge this power; you 
question my authority. I will now give 
you outward and sensible evidence that this 
is no fictitious or imaginary claim. You see 
this poor helpless, palsied man. I will say to 
him in presence of you all, ' Arise, take up 
thy bed, and go unto thy house.' And if 
simply at my bidding his nerves are braced, 
and his limbs gather strength, and he rises 
and walks, then judge ye whether I have 
a right to say to Mm, ' Thy sins are for- 
given.' Thus, by doing that which ia 
capable of proof, I will vindicate my power 
to do that which is beyond the reach of 
sensible evidence; and I will make manifest 
to you, by these visible tides of my grace, 
in what direction the deep under-current 
of my love is moving." (See Trench on the 
Miracles, p. 205.) 

Yer. 12. — The words are spoken, and the 
paralytic arose, and straightway took up the 
bod (iiyepd'fi, Kol eiiBvs &pas) — such is the 
most approved reading — and went forth 
before them all. There is a spiritual appli- 
cation of this miracle which it is well to 
notice. The paralytic lifting up himself is a 
figure of him who, in the strength of Christ, 
has lifted himself up from, the lethargy 



of sin. He has first applied to Chrisl^ 
perhaps by his own sense of his need, 
perhaps with the help of others. He may 
have had difficulty in approaching him. A 
multitude of sinful thoughts and cares may 
have thronged the door. But at length, 
whether alone or with the kind assistance 
of faithful friends, he has been brought to 
the feet of Jesus, and has heard those words 
of love and power, " Thy sins are forgiven 
thee." And then he will rise and walk. He 
will take up that whereon he lay. He will 
carry away those things whereon he has 
hitherto found satisfaction — ^his love of ease, 
his self-indulgence. His bed, whatever it 
may have been whereon he lay, becomes the 
proof of his cure. When the intemperate 
man becomes sober, the passionate man 
gentle, and the covetous man liberal, he 
takes up that whereon he lay. Thus does 
each penitent man begin a new life ; setting 
forward with new hopes and new powers 
towards his true home, eternal in the 
heavens. 

We are not informed of the effect of 
this miracle upon the scribes and Phari- 
sees. But it is too evident that, though 
they coidd not deny the fact, they would 
not acknowledge the power ; while the mass 
of the people, more free from prejudice, and 
therefore more open to conviction, united in 
giving glory to God. Faith in Christ as 
sent by God was in fact increasing amongst 
the mass of the people ; while unbelief was 
working its deadly result of envy and 
malice amongst those who ought to have 
been their guides and instructors. 

Vers. 13, 14. — It is probable that our Lord 
remained some time at Capernaum before 
he went forth again, The word "again" 
refers to his former going forth (see oh. i. 
35). When he went forth on this occasion he 
appears to have travelled southwards along 
the sea-shore. There, not far from Caper- 
naum, he saw Levi, the son of Alpheeos, 
sitting at the receipt of custom (M rh 
Tfhiiviov); more literally, at the place of 
toll. This place would be in the direct line 
for traders from Damascus to Accho, and 
a convenient spot for the receipt of the 
duties on the shipping. It is observable 
that in St. Matthew's own Gospel (ix. 9) 
he describes himself as "a man named 
Matthew." St. Luke, like St. Mark, calls 
him Levi. The same person is no doabt 
meant. It is most likely that his original 
name was Levi, and that upon his call to be 
an lapostle he received a new name, that of 
Matthew, or Mattathias, which, according 
to Gesenius, means " the gift of Jehovah." 
In his own Gospel he names himself Matthew, 
that he might proclaim the kindness and 
love of Christ towards him, fn the spirit of 
St. Paul, where he lays, 'Christ Jesui 



THE GOSPEL ACCORBING TO ST. MARK. Lch. n. 1— 28 



came into the world to save sinners, of 
whom I am chief" (1 Tim. i. 15). Follow 
me; me, ti.at is, whom you have already- 
heard preaching the gospel of the kingdom 
in Capernaum, and confirming it by many 
miracles, and especially by that conspicuous 
miracle spoken of by all, the healiug of the 
paralytic. St. Chrysostom says that " our 
Lord called Matthew, who was already con- 
strained by the report of his miracles." 
The condescension of Christ is shown ia 
this, that he called Matthew the " publi- 
can," who on that account was odious to 
the Jews, not only to be a partaker of his 
grace, but to be one of his chosen followers, 
a friend, an apostle, and an evangelist. 

It has been urged against the truth of 
Christianity, by Porphyry and others, that 
the first disciples followed Christ blindly, 
as though they would have followed with- 
out reason any one who called them. But 
they were not men who acted upon mere 
impulse and without reason. The miracles, 
no doubt, produced an impression upon 
them. And then we may reasonably sup- 
pose that their moral faculties perceived the 
majesty of Deity shining through the coun- 
tenance of the Son of God. As the magnet 
attracts the iron, so Christ drew Matthew 
and others to himself; and by this attrac- 
tive power he communicated his graces and 
virtues to them, such as an ardent love of 
God, contempt of the world, and burning 
zeal for the salvation of souls. 

Ver. 15. — And it came to pass — lyhera 
seems the best reading — as he was sitting at 
meat in his house. This was the house of 
Matthew. St. Matthew (ix. 10) modestly 
says, "in the house," keeping himself as 
much as possible in the background. St. 
Luke, with greater fulness, says (v. 29) that 
" Levi made him a great feast in his house." 
From this it appears that Matthew at once 
marked the occasion of his call by inviting 
his associates, publicans and sinners, that 
they too, being won by the example and 
teaching of Christ, might be led in like 
manner to follow him. Good is ever dif- 
fusive of itself; and Christian love prompts 
those who have experienced the love of 
Christ to draw others to tlie same fountain 
of mercy. We find publicans and sinners 
constantly associated together ; for, although 
there is nothing necessarily unlawful in the 
office of a tax-gatherer, yet, since men fre- 
quently followed that calling because it 
offered the opportunity for fraud and extor- 
tion, hence tlie "publicans" were, generally 
speaking, odious to the Jews, and regarded 
as nothing better than "sinners." More- 
over the Jews of old maintained that they 
were Abraham's seed, and protested that as 
a people dedicated to God, they ought not 
So be subject to the Romans, who were 



Gentiles and idolaters. They considered 
that it was contrary to the liberty and 
dignity of the children of God that they 
should pay tribute to them, a view which 
increased their prejudice against the tax- 
gatherers. And indeed this wag one main 
cause of the rebellion of the Jews, which 
led finally to their overthrow by Titus and 
Vespasian. 

Ver. 16. — According to the most approved 
readings, this verse should run thus : And 
the scribes of the Pharisees, when they saw 
that he was eating with the sinners and 
puhlicaus, said unto his disciples. He eateth 
and diinketh with publicans and sinners. 
The words "publicans and sinners" are 
thus inverted in their order in the two 
clauses, as though they were convertible 
terms. Of course, the scribes and Pharisees 
had not sat down at this feast, but some ot 
them had probably found their way into 
the chamber in which the feast was going 
on, where they would comment freely upon 
what they saw, and condemn our Lord's 
conduct as inconsistent with his character. 
It is as though they said, " By this conduct 
he transgresses the Law of God and the 
traditions of the elders. Why, then, do you 
follow him ? " 

Ver. 17. — Jesus heard their murmurings, 
and his answer was, They that are whole 
have no need of a physician, but they that are 
sick. As the physician is not infected by the 
disease of the patient, but rather overcomes 
it and drives it from him, so it is no dis- 
grace but rather an honour to the physician 
to associate himself with the sick, and so 
much the more, the greater the sickness. 
So that it is as though Christ said, " I who 
am sent from heaven by the Father, that I 
might be the Physician of the souls of 
sinners, am not defiled by their sins and 
spiritual diseases when I converse with 
them; but rather I cure and heal them, 
which is alike for my glory and for their 
good, and so much the more, the greater 
their sins. For I am the physician of 
sinners, not their companion. But you, O 
scribes and Pharisees, are not the physicians 
but the companions of sinners, and so you 
are contaminated. Nevertheless, you desire 
to be thought righteous and holy ; and 
therefore I do not associate with you, (1) be- 
cause the whole, such as you think your- 
selves to be, need not the spiritual Physician ; 
and (2) because your insincerity and hy- 
pocrisy are an offence to me." 

Ver. 18.— The first sentence of this verse 
should be rendeied thus : And the disciples 
of John and the Pharisees were fasting (^o-ai/ 
vria-T€vovT(s). In all the synoptic Gospels 
we find this incident following closely upon 
what goes before. It is not improbable that 
the Pharisees and the disciples of Johp 



EH. II. 1— '^8.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



81 



we?e fasting at the very time when Matthew 
gave his feast. This was not one of the 
fasts prescribed by the Law ; had it been so, 
it would have been observed by our Lord. 
There were, however, fasts observed by the 
Pharisees which were not required by the 
Law ; there were two in particular of a 
voluntary nature, mentioned by the Pharisee 
(Luke xviii. 12), where he says, "I fast 
twice in the week." It was a custom, ob- 
served by the stricter Pharisees, but not of 
legal oblisation. It was not correct to say, 
but thy disciples fast not. They fasted, no 
doubt, but in a different spirit ; they did 
not fast to be seen of men — they followed 
the higher teaching of their Master. It is 
remarkable to find the disciples of John 
here associated with the Pharisees. John 
was now in prison in the fort of Machserus. 
It is possible that jealousy of the increasing 
influence of Christ may have led John's 
disciples to associate themselves with tlie 
Pharisees. The point of this particular 
attack upon Christ was this : It is as 
though they said, " You claim to be a new 
teacher sent from God, a teacher of a more 
perfect religion. How is it, then, that we 
are fasting, while your disciples are eating 
and drinking?" The disciples of John 
more especially may have urged this out of 
zeal for their master. Such an unworthy 
zeal is too often seen in good men, who love 
to prefer their own leader to all others, for- 
getting the remonstrance of St. Paul, 
" While there is amongst you strife and 
contention, are ye not carnal, and walk 
after the manner of men ? " 

Ver. 19. —The Bridegroom here is Christ, 
because he espoused the human nature, and, 
through it, the Church to himself in his 
holy incarnation. This holy union he 
began by his grace on earth, and he will 
consummate it gloriously with his elect in 
heaven, when " the marriage of the Lamb 
shall have come, and his wife shall have 
made herself ready." Hence John the 
Baptist calls himself the friend of the 
Bridegroom, that is, of Christ. The sons 
^vioV) of the bridechamber are the special 
friends of the Bridegroom, those who are 
admitted into the closest fellowship with 
iiim. The expression is a Hebraism, like 
" the children of disobedience," and many 
other similar forms of expression. So long, 
then, as the bridegroom ia with them they 
cannot fast. But the days will come when 
the bridegroom shall be taken away from 
them, and then shall they fast. It is as 
though our Lord said, " It is not surprising 
that they should not care to fast as long as 
they enjoy my presence; but when I am 
taken from them, then shall they fast." 

Ver. 20. — This is the tirst occasion on 
which our Lord alludes to his removal from 



them. The bridsgroom shall be taken awaj 
from them. The Greek word (iirapSp) con. 
veys the idea of a painful severance! And 
then will they fast in that day (^i- iKchrj rji 
T)nipa). This is the true reading. After 
our Lord's death, his disciples frequently 
fasted as of necessity, and went through 
much privation and trial. And so it must 
be for the most part with all wlio will live 
godly in Christ Jesus, until he returns to 
take to himself his kingdom, when there 
will be a glad and everlasting festival. 

Ver. 21. — No man seweth a piece of new 
cloth — the Greek is (^haieovs ayvdtpou') un- 
dressed cloth, cloth newly woven, and before 
it has been dressed by the fuller — on an 
old garment. The latter part of this versa 
is better rendered, as in the Revised Version, 
thus : Else that which should fill it up taketh 
from it, the new from the old ; and a worse 
rent is made. The meaning of the words 
is this: An old garment, if it be torn, 
should be mended by a patch of old 
material ; for if a patch of new material is 
used, its strength or fulness takes away 
from the old garment to which it is sewn ; 
the old and the new do not agree, the new 
drags the old and tears it, and so a worse 
rent is made. 

Ver. 22. — "Bottles" in this verse is better 
rendered literally wine-shins (hamhs). And 
no man putteth new wine {olvov vioii) into 
old wine-skins; else the new wine will 
burst the skins, and the wine perisheth, and 
the skins ; but they put new wine into 
fresh wine-skins {luiKohs Kacvobs). The sense 
is this : New wine, in the process of fer- 
mentation, will burst old bottles made of 
wine-skins not strong enough to resist the 
strength of the fermenting fluid; so that 
there is a twofold loss — both that of the 
bottles and that of the wine. And there- 
fore new wine must be poured into bottles 
made of fresh wine-skins, which, by reason 
of their strength and toughness, shall be 
able to resist the fermenting energy of the 
new wine. And by these very apt illustra- 
tions our Lord teaches us that it is a vain 
thing to attempt to mingle together the 
spiritual freedom of the gospel with the old 
ceremonies of the Law. To attempt to 
engraft the living spiritual energy of the 
gospel upon the old legal ceremonial uow 
about to pass away, would be as fatal a 
thing as to piece an old garment with new 
material, or to put new wine into old wine- 
skins. There is here, therefore, a valuable 
lesson for the Christian Church, namely, to 
treat new converts with gentleness and con 
sideration. 

Ver. 23. — If there is a rapid sequence in 
this part of the narrative, the fasting re- 
ferred to in the last verses may have taken 
place the day before. St. Luke (vi. l) here 



83 



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. n. 1—28 



adds to St. Mark's account the words, " and 
did eat, rubbing them [that is, the ears of 
com] in their hands ; " an incidental evidence 
of a simple life, that they did not here eat 
prepared food, but the simple grains of 
wheat, which they separated from the chaff 
by rubbing the ears of corn in their hands. 
Tliis passage marks with some nicety the 
time of the year. The corn in that district 
would be ripening about May. It would, 
therefore, be not long after the Passover. 
The difficult expression in St. Luke vi. 1, 
eV (raS^drtft SeurepoTrpt^T^, and which if 
rendered in the Authorized Version " on the 
second sabbath after the first," is reduced 
by the Beviseis of 1881 to the simple phrase 
[iy a-aPfldTcfi), "on a sabbath," there not 
being sufficient evidence to persuade them 
to retain the word SeuTepoTrptSry. But other 
evidences seem to show that the incident 
occurred earlier than as recorded by St. 
Mattliew. The Fathers are fond of spiritual 
applications of this rubbing of the ears of 
corn. Bede, in remarking upon the fact of 
the disciples plucking the ears of corn, and 
rubbing them until they get rid of the 
husks, and obtain the food itself, says that 
they do this who meditate upon the Holy 
Scriptures, and digest them, until they 
find in them the kernel, the quintessence of 
delight; and St. Augustine blames those 
who merely please themselves with the 
flowers of Holy Scripture, but do not rub 
out the grain by meditation, until they 
obtain the real nourishment of virtue. 

Ver. 24. — That which is not lawful. The 
supposed unlawfulness was not the plucking 
of the ears of com with the hand, which was 
expressly permitted by the Law (Deut. 
xxiii 25), but the plucking and eating on 
the sabbiith day. 

Vers. 25, 26. — Sayid . . . and they that 
were with him. This seems opposed to what 
we read in 1 Sam. xxi., where David is stated 
to have been alone. But the facts appear 
to have been these, that David, fleeing from 
Saul, went alone to Ahimelech the high 
priest, and sought and obtained five loaves 
of tlie " shewbread," which he carried away 
with him to his companions in flight, and 
shared with them ; for he says (1 Sam. 
xxi. 2), " I have appointed my servants to 
such and such a place." This incident 
actually happened in the high priesthood 
of Ahimelech the father of Abiathar. Bede 
says that they were both present when 
David came in his distress and obtained 
the ahewbread. But Ahimelech having 
been slain, together with eighty-six priests, 
by Saul, Abiathar fled to David, and became 
his companion in his exile. Moreover, when 
he succeeded to the high priesthood on the 
death of Ahimeieeh, he did far more good 
service than bis father had done, and so was 



worthy of being spoken of with this spe«ia. 
commendation, and as though he was actu- 
ally hish priest, even though his father was 
then living. The words may properly mean 
" in the days when Abiathar was living who 
became high priest, and was more eminent 
than his father." The shewbread ; literally, 
the bread of the fcuse, that is, of the Divine 
presence, symbolizing the Divine Being who 
is the Bread of life. It was directed by the 
Law that within the sanctuary there should 
be a table of shittim (or acacia) wood ; and 
every sabbath twelve newly baked loaves 
were placed upon it in two rows. These 
loaves were sprinkled with incense, and then 
remained there until the following sabbath. 
They were then replaced by twelve newly 
baked loaves, the old loaves being eaten by 
the priests in the holy place, from which it 
was unl awful to remove them . These twelve 
loaves corresponded to the twelve tribes. 
The force of our Lord's reasoning is this : 
David, a man after God's own heart, when 
sorely pressed by hunger, applied to the 
high priest and took some of these sacred 
loaves, loaves which under ordinary circum- 
stances it was not lawful for the lay people 
to eat, because he wisely judged that a 
positive law, forbidding the laity to eat this 
bread, ought to yield to a law of necessity 
and of nature ; which intimates to us that 
in a grave necessity of famine, life may be 
lawfully preserved by eating even sacred 
bread which has been dedicated to God. 
Therefore, in like manner, nay, much more, 
was it lawful for Christ and his disciples to 
pluck the ears of com on the sabbath day, 
tliat by rubbing them in their hands they 
might pick out the good grain and satisfy 
their hunger. 

Ver, 27. — The sabbath was instituted for 
the benefit of man, that he might refresh 
and renew his body, fatigued and worn by 
six days' labour, with the restful calm of the 
seventli ; and that he might have leisure to 
apply his mind to the tiiiugs which concern 
his everlasting salvation; to consider and 
meditate upon the Law of God ; and rouse 
himself, by the remembrance of the Divine 
greatness and goodness, to true repentance, 
to gratitude, and to love. The force of the 
argument is this : The sabbath was made on 
account of man, not man on account of the 
sabbath. The sabbath, great and important 
fls that institution is, is subordinate to man. 
If, then, the absolute rest of the sabbath be- 
comes hurtful to man, a new departure must 
be taken, and some amount of labour must 
be undergone, that man may be benefited. 
Therefore was Christ justified in permitting 
to his disciples a little labour in plucking 
these ears of corn on the sabbath day, in 
order that they may appease their hunger, 
For it is better that the rest of the sabbatlr 



CH. n. 1-28.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



Si 



should bo disturbed, though but a little, 
than that any one of those for whose sake 
the sabbath was instituted should perish. 

Ver. 28. — Therefore the Son of man is Lord 
also of the sabbath. " The sabbath was made 
for man." It is the inferior institution, man 
being the higher, for whose sake the sabbath 
was appointed. But fte Son of man is 
Lord of all men, and of all things that per- 
tain to man's salvation ; therefore he must 
of necessity be Lord even of the sal "bath; 
■o that when he sees fit he can relax or 
dispenie with its obligations. It is true 



that for us Christians the first day of the 
week, the Lord's day, has taken the placa 
of the ancient Jewish sabbath ; but the 
principle here laid down by our Lord is 
applicable to the "first" day no less than 
to the " seventh ; " and it teaches us that 
our own moral and religious advancement 
and that of our brethren is the object which 
we should all aim at in the manner of our 
observance of the Christian Sunday ; while 
we strive to "stand fast in the liberty 
wherewith Christ has made as free." 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — Christ's authority to pardon. Our Lord's miracles of healing were, 
upon the surface and obviously, designed to relieve from suffering and to restore to 
health. They, at the same time, directed the attention of both those benefited, and of 
spectators, to the supernatural power and to the benevolence of the Divine Physician. 
But no Christian can fail to see in them a moral significance. Disorders of the body 
were symbolical of spiritual disease. And the great Healer, who pitied and relieved 
physical suffering, nevertheless had regard to the more serious affections of the soul, and 
designed by his works of healing to direct attention to himself, to excite faith in him- 
self, as able and willing to save sinners. It was in the miracle recorded in the passage 
before us that the Saviour first openly avowed the spiritual purpose of his ministry and 
the spiritual authority he possessed to pardon and to save. 

I. The case m which this authority was exercised. A paralytic is in a condition 
both helpless and hopeless. Deprived by the disease of the command of his limbs, his 
case is one beyond the power of medical skill to deal with. This palsy may, therefore, 
be regarded as symbolical of the sinner's pitiable condition and gloomy prospects. With 
regard to the paralytic's state of mind, we are to presume that he was sensible of his 
sinfulness and of his need of pardon and acceptance ; otherwise our Lord could never 
have treated him as he did. To the sufferer, his bodily malady was indeed afflictive ; 
but he must have had such a " conscience of sin " as to regard his spiritual disorder as 
more oppressive and more pitiable still. The case, then, in which the Lord Jesus will 
exercise his prerogative of pardon, is the case of the sinner whose sin is a felt burden, 
and who brings that burden to the Divine Saviour. 

IL The conditions present when Christ thus exercised his authoritt to 
PARDON. There was a general interest and appreciation in the community ; multitudes 
crowded to hear the Master's words, and many applicants were urgently seeking his 
healing mercy. There were sentiments of pity and kindliness on the part of the 
sufferer's friends, leading to practical interposition on his behalf. What these friends 
could do, they did ; they brought the sufferer to Christ. There was faith, both in the 
paralytic and in his friends — faith, which took a practical form in the approach to Jesus, 
in the conjoined effort to bring the sufferer beneath the notice of the Healer, and 
especially in the perseverance so Ingeniously and strikingly displayed. All these were 
conditions which the Saviour evidently regarded as peculiarly favourable to the public 
exercise of his prerogative to pardon. 

IIL The authokitative manner and language in which the AssmtANCB of 
PARDON WAS GIVEN. There was no inquiry into the state of the paralytic's mind ; for 
Jesus knew what was in man, and needed not to be told. There was no assertion of a 
delegated power ; for the Son of man had authority on earth to forgive sins. There was 
no hesitation, or delay, or qualification. Nor was Christ's language a mere statement 
that the sins of the paralytic were forgiven ; it was an actual pardon and absolution — 
nothing less. When Christ forgives, he forgives freely, fully, absolutely. He came 
to " save his people from their sins." He retains the same power still, and exercises it 
from the throne of his glory. 

IV. The support and vindication or spiritual by miraculous authoeitt. W« 



80 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. u. 1—28. 

can hardly wonder at the captious spirit in wliich Christ's claim was received, at ths 
cavillings of unbelief. Uoless they believed the speaker to be more than a prophet, 
more than human, they must have stumbled at his words. Their general principle was 
correct and sound : " Who can forgive sins, but God only ? " What was passing in 
their minds was, in the circumstances, natural enough. " It is easy to say, ' Thy sins 
are forgiven ; ' but what nssurance have we that the words are anything beyond words ? 
This is ground upon which the speaker cannot be refuted, and yet upon which the 
hearers cannjt be convinced." These reflections, which were passing in the minds of 
the scribes, were known to Christ. There was only one way of meeting the objection, 
of overcoming the difficulty. Jesus must descend to common ground, and appeal to the 
sensfs and the understanding of the bystanders. He accordingly wrought a miracle in 
support of his claims. In doing this, he both relieved the sufferer and vindicated his 
own authority in the spiritual realm. He bade the paralytic arise, take up his couch, 
and return home, sound and well. 

V. The effect produced by this twofold exercise of power. The patient was 
at once pardoned and cured. With rejoicing heart, with restored powers of limb, he 
arose and departed to his house, free from burden of guilt, and free from the pains and 
infirmities of disease. The scribes were silenced ; some may have been convinced, and 
few could have been unimpressed. The witnesses of the miracle were amazed at this 
exhibition of twofold authority by the Lord of nature and of spirits. They are recorded 
to have received the lessons aright ; for they glorified God as the Author of bealing and 
salvation in the person of his Sou, and they recognized the unique authority entrusted 
to One human in form, in feeling, and in voice, but of authority supernatural, beneficent, 
Divine ! 

Application. 1. The sinner may learn from this narrative in what manner, and in 
what spirit, to come to Jesus. 2. And he may be encouraged ty the representation 
here given of Christ's willingness and authority to save. 

Vers. 13 — 17. — Levies disciplesfdp and hospitality. The story of Matthew illustrates 
the part of improbaliilities in human life. Some would see in it the irony of fate ; w-e 
would recognize the mystery of Providence. The evangelists tell us of a man who 
occupied the humble and even despised position of collector of Roman dues or customs 
by the shores of the little Lake of Gennesaret, who was summoned to leave this lowly 
occupation, for what seemed the yet humbler office of attendant and scholar to a 
peasant Teacher, but who, in course of time, became the chronicler of his Master's life 
and teachings, and thus the writer of a treatise which stands first in the New 
Testament — a volume which has been more widely circulated and read than any other 
composition in any language spoken by man 1 Looking back upon the call of Matthew, 
we can see in it an importance which none of the bystanders coul<l possibly have 
surmised. The narrative yields instructive lessons, whether we consider the conduct of 
Levi himself, or study the action and the very memorable language used on this occasion 
by our Lord. 

I. Taking first the conduct of this toll-taker or tax-gatherer of Gennesaret, 
we remark in him an instance of: 1. A man forsaking a lucrative occupation in order 
to follow Christ. MatthlW had no doubt found time, amidst his many and exacting 
avocations, to resort to the Saviour's society and to listen to his public teaching. In 
this he furnishes us with an example of the effort and the self-denial which business 
men may find to be profitable to them, if they will, at some loss of time and gain, take 
advantage of opportunities of Christian fellowship and instruction. And when the time 
and the call came, the same spirit of self-sacrifice led this devout man to relinquish his 
secular occupation and emoluments, and to attend upon the Prophet of Nazareth, to 
learn his mind and to qualify for his service. Are none such called to a similar surrender 
to-day ? See also : 2. A man using his social influence to bring his companions under 
tht teaching of the Saviour. The feast to which Matthew invited his old associates 
was not merely complimentary or convivial. There can be no question that he was 
actuated by a high motive in inviting people of this class to meet Jesus. Probably it 
was the best, possibly it was the only, way in which this peculiar class could be brought 
into contact with the great Teacher. How well it is that those who have the means of 
doing so should use their hospitality for benevolent and truly Christian purposes— 



OH. II. 1—28.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 91 

should bring together those who need and those who are prepared to impart some 
spiritual blessing, and should thus instrumeutally bring together the sinner and the 
Saviour ! 

II. But we have here also lessons derivable from the conduct of Christ. 1. Christ's 
disregard and defiance of public opinion. This is evident (1) in his selection of 
disciples and apostles. He not only chose the lowly and the obscure; he, in this 
instance especially, chose the despised. The collectors of the Roman revenue were, 
among the Jews, the mark of general obloquy and contempt. The Son of n:an, who him- 
self came from the despised Nazareth, selected his friends from the mean and unlettered ; 
and in the case of Matthew he took a man from a sordid and repulsive calling to be an 
apostle of the greatest religion of the world. It is the wont of Divine wisdom to use 
" things which are not to bring to nought things which are." (2) In his companionship 
and social intercourse. That Jesus should eat and drink with publicans and sinners excited 
the surprise and the hatred of the " scribes of the Pharisees," who accounted the common 
people as accursed. But the rule of Jesus was to go where he could do the Father's will, 
and pluck men as brands from the burning. It is not well to be a " companion of fools," 
yet there are occasions upon which the mature and established Christian will do well 
to seek the society of the ignorant and debased, with the view of instructing and 
elevating them by the gospel of salvation. 2. Christ's vindication of this disregard 
and defiance. He had a reason for acting as he did. (1) Jesus recognized men's 
spiritual need. To the scribes, the guests at Levi's house were simply contemptible 
sinners, but to the holy Lord they were the spiritually sick ; he saw upon them the 
marks of a dire disorder, the promise of approaching death. This is the just and Divine 
light in which to look at the misled and erring children of men. When we regard 
them thus, not contempt, but pity, will fill our hearts. (2) Jesus asserted his own 
power to heal and save and Mess. He was the Divine Physician, in whom alone is 
help and hope for man. Bad as was the case of the " sinners," it was not beyond the 
power of his skill and kindness. He had purposes of mercy and power to save. And 
from the ranks of the sinners Jesus won over many to be soldiers of righteousness ; 
from the pest-houses of the plague-stricken he drew forth many who, restored to 
spiritual health, became in turn amongst their sinful fellow-men, " ministers to minds 
diseased." 

Application. 1. Let preachers and teachers of the gospel regard none as so base in 
condition, or so depraved in character, as to be beyond the power of Christ to save. 
2. Let those who are humbled beneath a sense of sin and ill desert be encouraged to 
come to Jesus, who will both welcome them into his presence, and confer upon them 
all the priceless blessings of salvation and of eternal life. 

Vers. 18 — 22. — Christianity and asceticism. Strange as it seems, it is unquestion- 
able that the very humanity of Jesus, his truly broad and human sympathies, were an 
offence to the religious leaders of his time. The Pharisees fasted oft; John came 
neither eating nor drinking; Jesus, who came that he might live among men and 
who associated with them in all their innocent occupations and enjoyments, excited the 
displeasure and malice of those who were, too superficial and ceremonial to understanci 
his large-heartedness and spirituality. Accordingly, when our Lord joined the festive 
party at Levi's house, there arose questionings which issued in the explanations givet 
in this passage of the relation between the old religion and its asceticism, and the new 
religion and its cheerfulness and Divine breadth. 

I. A PERSONAL AND TEMPORARY REASON why the disciples of Jesus should not be 
ascetic. Like a true Leader and Master, Jesus defends his followers, whereinsoever 
their conduct admits of defence. The figure which he employs is one which John 
bad already used, designating his Divine successor the Bridegroom who should possess 
the bride. The true ground of Christian joy is, in this passage, figuratively but 
beautifully explained. The Jewish wedding was an occasion for festivity, rejoicing, 
music, and society. The companions of the bridegroom — "children of the bride- 
chamber" — were his choicest and most trusted and beloved friends. They were happy 
in their friend's society, and rejoiced with him in his joy, and took a proAiinent part in 
the festivities appropriate to the occasion. The Lord Jesus honours his disciples by 
describing them as sustaining such a relationahio to him, the Divine Bridegroom. 



9a THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. u. 1— 28 



Whilst he was with them, how could they he sad? how could they fast? how could 
they refrain from holy mirth and pious songs ? There is no ground of joy so just, so 
sacred, as the friendship of Jesus. To have him with us alway, to hear his voice, to 
he assured of his interest and love, — this is the purest satisfaction and the highest glad- 
ness Known to human hearts. " I have," says he to his own — " I have called you friends." 
" Tour sorrow shall he turned into joy." Christ's defence, then, is, that at the time 
and in the circumstances a joyful spirit was natural and blameless in his companions 
and disciples. And this was evidently, at this period at all events, the case. To the 
reader of the Gospels (although M. Renan has, no doubt, exaggerated the facts), it is 
clear that, in their earlier " progresses " through Galilee, our Lord and his followers led a 
cheerful, bright, and joyous existence. Time enough to mourn when their Lord, the 
Bridegroom, should be taken away from them. Then, at his ayjproaching departure, 
sorrow filled their hearts. Yet this was but for a season ; with his return at Pentecost, 
the joy of the Church returned. 

II. A OBNEBAL AND ENDTJEING EEA80N WHY THE DISCIPLES OF JbSUS SHOtTLD NOT BE 

ASOBTio. True, Christ has gone; so, if his personal presence alone restrained the 
disciples from mourning, sadness and fasting would be appropriate in the Church of the 
Redeemer, as the customary habit and sentiment. But the case is otherwise ; our Lord 
himself has justified, in this passage, a lasting antagonism between his religion and 
practices of asceticism. Not that, under the Christian dispensation, fasting is unlawful; 
but that it should be rather exceptional and special than distinctive of the new life. 
The fact is, as Christ shows in these two parables, that there is a want of harmony 
between the old practices and the new faith, the old garment and the new cloth, the 
old skins and the new wine. 1. Christianity is a religion of the spirit rather than oj 
the form. Our Lord teaches that it is better not to appear unto men to fast ; it is better 
to humble ourselves in secret, because of our sins and the sins of our time, before our 
(Jod. There is much danger of regarding fasting as in itself, because a mortification of 
the flesh, acceptable to God. This is a mistaken conception, as may be learned even 
from some passages of Old Testament Scripture. 2. Christianity is a religion of 
love rather than ^ fear. Those who are in dread of justice may seemingly be justified 
in their attitude of mind, when they so give way to sentiments of abject self-abasement 
that they cover themselves with sackcloth and ashes, and deprive themselves of 
necessary food. But those who are conscious that, through Christ, they are living in 
the enjoyment of the Divine favour, can scarcely be expected — at least, as an habitual 
exercise — to mourn and fast. They " rejoice evermore ; " the "joy of the Lord is their 
strength;" his " statutes are their song in the house of their pilgrimage." For them, 
"perfect love casteth out fear." 3. Christianity is a religion rather of hopefulness 
than of gloom. It teaches us to look forward to the future with bright anticipation, 
ardently to desire the return of the Lord in triumph, and cheerfully to prepare for a 
glorious future. The Bridegroom will return and claim his own ; how can the spiritual 
spouse do other than look forward, hopefully and joyfully, to the glad and festive day ? 
ni. The general principle underlying our Lord's reply is this: The form of eeligion, 

WITHOUT THE EBALITT AND SPIEITUAL BTJB8TAN0E, IS ALTOGETHEE VADT. All religioUS 

observances have a tendency, — such is the weakness of human nature, — to harden into 
dead formalities. At first they are good, for they are the expression of sincere feeling 
and conviction. But by-and-by the spiritual disappears, and the mere ceremony 
remains. And the unspiritual mistake the form for the substance, and come to flatter 
themselves that they are religious and that it is well with them, when they are 
simply by ceremonial excuses justifying themselves for a heart and life profoundly 
irreligioua. Thus it was with multitudes of the Jews, in the time of our Saviour and 
of the apostles. What stress they laid upon circumcision, upon sacrifices, upon 
ceremonial purity, upon tithes, upon alms, upon sabbath-keeping, upon observing sacred 
festivals, upon fasts appointed and traditional, upon the customs and superstitions 
received from their fathers ! And how, at the same time, they neglected the weightier 
matters of the Law ! Hence our Lord's frequent upbraidings of the scribes and 
Pharisees. They deceived themselves, they deluded others, they hindered the hearts 
of men from receiving the gospel. When Christianity was established, it was threatened 
by the same disastrous tendency. First, the Judaizers endeavoured to overlay th« 
spirituality of the gospel with Jewish rites and customs. And afterwards, whei 



CH.II.1— 28.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDiNG TO ST. MARK. 93 

Christianity was in the act of vanquishing paganism, it submitted to assume much 
that was heathen. The great system of sacerdotalism, with its sacramentarianism, its 
saint-worship, and its mortifications and asceticism, was acquired from heathenism. 
And how much of this survives even to the present day, we have only to look around 
us that we may see. Now, Christ in his answer supplies the true corrective and safe- 
guard against the action of this evil tendency. Why should his disciples fast, when 
(as a matter of fact) they were happy and jubilant ? It would have been mere formality 
and hypocrisy, than which nothing was more repugnant to his spiritual doctrines and 
the character of his religion. 

Application. 1. Let those who fast, fast in spirit, and afSict the soul, and place no 
confidence in the flesh. 2. Let those who feast, feast as the children of God and the 
friends of Christ. 3. Let the demeanour of Christians be such, so glowing with sincere 
and hopeful cheerfulness, as to commend the glorious gospel. 

Vers. 23—28. — The sabhath. The grounds upon which the Pharisees and scribes 
took offence at our Lord and his ministry were various. Some of these — as, e.g., his 
claim to pardon sin — were very serious ; for in such a case Jesus was either an im- 
postor and blasphemer, or he was the Son of God. Others were very trivial, as, e.g., 
his neglect of some unauthorized traditions, or his preference of moral duty to obser- 
vance of the ceremonial law. In this and in the following incident, the sabbath was 
the ground of misunderstanding, and Christ's preference of humanity to cer^onial 
compliance occasioned, on the part of his adversaries, hatred, enmity, and conspiracy. 
Still, the malice of Christ's foes furnished opportunities for the assertion of great 
religious principles. From this narrative we learn that human need should take 
precedence of ceremony and tradition. There is ever a danger lest the outward 
husk of religion should be mistaken for the precious kernel. Nowhere is this danger 
more stringently guarded against than in the conduct and the discourses of Christ. 
The principle is vindicated — 

I. By an appeal to Old Testament history. It was a master-stroke of contro- 
versy on the part of the great Teacher to appeal to the Scriptures, which the Pharisees 
professed to hold in such reverence. The conduct of David, one of the great heroes 
and saints of their national history, was quoted in justification of the conduct of the 
disciples of Jesus. To eat is a necessity of human nature, and some kind of action, of 
rudimentary labour, is necessary in order to eating. The disciples of Jesus had plucked 
ears of corn, had rubbed the grain free from husk in their hands, and had eaten, in 
order to satisfy their hunger. Possibly in so doing they had violated the tradition of 
the elders, whichmaintained that anything approaching to labour on the sabbath day 
was an infraction of the Divine command. However, the Lord vindicated them by the 
example of David, who, for the purpose of providing food for himself and his com- 
panions, had not hesitated to take the shewbread of the sanctuary, which was reserved 
for the use of the priests alone ; and this probably also on the sabbath day. Punc- 
tiliousness of observance must give way before those necessities which the Creator has 
impressed upon our human nature. 

II. By the assbetion that the sabbath is the means to which human wblfabe 
IS THE END. How blessed an institution is the weekly day of rest ! The importance 
of the sabbath to man's bodily and spiritual welfare is very much overlooked by many 
advocates for the employment of labour on that day, and by many Christians who, in 
their zeal for men's instr jotion and salvation, labour seven days a week instead of six. 
Yet, as we are here taught, we are not to make an idol of even so precious an institu- 
tion. The day of rest was designed for man's good ; and it must be maintained that 
man's good comes first, and the sabbath next. Thus it is allowable and it is required 
to perform " works of necessity and mercy " on the sabbath, and even on the Lord's 
day, which may be regarded as the higher sabbath of the Christian. Those who 
preach and teach, who visit the sick and the afflicted, although their doing these things 
may make them labour seven days in the week, may make them " sabbath-breakers," 
are held guiltless by the application of the great principle of the text. 

m. By the claim op Chbist to loedship over the sabbath day. Christ is 
indeed Lord of alL He uses his lordship not so much to institute as to abrogate cere- 
monies, not so much to burden the religious life with observances as to set it free iron 



94 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [cH.n.l-2& 

such trammels. He imparts the true sabbatic spirit ; he gives the rest of heart, which 
is even more important than bodily repose. He sanctifies all days by his Spirit, 
making every day to the Christian better and more sacred than the holiest festival or 
the most solemn fast to the Jew of old. If the day be begun, continued, and ended in 
him, and if all our works be done under his lordship and by his inspiration, life 
itself will be a true sabbath, filled with the rest of his love and with the music ot 
his praise. 

Pbactical lessons. 1. Guard against a merely external, ceremonial religion, which 
is ever prone to degenerate into superstition. 2. Consider the preciousness of the 
weekly day of rest ; it was given for our advantage ; it should be used for the glory of 
God, in the welfare of those for whom Christ lived and died. 3. Think aright of him 
who, without presumption, could claim a prerogative so lofty as lordship over the 
sabbath. To be filled with his spirit, to yield ourselves to his authority, — this is the 
best means of fulfilling the spiritual law ot the God who is a Spirit, and who asks for 
spiritual homage and service. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers.'l — 12. — Cure of the paralytic. I. Difficulties aeb ebadilt overcome whebb 
THERE IS FAITH. The house was probably a poor one, roofed with mud and shingle. 
It would be easy, therefore, to dig a hole and obtain entrance in that way. But doing 
it required a certain amount of ingenuity and effort, which proved that the man and 
his friends were resolved to get to Jesus and obtain the cure. All this trouble and 
thoughtful ness was the outcome of faith in Christ. Their boldness was the confidence 
of faith. Where the heart is right, difficulties in the way of seeking or following the 
Saviour will only call forth keener ingenuity and higher resolution. 

II. Faith ever SEcnREs the sympathy and encouragement of Christ. Christ's 
first words were not chiding, but a welcome. He said, " Son [child], thy sins are for- 
given." Tliere would be tenderness and sympathy in the tone as well as in the 
words. He spoke as a father or an elder brother. The sick man may have been 
young. But in the midst of all the kindness the guilty past of the man is not for- 
gotten. He had been a sinner, and probably his malady was but the fruit of his 
misdoing. A thrill of wonder and fear, mingled with more hopeful feelings, would 
pervade him as he listened. Here was one who knew all about him, and yet had 
compassion on him ! The faith of the patient and his bearers (possibly relatives) was 
thus rewarded beyond their hopes. A greater boon was conferred than they sought. 
Christ is never satisfied with half measures. He goes at once to the root of the evil, 
and seeks to save a man altogether, in soul as well as in body and fortune. 

III. In showing mercy Christ assumes the highest authority. Whilst the 
nature of the case before him demanded that the cure should be thus radical,, the mere 
utterance of the words, " Thy sins are forgiven," involved a claim which those looking 
on were not ready to acknowledge. 1. Faith in being taxed is rewarded. The 
believing men were required to believe more, and more definitely, than they had already 
done. And to him chiefly concerned there were already inward witnesses in favour of 
the new claim. That Christ should have divined the secret source of the bodily weak- 
ness and mental unrest was a presumption that he was what he professed implicitly 
to be. Doubtless, with the rising of his spirit to the new duty of recognizing the 
authority of Jesus, the sick man's conscience would receive sudden and unlooked-for 
relief. The tide of life would turn again in the glad flush of peace and happiness. 
Christ's demands upon men to believe more than they already do are intended as con- 
ditions of his bestowing greater blessings. 2. In order to do all that he was sent to do, 
Christ required to be Divine. The argument was perfectly sound, which the scribes 
carried on " in their hearts." Only God can, in the ultimate, forgive sins. Yet his 
power is sometimes delegated according to fiixed principles and appointments. But 
probably they included in their reasoning the unspoken evidence given in Christ's 
manner, that he forgave out of and from himself. The entire circumstances of the case 
show that he must have done this. And so ever, when men come to him, it is that he 



CH. II. 1—28.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MA^iK. 96 



may exercise this authority and power. What they did not thiuk of was the possibility 
of him whom they accused being " very God of very God." 

TV. Difficulties are created where faith is absent. The simple soul of the 
paralytic grasped the secret of Divinity which escaped the subtlety of the scribes. Their 
very knowledge stood in their way, because it was not spiritually acquired and employed. 

V. TnB powEB OF Christ is a practical demonstration of his adthoritt. 
1. Strictly speaking, healing the paralysis of the man was not, when taken by itself, 
on the same level with the forgiveness of his sins; but the two actions are distinctly 
declared to be in connection with one another. They both appealed to the same Divine 
power. If, therefore, the pretension to this power made in the former utterance was 
blasphemous, the ability to perform the consequent miracle would not have been forth- 
coming. It is also possible that the visible fact of the cure may have been meant as a 
making good of the invisible transaction declared in the first words. They were shown 
thereby not to be mere words. 2. And similarly, but even more cogently, is the proof 
of our Lord's divinity furnished by the spiritual experience of those whom he redeems. 
That they are forgiven is witnessed to in the subsequent power given to live righteously, 
and to continue in fellowship with a reconciled God. To those who are conscious of 
this inwarii result (" kept by the power of God through faith, unto salvation ") there 
is no other evidence so conclusive. — M. 

Vers. 13 — 22. — Levi's feast : the moral questions it occasioned. 1. (Vers. 13 — 17.) 
Eating with publicans and sinners. In calling Matthew (Levi) from the receipt of 
custom, our Saviour made him relinquish all his old pursuits and companions, and con- 
ferred upon him an unexpected honour. The feast given by him was, therefore, partly 
a farewell, partly a celebration. In overste|iping the boundary line of Jewish religious 
and social etiquette, the Lord perfornied an act of great significance, which was sure to 
call forth remark. 

I. Superficial knowledge, when linked with malice, will put the worst con- 
struction UPON the best actions. Conventional morality was invoked to condemn 
Christ in mingling with the publicans. No trouble was taken to ascertain the true 
character of the feast. By their criticism the Pharisees exposed their own hoUowness 
and un spirituality. They condemned themselves in seeking to condemn Christ. For 
such judgments men are responsible. The greatest care and most spiritual view should 
be taken ere judgment is passed upon the actions of others, especially when their 
character is known to be good. 

II. It is the motive which is the true key to the nature op actions. 1. Tfds 
applies absolutely in the case of actions in themselves indifferent, or only conventionally 
forbidden ; but in all actions it is an indispensable cnnon of ullimate judgment. Even 
where the external nature of an action is unmistakable, the utmost care should be 
taken in forming an opinion. Absolute and unqualified judgment is for God alone. 
2. When challenged for our conduct it is well to explain the principles upon which we 
act. Christ at once makes known his motives, and with no anger. Yet in so doing 
he judged his accusers. They pretended to be whole, and so could not object to him 
doing good to those who required his aid. Why were they dissatisfied, if not from 
secret disquietude with their own condition and attitude? Irony proceeding from 
deepest spiritual discernment ! 

III. The Holiest sought out and companied with sinners that he might make 
them holy. It is only by sympathy, and by appeals to their highest nature, that 
sinful men can be won to God. — M. 

Vers. 13 — 22. — Levi's feast: the moral questions it occasioned. 2. (Vers. 18 — 22.) The 
rationale of fasting. I. The origin of the question. This seemed to be natural enough. 
A real perplexity was created which required to be removed. , There is no malice or 
bitterness in the inquiry. Amongst spiritual associates all such difficulties ought to be 
frankly faced and kindly discussed. 1. The feast of Levi was coincident with a tra- 
ditional fast. The Pharisees and the disciples of John both observed the fast, were 
observing it at the time the others were feasting. Now, within the band of Olirist's 
disciples were two sections — one formerly wholly, and still to a great extent, identified 
with the doctrines and observances of John ; the other following without question th' 



8« THE GOSPEL ACOOEDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. n. 1— 28, 

spiritual guidance of Christ. The contrast would, therefore, be very marked. A schism 
seemed to discover itself within the circle of the brethren. 2. The general life of the 
disciples of Christ was not so ascetic as that of John's, and the traditional fasts of 
Judaism were not so strictly observed hy them. The special occasion was only a striking 
instance of general divergence. In answering the question, then, the key would be 
given to the entire life which Christ desired men to lead. 

II. Its solution. The answer was prompt and kindly, and it seemed to justify the 
question. It goes to the very root of the subject. No attention is given to the circum- 
stance of fasting being a positive or conventional enactment. Its meaning and purpose 
are at once referred to, as alone determining the validity or otherwise of its claims to 
being observed. 1. Subjective conditions and aims are stated to be of chief consequenca 
in rega/rd to such a question. This was a new departure, a rationalizing of positive 
law and observance. Institutions and practices of religion are to stand or fall according 
to their spiritual adaptation to the needs of ths human soul. 2. Circumstances which 
determine spiritual states are, therefore, decisive as to the obligation or otherwise of 
fasting. The Jews under the Law were without Christ ; now he had come, and the 
spiritual experience of men who received him was wholly altered. Fasting would be 
out of keeping, because the mood of those who discerned and believed Christ (the 
Bridegroom) was festive and joyous. A feast rather than a fast was therefore the 
fitting ceremony. 3. A fundamental distinction exists between Judaism and Chris- 
tianity. The one was old and ready to vanish away ; the other was new and instinct 
with fresh, vigorous life. Any confusion of them would therefore be mutually injurious. 
This distinctive character of each is represented in two illustrations, viz. (1) The old 
garment and the new piece of cloth. It would be foolish to employ Christianity merely 
to make good the defects of Judaism. The combination would not only be motley ; it 
would be disastrous, because of the difference of spiritual force in the two systems. 
Judaism was antiquated, full of holes and rottenness, and ready to vanish away. To 
patch it up with the gospel would, therefore, only hasten its destruction. Pasting was 
representative of the legalistic or external rites of Judaism ; Christianity was as new 
and " unfuUed " cloth, which would shrink when put upon the old garment, and make 
the rent worse. This is one side of the truth ; and in (2) the new wine and the old 
bottles, we have the other. Legal forms and observances are inadequate to contain and 
express the fresh, spiritual, ever-expanding life of the Christian. Spiritual truth and life 
must create their own ritual, and dictate their own ideal of morality. — M. 

Vers. 23 — 28. — The sabbath made for man. I. The purpose op thb sabbath is to 

BE KEPT IN VIEW IN INTBEPEETING ITS OBLIGATIONS. 

II. BULES WHICH DO NOT HAVE EEOAED TO THIS MAT VIOLATE WHAT THEY PBOPESS 

TO PEESEEVB. 1. The disciples were within the written permission of the Law. " To 
pluck and rub with the hand ears from the field of a neighbour was allowed; Moses 
forbade only the sickle (Deut. xxiii. 25). But the matter belonged to the thirty-nine 
chief classes (fathers), each of which had its subdivisions (daughters), in which the 
works forbidden on the sabbath were enumerated. This was their hypocritical way, 
to make of trifling things matters of sin and vexation to the conscience " (Braune). 
2. "Men see that others neglect rules, when they see not their own violation of 
principles " (Godwin). 

III. The best inteebsts op man are to bb served by the sabbath. 1. " The 
sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath." This is proved by an 
incident from the life of David As they revered David, the allusion was an argumentum 
ad hominem as well as an ilhistration of a general principle. By that occurrence it 
was shown that even the sanctities of the temple were subordinated to the welfare of 
God's anointed and his followers. If, then, these things bent to the highest interests of 
man, so must the sabbath. 2. " The Son of man is Lord of the sahbath." This is an 
inference from the foregoing principle. For Christ claimed this authority not merely 
as a man, but as " the Son of man in his inviolable holiness, and in his mysterious 
dignity (intimated in Daniel) as the holy Child and Head of humanity appearing in 
the name of God" (Lange). He summed up in his own person the highest interest* 
of the race. And as Lord of the sabbath he uses it ever for the advancement of 
holiness and the development of spiritual freedom in his saints. — ^M. 



CH. It 1—28.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 97 

Vers. 3 — 5. — Tlie pardon of the paralytic. This miracle is recorded also by Matthew 
and Luke. The former indicates its chronological position as occurring after the return 
from Gadara. Our gracious Lord " again entered into Capernaum," so slow is he to 
leave the most undeserving. The news of his arrival quickly spread ; indeed, whenever 
he enters a home or a heart, he cannot be hid. True love and eager faith will surely 
find him, and in this passage we find an example of that truth. 

I. The coming op the pakalttio is full of teaching for those who are now seeking 
the Saviour. 1. Se had friends who helped him. Powerless to move, he was peculiarly 
dependent on their kindness. A sufferer from palsy not only needs much patience and 
resignation himself, but creates a demand for it in others, and so may prove by his 
presence i-i the home to be a means of grace to those called on to minisWr to him. To 
nerve and help those who are permanent invalids is a holy service, to which many are 
secretly called, who therein may prove themselves good and faithful servants of the 
Lord. Such ministration needs a gentle hand, a patient spirit, a courageous heart, and 
a nobie self-forgetfulness. Above all, we should endeavour to bring our sick ones to the 
feet of Jesus, that they may rejoice in his pardoning love. Our counsels, our example, 
and our prayers may do for them what these people did for their paralyzed friend. 

2. He found difficulties in approaching Christ. The crowd was impassable. They 
ascended the staircase outside (Matt. xxiv. 17), and so reached the flat roof. Then 
they broke up the covering of the roof and let down the bed on which the sick of the 
palsy lay. These obstacles tried their faith, proved and purified it. There are 
difficulties in the way of our approach to Christ ; some of which may be removed by 
our friends, others of which can only be overcome by our own faith and courage. 
Prejudices, easily besetting sins, evil companions, are examples. 3. TTie difficulties 
were victoriously stirmounted. The fact that they were so was a manifest proof of the 
faith which animated this man and his friends. Some way is always open to those 
eager for salvation, though it may be one that seems unusual to onlookers. 

II. The gbacioxtsness op the Savioub. 1. He knew the man's deepest wants. 
Probably the paralytic was more troubled about his sin than about his sickness, 
although his friends did not know it. We ought to be more anxious about the soul 
than about the body. Christ Jesus reads our secret thoughts. " He knew what was in 
man." He noticed and exposed the unexpressed anger of his enemies (ver. 8). But 
while he discovers the secret sin, far more readily does he discern the silent longing for 
pardon. 2. He was willing and waiting to bless. There was no delay. The strange 
interruption to teaching was not resented but welcomed. At once he spoke the word 
of pardon for which the man's heart was hungering, although he foresaw the indignation 
and scorn wnich would follow on the declaration, " Thy sins be forgiven thee." Divine 
love is not to be restrained by human narrowness, whether in the Church or outside it. 

3. Se showed himself ready and able to forgive. Possibly ornr Lord saw a connection 
between this illness and some special sin. He guards us, however, against supposing 
that it is always so (Luke xiii. 15 ; John ix. 3). Perhaps the secret pangs of conscience 
were in the way of physical restoration here. Sometimes pardon was given after cure 

gjuke xvii. 19 ; John v. 14). The scribes were right in their declaration that none but 
od can forgive sins. The Levitical priests, under the old dispensation, were authorized 
to announce Divine forgiveness, as God's representatives, after the offering of appointed 
sacrifices ; but the scribes very properly recognized that Jesus claimed to do far more 
than that. He admitted that it was so, and as the Son of man (Dan. vii. 13) he 
claimed the power they denied him, and at once gave a proof that the power was 
actually his. They might have argued that there was no evidence that the man's sins 
were forgiven ; that Jesus was making a safe claim, which could not be tested. In 
order to meet this he said in effect, " I will now claim and exercise a power the result 
of which you can see ; and it shall either brand me as an impostor, or else it shall be a 
sign that my former utterance had effect." Then said he to the sick of the palsy, " Arise, 
and take up thy bed, and go thy way into thine house." Like that man, may our re- 
covered and redeemed powers be instantaneously used in obedience to Christ. — A. B. 

Vers. 14, 16. — Levi's call from dishonour to discipleship. All the sacred Scriptures 
serve to show that God's redemption is meant for those who are conscious of their sin, 
however grievous have been their offences. Promises prove this. Isaiah's description 
BT. habk. a 



98 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MABK. [oh. n. 1—28. 



of a people whose head was faint and whose heart was sick is followed by the 
invitation, " Come now, and let us reason together," etc., and this is intensified by the 
gracious words of Christ, " Come unto me, all ye that labour," etc. Facts suggest the 
same truth, e.g. God's dealing with Adam, the call of idolatrous Abram, and the pardon 
of Manasseh ; and all such evidences are concentrated in Christ. Descended through 
Tamar, Eahab, Bathsheba, and David, he chose no spotless ancestry according to the 
flesh, but was from the first "numbered with the transgressors." His life-work 
touched the sinful — the woman who was a sinner, the adulteress of Samaria, the thief 
on the cross, etc. No wonder that his gospel was received by publicans and by 
sinners, in the house of Herod, in the court of Nero, among the idolatrous Ephesiang 
and the profligate Corinthians. He came " not to call the righteous, but sinners to 
repentance." Levi the publican was an example of these. Let us consider — 

L The position Levi ooouprED. "Levi" was the original name borne by the 
evangt-list and apostle who was known in the Church as "Matthew," equivalent to " God's 
gift," he being so named because in him the Lord had a fulfilment of his own words, 
" All that the Father hath given me shall come to me, and him that cometh to me, I will 
in no wise cast out." Levi was a tax-gatherer, a rate collector, employed by the richer 
publicans (of whom Zacchseus was an example) to collect dues levied on the lake fishery 
or on the traffic passing through the district to Damascus ; and consideration of what 
that involved may encourage the despondent. 1. He was low in the social scale. As 
a standing emblem of the authority of Roman tyranny, the tax-gatherer, especially 
when, like Levi, he was a renegade jew, wasf intensely hated and despised ; none of his 
fellow-countrymen would speak or eat with him. Prom the first Christ set himself 
against this prejudice and social distinction. As the " Son of man," as the King of 
men, he would have no narrow circle from which to draw his followers. His blessings 
were for the most despised and poor, as are God's air and sunshine. 2. Me was an 
outcast from religious men. As patriots, the Jews hated him ; as upholders of the 
ancient faith, they excommunicated him. Hence Matthew the apostle would seem to 
be a marvel of grace. The excommunicated man was to build up the communion of 
the Christian Church, the apostle was to become a pillar of Divine truth, the instru- 
ment of oppression was to proclaim true liberty, the byword was to become a burning 
and a shining light. God chose despised things to bring to nought those which were 
great and honoured. The Church's judgment is not always right, therefore "judge not, 
that ye be not judged." Christ saw in Levi one who was seeking higher things, and 
he said to him, " Follow me." 3. He was subject to grievous temptations. The bad 
reputation of the publicans was doubtless, to a large extent, deserved. The vicious 
system of raising revenue adopted by Rome, and still practised in Turkey, would tend 
to make men avaricious, hard, and unscrupulous. Large sums of money passed through 
their hands, and were loosely collected and accounted for ; bribes were frequently 
offered and universally accepted, in order to obtain exemptions and privileges ; and a 
publican, from the mere fact of being one, had no reputation to lose, so that if he had 
been more scrupulous than others he would get no credit for it. In that position 
Christ saw Levi and pitied him, and thence in his love he called him, teaching us that 
none are so low, or have circumstances so adverse, as to be beyond the reach of his pity 
and salvation. 

IL The bbbvice Levi attempted. 1. Be freely gave up all to follow Jesus. It 
was a lucrative position, but he felt called to something nobler, for the sake of which 
any sacrifice should be made. Suggest certain trades and occupations which are now 
such a hindrance to the Divine life that for Christ's sake they ought to be abandoned 
by his followers. Indicate the call which sometimes comes to Christians to give up 
even innocent employments, for the higher work of preaching Christ. 2. He invited 
others to see and hear his Master. Luke (v. 27) speaks of this as a " great feast " 
which Levi made in honour of his Lord ; to which he invited his old comrades, who 
like himself would be popularly ranked among " the publicans and sinners." The feast 
was an occasion for speaking his farewell, and giving reasons for the change in his life. 
He wished to show that he was about to serve One greater than Csesar, and to do a 
nobler work. At his request Jesus became his guest. May that gracious Lord appear 
in our homes, at all our festive gatherings, and so show himself through uv to those 
around us, that they too may find joy in his service ! — A. E. 



OH. n. 1— 28.J THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST MAEK. M 

Vers. 18 — 20.— On fasting. Weak brethren too often do the work of evil men. 
The disciples of John, who were not hostile to our Lord, were made on this occasion th« 
tools of the Pharisees, whose great object was to damage our Lord's reputation amongst 
the people, and to weaken the allegiance of his followers. The Baptist had never for 
bidden his disciples to observe the customary fasts, and his own ascetic life had taught 
them such lessons of self-denial that they readily observed them, especially at a tima 
like this, when he was languishing in prison. Sore and sensitive in heart as they were, 
it was easy for the Pharisees to suggest that Jesus owed much to their teacher's 
testimony; that he had professedly been John's Friend and Fellow-worker; that he was 
doing nothing whatever to effect his deliverance ; that he did not even fast for grief 
because of his imprisonment, but was enjoying social festivity in the house of a 
publican. But although the design of the Pharisees was to convict our Lord of dis- 
regard of national tradition and pious custom, and to condemn him for forgetfulness of 
his imprisoned friend, they only succeeded in educing a complete justification of his 
conduct, and the announcement of • noble principle which we have to consider, viz. 
that religious observances are only acceptable to God when they are the natwral outcome 
of the religious life of him who offers them. In this passage we see the following facts: — 

L Hypocrisy is condemned. John's disciples were not guilty of this offensive sin. 
No doubt their fasting was, at this time, a true expression of inward grief; and w»s on 
other occasions used by them as a means of spiritual discipline. Our Lord does not 
imply that they were hypocritical, but asserts that his own disciples would be, if they 
outwardly joined in a fast which would be an untrue representation of their present 
feeling. Hopeful and jubilant in the presence of their Lord, his disciples could not 
fast, and would be wrong to do so. This tacitly condemns all fasts which arise from 
improper or untrue motives, or which are outwardly kept at the dictation of others. 
The principle, however, is of general application, teaching us that, under the new dis- 
pensation, no outward manifestation of devotion is acceptable to God, except as it is 
true to the inward feeling of the worshipper. The sin of unreality was often rebuked 
by the prophets, and still more vigorously by John the Baptist and by our Lord ; 
indeed, the sternest words ever uttered by Christ were levelled against the unreal, 
insincere, and hypocritical Pharisees. From that sin he would save his disciples, and 
therefore asserted that as their inward condition did not lead them to fasting, a fast 
would at that time be unnatural and perilous. Be you who or what you may, be real 
and true before God and man. " K thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full 
of light." 

II. ExTEBNALlSH IS BEBtJKED. By cxtemalism we mean the putting of external 
religious ceremonies in the place of spiritual acts of worship. We distinguish this 
decisively from hypocrisy, as the words are by no means interchangeable — some of 
the Pharisees, for example, being thoroughly sincere. But many rites enjoined under 
the old dispensation, which were meant to have spiritual significance and to give utter- 
ance to soul-longings, had become mere husks in which the kernel had rotted. Sacri- 
fices were offered without sense of guilt ; washings were frequent, even to absurdity, 
but did not express conscious uncleanness of soul ; alms were largely given, but without 
generosity ; fasts were observed without any humiliation of soul before God. Eeligion 
had become mechanical and soulless, and from that curse Christ would save his dis- 
ciples. Hence he commended the mite of the widow, and not the large gifts of the 
wealthy ; he chose his friends not from the priests in the temple, but from peasants in 
Galilee ; he discerned faith not in the long prayers recited by the Pharisees, but in 
the secret petition of the trembling woman who only durst touch the hem of his gar- 
ment. To him the unuttered sigh was a prayer, the generous purpose an alms-deed, 
and a holy aspiration was an evening sacrifice. So here he taught that fasting was not 
a rite of any value in itself, and that self-inflicted penance was not as such pleasing to 
God. (Apply this to what is similar in our days.) 

III. Fbbedom is pboclaimed. He who condemned fasting and all other ritei 
and ceremonies, when put in a -wrong place, allowed any of these to be used 
by his disciples when they naturally and truly expressed their inward spiritual 
life. When, for example, the Bridegroom was taken away, when the shadow oJ 
Calvary's cross rested on them, they fasted ; for they had no heart to do anything else. 
But when the Kesurrection morning dawned, and the gates of the grave were opened. 



100 TUE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. n, 1— 2a 



and the Bridegroom came back to his waiting bride, to fulfil the promise, " I am witk 
you always," then, and on the day of Pentecost, they could not fast. If now there are 
times when to our doubting minds the heavenly Bridegroom seems far away ; if now 
we ever feel that temporary abstinence from food, or from pleasure, or from work, 
would help our spiritual life, — then let us fast ; but even then let us do so in remem- 
brance of the words, " Thou when thou fastest, anoint thy head, and wash thy face, 
that thou appear not unto men to fast." In regard to this and all other ceremonies, 
"Ye, brethren, are called unto liberty, only use not that liberty for an occasion to the 
flesh, but by love serve one another." 

IV. JoTFULNESS IS INCULCATED. In this Tcspect the practices of our Lord presented 
a striking contrast to those of John or of the Pharisees. Here he justifies his 
disciples, as formerly he had defended himself, against aspersions cast upon them for 
joining in social festivity. Appealing to the consciences of his questioners, and allud- 
ing to the last words of testimony their master had uttered concerning himself (John 
iii. 29), he asked, " Can the sons of the brideohamber mourn, while the bridegroom is 
with them ? " We ought to be so glad because of our relation to Christ, because of his 
constant presence and undying love, that, like Paul, we can be "joyful in tribulations 
also," and sing God's praise in the darkness of a prison. — A. R. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — The paralytic. I. The paealytio a type op helplessnebb ir 
TBNERAt. In this case both physical and moral. No malady is serious but that 
which attacks the freedom of the soul in its seat. 

II. DiFPicuLTlBS ABB POE THE TEIAL OF FAITH. The physical difficulty of getting 
to Christ's presence we may view as a parable or allegory of deeper moral difficulties. 
How hard to be a Christian — to reach the truth and live in the light of it 1 Argument 
breaks down ; many saps in our reasoning it is not easy to get over. But— 

"What if the breaks themselves should prove at last 
The most consummate of contrivances 
To train a man's eye, teach him what is faith ? " 

ni. The beat of health often lies in the imagination. A man has a dark 
picture of himself, his sin, his doom, etc., constantly before him. He cannot be well or 
happy. Reverse this picture, and the whole nature, physical and moral, recovers its 
healthy working. Christ will not suffer men to despond or despair of themselves. 
Believe yourself condemned, a life-failure, and you remain a paralytic. Believe in your 
Divine possibility and future; you can rise and walk. When the gospel is truly 
preached, men are mot crushed, but uplifted ; not discouraged, but heartened about 
themselves. 

IV. The gift op sympathy and of poweb. Here was a signal example of the 
diagnosis of Jesus. He saw, as we say, what was the matter. He spoke to the point ; 
and his word was an idea and a power. Never is true sympathy disjoined from 
power. To love our fellows is to enjoy the noblest power. — J. 

Vers. 15 — 22.— Matthew's home. I. The sooialitt op Jesus. He was found at 
ordinary dinner-parties and entertainments throughout his course, and to the last. He 
was a contrast in this to the ascetic Baptist. He was found in " questionable " com- 
pany. But the company of Pharisees would have been as " questionable." With a 
clear conscience a man may go into the miscellany of people called " society." A free 
and open manner is certain to bring remark and censure upon him. But better to mix 
with others and be thought " no better " than they, than hold aloof and sour the heart 
with Pharisaic self-conceit. There is danger in general society, and danger in religious 
cliques. 

II. LovB; justifying all eccentbicitibs. It was eccentric to mix with those 
common and tabooed people. The whole conduct of Jesus was eccentric, and brought 
about fatal consequences. To aim at singularity is a foppery ; to follow love's impulse 
alone is graceful, generous, polite, refined. This is singular. Would there were more 
of such singularity ! 

III. Natuealnesb. The spirit of man is like the face of earth and sky. Clouds pass 
over it; the sun is hidden. Anon all is bright again, and birds sing. To follow th« 



IH. n. 1—28.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK, 101 

lead of joy is in the best sense natural. Let the face and manner reflect the inner mind" 
to reverse this is to act a part. The pure and lovely hypocrisy is that which tries to 
affect the mien of mirth, though the heart be heavy. To put on the mask of gloom for 
the sake of warning others is Pharisaic, not Christian. Jesua is the example of th« 
perfect gentleman. 

IV. The place and time of asceticism. It is the reaction of the mind agidnst 
certain sorrows. We must be true again to feeling and to fancy. It would be a 
violence to natural taste to put on wedding garments when a friend has passed away, 
however logical it might seem. There is a natural homoeopathy of grief. Speaking of 
it and representing it outwardly tends to its relief; but to mimic a grief we feel not is 
to do a violence to ourselves. Be true to yourself: this is the only secret of moral 
beauty, from the lowest to the highest moods, and is the lesson of Jesus. — J. 

Vers. 23 — 28. — Love greater than law. I. Human life is more important thaw 
THE means of living. All laws, ceremonial or otherwise, may be regarded as means 
towards ends. What end do we know higher than human weal and bliss ? Christ 
points out that this is the real end of legislation — man, his education, his good, 
physical and spiritual. 

II. It IB A GROSS FALLACY TO P0T THE MEANS BEFORE THE END. This the Pharisees 
did. They said, " Man for the sabbath." Christ said, " The sabbath for man." Cere- 
monies are all means of spiritual culture. Not so with moral ideals. They are our end. 

III. Law is ROOTED in love. Christ is the representative of Divine love. If he by 
example or precept declares that a law is to be suspended or abrogated, this is in the 
interests of love. How absurd would it be, on a desert island, for a shipwrecked crew, 
almost starving, to refuse to avail themselves of food cast in their way, e.g. by a chance 
flight of birds, because it was a fast day! Analogous was the case mentioned by Christ 
(ver. 26). The sabbath had no meaning except as an expression of Divine love ; and 
the rigid observance of it in defiance of love's dictates would be a mockery. Christ is 
Lord of love, and therefore Lord of law. — J. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — The sick of the palsy: the spiritual and physical healing. The 
excitement having subsided, Jesus enters again into Capernaum. He, in the house, 
was teaching, " Pharisees and doctors of the Law sitting by," from all parts. The 
mighty " power of the Lord was with him to heal," as was made evident before, or as 
was to be proved by this event. It being " noised that he was in the house, many 
were gathered together," crowding " about the door." But attention is arrested by the 
bold deed of four men, who, carrying one sick of the palsy, and finding it impossible to get 
into the presence of Jesus, ascend to the low flat roof, " and let down the bed whereon 
the sick of the palsy lay," as men are wont to let down straw and other things to-day 
in similar houses. Instantly the whole event assumes a spiritual character, and Jesus, 
for all time, gives the spiritual its pre-eminence: " Jesus, seeing their faith." The 
spiritibal must take precedence, the material must follow. 

I. In ORDER TO SPIRITUAL HEALING A SUITABLE CONDITION IS NEEDFUL. Here and 

elsewhere that condition is expressed by the one worA faith. Faith, though a simple 
act or condition of mind, is the result of many — consciousness of need, desire of relief, 
self-distrust, some knowledge of Christ, appreciative confidence leading to assured 
persuasion. In faith the soul is already at one with the Saviour ; it has come to him ; 
it is united to him. The faith of others besides that of the sick is a favourable 
condition. Here it first arrests attention : " Jesus, seeing their faith." How many are 
dependent for their salvation upon the faith and effort of others ! By their deed they 
declared their faith. It said, " Thou canst ; " if not also, " Thou wilt." Through their 
faith must be seen, however, that of the sufferer shining. For who urged them on to 
do even this for him ? Would he have undergone the pain of this treatment had he 
not had faith ? It is saying, as said another, " If I do but touch his garment, I shall 
be made whole." With the desire of the sufferer for relief the charity of his helpers 
mingled. Their acts of faith were so interwoven that they became one faith. It was 
this that Jesus saw. 

II. Where the suitable spiritual condition is found the hbalins- inevitablt 
TAKES place Yea, though the word declaring it be not uttered ; and even when it i» 



108 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARii. [ch. n. 1— 2& 

uttered, men, " reasoning in their hearts," believe not. Where Jesus to-tlay sees faith 
— and he is always on the look-out for It — there he heals. The faith of sufferers and 
helpers must have respect to his promise and his power to heal, and not busy itself so 
much with listening for the word which declares the healing to be done. " Jesus, 
seeing their faith," and knowing there was the suitable condition for the reception of 
spiritual blessing, even above and beyond that for which they asked, " saith, Son, thy 
sins are forgiven." So is faith rewarded; so are spirituals put in their rightful place 
before temporals ; not really to hinder the temporal, but the better to prepare for it. 

III. The opposition or antagonists is used by Christ for the greater conpjb- 
MATION OF the BELIEVING ONES ; and, in mercy, also to awaken conviction in the 
unbelieving heart. " Perceiving in his [own] spirit that they so reasoned " within the 
dark chambers of their hearts, he graciously condescended to reason with them. " If 
I can do the harder of two works, surely I can the easier. That ye will not doubt. 
But ' whether is easier ' in your view, to say, ' Thy sins are forgiven ; ' or to say, ' Arise, 
take up thy bed and walk'? This must not only be said ; to prove itself a real word 
of power, it must be done. Of this ye can be judges. But that ye — even ye reasoning 
and unbelieving ones — may know the unlimited power of the Son of man in the 
spiritual realm, behold a proof of his power in the material ! A word declares it. ' I 
say unto thee, arise.' " A word of power indeed ; for " he arose and took up the bed, 
and went forth before them all " — a visible, undeniable testimony that the true king- 
dom of God had come, that the true King was amongst them ; and they also were not 
only amazed, but "they glorified God," and confessed, "We never saw it on this 
fashion." So he who maketh " the wrath of man to praise him," maketh the thought 
of evil to turn to the greater good of them whom he would bless. 

IV. The wonderful power for the good op all that faith in the Son op man 
CALLS INTO PLAY. Therefore let every one who has faith use it : in faith bringing the 
sin-stricken to Jesus; with strong faitJi encouraging all to seek him, to yield to him, 
to follow, and to trust in him. And let every worker work in faith ; for the faith of 
the bearer of the sick is regarded. Let parents bring their children to Jesus in faith ; 
and pastors bring their flocks before him in faith ; and friends, friends ; and lovere of 
men lay the world at his feet in lowly, loving, believing prayer. Unbelief stays the 
strong arm of Christ, because it presents the unsuitable conditions before him who 
always acts according to the " laws " of his own kingdom. Faith is not strength, but 
acknowledged feebleness. We can aid the consciously feeble, but the presumptuously 
strong put themselves beyond the power of men and the will of the Lord. — G. 

Vers. 13 — 22. — Fasting. " By the sea side" the great Teacher is heard by a listening 
multitude. Then passing near " the place of toll, his eye fell upon Levi, son of 
Alphseus," whose service he imperatively claims. Levi, already called to be a disciple, 
now called to be an apostle, with much sacrifice arises to follow his Lord and Master to 
the end, so teaching for aU future apostles and servants that the claims of the kingdom 
of Heaven stand first in importance, and must first be met. The simple, brief, authori- 
tative command, " Follow me," may seem to need an exposition and expansion. It is 
the consimimation, doubtless, of many words of instruction ; and, perhaps, the outward 
call corresponds to an inward conviction of duty and an inward preparedness for 
the sacrifice. The story of compliance is almost as brief as that of the call, " And he 
arose and followed him." But this does not shut out the possibility of the calm 
adjustment by Levi of his affairs, as would be necessary before setting out upon a new 
course of life. Only the impetuous need hurry lest they should change their minds. 
Then, as it would seem in commemoration of the great change, when the new name 
Matthew may have been assumed, he, called like Elisha, to the sacred office, like him 
he makes his feast to his neighbours — his fellow tax-gatherers alid friends — and his 
sacrifice to his God. And Jesus and his disciples are there. Then the murmuring 
voice of " the scribes of the Pharisees " must needs accuse him to his disciples : " He 
eateth and drinketh with publicans and sinners." Ah, happily for them and us he doth. 
He who did not always stoop to vindicate his ways, or tell wherefore or by " what 
authority " he did such and such things, now, however, vouchsafes to declare his reason. 
First paiabolically : " The ' whole have no need of a physician, but they that are sick.' 
If these are the sick and faulty, as your words imply, they indeed need me." But 



on. n. 1—28.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. 103 

the word applies itself. The really " sick " may be the carping complainers. Then, mors 
precisely, he declares his mission : '"I came not to call the righteous, but sinners.' 
My dealings are with sinners. How can I reach them if I avoid them ? " Let every 
self-conscious sinner who, bruised and sick, desires healing, hear this word of the Lord, 
the Lord who comes to " call " and to " eat with " the sinner that he may " heal " him. 
For all time he is to be known as the Seeker of the sinner and the Healer of the sick. 
But other mcrmurers are at hand. The feasting of Jesus and his disciples contrasts with 
the sadness and fasting of John — then in prison — and his disciples, now left alone ; and 
with the punctilious fasting of the Pharisees. How is this ? The reply from the lips 
of the Master is given in three parables, of which the first only, and but partially, is 
explained. The reply is not temporal and local merely, relating solely to the circum- 
stances of that hour. The true parable has always witldn it a principle of universal 
application. The principle here embodied is — 

The true purpose op FASTiua. This may be defined to be the honest expression of 
conditions proper to be represented by fasting. " There is a time to fast, and a time to 
feast;" and the outward ordinance must correspond with the inward spirit. The 
symbols of sorrow must not be assumed when the heart is merry. The song, not the 
sackcloth ; the wine of joy, not the ashes, — is the more becoming. It is a lesson on 
congruity, or the true harmony or fitness of things ; and the lesson is enforced by 
three parables. 1. " Can the sons of the bridechamber fast while the bridegroom is 
with them ? " These words say, as plainly as words can, " Men must fast when there is 
occasion to fast." Is any sad ? let the signs of sorrow appear ; but if the heart within 
is merry, let him declare it in song. " Is any cheerful ? let him sing praise." Pasting 
by order, whatever may be the state of the heart at the time, is not in accordance 
with Christ's teaching. It is not in harmony with itself. It becomes a species of 
hypocrisy. The day of loneliness and exposure and sadness will come ; " and then 
will they fast in that day." 2. The patch upon the " old garment," while confirming 
the former lesson, declares the uselessness of patching up the old, dry, effete formalism 
with a piece of new, earnest, vigorous life. This would make the faults all the more 
obvious. Christ's work was not a patch upon the old ; it was a new garment. How 
often men seem to be sewing a patch of Christian propriety on a faulty life — a mere 
mending of the torn and useless ; and how impressively does this teach the need of a 
new garment altogether — the white robe of righteousness, an entire change of heart 
and life, a new birth! 3. But yet more forcibly Christ would teach by another 
parable the need there was for outward ordinances suited to the new spirit which he 
came to infuse. The fervent, vital evangelical spirit would certainly rend the dry, hard 
formalities of legalism. The words seem to refer to the more elastic organization 
which the expansive spirit would require. As to-day, when a new spirit enters the 
Churches, it demands not the rigid, unyielding methods of the past, but new ones. Even 
the good and useful that have long ministered to the spiritual comfort and joy of the 
fathers, must give place to others which the fresh, vigorous, inventive life of the children 
demands. " New skins " for " new wine." Yet they must be skins — that which is suitable 
to the holding of wine that it may be preserved. If changes be made in organizations 
or methods to suit the constantly fermenting times, they must be such as will conserve 
the true spirit of devotion and Christian brotherhood. What a striking comment on 
these words is found in the employment, by many even of the most rigid Churches in 
our day, of methods which the new spirit within them has demanded ! Bach may learn 
for himself: (1) The necessity for a strict correspondence between his outward religious 
performance and his inward religious state, and between all ordinances and the truths 
to which they relate. (2) The insufBciency of merely mending the old life of sin by 
a few patches of new manners. A whole new garment may be had for the asking. 
(3) The new reviving spirit should find its own appropriate means and ordinances, 
such as will preserve it from being dissipated and lost. — G. 

Ver. 23 — ch. iii. 6. — The Lord and the law of the sabbath. Jesus passed " through the 
cornfields," in the course of fulfilling his great mission ofpreaching, healing, and blessing. 
His " disciples began as they went " to pluck the ears of corn growing in abundance 
and probably lying across their path. It was the day of delights, a day hallowed and 
blessed. The plentifulness of the Divine beneficence, the quiet of the sabbath calm, 



104 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. n. 1—28. 

the glow of the bright light, would bring near to these self-sacrificing disciples thoughts 
of him who now most truly must provide for them their daily bread, the firstfruits of 
whose care they now gather. Gladly the lynx-eyed Pharisees arrest the great Teacher 
with their " Why do they on the sabbath day that which is nut lawful?" The direct 
reply is reserved, and the inquirers thrown bacU upon themselves and their carelessness 
in reading " what David did when he had need." The reply rests upon this word 
" need," and the following word " hungred," as in the second instance it rests upon " to 
do good, and to save a life." And we are reminded at once of the two classes of circum- 
stances in which, as we have been accustomed to hear, the sabbath form may be 
broken without infringing the sabbath law, yea, even when that is done which at 
other times " it is not lawful " to do, viz. in works of necessity and works of charity. 
But underlying and overarching the whole is the law which the " Lord of the sabbath " 
now utters, a law wider in its application than the many details of sabbath observance 
— " The sabbath was made for man." 

I. Let us first learn that the sabbath was hade. It wm a Divine institution. 
It was ordained of God. It was no mere accident that led men to mark the sabbath 
day with a special sanctity. From the many days, each laden with blessing, it pleased 
God to choose each seventh day for rest. To the toil-worn and weary how great an 
addition of blessing is this ! The sabbath was not an imposition. It was designed to 
ease the heavily laden ; to give time for song ; to brighten the house by the presence of 
the father, who from morn till night was torn from his family by the necessities of 
labour ; to minister to the demands of the higher nature ; to bring all into closer alliance 
with things spiritual, by reflection and by worship. Truly this is to crowd it with 
blessing. It was not to be a dull day, for it was blessed ; it was not to be a common 
day, for it was hallowed. 

II. Brrr the sabbath which was made, was made fob hak. It was made in 
his interests, to promote his weal. Therefore, anything that can prove itself to be 
" for man " — for man at large — is in harmony with sabbath law and the sabbath spirit. 
And the strictest sabbath regulations must break down in presence of human neces- 
sities, provided they are indeed and of a truth necessities. Yea, the need cf the ox or 
ass must be considered, whether it be the need of rest or deliverance from the pit. Il 
is " lawful to do good," it is lawful " to save life," it is lawful to feed the hungry — even 
the sacred temple bread yielding service to needy men. The highest interest to he 
considered is the interest of human life. All must be sacrificed to it. The tempis 
service itself must be stayed ;/ the priest be needed to pluck one out of fire. 

III. Since re is made for man, he who, being Son op all, lb Lord of all, n of 
necessity and eight Lord of man's sabbath. Thus this great gift, the Divine 
preservation of which was always a sign of blessing, and the removal of wliich a sign 
of cursing, — this Lord's day and man's day, by the Lord's appointment and ordination, 
must, if men would be wise, be observed in such a way as to promote the highest 
interests of men, as they are interpreted by him who is Lord of them and Lord of 
their day. Oh, how well were it if the tight-laced, and the loose-laced also, would 
consider this great law, and make the sabbath a day over which its true Lord rules ! 
Learn the sin of him who breaks the sabbath and who teaches men so. 1. He sins 
against God who made it to be a sabbath. 2. And he sins against man who needs 
it to be a sabbath, and for whom it was made. Is it a sabbath if the son of toil, after 
six long days of labour, is compelled to serve a seventh ? This is contrary to the Law 
of the Lord. Far less is it a sabbath if all opportunities for religious worship, for 
spiritual refreshment, for family fellowship, are sacrificed ; and still less if the day be 
spent in merely worldly amusements and pleasures ; and least of all if it be devoted 
to evil. Then the day, designed for the good of body and soul, is spent to the injury 
or ruin of both. And so the Lord's day becomes the devil's day. — G. 

Vers. 1 — 12. Parallel passages: Matt. ix. 2 — 8 ; Luke v. 17 — 26. — The curt of the 
paralytic. I. The popularitt of our Lord. After the cure of the leper, recorded at 
the close of the preceding chapter, our Lord, to avoid tumult or undue excitement on the 
part of the people, or an unseasonable precipitation of his plans, retired to and remained 
some short time in unfrequented places ; but the crowds kept resorting (ijpx<»''ro, im- 
neifect) to him from all directions. After an interval of some days (Si' fineoiy) it wM 



•H. n. 1 28.] THE GOSPEL AOCORDtNG TO ST. MARK. lOl 



reported that he was back in Capernaum — that, having previously arrived («'s), he was 
now in the house. But what house ? Some say Peter's ; others, as Euthymius, that it 
was simply a house (tli olKir Tira) ; better perhaps understand it indefinitely of a house 
which he used as an inn or place of temporary abode, or to which as a sort of home 
he usually resorted. The expression may thus, in a certain sense, be equivalent to tha 
OeTman zu ffause. 

II. Strange method or approach. Again multitudes flocked to him ; the humble 
dwelling was soon filled to overflowing, and still the crowd pressed on towards the 
door — even the parts next to it became so thronged that they could no longer contain 
or afford them room. As was his wont, he was speaking, perhaps conversationally 
(^X(£\ci) the word, that is, of the kingdom or of his doctrine unto them. Just then a novel 
and curious incident added a new feature to the scene. On the outskirt of the crowd 
four men appeared, bearing a pallet between them, as St. Mark informs us— one 
at each comer probably ; and on it lay a helpless invalid. But so intently were all eyes 
fixed on, or all necks stretched out towards, the great Teacher that the crowd paid no 
attention to the invalid and his bearers, or at least showed no disposition to make way 
for them. But, wherever there is a strong will, there is sure to be a way. They were 
not to be deterred from their purpose, nor to be kept back from him whose presence 
they sought. They mount the fiat roof of the house, whether by steps outside or other- 
wise. They remove a sufiScient portion of the roof, or, as it is literally, they unioof the 
roof, digging out the tiling overlaid with earth, and so let down the couch on which 
the sick of the palsy lay, " into the midst before Jesus," as we learn from St. Luke. 

III. Its fbasibilitt. The objections of infidel writers, who have shown much 
ignorance and wasted much strength in attacking the plan resorted to in bringing the 
paralytic into the presence of the Saviour, are sufficiently and satisfactorily refuted by 
the fcUowing plain statements of facts in ' The Land and the Book ' : — " Those (houses) 
of Capernaum, as is evident from the ruins, were, like those of modem villages in the same 
region, low, very low, with flat roofs, reached by a stairway from the yard or court. 
. . . Those who carried the paralytic . . ascended to the roof, removed so much of 
it as was necessary, and let down their patient through the aperture. Examine one of 
these houses, and you will see at once that the thing is natural, and easy to be 
accomplished. The roof is only a few feet high, and by stooping down, and holding the 
comers of the couch — merely a thickly padded quilt, as at present in this region — they 
could let down the sick man without any apparatus of ropes or cords to assist them. . . . 
The whole affair was the extemporaneous device of plain peasants, accustomed to open 
their roofs, and let down grain, straw, and other articles, as they still do in this 
country. . . . The materials now employed are beams about three feet apart, across 
which short sticks are arranged close together, and covered with the thickly matted 
thorn bush called hellan. Over this is spread a coat of stiff mortar, and then comes 
the marl or earth that makes the roof. Now, it is easy to remove any part of this 
without injuring the rest. . . . They had merely to scrape back the earth from a 
portion of the roof over the lewan, take up the thorns and the short sticks, and let down 
the couch between the beams at the very feet of Jesus. The end achieved, they could 
speedily restore the roof as it was before. I have the impression, however," Dr. Thomson 
goes on to say, " tliat the covering at least of the lewan was not made of earth, but of 
materials more easily taken up. It may have been merely of coarse matting, like 
the walls and roofs of Turkman huts ; or it may have been made of boards, or even 
stone slabs (and such I have seen), that could be quickly removed. All that is 
necessary, however, for us to know is, that the roof was flat, low, easily reached, and 
easily opened, 50 as to let down the couch of the sick man ; and all these points are 
rendered intelligible by an acquaintance with modem houses in the villages of 
Palestine." The frequency and force with which this portion of the miracle has been 
assailed must be our apology for quoting the above somewhat long extract. 

IV. The evidencb of their faith. The evangelist Matthew informs us that Jesus 
saw their faith, but maizes no mention of the circumstances just referred to, which are 
so fully related by St. Luke, and with such particularity and minuteness of detail by St. 
Mark. The singularity of the effort which they made to reach the Saviour afforded 
ocular demonstration of their belief in his power to help and heal. The faith thua 
manifested was not restricted to the invalid, nor to those that bore him. It was sharei^ 



106 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. n. 1—28 



by both alike. They would not have engaged in the friendly ofBce unless they had had 
faith in the probable result, nor would they have undertaken it against the will or wish 
of the invalid ; neither would he have consented to allow himstlf to he conveyed, ai 
he did, without believing in the power of him from whom he hoped relief. 

V. Natubb of faith, as seen in this transaction. Two things, the exact 
counteijiart of each other, are the love of the Saviour and the faith of the sinner; 
they exactly and mutually correspond ; the latter is the cheerful response to the 
former. The Saviour is waiting to be gracious; the sinner, in the exercise of 
faith, is ready to accept that grace. The Saviour offers the much-needed forgiveness ; 
the sinner, by faith, stretches out his hand to receive the boon. The true nature of 
faith, moreover, is taught us here ; it is not merely belief in a dogma, it is dependence 
on a person ; it is not merely belief in a doctrine, it is reliance on a living Saviour ; it 
is thus not only assent to a Divine testimony, it is trust in a Divine person. Accor- 
dingly, it is sometimes represented in Scripture as a coming to Christ ; sometimes it is 
the receiving of Christ ; again, it is a looking to Christ ; also a fleeing to him for refuge. 
It is exhibited by other figures all of wliich imply not only implicit belieC in what the 
Scriptures report of Christ, but actual trust in him as being all that Scripture represents 
him, and willing to do all that Scripture declares him to be able and willing to do. 

VI. The disease and its eemedt. The sufferer was a paralytic, or rather, as St. 
Luke with his usual professional accuracy characterizes him more strictly, paralyzed or 
palsy-stricken (TropoXeXu^neVos). This disease, which assumed a very aggravated form in 
the East, was attended with great suffering, besides leaving its victim altogether help- 
less. If leprosy was typical of pollution, and demoniac possession of passion, this form 
of disease was a type of utter prostration. The mode of cure adopted by our Lord in 
this case was somewhat unusual. Generally he administered relief to the body before 
restoring health to the soul ; in the case of the paralytic the process is just the converse of 
this. Whether it was that sinful indulgence or evil excesses of some kind had weakened 
the nervous system of this man, and left him in this state of pain and prostration ; or 
whether he felt with peculiar keenness the burden of sin pressing on his conscience ; 
or whether some expression of penitence, though unrecorded, had escaped his lips ; or 
whether it was only deep contrition of spirit of which our Lord alone was cognizant ; — 
whichever of these it was, he first removed the soul disease. The expression, as 
recorded by St. Luke, is merely "man ; " but both St. Matthew and St. Mark report the 
tenderer word of address, "son" or "child," more on the ground of affection than 
because of the youth of the sufferer; while St. Matthew alone adds the word of 
cheering — (eaf)o-€i), " Be of good cheer " — an expression so calculated to relievo the bur- 
thened spirit and ease the aching heart. 

VII. Gbound of bncoukagement. But the ground of this encouragement is in the 
words, " Thy sins are forgiven thee ; " not, ob.serve, " be forgiven thee," for a.(p4a)prai is not 
for tupavTM, the aorist subjunctive in a preoative sense, but for k<piivTca, perfect indicative in 
an afBrmative sense — have been forgiven thee. The deed, in fact, was done, the blessing 
was bestowed, the sins of the man were, as the word implies, dismissed — sent away like 
the sins of Israel on the head of the scapegoat "into a land uninhabited," never again to 
return or be remembered. 

VIII. Hostile on-lookbes. In that surging crowd were some cold, unsympathetic 
hearts ; there sat or stood there men who had come, if not as spies, yet through 
curiosity of a calculating, critical, sceptical kind. Not only had Galilee sent its con- 
tingent of such men from every village, but several had come all the way from the 
southern province, and even from its capital — an indirect evidence, by the way, of what 
is directly recorded by St. John of ministerial work carried on in these parts, and of 
attention roused by it. In the parallel portion of St. Luke where we read that "the 
power of the Lord was present to heal them (airoiJi) " — that is, of course, those who 
sought or needed healing — there is a tolerably well-supported variant which reads the 
pronouu m the singular a\ir6v after N, B, L, H ; the meaning in this case is, " the power 
of the Lord was in the direction of his healing," or more freely, " the power of the Lord 
[Jehovah] was present for his [worl; of] healing." 

IX. A SECT AND A PEOFEssioN. St. Matthew and St. Mark both notice ine presenc* 
of certain of the scribes. These were originally copyists, but afterwards textual critics, 
»ud subsequontly expositors of the Law — in fact, the theologians of the nation. 8t 



CH. II. 1—28.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 107 

Luke, however, gives us the additional information that " there were Pharisees and 
doctors of the Law sitting by." The fatter had to do with the Law of the Old Testament, 
just as the scribes, but in the capacity of jurists. Hence the lawyers and scribes are 
commonly thought to have been identical. No doubt the. snrae person might be both — 
a theologian and a jurist or ecclesiastical lawyer; wliile the Pharisees were the 
formalists — th6 religious sect that set such store by form and ceromony. The namt is 
derived from parash, to separate, and thus signifins separatists. Now. these parties 
reasoned the matter out in their own minds (5ia\oyt(6iJL(vot), and were not long in coming 
to a conclusion that Jesus was guilty of a blasphemous ass'imption of an exclusively 
Divine attribute. 

X. The interpretation op their thoughts. It was, " Why does this fellnw th i» 
speak blasphemies ? " The " this" is contemptuous, and the " thus " implies " wickedly," 
or " as we have heard." If, however, we accept the text of the critical editors, Lachmann, 
Tischendorf, Tregelles, as well as that followed by the Revisers, it reads thus : " Why 
does this man thus speak ? he blasphemeth." In the received text the plural denotes 
intensity, and is equivalent to " all this blasphemy ; " or it refers to different expres- 
sions which they looked upon as blasphemous. It must be here observed that in 
Scripture language the word passes from the classical sense of speaking evil of or 
slandering a fellow-creature to the Hellenistic meaning of speaking impiously of God, 
or laying claim to a Divine attribute. 

XI. Drift of their rbasonino. " Who can forgive sins but one, that is, God, or 
God alone ? " Such was the gist of their reasoning ; the natural answer, of course, was 
that, unless in the exercise of delegated authority, or in a declarative sense, the thing 
transcended human power. God reserves to himself the power of pardon ; Jesus, in his 
own name and by his own authority, claims tc bestow forgiveness ; therefore he blas- 
phemeth, thus making himself equal to God. Both their premisses were correct and 
strictly logical ; but the conclusion drawn from them was altogether erroneous — the 
very reverse of the fact. It sliould rather have been, not " he blasphemeth," arrogating 
to himself a Divine attribute, but, on the contrary, "he is truly Divine," really 
possessing Divine power. 

XII. Helps them to the right conclusion. Our Lord knew at once ana well 
(iirtyvoiis) in his spirit their secret reasonings ; for, though his soul was human, his spirit 
was Divine ; while to the query latent in their minds, he accommodates the question 
which he addresses to them, as though he said, " Ye ask. What right have I to speak thus ? 
I reply. What right have ye to reason thus ? Which claim is easier to make — that of 
forgiving sins, or that of curing palsy ? " But the nature of proof in each of the two cases 
is widely different : in the one case it is obvious, in the other it is obscure ; in the one 
it is patent, in the other latent. But our Lord proceeds to put them in the position of 
coming to a correct conclusion. He gives them sufiScient data to guiile them : of what is 
cognizable by the senses he gives sensible proof ; what is spiritual he leaves them to 
infer. " Up," he says to the paralytic, if we adopt the reading eyetpe, approved of by 
Lachmann and Tischendorf, and to be taken as a particle of excitement, like 076 or 
ivo, or auf in German, rather than with aeavrhi' understood ; or " Arise," if we read 
iyttpov, with Tregelles ; or " Arise at once," if we adhere to ^yetpai of the received text, 
though Pritzsche affirms that the middle voice signifies " to arouse or raise some one 
for one's self," while the passive is " to be aroused, raised up," and so " rise." Our Lord 
then adds, "Take up thy bed" (Kpa^Parov, equivalent to the Latin grabatum, and 
equivalent to St. Luke's KXiviSiov, little bed, or mattress or pallet — every way appro- 
priate, as well in sense as because the latter evangelist wrote for the Greeks, as St, 
Mark for the Romans, at least in the first instance), "and go into thy house." 

XIII. Strange contrast. Immediately the command was obeyed, and the man, 
who was carried on a bed by four into the Saviour's presence was now raised up Qiy^pin), 
and carried his bed on his back in presence of them all. As Bengel has finely expressed 
it, " Sweet saying 1 the bed hath borne the man : now the man bore the bed." 

XIV. Power 3P forgiveness. Thus our Lord, by this visible, palpable, and 
undeniable exercise of Divine power in relieving the body, proved that he possessed the 
power, and not only the power but the legitimate authority Q^ovaiav), to restore thn 
Boul from the disease of sin. 

XV. This power possessed on earth. Of himself he ipeais as the " Son of man.' 



108 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. ii. 1— 28 

This designation he applies no less than eighty times to himself; but it is only twice or 
thrice so applied by others, and in each instance of such application his exaltation 
is implied. He affirms that on earth the Son of man has power to forgive sins, how 
much more in heaven? In his humiliation, how much more in his exaltation ? In hii 
humiliation on earth, how much more in his glorification in heaven ? 

XVI. God oLOBiriBD. No wonder the man himself, as St. Luke tells us, glorified 
God ! And no wonder that the multitude (oi Sx-^ot according to St. Matthew, nivrat 
according to St. Mark) all likewise united with him in giving'glory to God ; while Hill, at 
the same time that they glorified God, expressed their own amazement in one way or 
other — some (as in St. Matthew) in reference to such power given unto men ; others 
(according to St. Luke) because of the strange things — things beyond expectation 
(TTapiio^a) — they had just seen ; and some (as we read in St. Mark) because they had 
never seen it on this fashion. — J. J. G. 

Vers. 13 — 22. Parallel passages : Matt. ix. 9 — 17 ; Luke v. 27 — 39. — Call of Levi, 
Feasting, and Fasting. L The call of Levi. l.Publicans,ii>ho were they f Thepublicans 
proper, who paid a certain sum contracted for into the public treasury (jpuhlicum), were 
Roman knights, a wealthy class of citizens. These, again, had their agents who sublet, 
or acted as their own agents in subletting, the collection of the taxes, usually to natives of 
the country from which the taxes were to be collected. The correct name of these tax- 
collectors was portitores. 2. Objects of public odium. No class of men was so obnoxious 
to the Jews. They were looked on as unpatriotic, because they were in the service of a 
foreign government ; they were regarded as irreligious, because they were engaged in an 
occupation suggestive of subjection to alien rule, and so derogatory to the high position 
of that people whom God had chosen for his peculiar possession and honoured vsith 
special privileges ; in addition to all this, they were generally extortioners who by 
unjust exactions oppressed their countrymen. Thus regarded as traitors to their 
country and as apostates from the national faith, while at the same time they were 
exorbitant in their demands on their fellow-citizens, they were not without some reason 
subjects of odium and obloquy — men who had thus lost caste, both social and religious. 

3. St. Matthew oritfinally a publican. To this obnoxious class of men belouged the son 
of AlphEBUs, called Levi by St. Mark and St. Luke, but in the first Gospel named 
Matthew, which means " gift of Jehovah," nearly the same as Theodore, or Dositheus or 
Dorotheus, in Greek. That Levi was identical with the evangelist Matthew scarcely 
admits of any reasonable doubt. Busily employed in this obnoxious trade, he sat one day 
as usual at the custom-house or place of toll on the shore of the Lake of Gennesaret. 

4. His call. Capernaum, now, as we have seen, probably Tell Sum, was then a busy 
mart of merchandise and a commercial centre, whence roads diverged, one to Damascus 
in the north-east ; a second to Tyre in the north-west on the Mediterranean seaboard ; • 
third ran southward to Jerusalem, the capital of the country ; while a fourth led to 
Sepphoris or Dio-Ceesarea, the Roman capital of the province. It was exactly the kind of 
place where one would expect to find a custom-house for collecting the tolls of the lake, 
harbour dues, and duties on exports and imports, or other taxes. As our Lord went past, 
he fixed his eyes on (St. Luke, iSedaaro, equivalent to observed) the tax-gatherer, who sat 
as usual at his post, not slothful in his business such as it was, and addressed to him the 
plain, direct invitation, " Follow me." Strange to say, that simple utterance had more 
than magic effect on this once unscrupulous, perhaps hardened custom-house oflScer. 
We are far from affirming that this was the first time that Levi had come in contact 
with Jesus. Gospel light had shined through all that once dark district; there 
can be little doubt that he had heard some of his discourses and listened to the gracious 
words that so often fell from his lips, or he had witnessed some of those works of wonder 
which he performed. Perhaps he had mingled in that crowd of the Capernaumites, 
which St. Mark reports in the preceding section of his Gospel, and had been a silent 
spectator when the poor paralytic had been so benefited and blessed in both body 
and soul. 6. Sis love to Jesus. Be this as it may, he, at all events, immediately 
accepted the invitation, and without demur or delay rose up at once — left all, as St 
Luke tells us — and followed Jesus. Nor was tliis all ; he shows his love to Jesus in 
another way — by an entertainment given in his honour. He made a great feast in his 
own house, as St. Luke further informs us. From this circumstance we natumlly infer 



oa. n. 1—28.] THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. MARK. lOJ 

that his means were respectable ; that, if not very wealthy, he was at least in comfortable 
circumstances ; that by consequence the sacrifice he made for the Master was very 
ConsiJerable, and that his attachment was proportionately great. 6. Further object of 
Levies feast. This complimentary feast to the Saviour was at the same time a farewell 
feast to his former associates, and a feast, moreover, by which he brought them into 
close contact with all that was spiritually good, in hope, no doubt, that they too might 
share the benefit and enjoy some measure of the same blessing which he himself had 
received. 7. His humility. Besides the self-sacrificing generosity of Levi who, no 
doubt, assumed the name of Matthew on his conversion, and his love to the Saviour as 
also to the souls of his brethren, he manifests a beautiful humility and an entire 
absence of ostentation. Acting on this principle, " Let another praise thee and not 
thioe own lips," he makes no mention of the feast, more especially of the fact that it 
was himself, in his ovm house (so St. Luke), that gave at his own expense this great 
feast or reception (SoxMv i>.iyik-iiv), as St. Luke terms it; while in the list of the names 
of the twelve apostles St. Mattthew alone, in his Go.^pel, speaks of himself as the publican. 
8. A seeming tautology. In the fifteenth verse of this second chapter there appears to 
be a redundancy, for first we read that Tnany publicans and sinners sat at meat, or 
reclined (<rwi'ai'cK6iyTo), with Jesus and his disciples; and then it is added, "for there 
were rnany, and they followed him." This seeming tautology is partially avoided by 
the reading o% xal of codex D, or by the rendering qui of the Italic and Vulgate ; while 
soma understand the first part of the clause as a justification of the former statement 
about " many publicans and sinners," and a further affirmation of its being literally and 
exactly true, the expression " followed " being joined, as is done by some editors, to the 
next verse, that is, " And there followed him also scribes and Pharisees." These 
expedients are unnecessary, for if we take ?taia> in the sense of vap^tiav, which it some- 
times has, the words assign an appropriate reason, or account properly for the large 
number referred to ; thus, " Many publicans and sinners sat also together with Jesus 
and his disciples, for many were present [i.e. in Levi's house], and had followed Jesus 
[viz. thither]." 9. Exception taken to such company. " How is it that he eateth with 
publicans and sinners?" vathec," Why is it that he consorts with such?" thefuU expres- 
sion being ri iartr irt, or ri ydyovfv ifrj as in John xiv. 22. This complaint was addressed 
to the disciples, as though these separatists and sectaries still stood in salutary awe of the 
Master himself ; but Jesus heard or overheard it, if the reading irapaKoiaas be admissible, 
and made reply by the aphorism, " They that are whole or strong," according to St. 
Matthew and St. Mark, but more precisely and perhaps professionally, according to St. 
Luke, "in sound health (iyialrovTts) " have no need of the physician. He then applies 
the maxim to tlie particular case before him in the words, "I came not to call righteous 
[persons] but sinners to repentance." 10. The objects of the Saviour's mission. Theo- 
phylact understands by " the righteous " here those who think or speak of themselves as 
righteous, and imagines that our Lord terms them so by way of irony (kot" elpotyelav). 
This explanation of Theophylact, and others who hold with him, that by "righteous" in 
this passage are meant tliose who think themselves righteous, who are so in their own 
estimation, presents only one aspect of the matter. While there are many degrees in 
anrighteousness, self-righteousness is but one of those degrees, and, as such, is not a 
characteristic of the class, viz. the righteous which our Lord excludes from the objects of 
his mission. The meaning is rather that, as there is none by nature righteous — none 
righteous till made so by the Saviour himself none really and perfectly righteous— the 
unrighteous (and all in their natural state are such, notwithstanding certain differeuces 
in degree) ; the sinful (and all belong to this category, for all have sinned though in vary- 
ing grades) — these are the very objects of his search and saving power. In a word, the 
morally unhealthy are those on whom the skill of the great Physician needs to be exer- 
cised, and who most require its exercise. Those that are such and feel themselves to be 
such are just the persons contemplated in his mission, and to whom on his errand of 
mercy he comes and calls. 11. The Saviour's proper place. Instead, then, of going out of 
his way, or his presence being found in the wrong place, our Lord, in consorting with 
publicans and sinners — sinners the vilest and the worst, as the objectors at least 
esteemed them — was just among those lost ones whom he came to seek and save, those 
sorely diseased ones whom he meant to restore to spiritual health and moral vigour 
As in a hospital or lazar-house the physician's work is most abundant, so among suc£ 



110 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. fcH. ii. 1— 28 

moral lazais the great Physician found the widest field of operation. We may not forget, 
however, that it is with much caution and certain restrictions that any mere man can 
so have intercourse with the degraded of his species ; but Jesus, the God-man, ran no risk 
of moral taint, or of compromising character by associating freely and fully with such. 

II. Fasting. 1. Fasting. In the former case just considered, the objectors shrank 
from directly assailing our Lord ; they only took the disciples to task. Now, however, 
thi'x have waxed bolder, and they attack the Master himself. The disciples of John 
imbibed the ascetic spirit of their master, who came neither eating nor drinking; the 
Pharisees, in addition to the one great annual fast appointed to be held on the Day of 
Atonement, and the four annual fasts observed after the Exile and enumerated by 
Zech. viii. 18 as " the fast of the fourth month, and the fast of the fifth, and the 
fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth " (held in the same month, and probably 
the same as that on the Day of Atonement), observed also the two weekly fasts which 
superstition or will-worship had superadded, namely, Thursday, the day on which, 
as was alleged, Moses reascended the mount, and Monday, on which he returned. 
Holding a common principle, the disciples of John and the Pharisees make common 
cause, and question our Lord about the laxity of his disciples in this regard^not fasting, 
while they themselves were so strict in such observances. 2. 2%e true nature offcbsti/ng. 
This is made manifest by our Lord's reply. Nor do we find any new doctrine here ; it 
is the restatement of an old truth or rather principle. As rending the garments was 
a token of grief, so fasting was at once an effect and evidence of grief. Bat if the 
reality were absent, the former was meaningless and the latter hypocritical ; hence the 
prophet warned his countrymen to rend their hearts and not their garments, and turn 
truly unto the Lord. So here the disciples of Jesus had not as yet any cause of griet 
Why, then, indulge in empty pretence, employing the sign when the thing signified 
was absent, and when, in fact, no occasion existed for either, and when from the time 
and the circumstances both were uncalled for? 3. Allusion to an ancient custom. 
John the Baptist had spoken (John ii. 29) of Jesus as the Church's Bridegroom; 
our Lord accepts the name John thus gave him, and adopts the figure, identifying 
himself with the bridegroom. In " the children of the bridechamber " we have an 
expression of Hebraistic impress, and equivalent to the more classical vapdyv/upoi or 
vviKpayayoij-viho were the friends of the bridegroom — the groomsmen — and who sat or went 
beside him to fetch the bride, and conduct her from her home, with merry music, gay 
procession, bright torches, and festive joy, to the house of her husband. Thus we read, 
in Judg. xiv. 10, 11, " So his father went down unto the woman : and Samson made 
there a feast ; for so used the young men to do. And it came to pass, when they saw 
him, that they brought thirty companions to be with him." The allusion makes the 
meaning manifest. " Can," asks our Lord by a particle (m^) which usually implies a 
negative answer, " the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with 
them ? " The answer was obvious. The presence of the bridegroom made it a time 
of feasting instead of fasting — of joy and not of grief ; and so he returns answer to 
himself, "As long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast." Here 
the ancient Syriac Version omits this clause altogether, and substitutes for it the bare 
netiative " no," as our Lord's reply to his own question. 4. Our Lord's first intima- 
tion of his sufferings. Yet he points to a time suited to fasting, and we can well 
imagine huw a cloud shaded his benignant brow as he pronounced the darkly ominous 
words: " But," he says, "days shall come, yea, days when" (such is the import of 
the «ol iray of St. Luke) " the bridegroom shall be taken away from them ; then will 
they fast in those days." The Revised Version renders perhaps more simply, though 
sonjewhat less significantly, we think, as follows: — "But the days will come; and 
when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, then will they fast in those 
days." This is the first public intimation which our Lord gives of his future sufferings 
and death. He had indeed enigmatically hinted it to the Jewish rulers in the 
words, " Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up " (John ii. 19) ; and 
he had dimly alluded to it in his private conversation with Nicodemus in the words, 
"Even so must the Son of man be lifted up" (John iii. 14). When that gloomy 
prospect should be realized, then it would be a time of real grief and consequently • 
suitable season for fasting, 5. Maxim teaching the avoidance of things incrmgmuua. 
Our Lord takes occasion, from the notion of nersons indulging sorrow when the oocasic* 



•H.U. 1—28.3 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. Ill 

was festive and joyous, to enunciate a maxim of deep import and great significance, as 
also of far-reaching tendency and manifold applications. The new patcii on an old 
garment is a sample of incongruity. The words in St. Mark read thus : " No man also 
seweth a piece of unfulled cloth on an old garment: else the new patch [or new 
piece that filled it up] taketh away something from the old, and the rent becomes 
worse ; " or the second clause may be rendered as follows : " Else the patch [or piece 
that filled up] takes away the new from the old." Also in the Gospel of St. Luke 
the words as commonly read are, " No man putteth a piece of new garment upon an 
old ; if otherwise, then both the new maketh a rent, and the piece that was taken 
out of the new agreeth not with the old ; " or if the reading (o-x^o-as) of x, A, B, D, L, 
B, and the Syriac be adopted, the rendering may be, " No man having rent a piece 
from a new garment putteth it upon an old ; if otherwise, he will both rend the new 
garment [i.t. by taking the inipxriiui, or patch, out of it] and the piece from the new 
garment will not agree with the old." The word " unfulled, " used by St. Mark, makes 
the meaning plainer, and implies that the unfulled patch, from its nature being stronger 
or more liable to shrink, works the mischief. 6. Ill effects of such incongruity. The 
following ill efi'ects are produced : — (1) The new garment is marred and rendered incom- 
plete; (2) the old is not made better, but worse, the rent becoming larger; (3) the 
entire want of suitability or consistency ; in other words, obvious unseemliness, as well 
as unsuitability. The Latins called a man " inept " (ineptus) who neglected what 
time, place, or circumstances demanded. Even a thing which may be proper enough in 
itself, if done out of season, is spoiled. On the contrary, everything that God makes is 
beautiful in its season ; and everything that man does should aim at and imitate the 
same. Thus is it also when the proper requirements of place, and those of circumstances, 
are neglected. 7. Variety of applications. This parable or proverbial representation is 
capable of a great variety of applications, all showing the necessity of duly attending 
to the fitness of things and the exceedingly inconvenient consequences sure to result 
from the opposite course. (1) The old dispensation and the new may not be mixed up 
together. Though they were one in essence, and though one vital principle pervaded 
them, yet the externals differed — the outward forms were distinct. (2) The gospel was 
never meant to be used as a patch on the old threadbare garment of the Law. The old 
economy was not to be repaired in this way ; it had to be renovated. The legal dispensa- 
tion was not to be patched up with gospel grace. Christianity was never intended to be 
a patehed-up Judaism ; the old had served its day and died, the new came in to take its 
place. Nor is the new Christian life of individuals a purple patch here and there upon 
the old. (3) More directly still to the present instance, the young life of new disciple- 
ship was not to be forced into conjunction and so crushed into conformity with Pharisaic 
asceticism, nor was their moral freedom to be hampered by such unnatural and unwel- 
come restrictions. 8. A close connection. Again, as the incompatibility of fasting with 
a time of feasting, of sorrow with a season of gladness, is exhibited by the comparison 
of a wedding feast, the wedding feast naturally suggested the wedding garment, and 
again, by a similar association of ideas, the wine in use at a wedding. Thus, too, the 
garment as an outer garb refers to externals, and the wine to something internal ; so the 
principles of true freedom infused by the gospel must burst through the narrowness of 
mere ceremonial swathing-bands. — J. J. G. 

Vers. 23 — ^28. Parallel passages : Matt. xii. 1 — 8 ; Luke vi. 1 — 5. — Sahbath observ- 
ance. I. WoBSHiP, NOT AMUSEMENT, SUITS THE SABBATH. The common heading of 
this section in the Gospels is, " The disciples pluck the ears of corn on the sabbath day." 
On this occasion our Lord and his disciples were out walking on the sabbath ; but they 
were not walking for pleasure or even for health. They were on their way to the hoube 
of God, as we learn from the parallel passage in St. Matthew, where we read that 
" when he was departed thence, he went into their synagogue." The two main ideas 
associated with the sabbath are rest and worship ; the former held the first place in the 
old dispensation, the latter the second. In the gospel dispensation their position 
seems reversed; for, while never sundered and never to be separated, worship comes 
more to the front, holding a primary, while rest holds a secondary place. On the sab- 
bath our Lord and his disciples attended the usual place of Jewish worship ; ou the 
sabbath the apostles, after our Lord's death and resurrection, met for the service oi 



118 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. n. 1—28. 

Gk)d ; on the sabbath, thenceforth the first day of the week, the Holy Spirit descended 
in Pentecostal power and plenty, while by means of St. Peter's sermon three thousand 
were converted that same day ; on the sabbath the primitive Christians, taught by 
apostles and following apostolic example, met together to break bread, to read God's 
holy Word, or hear it preached, as also for prayer and praise, and to contribute for th4 
necessities of the saints. Refreshment for the spirit and rest for the body went hand in 
hand ; but worldly amusement found no place on the sabbath, and worldly pleasura 
formed no part of its service. 

II. Works op necessity allowable oh the sabbath. Stretches of corn-land 
abound in the fertile plain of Gennesaret. A pathway frequently ran through these 
unfenced fields, and on these pathways seed often fell and grain grew, as was the case 
with the wayside in the parable of the sower. Our Lord was passing by one of these, 
through the fields of corn (literally, sown places), alongside the grain. The disciples 
were "plucking and eating," as St. Matthew tells us, or, as St. Mark more graphically 
describes it, they " made a way " for themselves by plucking the stalks that had sprung 
up on what had previously been a path, and being an hungred, that is, in a state ol 
hunger — for St. Matthew adds this important fact of their being hungry (iTrelvcurav) — 
" they began to rub the ears of corn in their hand," as St. Luke informs us, and thus 
sought to appease the cravings of appetite. This was, of course, a work of necessity, 
and of urgent necessity, on the part of these hungry men. They had, however, only 
begun this operation (ijp^avTo), when the Pharisees rudely checked them, administering 
the sharp rebuke recorded in this passage. 

in. An bxegetical consideration. The common English Version requires to make 
two assumptions in behoof of its rendering: 1. That iOiv toiciv is the same as iShu 
iroie'ia-eai, though the former in reality is to make a path " viam sternere vel munire — einen 
Weg machen" as Fritzsche expresses it ; while the latter is to go on one's way iter 
facere or progredi, which is the rendering of the Vulgate. 2. That the chief force here, 
as occasionally elsewhere, lies in the participle. In this way is reached (1) the usual 
free rendering, " His disciples began as they went to pluck the ears of com ; " but (2) 
the more correct translation is certainly that which is insisted on by the most accurate 
■oholars, such as Fritzsche and Meyer, namely, " His disciples began to make a path [or 
way] plucking the ears." Though the Revised Version follows the ordinary rendering, 
it gives, in a note on this passage, an approximation to what we consider the right 
rendering, viz. " began to make their way plucking." 

IV. The bigoboub sabbatabianism of the Phaeisbbs. The question of the Phari- 
sees is explained, or indeed translated, by some (1) as signifying, " Lo, what are they 
doing on the sabbath? That which is not lawful ; " while by others it is rendered (2), 
" Lo, why are they doing on the sabbath what is not lawful ? " In neither case can it 
poperly mean that the thing was unlawful in itself, and still more unlawful because of 
its being done on the sabbath day. The superstitious Sabbatarianism of the Pharisees 
suggests the real gist of the question. The action in itself was perfectly allowable, 
according to the Law as it stands written in Deut. xiiii. 25, " When thou comest 
into the standing com of thy neighbour, then thou mayest pluck the ears with thine 
hand." The Pharisees, guided by oral tradition, interpreted the law of the sabbath 
80 rigorously as to identify the plucking of the ears with reaping, and the rubbing of 
ihem in their hands with thrashing, so that the Law, as they explained it, was violated 
by both operations. 

V. Sabbath deseoeation falsely laid to the ohabgb of the disciples. Our 
Lord undertakes the vindication of his disciples; he justifies their conduct by reminding 
their accusers of an incident in the life of David, when ceremonial observance yielded to 
moral necessity, and positive precept to the requirements of mercy. The occasion was 
that on which David found himself at Nob, a sacerdotal town to the north-east and 
within sight of Jerusalem, in a state of destitution — "he had aeed" (xpefoi' ?crxe), such is 
the general statement; and ready to perish with hunger— "was an hungred" (^irelyairev), 
this is the particular specification. The " bread of the face" or presence, according tc the 
Hebrew, or "the loaves of proposition," as rendered by the Vulgate, were twelve loaves — 
one for each tribe, placed in the presence of Jehovah as a symbol of the people's depen- 
dence on their heavenly Father for daily bread. None was permitted the use of thesa 
loaves but the priests; they were their perquisite. This rigid rule was relaxed in favoui 



OH. iL 1—28.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. MARK. 118 

of David ; and not only of David, whose eminence might be thought such as to entitle 
him to greater consideration, and sufficient to make his case exceptional, but in favour 
of those who were with him. Our Lord adduces this instance of violating the letter of 
the Law, asking the Pharisees, according to a formula of their own, but with scornful 
irony, or rather in a tone of severe reproof, " Did ye never read ? " or, as it is expressed 
in St. Luke, " Did ye not even read this ? " — ye who are such sticklers for the Law and 
adepts in Scripture knowledge. 

VI. Solution of a DiFFicirLTy. The name of Abiathar instead of Ahiraelech has 
given trouble. Of the many attempted solutions, such as in the presence of Abiathar, 
afterwards high priest, for it was Ahimelech, father of Abiathar, who really gave the 
shewbread to David and his men ; or that he had both names ; or that the deed wa» 
done by Ahimelech in the pontificate of Abiathar his son, as Theophylact explains it ; 
or in the section or paragraph of Abiathar the high priest; or that the insertion of the 
article distinguishes the lifetime from the pontificate of Abiathar, according to Mid- 
dleton ; — of all these it must be said that they either involve error or have the appear- 
ance of mere shifts or evasions. Of them all, Middleton's is perhaps best known, and 
hag been adopted by not a few critical scholars. Thus, in the first edition of Scrivener's 
' Plain Introduction to the Criticism of the New Testament,' we find the following 
statement : — " In Mark ii. 26, M 'Afi. apx^ ' in the time that Abiathar was high priest,' 
would be historically iucorrect ; while ^irl *AJ3. toD opx-.' in the days of Abiathar the high 
priest,' is suitable enough." But this insertion of the article is a matter of dispute, for 
though it is found in four respectable uncials, including A and C, as also in the following 
cursives : — 1, 33, and 69, of which 33 is known as the " Queen of the cursives ; " yet it 
is absent in this place from N, B, L, and many other uncials, and is rejected by most of 
the critical editors. We cannot, therefore, build an argument on it. We are inclined 
to Fritzsche's opinion, that the real removal of the difficulty appears to be effected by 
the position of the words 4Tr\ 'A$. &px; which implies that the transaction took place in 
the time of Abiathar, afterwards high priest ; while M ipx- 'A/3. would restrict the 
occurrence to the actual time of his priesthood, though it is admitted that with a par- 
ticiple, as &PXOVTOS or (Soo-iXfiJocToj, for example, the position does not thus alter the sense. 
For the mention of Abiathar instead of Ahimelech several reasons might be assigned. 
He was more celebrated than his father, as also better known to the readers of Old 
Testament Scripture ; besides, the mention of him as being present, and a consenting 
party to the transaction, would be calculated to obviate the possible retort which the 
Pharisees might otherwise make, namely, that Ahimelech paid the penalty of his 
profanation by his being slain. 

VII. The OHABOE of SABBATH-BBEAKIUa BY THE DIBCIPLBS FUBTHEB BEFUTED. 

Additional arguments are found in the Gospel of St. Matthew to disprove the charge of 
sabbath profanation which these narrow, bigoted Piiarisees urged against the disciplea, 
The rather laborious service of the priests on the sabbath, in sacrificing, removing the 
shewbread, and other duties, was an apparent profanation of the sabbath ; but in their 
case the Law was relaxed, or rather the principle of God's love to man, which lay at the 
foundation of the Law, and was the animating spirit of the Law, took precedence of the 
letter. He taxes them with culpable and disgraceful, if not wilful, ignorance of such a 
plain Scripture as "I will have mercy and not sacrifice." K, then, the necessity of David 
and his men prevailed over the letter of the Law ; if the sabbath services of the priests 
made sabbath labour to some extent a duty ; and if the claim of mercy be prior to and 
higher than that of sacrifice, our Lord claims exemption for his hun^y disciples from 
the unbending rigour of the Law, or rather from the harsh, superstitious misinterpre- 
tation of it by those cold, heartless, cavilling, censorious Pharisees. 

VIII. The sabbath designed to be subsebvibnt to man. Our Lord proceeds to 
take higher ground. The sabbath was made for the sake of man, Gentile as well as 
Jew ; it originated for his benefit ; it is only the means to an end, and man's InterestB 
are that end ; it owes its existence to man, and has the reason of i ts existence in man. 
It is a memorial of his creation, a remembrancer of his redemption, and a foretaste as 
well as pledge of his future and everlasting rest. It is most valuable in its essential 
nature and right use ; but if the circumstantial come into collision with the essential, 
or the ceremonial conflict with the moral, in either case the former, in the very nature 
of things, is bound to give place. 

8T. MABE. I 



lU IHE GOSPEL ACCOKDIJSG TO ST, MABK. [oh. in. 1—35. 

IX. The Son op man's loedship with ebspeot to the sabbath. The Son of man 
here mentioned is, in spite of all rationalistic quibbling, the Saviour, and he is Lord of 
the sabbath. In St. Mark and St. Luke ko! stands before "sabbath;" it is likewise 
inserted in St. Matthew by some, but excluded by others. It may mean even or also 
In the first of these two significations it implies that much as they valued the ordi- 
nance of the sabbath above all the other commandments of the Decalogue, and super- 
stitious as was the veneration with which they regarded it, the Son of man was Lord 
even of the sabbath ; and so he could make it elastic as the exigencies of any particular 
case might require; he could modify it according to any special emergency; he could 
determine the mode of its observance between the two limits of man's benefit on the 
one hand, and the Law's behest on the other. But if we take the meaning of the copu- 
lative to be also, then it signifies that, amid and in addition to his other lordships, the 
Son of man possesses tliis also — that he is Lord of the sabbath day. He is Lord of 
angels, for they worship him; he is the Lord from heaven, and all its hosts do acknow- 
ledge him ; he is Lord of earth, for by him it was made, and through him it is upheld ; 
he is the Lord of all creation, for he is the firstborn of every creature, that in all things 
he should have the pre-eminence; " he is Lord also of the sabbath." He vindicates his 
law from the lax observance of the worldling or pleasure-seeker on the one hand, and 
from the narrowness of Pharisaic superstition on the other. He manifests its true 
nature for the rest and refreshment — the physical, mental, moral, and spiritual blessing 
of mankind. 

X. The PBHPBTUAi. obligation of the sabbath. In proof of its perpetual obliga- 
tion we may refer to its Divine appointment, so long prior to the division of Adam's 
family into the two great sections of Jew and Gentile — before the call of Abram and 
the existence of the Jewish nation ; before the promulgation of the Law from Sinai and 
the establishment of the Jewish polity. We may trace the proof of its observance in 
the division of time into weeks among almost all nations and from the remotest 
antiquity ; in certain incidental notices afforded by the history of the period between 
creation and the publishing of the Law ; in the miraculous supply of a double 
portion of manna, which, even before the latter event, Israel received on the sixth day 
as a provision for the seventh ; in the note of memory prefixed, implying at once its 
appointment and observance before the giving of the Law, and intimating not a new 
enactment merely national in its range, but the republication to a particular nation of 
an old one, that from the beginning had been binding on all. The latitude of its 
extent to the Gentile stranger, as well as to the Jew, may be argued from the terms of 
the command itself, " Nor the stranger that is within thy gates." Some importance, 
too, may be attached to its central position in the Decalogue, linking together the duties 
we owe our Father in heaven, and those which we owe our brother man on earth ; 
while it blends, moreover, the joint memorials of creation and Calvary, and combines 
at the game time the creature's comfort and the Creator's glory in the words, " To you 
an holy day, a sabbath of rest to the Lord." We must have in recollection, besides, 
that it was written, as well as the other precepts of the moral law, by the finger of God 
on the stone tablet, in token, it would seem, of its durability. Further, we may observe 
the tense of the verb used in the last verse of this chapter, viz. " the Son of man is " — that 
is, continues — " Lord of the sabbath ; " consequently Lord, not of an obsolete or decaying 
ordinance, but of a present, ever-abiding institution. Thus, indeed, it appears that " the 
sabbath was made for man," for the species, coeval and coextensive with the race — " for 
man," as has been well observed, " from the beginning ; for man till the end ; for man 
generally, at all times, in all countries, and under all circumstances." And when, we 
may ask, or where, or how was this original sabbath law either repealed or relaxed ? — 
J. J. G. 



EXPOSITION 
OHAPTBB IIL 



This chapter begins with the record of 
another cue of healing on the sabbath day ; 



nation of the Pharisees with the Uerodians 
to bring about the destruction of the Saviour. 
We may observe that he again chose th( 
sabbath for a new miracle, that he might 



and it closee with the notice of a oombi- I again and again confute the error of th« 



CH. m. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK, 



11& 



■ciibes and Pharisees with regard to the 
observance of the sabbath. 

Yer. 1. — He entered again into the syna- 
gogne. St. Matthew (xii. 9) says, "their 
synagogue " (eii rijv (rvvayary^v outmc). 
This would probably be on the next sabbath 
after that named at the close of the last 
ohapter. And there was a man there which 
had a withered hand {i^rjpai^/j.^vriv extav t-^v 
X"pa) ; literally, icAtefeftad hishand withered, 
or dried up. And they watched him (irape- 
riipovii aiiThv) ; kept watching him. TJiere 
were probably scribes sent for this purpose 
from Jerusalem. St. Jerome informs us 
that, in an apocryphal Gospel in use 
amongst the Nazarenes and Ebiouites, the 
man whose hand was withered is de- 
scribed as a mason, and is said to hare 
asked for help in the following terms : — " I 
was a mason, seeking my living by manual 
labour. I beseech thee, Jesus, to restore to 
me the use of my hand, that I may not be 
cninpelled to beg my bread." This is 
so far consistent with St. Mark's de- 
scription (_i^TlpafifietfTjv %x^^ "^^^ X^^P"-") ^^ to 
show that the malady was the result of 
disease or accident, and not congenital. St. 
Luke (vi. 6) informs us that it was the right 
hand. The disease probably extended 
through the whole arm according to the 
wider meaning of the Greek word x^V- 
It seems to have been a kind of atrophy, 
causing a gradual drying up of the limb ; 
which in such a condition was beyond the 
teach of any mere human skill. 

Yer. 2. — The scribes had already the 
evidence that our Lord had permitted his 
disciples to rub the ears of com on the 
sabbath day. But this was the act of the 
disciples, not his. What he was now pre- 
paring to do was an act of miraculous power. 
And here the case was stronger, because 
work, which was prohibited under pain of 
death by the Law (Exod. xxxi. 14), was 
understood to include every act not abso- 
lutely necessary. 

Yers. 3, 4. - Stand forth. The words in 
the original are 'Zyeipai els rh liftrov, Bise up 
into the midst. In St. Matthew's account (zu. 
10), the scribes and Pharisees here ask our 
Lord, " Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath 
day ? " The two accounts are easily reconciled 
if we first suppose the scribes and Pharisees 
to ask this question of our Lord, and then 
our Lord to answer them by putting their 
own question to them in another form. 
Is it lawful on the sabbath day to do good, 
or to do harm 1 to save a life, or to kill 'i 
Our Lord's meaning appears to be this: 
" If any one, having it in his power, omits 
to do an act of mercy on the sabbath day 
for one grievously afflicted, as this man is, 
if he is able to cure him, as I Christ am 
AD<b, he does him a wrone : for he denies 



him that help which he owes him by the law 
of charity." Our Lord thus plainly signi- 
fies that not to do an act of kindness to a sick 
man on the sabbath day when you are able to 
do it, is really to do him a wrong. But it is 
never lawful to do a wrong; and there- 
fore it is always lawful to do good, not 
excepting even the sabbath day, for that 
is dedicated to God and to good works. 
Whence it is a greater sin to do a' wrong on 
the sabbath than on other days ; for thus 
the sanctity of the sabbath is violated, just 
as it is all the more honoured and sanctified 
by doing good. In our Lord's judgment, 
then, to neglect to save, when you have it 
in your power to do so, is to destroy. They 
held their peace. They could not answer 
him. They are obstinate indeed in their 
infidelity, who, when they can say nothing 
against the truth, refuse to say anything 
for it. 

Yer. 5. — When he had looked round about 
on them with anger, being grieved ((tuX- 
Xvn-oifievos) — the word has a touch of " con- 
dolence" in it — at the hardening of their 
heart. All this is very characteristic of 
St. Mark, who is careful to notice the visible 
expression of our Lord's feelings in his 
looks. The account is evidently from an 
eye-witness, or from one who had it from an 
eye-witness. He looked round about on 
them with anger. He was indignant at their 
blindness of heart, and their unbelief, which 
led them to attack the miracles of mercy 
wrought by him on the sabbath day as 
though they were a violation of the law of 
the sabbath. We see here how plainly 
there were in Christ the passions and affec- 
tions common to the human nature, only 
restrained and subordinated to reason. Here 
is the difference between the anger of fallen 
man and the anger of the sinless One. 
With fallen man, anger is the desire of 
retaliating, of punishing those by whom you 
consider yourself unjustly treated. Hence, 
in other men, anger springs from self-love ; 
in Christ it sprang from the love of God. 
He loved God above all things ; hence he 
was distressed and irritated on account of 
the wrongs done to God by sins and sinners. 
So that his anger was a righteous zeal for 
the honour of God; and hence it was 
mingled with grief, because, in their blind- 
ness and obstinacy, they would not acknow- 
ledge him to be the Messiah, but misrepre- 
sented his kiiKlneeses wrought on the sick 
on the sabliath day, and found fault with 
them as evil. Thus our Lord, by showing 
grief and sorrow, makes it plain that his 
anger did not spring from the desire ol 
revenge. He was indeed angry at the sin, 
while he grieved over and with the sinners, 
as those whom he loved, and for whose saka 
he came into the world that he might r& 



116 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. [ch. m. 1— 3& 



deem and save them. Stretch forth thy 
hand. And he stretched it forth : and his 
hand was restored. The words " whole as 
the other " {vyiiis ws v &\\7i) are not found in 
the best nnoials. They were probably in- 
serted from St. Matthew. In this instance 
our Lord performed no outward act. " He 
spake, and it was done." The Divine power 
wrought the miracle concurrently with the 
act of faith on the part of the man in 
obeying the command. 

Ver. 6. — The Pharisees and the Herodians 
eombine together against the Lord. This 
was a terrible crisis in his history, or rather 
in the history of those unbelieving men. 
They are now in this dilemma : they must 
either accept his teaching, or they must 
take steps against him as a sabbath-breaker. 
But what had he done? The miracle had 
been wrought by a word only. It would have 
been difficult, therefore, to have obtained 
a judgment against him. Therefore they 
secured some fresh allies. They had already 
gained to their side some of the disciples of 
John the Baptist(ch. ii. 18), now they associ- 
ate with themselves the Herodians. This is 
the first mention that we find made of the 
Herodians. They were the natural oppo- 
nents of the Pharisees; but here they seem 
to have found some common ground of 
agreement, though it is not very easy to say 
what it was, in combining against our Lord. 
But it is no uncommon thing to find 
ooalitious of men, strangely opposed to one 
another on most points, but united to effect 
some particular object ; and it is eusy to see 
how the purity and spirituality of our Lord 
and of his doctrine would be opposed, on the 
one hand, to the ceremonial formality of the 
Pharisee, and on the other to the worldly 
and secular spirit of the Herodian. 

Vers. 7, 8.-— Jesus with hie disciples with- 
drew to the sea. This shows that the 
miracle just recorded took place in the in- 
terior of Galilee, and not at Capernaum, 
whioh was close by the sea. The chief city 
in Gkililee at that time was Sepphoris, which 
Herod Antipas had made his capital. 
There the Herodians would of course be 
numerous, and so too would the Pharisees ; 
since that city was one of the five places 
where the five Sanhedrims met (see Beland, 
'Palestine,' p. 100, referred to in the 
' Speaker's Commentary,' in loc.). The re- 
mainder of these two verses should be read 
and pointed thus: And a great multitude 
from Galilee followed : and from Jndeea, and 
from Jerusalem, and from Idnmeea, and 
beyond Jordan, and about Tyre and Sidon, 
a great multitude, hearing what great things 
he did, oome unto him. Tho meaning of 
the evangelist is this, that, in addition to 
the great mnltitude that followed him from 
the parts of Galilee which he had just been 



visiting, there were vast numbers from other 
parts who had now heard of his fame, and 
flocked to him from every quarter. This 
descriplion sets before us in a strikingly 
graphic manner the mixed character of the 
multitude who gathered around our Lord to 
listen to his teaching, and to be healed by 
him — as many, at least, ai had need of 
healing. 

Ver. 9. — And he spake to his disciples, 
that a small ship ^irKoidpiov) — literally, a 
little boat — should wait on him (wpoirKaf 
Tspri cmTif) — literally, tihould be in close 
attendance upon him — because of the multi- 
tude, lest they should throng him. This 
shows in a very graphic manner how 
assiduously and closely the crowd pressed 
upon him, so that he was obliged to have a 
little boat always in readiness, in which he 
might take refuge when the pressure became 
too great, and so address them with greater 
freedom from the boat. St. Luke (v. 3) 
says, "He sat down, and taught the people 
out of the ship," making the boat, so to 
speak, his pulpit. 

Ver. 10. — As many as had plagues — the 
Greek word is /idimya! ; literally, seonrges, 
painful disorders — pressed upon him (Ssre 
iTrmlvTeiy auT^); literally, fell upon him, 
clung to him, hoping that the very contact 
with him might heal them. This expression, 
" scourges," reminds us that diseases are a 
punishment on account of our sins. 

Ver. 11. — And the unclean spirits, when- 
soever they beheld him, fell down before 
him, and cried, saying. It is worthy of 
notice that the afflicted people fell upon 
him iiTrlirnrTeiv ouT^); but the unclean 
spirits fell down before him (Trpoa-eirnrrev 
auT^), and tliis not out of love or devotion, 
but out of abject fear, dreading lest he 
should drive them out of the "possessed," 
and send them before their time to their 
destined torment. It is just possible that 
this homage paid to our Lord may have been 
an act of cunning — a ruse, as it were, to lead 
the people to suppose that our Lord was in 
league with evil spirits. Thou art the Son 
of God. Did, then, the unclean spirits really 
know that Jesus was the Son of God? A 
voice from heaven at his baptism had prth 
claimed him to be the Son of God, and that 
voice must have vibrated through the 
spiritual world. Then, further, they must 
have known him to be the Son of God by 
the numerous and mighty miracles which 
he wrought, and which they must have 
seen to be real miracles, such as could only 
have been wrought by the supernatural 
power of God, and which were wrought by 
Christ for this very purpose, that they 
might prove him to be the promised 
Messiah, the only begotten Son of God. It 
may, however, be observed that they dU 



OH. in. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. MAEK. 



117 



not know this bo dearly, bnt that, oon- 
Bidering, on the other hand, the greatneas 
of ihe mystery, they hesitated. It is pro- 
K-flble that they were ignorant of the end 
and fruit of this great mystery, namely, 
that mankind were to be redeemed by the 
Incarnation, the Cross, and the Death of 
Christ; and so their own kingdom was 
to be overthrown, and the kingdom of God 
established. Blinded by their hatred of 
Jesus, whom they perceived to be a 
most holy Being, drawing multitudes to 
himself, they stirred up the passions of evil 
men against him, little dreaming that in 
promoting his destruction they were over- 
throwing their own kingdom. 
Ver. 12. — (See notes on oh. i. 44.) 
Yer. 13. — Into a mountain; literally, into 
fhemountain^iisrh Upas). Similarly, St. Luke 
(vi 12) says, " He went out into the mountain 
to pray." The use of the definite article 
might either point to some well-known 
eminence, or to the high table-land as dis- 
tinguished from the plain, and in which 
there would be many recesses, which would 
explain the use of the preposition els. 
Tradition indicates Mount Hatten as the 
place, about five miles to the west of the Sea 
of Galilee. The siunmit rises above a level 
space, where large niunbers might stand 
within hearing. It is supposed, with good 
reason, that it was from thence that the 
sermon on the mount was delivered. It was 
at daybreak, as we learn from St. Luke 
(vi. 13), after this night of prayer, that he 
called unto him whom he himself would 
(o&s ^ee\ev avrSs): and they went unto 
bim (/col airrj^eov irphs); literitlly, they went 
iway to Mm, the word implying that they 
forsook their former pursuits. His own will 
was the motive power : he called " whom he 
himself would ; " but their will consented. 
" When thou saidst. Seek ye my face ; my 
heart said unto thee. Thy face. Lord, will I 
seek." 

Vers. 14, 15. — Out of those who thus 
came to him, he ordained twelve (iTroir](Te) ; 
literally, he made or appointed twelve. They 
were not solemnly ordained or consecrated 
to their office until after his resurrection. 
Their actual consecration (of all of them at 
least but one, namely, Judas Iscariot) took 
}>!ace when he breathed on them and said, 
"Eeceive ye the Holy Ghost" (John xx. 
22). Bnt from this time they were his 
apostles-" designate." They wore henceforth 
to be with him as his attendants and dis- 
ciples. They were to go forth and preach 
under his direction, and by his power they 
weiw to CEist out devils. Several manuscripts 
add here that they were " to heal sicknesses," 
but the words are omitted in some of the 
oldest authorities. The authoriiy over un- 
clean spirits is more formally conveyed 



later on (aee ch. vi. 7), so that here St. 
Mark speaks by anticipation. But thii 
shows how much importance was attached 
to this part of their mission ; for it recognize! 
the spiritual world, and the special purpose 
of the manifestation of the Son of God, 
namely, that he might " destroy the worka 
of the devil." He appointed twelve. The 
number twelve symbolizes perfection and 
universality. The number three indicates 
what is Divine ; and the number four, created 
things. Three multiplied by four gives 
twelve, the number of those who were to go 
forth as apostles into the four quarters of 
the world — called to the faith of the holy 
Trinity. 

Vers. 16, 17. — ^And Simon he sumamed 
Peter. Our Lord had previously declared that 
Simon should be so called. But St. Mark 
avoids as much as possible the recognition 
of any special honour belonging to St. 
Peter ; so he here simply mentions the fact 
of this surname having been given to him, 
a fact which was necessary in order that he 
might be identified. All the early Christian 
writers held that Peter was virtually the 
author of this Gospel. Simon, or Simeon, it 
from a Hebrew word, meaning " to hear." 
James the son of IZehedee, so called to dis- 
tinguish him from the other James; and 
John his brother. In St. Matthew's list, 
Andrew is mentioned next after Peter, as 
his brother, and the first called. But here 
St Mark mentions James and John first 
after Peter ; these three, Peter and James 
and John, being the three leading apostles. 
Of James and John, James is mentioned 
first, as the eldest of the two brothers. And 
them he sumamed Boanerges, which is. Sons 
of thunder. "Boanerges" is the Aramaic 
pronunciation of the Hebrew B'ne-ragesh ; 
B'ne, sons, and ragesh, thunder. The word 
was not intended as a term of reproach; 
although it fitly expressed that natural 
impetuosity and vehemence of character, 
which showed itself in their desire to bring 
down fire from heaven upon the Samaritan 
Tillage, and in their ambitious request that 
they might have the highest places of 
honour in his coming kingdom. But their 
natural dispositions, under the Holy Spirit's 
influence, were gradually transformedso as to 
serve the cause of Christ, and tlieir fiery zeal 
was transmuted into the steady flame of 
Christian earnestness and love, so as to be- 
comK an element of great power in their new 
life as Christians. Christ called these men 
" Sons of thunder " because he would make 
their natural dispositions, when restrained 
and elevated by his grace, the great instru- 
ments of spreading his Gospel. He destined 
them for high service in his kingdom. By 
their holy lives they were to be as lightning, 
and by their preaching they were to be ae 



118 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. [ib. m. 1—35 



thunder to rouse nnbelievers, and to bring 
them to repentance and a holy life. It was 
no doubt on account of this zeal that James 
fell so early a -victim to the wrath of Herod. 
A different lot was that which fell to St. 
John. Spared to a ripe old age, he influenced 
the early Church by his writings and his 
teaching. His Gospel begins as with the 
voice of thunder, " In the beginning was 
the Word, and the Word was with God, and 
the Word was God." Beza and others, fol- 
lowed by Dr. Morlson, have thought that 
this distinctive name was given by oui 
Lord to the two brothers on account of some 
deep-toned peculiarity of voice, which was 
of much service to them in impressing the 
message of the Gospel of the kingdom upon 
their hearers. 

Vers. 18, 19. — Andrew is next mentioned 
after these eminent apostles, as the first 
called. The word is from the Greek, and 
means "manly." Bartholomew, that is, 
Bar-tolmai, the son of Tolmay. This is a 
patronymic, and not a proper name. It has 
been with good reason supposed that he is 
identical with Nathanael, of whom we first 
read in John i. 46, as having been found 
by Philip and brought to Christ. In 
the three synoptic Gospels we find Philip 
and Bartholomew enumerated together in 
the lists of the apostles ; and certainly the 
mode in which Nathanael is mentioned in 
John zzi. 2 would seem to show that he 
was an apostle. His birthplace, too, Cana 
of Galilee, would point to the same conclu- 
sion. If this be 80, then the name Nathanael, 
the "gift of God," would bear the same 
relation to Bartholomew that Simon does to 
Bar-jona. Matthew. In St Matthew's own 
list of the apostles (x. 3) the epithet " the 
publican" is added to his name, and he 
places himself after Thomas. This marks 
the humility of the apostle, that he does 
not scruple to place on record what he was 
before he was called. The word Matthew, 
a contraction of Mattathias, means the " gift 
of Jehovah," according to Geeenius, wmoh 
im Greek would be "Theodore." Thomas. 
Eusebius says that his real name was Judas. 
It is possible that Thomas may have been 
a surname. The word is Hebrew meaning 
a twin, and it is so rendered in Greek in 
John xi. 16. James the son of Alphcens, 
or Clopas (not Cleophas) ; called " the Less," 
either because he was junior in age, or 
rather in his call, to James the Great, the 
brother of John. This James, the son of 
AlphreuB, is called the brother of our Lord. 
St. Jerome says that his father Alphaeus, 
or Clopas, married Mary, a sister of the 
blessed Virgin Mary, which would make 
him the cousin of our Lord. This view is 
confirmed by Bishop Pearson (Art. iii. on 
tbe dreed). He was the writer of the Epistle 



which bears his name, and he beoara« 
Bishop of Jerusalem. Thaddaeus, called also 
Lebbseus and Judas ; whence St. Jerome 
describes him as " trionimnn, ' i.e. having 
three names. Judas would be his propel 
name. Lebbseus and Thaddseus have a 
kind of etymological affinity, the root of 
LebbsBus being " heart," and of Thaddseus, 
"broiist." These nauies are probably re- 
corded to distinguish him from Judas the 
traitor. Simon the Canaanite. The word in 
the Greek, according to the best authorities, 
is, both here and in St. Matthew (x. 4), 
Kaviwaios, from a Chaldean or Syriao word, 
Kanean, or Kdnenieh. The Greek equiva- 
lent is ZrjAoiT^js, which we find preserved in 
St. Luke (vi. 15). It is possible, however, 
that Simon may have been born in Cana of 
Galilee. St. Jerome says that he was called 
a CanansBan or Zealot, by a double reference 
to the place of his birti) and to his zeal. 
Judas Iscariot. Iscariot. The most probable 
derivation is from the Hebrew Ish-Kerioth, 
" a man of Kerioth," a city of the tribe ol 
Judah. St. John (vi. 7) describes liim as 
the son of Simon. If it be asked why our 
Lord should have chosen Judas Iscariot, the 
answer is that he chose him, although lie 
knew that he would betray him, because it 
was his wUl that he sliould be betrayed by 
one that had been " his own familiar friend," 
and that had "eaten bread with him." Bengel 
says well here that " there is an eleotion of 
grace from which men may fall." How <nt 
our Lord knew from the first the result? of 
his choice of Judas belongs to the profound, 
unfathomable mystery of the union of the 
Godhead and the manhood in his sacred 
Person. We may notice generally, with re- 
gard to this choice by our Lord of his 
apostles, the germ of the principle of sending 
them forth by two and two. Here are Petei 
and Andrew, James and John, Philip and 
Bartholomew, and so on. Then, again, our 
Lord chose three pairs of brothers, Peter 
and Andrew, James and John, James the 
Less and Jude, that he might teach us how 
powerful an influence is brotherly love. We 
may also observe that Christ, in selecting his 
apostles, chose some of his kinsmen accord- 
ing to the flesh. When he took upon him 
our flesh, he recognized those who were near 
to him by nature, and he would unite them 
yet more closely by grace to his Divin* 
nature. Three of the apostles took the 
lead, namely, Peter and James and Jokn, 
who were admitted to be witnesses of his 
transfiguration, of one of his greatest 
miracles, and of his passion. 

Vers. 20, 21. — The last clause of ver. 19, 
And they went into an house, should form 
the opening sentence of a new paragraph, 
and should therefore become the first olaust 
of ver. 20, as in the Be vised VersioE Accord- 



OH. m. 1—35,] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



119 



ing to the most approved reading, the words 
ure (cpx^Tai eis oTkov), He cometh into an 
house, or, He cometh home. There is here 
a considerable gap in St. Mark's narrative. 
The sermon on the mount followed upini the 
call of the apostles, at all events so far as it 
. affected them and their mission. Moreover, 
St. Matthew interposes here two miracles 
wrought by our Lord after his descent from 
the mount, and before his return to, his own 
house at Capernaum. St. Mark seems 
anxious here to hasten on to describe the 
treatment of our Lord by his own near 
relatives at this important crisis in his 
ministry. So that they— i.e. our Lord and 
his disciples — could not so much as eat bread; 
such was the pressure of the crowd upon 
them. St. Mark evidently records this, in 
order to show the contrast between the zeal 
of the multitude and the very different 
feelings of our Lord's own connections. 
They, his friends, when they heard how he 
was thronged, went out to lay hold on him ; 
for they said, He is beside himself. This 
little incident is mentioned only by St. 
Mark. Wlien his friends saw him so bent 
upon his great mission as to neglect his 
bodily necessities, they considcicil that he 
was bereft of his reason, that too much zeal 
and piety had deranged his mind. His 
friends went out (e^ijA.eoj') to lay hold on 
him. They may probably have come from 
Nazareth. St. John (vii. 5) says that " even 
his brethren did not believe on him ; " that 
is, they did not believe in him with that 
fulness of trust which is of the essence of 
true faith. Their impression was that he 
was in a condition requiring that he should 
be put under some restraint. 

Ver. 22. — The scribes which came down 
from iTerusalem said, He hath Beelzebub, etc. 
These scribes had apparently been sent 
down by the Sanhedrim, on purpose to watch 
him, and, by giving their own opinion upon 
his claims, to undermine his influence. They 
gave as their authoritative judgment, " He 
hath Beelzebub." One of the most prominent 
iharacteristios of the public works of our 
Lord was the expulsion of evil spirits. There 
was no questioning the facts. Even modern 
scepticism is here at fault, and is con- 
strained to admit the fact of sudden and 
complete cures of insanity, So the scribes 
were obliged to account for what they could 
not deny. " Ho hath Beelzebub," they say ; 
that is, he is possessed by Beelzebub, or 
" the lord of the dwelling," as a source of 
supernatural power. They had heard it 
alleged against him, " He hath a devil ; " and 
so they fall in with this popular error, and 
give it emphasis, by saying. Not only has he 
» devil, but he is possessed by the chief of 
the devils, and therefore has authority over 
inferior spirits. Observe the contrast be- 



tween the thoughts of the multitude and o( 
those who professed to be their teachers, the 
scribes and Pharisees. The muleitude, free 
from prejudice, and using only their natural 
light of leason, candidly owned the great- 
ness of Christ's miracles as wrought by a 
Divine power ; whereas the Pharisees, filled 
with envy and malice, attributed these 
mighty works which he wrought by the finger 
of God, to the direct agency of Satan. 

Vers 23 — 27.— How can Satan cast out 
Satan? Observe here that our Lord dli- 
tinctly affirms the personality of Satan, and 
a real kingdom of evil. But then he goes 
on to show that if this their allegation were 
true, namely, that he cast out devils by the 
prince of the devils, then it would follow 
that Satan's kingdom would be divided 
against itself. .'Vs a house divided against 
itself cannot stand, so neither could the 
kingdom of Satan exist in the world if one 
evil spirit was opposed to another for the 
purpose of diB)in.>ssessing, the one the other, 
from the minds and bodies of men. Our 
Lord thus employs another argument to 
show that he casts out evil spirits, not by 
Beelzebub, but by the power of God. It is 
as though he said, " As he who invades the 
house of a strong man cannot suoeeed until 
he first binds the strong man ; in like man- 
ner I, Christ Jesus, who spoil the kingdom 
of Satan, whilst I lead sinners who had been 
under his power to repentance and salvation, 
must first bind Satan himself, otherwise he 
would never suffer me to take his captives 
from him. Therefure he is my enemy, and 
not in league with me, not my ally in the 
casting out of evil spirits, as you falsely 
represent me to be. It behoves you, then, to 
understand that it is with the Spirit of God 
that I cast out devils, and that therefore the 
kingdom of God is come upon you." 

Ver. 28. — All their sins shall be forgiven 
unto the sons of men, etc. St. Mark adds 
the words (ver. 30), "Because they said, 
[eA67o>', ' they were saying,'] He hiith an un- 
clean spirit." This helps us much to the 
true meaning of this declaration. Our Lord 
does not here speak of every sin against the 
Holy Spirit, but of blasphemv n<rainst the 
Holy Spirit. These words of St, Mxrk point 
to a sin of the tongue more e-peoially, 
although not excluding thougLts und deeds 
against the Holy Spirit. Observe what these 
Scribes and Pharisees did ; they cavilled at 
works manifestly Divine — works wrought by 
God for the salvution of men, by which he 
confirmed his faith and truth. Now, when 
they spake against these, and knowingly and 
of malice ascribed them to the evil spirit, 
then they blasphemed ttgainst the Holy 
Ghost, dishonouring God by assigning his 
power to Satan. What could be more hateful 
than this ? What greater blasphemy oooU 



120 



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDIJS'a TO ST. MARK. [oh. iu. 1— o6 



be imagined? And surely they must be 
guilty of this sin who ascribe the fruits and 
actions of the Holy Spirit to an impure and 
unholy source, and so strive to mar his work 
and to hinder his influence in the hearts of 
men. 

Ver. 29. — Hath never forgiveness. Not 
that any sinner need despair of forgiveness 
through the fear that he may have committed 
this sin; for his repentance shows that his 
state of mind has never been one of entire 
enmity, and that he has not so grieved the 
Holy Spirit as to have heen entirely forsaken 
by him. But is in danger of eternal damna- 
tion. The Greek words, according to the most 
approved reading, are a\K' ivox6s ^anv 
mwvlov i./iapT'liiMTos : Imt is guilty of an eternal 
atn; thus showing that there are sins of which 
the effects and the punishment belong to 
eternity. He is bound by a chain of sin 
from which he can never be loosed. (See 
St. John ix. 41, "Therefore your sin re- 
maineth.") 

Vers. 31 — 33. — Our Lord's brethren and his 
mother had nnw arrived (see ver. 21) to look 
after him. He was in the house teaching; 
but the crowd was so great that they could 
not approach him. The mnltitude filled not 
only the room, but the courtyard and all the 
approaches. St. Luke (viii. 19) says, " they 
eould not come at him for the crowd." His 
brethren here spoken of were in all proba- 
bility his cousins, the sons of Mary, the wife 
of Alphseus or Clopas. But two of these, 
already chosen to be apo.stles, were most 
likely with him in the room, and of the 
number of those towards whom he stretched 
out his hand and said, " Behold, my mother 
and my brethren ! " whilst Mary and the 
others had come (Mary, perhaps, induced by 
the others in the hope that the sight of his 
mother might the more move him) for the 
purpose of bringing him back to the quiet 
of Nazareth. We cannot suppose that the 
Virgin Mary came with any other feeling 
than that of a mother's anxiety in behalf of 
her Son. She may have thought that he was 
in danger, exposed to the fickle temper of a 
large multitude, who might at any moment 
have their passiona stirred against him by 



his enemies, the scribes and Pharisees ; and 
so she was willingly persuaded to come and 
use her influence with him to induce him to 
escape from what appeared evidently to be a 
position of some danger. If so, this explains 
our Lord's behaviour on this occasion. The 
multitude was sitting about him, and he was 
teaching them ; and then a message was 
brought to him from his mother and his 
brethren who were without, perhaps in the 
courtyard, perhaps beyond iu the open street, 
calling for him. The interruption was un- 
timely, not to say unseemly. And so he says, 
not without a little tone of severity in hia 
words, Who is my mother and my brethren 1 
Our Lord did not speak thus as denying 
his human relationship ; as though be was 
not "very man," but a mere "phantom," as 
some early heretics taught ; and still less as 
though he was ashamed of his earthly re- 
lationships ; but partly perha|js because the 
messengers too boldly and inconsiderately 
interrupted him while he was teaching ; and 
chiefly that he might show that his heavenly 
Father's business was more to him than the 
affection of his earthly mother, greatly as he 
valued it ; and thus he preferred the spiritual 
relationship, in which there is neither male 
nor female; bond nor tree, but all stand 
alike to Christ in the relationship of brother, 
sister, and mother. It is remarkable, and 
yet the reason for the omission is obvious, 
that our Lord does not mention " fathei " in 
this spiritual category. 

Ver. 34. — looking round on them (irepi- 
p\e\f/diJ.ivos) which sat round about him. 
Here is one of the graphic touches of St 
Mark, reproduced, it may be, from St. Peter. 
Our Lcird's intellectual and loving eye swept 
the inner circle of his disciples. 'The twelve, 
of course, would be with him, and others with 
theov His enemies were not far off. But 
immediately about him were those who con- 
stituted his chosen ones. As man, he had his 
human affections and his earthly relation- 
ships ; but as the Son of God, he knew no 
other relatives but God's children, to whom 
the performance of hia will and the promo- 
tion of his glory are the first of all duties 
and the dominant principle of their lives. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — The tuithered hand. This incident serves to bring out tke antagonism 
between the spiritual and benevolent ministry of the Lord Jesus, and the formalism, 
self-righteousness, and hard-heartedness of the religious leaders of the Jews. It serves 
to explain, not only the enmity of the Pharisees, but their resolve to league with whom- 
soever would help them in carrying out their purposes and plot against the very life 
of the Son of man. It serves to exhibit the mingled feelings of indignation and of 
pity with which Jesus regarded his enemies, whose hatred was directed, not only 
against his person, but against his works of mercy and healing. But the incident shaU 
here be treated as a symbol of man's need and of <5hrist's authority and method as man's 
SavioiiSt 



DH. III. 1—35,] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 121 



L The condition of this majt in the synagogue is a symbol op the state and 
NEEP or MAN. He was a man " with a withered hand." 1. The hand is the symbol of 
man's practical nature. The husliamlman, the mechanic, the painter, the musician, 
every craftsman of every grade, makes use of th-e hand in executing works of art or 
fulfilling the task of toil. The right hand may be re:iarded as the best bodily emblem 
af our active, energetic nature. It is our lot, not only to think and to feel, but to will 
and to do. 2. The withering of the hand is symbolical of the effect of sin upon our 
practical nature. As this man was rendered incapable of pursuing an industrial life, 
so the victim of sin is crippled for holy service, is both indisposed and incapacitated 
for Christian work. The withering of muscle, the paralysis of nerve, is no more disas- 
trous to bodily effort than tlie blighting and enfeebling power of sin is destructive of all 
holy acceptable service unto God. 3. T/ie apparent hopelessness of this man's case it 
an emblem of the sinner's hopeless state. This unhappy person was probably con- 
demned by his misfortune to poverty, privation, neglect, and helplessness. He was 
aware of the inability of human skill to cure him. The case of the sinner is a case of 
inability and sometimes of despondency. Legislation and philosophy are powerless to 
deal with an evil so radical and so unmanageable. Unless God have mercy, the sinner 
is undone ! 

11. The MiBAOULOtrs action of Christ symbolizes one aspect op his redemptive 
WOBK. And this in two respects : 1. He saves by the impartation of power. Christ 
in the synagogue spoke with authority, both when addressing the spectators who 
cavilled, and when addressing the sufferer who doubtless welcomed his aid. Power 
accompanied his words — power from on high; healing virtue weut forth from him. 
How grateful should we be that, when the Son of God came to earth with power, it 
was with power to heal and bless ! He is " mighty to save." There was power in his 
person and presence, power in his words and works, power in his example and 
demeanour, power in his love and sacrifice. When he saves, he saves from sin and from 
sin's worst results. The spiritual inefficiency and helplessness, which is man's curse, 
gives place to a heavenly energy and activity. The redeemed sinner finds his right 
hand of service whole, restored, vigorous. Under the influence of new motives and 
new hopes, he consecrates his renewed nature of activity to the Lord who saved him. 
2. He saves with the concurrence of human effort. Observe that the Lord Jesus 
addressed to this sufferer two commands. He ba le him " Stand forth!" which he cculd 
do ; and " Stretch forth thy hand ! " which he could not do — or at least might, judging 
from the past, have felt and believed himself unable to do. Yet he believed that the 
Prophet and Healer, who spoke with such authority, and who was known to have 
healed m&ny, was not uttering idle words. His faith was -called forth, and his will was 
exercised. Without his obedience and concurrence, there is no reason to suppose that 
he would have been healed. So every sinner who would be saved by Christ must 
recognize the Divine authority of the Saviour, must avail himself 1 1 the Saviour's com- 
passion, and in humble faith must obey the Saviour's command. It is not, indeed, 
faith which saves. It is Christ who saves, but he saves through faith; for it is by faith 
that the sinner lays hold upon the Saviour's might, and comes to rejoice in the Saviour*! 
grace. 

Application. 1. The first requisite for a sinner who would be saved is clearly to 
see, and deeply to feel, his need and helplessness. 2. The next requisite is to come into 
the presence of the Divine Saviour. 3. Yet again, it is requisite to exercise faith in 
him who is mighty and willing to save. 4. And every healed and restored sinner 
should consecrate all his active powers to the service of his Redeemer. 

Vers. 6 — 12. — Persecution and popularity. The evangelist represents, in very 
graphic language, the crisis in the ministry of Jesus now reached. We learn what was 
the attitude towards Jesus, both of the populace and of the ruling classes. We see 
the scribes and Pharisees meeting with the Herodians, and plotting against the Bene- 
factor of mankind. We see the multitudes thronging from every quarter to look upon, 
to listen to, the far-famed Prophet of Nazareth. It is a striking contrast. It may be to 
Bs an earnest of what was to come ; of the malice tliat slew the Lord of glory, and ol 
fte praise that should encompass him from all lands ; of the cross, and of the throne. 

I. Wb have a picture op our liOED's popularity. L This passage furnishes tht 



122 THE GOSPEL ACCOIIDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. m. 1— 3fc, 



evidence of our Lord's populaiity. The people left their cities and villages, their homes 
and occupations, in order to follow Jesus. From various parts of the province ol 
Gnlilee, through which he had just been travelling upon an evangelistic tour, the people 
flocked to the neighbourhood of the lake. They came also from Jerusalem and Judsea, 
where successive miracles had made his name and person familiar to the inhabitants of the 
metropolis. Not only so, but from the east side of the Jordan, and Idumsea; and (strangest 
of all) from Phoenicia, far away in the north-west, multitudes, attracted by the great 
Prophet and Physician, found their way to Gennesaret. It is plain that an immense 
impression had been created by the ministry of our Lord, that he was becoming the 
chief figure in the land, succeeding to the prominence and the popularity of John the 
Baptist. 2. This same passage brings before us the grounds of our Lord's popularity. 
Wherever he had gone, he had so acted as to justify the name he gave himself, " the 
Son of man ; " he had shown himself the universal Saviour and Friend. Some came 
grateful for healing virtue and for pardoning mercy, having themselves tasted and seen 
that the Lord was good. Some brought to him the maladies of themselves or their 
friends, hoping to experience his grace. The unclean spirits came, confessing him to be 
the Son of God, acknowledging his regal authority, prepared to flee at his bidding and 
to leave the sufferers free. Some came to see him of whom such great and delightful 
tidings had been spread abroad ; and others hoping that they might witness some illus- 
trations of his saving might. His ministry of teaching attracted sonje, and the sequel 
tells us how richly such were rewarded by the incomparable discourses which were 
delivered at this period of Christ's career. And there were, doubtless, some few noble, 
devout, and ardent souls, who longed for the revelation of a spiritual kingdom, which 
should fulfll the promises of God and realize the ancient and prophetic visions. 3. The 
consequences of Christ's popularity are no less clearly related. It is plain that at this 
period our Lord was quite embarrassed by the excitement and eagerness of the crowds 
who thronged around him. It was this embarrassment that led him, first to withdraw 
to the lake, and then to request that a boat might be in readiness to receive him from 
the pressure of the crowd, and, if necessary, to take him to the near seclusion of the 
eastern shore. It was this embarrassment also which led him to direct those who par- 
took of the benefit of his compassion to refrain firom celebrating his praise, and even to 
keep silence concerning what he had done for them. 4. But let us bear in mind that 
this popularity was but superficial. Jesus knew well that most who followed him did 
80 either from curiosity or with selfish desires of benefiting from his ministry. Ha 
was not deceived by the popular interest and acclaim. He was aware that at any 
moment the tide might turn. At Nazareth it was proved how ungrateful and violent 
the people could be when once their passions were roused or their prejudices crossed. 
And his ministry closed amidst the clamour and the execration of the fickle multitude, 
upon whose minds the arts of crafty priests and politicians played, as the storm-wind 
plays upon the surface of the mighty sea. 

n, Wb have a PICTTTRB or cub LoBD's persecutors, THBIB plots and PBOJB0T8. 

At the very time that multitudes were openly thronging around Christ, there was 
secret consultation among men of position and influence as to the means of effecting his 
ruin. We observe the occasion of this hostile attitude and action. For a while there 
had been, no opposition, but rather a general interest and expectation. The change 
seems to have come about as a consequence of the violation by the Lord Jesus of the 
customs and traditions of the ceremonial rabbis or scribes. There were deep-seated 
reasons for the hostility cherished against the Prophet of Nazareth by the religious 
leaders — scribes and Pharisees. 1. His conduct towards the common people was a grave 
offence. The rabbis gonerally held the unlearned and lower class in great contempt ; 
in their esteem those who knew not the Law were cursed. They would not associate 
with them or touch them. Now, the Lord Jesus made himself at home with all 
classes, and accepted invitations, not only from rulers and scholars, but from publicans, 
at whose table he met the worldly and the sinful. He even chose one from the despised 
class of tax-collectors to occupy a place among his own immediate friends and fol- 
lowers. He ate and drank with publicans and sinners, and, when he preached, 
encouraged such to draw near to him. " The common people heard him gladly." That 
an acknowledged rabbi should act in such a way was a scandal in the view of the self- 
righteous and ceremonious ; it was conduct likely to lower the learned in the general 



iH. m. 1— 35.J THE GOSPEL ACCORDINQ TO ST. MARK. 12b 

esteem, to bring religion and the profession of the scribes into contempt. 2. We 
gather from the Gospel record that the chief cause of complaint against Jesus was his 
neglect and violation of the ceremonial Law. This Law was to the rabbis the breath of 
their nostrils; and our Lord and his disciples, doubtless under his influence, were very 
negligent of the observances upon which the ruling class laid such stress. The 
Pharisees fasted, Jesus feasted ; the Pharisees performed innumerable ablutions, Jesus ate 
bread " with unwashen hands." 3. 'ITie sabbath was, however, the most important point 
of difference. Many of the rigid Jewish religionists held the most narrow opinions aad 
cherished the most absurd and ridiculous scruples with regard to what was lawful and 
what unlawful upon the weekly day of rest. It was not possible that Jesus, with his 
views as to the spirituality of worship and as to the nature of holiness, should agree 
with these petty and childish notions ; it was not possible that he should do other than 
violate traditional rules and shock formal prejudices. He encouraged his disciples to 
pluck and eat corn on the sabbath ; he performed cures upon the day which he held 
to be made for man ; he directed those who were healed to take up their couch and 
return home. In all these respects he both vindicated religions liberty and asserted 
himself " Lord of the sabbath." The rigid ceremonialism and ritualism of the rabbis 
was ofl'ended, alike with the superiority which the Lord claimed over all rules, and with 
the disdain he showed for their usages and traditions. They hated him, as narrow and 
formal religionists of all schools ever hate the teachers who place religion in the heart 
rather than in ceremonies and creeds, and who proclaim that newness of life is the one 
Booeptable offering and sacrifice in the sight of the Divine Searcher of hearts. 4. Our 
Lord's treatryent of the scribes and Pharisees was itself a cause of offence, an occasion 
of their enmity to him. Instead of treating them with deference, he defied their 
judgment,' and (at a later period of his ministry) uttered denunciations and woes upon 
them for their hypocrisy. When about to heal the withered hand, Jesus " looked round 
abcut on them with anger, being grieved at the hardening of their heart." It was not 
th es ?hat ihey were wont to be regarded and treated. If this treatment were continued, 
tt«ir aifluence must be undermined. 5. The cause of hostility just mentioned was a 
symptom of a deeper difference between Jesus and the rabbis : the spiritual quality 
if his teaching was such as to conflict with all their notions of religion. With them 
religion was an affair of the outward life alone ; with him it was, first and foremost, an 
affair of the heart. And even with respect to outward actions there was this great 
difference : the rabbis thought of the attitude of prayer, Christ of the feeling and 
desire ; the rabbis thought much of tithes and fasts, of sacrifices and services, Christ 
of the weightier matters of the Law ; the rabbis thought much of what went as food into 
the man, Christ of the thoughts which expressed themselves in moral conduct. Observe 
the feeling that was aroused in the breasts of the Pharisees. Luke tells us " they were 
filled with madness," i.e. carried away by violent rage and hostility. What a revela- 
tion of human iniquity I The actions of the holy and gracious Redeemer excite the 
fury of those he came to benefit and save! And the hostility then felt grew and 
gathered as the months passed on, until it culminated in the successful plot against the 
Holy One and Just. Such feeling did not evaporate in words ; it led to action. The 
enemies of Jesus retired to deliberate, to plot. There was more than indignation; 
there was :nalice, a resolve to avenge themselves upon One too holj', too authoritative, 
for then to bear with him. An unnatural alliance was formed between the rabbis, 
who represented the principles of rigid Judaism both in nationality and in religion ; 
and the Herodians, who seem to have been Sadducees in religion, and in politics sup- 
porters of the house of Herod, and accordingly advocates of all possible independence 
■ipon Rome. It is not easy to understand this league. The Herodians themselves may 
not so much have hated Jesus as, from political motives, they desired to gain the 
favour of the powerful Pharisaic party, whose influence with the people generally was 
great, and who might be made the means of stre.igthening the supporters of jintipas. 
The aim which these confederates set before them was atrocious indeed ; it was nothing 
less than the destruction of Jesus. Answer his reasoning they could not. Equally 
unable were they to find fault with his irreproachable character, his benevolent actions. 
Their only weapons were slander and craft and violence. How to work upon the fe»r« 
cf the secular authorities and the passions .if the populac« — this was their aim and 
endeavour. 



124 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. m. 1—35 

Verg. 13 — 19. — The twelve. Some of those twelve had lieen " called " by the Master 
long ago, and had already been much in his company. Others had been, for a shortet 
time and less intimately, associated with him. This formal appointment and com- 
mission took place upon the mount, and immediately before the delivery of the ever- 
memorable sermon to the disciples and the multitude. The passage is suggestive ol 
great general truths. 

I. Ghbist thought fit to employ human aoents in the peomuloation of his 
RELIGION. That he might have dispensed with all created agency, that he might have 
employed angelic ministers, we cannot doubt. But in becoming man — " the Son of 
man" — he contracted human sympathies and relationships, and undertook to work, 
with a Divine power indeed, yet by human means. 

II. Christ selected his agents by viktue of his own wisdom and AnTHOEiTY. 
He called " whom he himself would." The Lord Jesus is the absolute Monarch in his 
own kingdom. Having perfect knowledge, unerring wisdom, and unfailing justice, he 
is fitted for supreme, unshared rule. 

III. Christ chose his trusted apostles from a lowxy position of society. 
Only one of the band — and he the unworthy member — was from Jud^a. All the 
others were Galileans ; and the inhabitants of this northern province were comparatively 
rude, unlettered, unpolished. Some rabbis would fain have been received into the 
number, but the Lord would not encourage them. He preferred to deal with unso- 
phisticated natures. Perhaps James and John and Levi were in fair circumstances ; 
the rest were in all likelihood poor. The twelve were, in education, very different from 
such men as Luke and Paul. Christ chose, as he has often done since, " the weak things 
of the world to confound the mighty." He rejoiced and gave thanks because things, 
hidden from the wise and prudent, had been revealed unto babes. 

IV. Chbist appointed agents with various gifts, qualifications, and cha- 
racter. The three leaders among the apostles were certainly men of ability. Peter's 
vigour of style was only one index to the great native force of his character ; James 
was slain by Herod, as probably the most prominent representative of the early Christian 
community ; and John's writings show him to have been both profound and imaginative 
as a thinker. Of the other apostles, James the Less was certainly a man of inflexible 
will and of vigorous administrative power. In disposition these twelve men differed 
marvellously from oee another. Two were " sons of thunder," another — Thomas — was of 
a doubting, melancholy spirit, and Simon was ardent and impulsive. All but Iscariot 
were deeply attached to Jesus, and it was not without purpose that one avaricious and 
treacherous person was included in the number. What various instruments our Lord 
employs for accomplishing his own work ! 

V. Christ kecornized and employed the special gifts of his disciples in his 
OWN service. This passage brings this truth vividly before us. Simon was surnamed 
" The Eock " — a title to which his charwcter especially entitled him ; and the suns of 
Zebedee were designated " Sons of Thunder," doubtless from their ardent, impetuous 
zeal in the service of the Lord. There was a special work corresponding to the special 
endowments of each. 

VI. Christ qualified these agents by kebping them in his own society and 
beneath his own influence. " That they might be with him." How simple, yet 
how profound these words ! What a Companion ! What lessons were to be learned 
from his character, his demeanour, his language, his mighty works ! Nothing could so 
qualify these men for the service of coming years as this brief period of daily and close 
intimacy with a Being so gracious, so holy, so wise. 

VII. Christ himself commissioned and authorized these agents. They were 
to be "sent forth;" hence their designation, "apostles." They were to be his 
messengers, his heralds, his ambassadors. And what was their ministry ? 1. To preach, 
to publish good tidings of salvation, righteousness, eternal life, through Christ. To 
this end it was evidently necessary that they should imbibe the Master's spirit, as well 
as know the Teacher's doctrine. It was necessary that, in due time, they should be 
witnesses of his resurrection and partakers of the Spirit poured out from on high. 
2. To have authority to cast out demons, to carry on the work of the Lord, and to 
contend with the kingdom of Satan, and establish the reign of Christ, of Ught. <^ 
righteousness, of peace. 



OH. m. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 125 

Application. 1. Christ's first call is to discipleship. We must first leam that we 
may teach ; obey and serve that we may guide and aid others. 2. We are summoned 
to consecrate all our gifts and acquirements to the service and cause of Immanuel. 3. 
It is the highest honour and the purest happiness to be employed by Christ as his 
agents. 4. It is necessary to be much with Christ in order that we may be fitted 
efficiently to work for Christ. 

Vers. 20 — 30. — Blasphemy. Great men are often misunderstood by reason of their 
very greatness. Aims higher than those of others need other methods than such as 
are commonly employed by ordinary persons. How much more must this have been 
the case with the Son of man ! His mission was unique — was altogether , his own. 
He could not fulfil his ministry and do the work of him who sent him, without 
stepping aside from the beaten tracks of conduct, and so courting criticism and obloquy. 
He could not well conciliate public opinion, for he came to condemn and to revolu- 
tionize it. For the most part he went his way, without noticing the misrepresenta- 
tions and the calumnies of men. Yet there were occasions, like the present, when he 
paused to answer and to confute his adversaries. 

I. The blasphemous charge beouqht against Jesus. His friends charged him 
with madness ; his enemies attributed his works to the power of evil. In the allega- 
tion of the former there may have been some sincerity ; those of the latter were ani- 
mated by malice and hatred. Probably these scribes were sent down into Galilee from 
the authorities at Jerusalem, to check the enthusiasm which was spreading throughout 
the northern province with regard to the Prophet of Nazareth. The same charges 
were brought against him in Jerusalem ; so that there may have been an under- 
standing as to the method to be adopted in opposing the great Teacher. The scribes 
discredited Jesus, first, by asserting that he was possessed by Beelzebub, the Syrian 
Satan ; and secondly, by explaining his power to dispossess demons by the league 
between him and the lord of the demons, whose authority the inferior spirits could not 
but obey. There was no attempt to deny the fact that demoniacs were cured ; this 
would have been so monstru\isly false that to take such a position would have been to 
ruin their own influence with the people. 

II. The refutation of this blasphemy. 1. Our Lord's reply was on the ground 
of reason — of what might be called common sense. He used two parables, by which he 
showed the unreasonableness, the absurdity of the allegations in question. Suppose a 
house or a kingdom to be divided against itself, to be rent by internal discord and 
faction ; what is the result ? It comes to ruin. And can it be believed that the crafty 
prince of darkness will turn his arms against his own servants and minions ? So, 
Satan would " have an end." 2. Having refuted their argument, our Lord proceeded 
with his own ; gave his explanation of what was the spiritual significance of his 
ministry, especially as regarded the " possessed." So far from being in league with 
Satan, the Lord Jesus was Satan's one mighty Foe; he had already, in the temptation, 
overcome him, and was binding him, and now, behold ! he was spoiling the house of 
his vanquished enemy, in expelling the demons from the wretched demoniacs of 
Galilee 1 He could not have done this had he been in league with Satan, had he not 
already vanquished Satan. Having effected this, he " spoiled principalities and powers." 

III. The censure of this blasphemy. Our Lord first reasoned ; then (as recorded 
from ver. 28) he spoke with authority, as One in the secrets of Heaven, with power to 
declare the principles of Divine judgment. There is, he declared, an eternal and 
unpardonable sin. If the scribes were not committing this, they were approaching it. 
The sin against the Holy Ghost, the confusion of truth with error, good with evil, — is 
a sin, not of ignorance, not of misunderstanding, but of wilfulness ; a sin of the whole 
nature ; a sin against the light without and the light within. Our Saviour, in con- 
demning this sin, speaks as the rightful Lord, the authoritative Judge, of all mankind ! 

Application. " What think ye of Christ?" To think of him with indifference is 
unreasonable, and shows the most blameable insensibility to the great moral conflict of 
the universe, on one side of which Jesus is the Champion. To think of him dis- 
paragingly is blasphemy ; for " he that honoureth the Son honoureth the Father," and he 
that honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father. It is blasphemy to speak 
•gainst the character or the authority of the Son of God. What remains, then ? This 



126 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. [oh. m. 1—36 

to think and speafe of him with reverence and gratitude, faith, and love. This ii 
just and right ; and though Christ does not need our homage and honour, he will accept 

it and reward it. 

Vers. 31 — 35. — Kindred of Christ. The feeling with regard to Christ had, tar this 

time, become extremely strong. On the one hand, the people generally were deeply 
interested in his teaching, were eager spectators of his mighty works, and in many 
cases were much attached to himself. Hence the crowd which thronged the house 
where Jesus was engap;ed in teaching — a crowd so dense that none from the outside 
could approach the Master. On the other hand, the opposition to the Prophet of 
Nazareth was growing and spreading among the scribes and Pharisees, some of whom 
from Jerusalem were now usually among the audience, anxiously on the watch for any 
utterance which they might use to the disadvantage of the bold and fearless Teacher. 
In these circumstances, the concern of the relatives of Jesus was natural enough. They 
saw that his labours were so arduous and protracted that he was in danger of exhaus- 
tion through weariness. And they feared that the attitude he was taking towards the 
hypocritical Pharisees was imperilling his liberty and safety. They accordingly 
professed to believe in his madness, and sought to lay hold on him. Hence the inter- 
ruption recorded in this passage, which gave rise to this memorable and precious 
declaration of bis spiritual a£Bnity and kindred to all whose life is one of obedience to 
the Father. 

I. The fact op spnirnjAL kindbbd between Cheist and his people. Earthly 
relationships were admitted and honoured by Jesus. Yet spiiitual kindred wag set 
above them. Under the gospel dispensation there are revealed emphatically the father- 
liood of God, and the brotherhood of Christ. We are the children of God. Jesus, in 
his glory, " is not ashamed to call us brethren." 

II. The pboof of spiritual kindeed with Christ. Who are they whom Jesus 
commends and admits to his fellowship and confidence ? They who do his Father's 
will. Upon such he looks with approval. 1. His requirement is not intellectual or 
sentimental merely, but practical. Belief and feeling are necessary, but not suificient. 
We are made to act, and in our life to carry out the Divine commands. Jesus asks 
the devotion of the heart, expressed in the service of the active nature. We are saved 
by grace, and works are the proofs of faith. Obedience proceeds from hearty confi- 
dence and sincere love. Indeed, the Lord himself has told us that this is the work 
of Qod, that we " believe on him whom he hath sent." And Christians are those who 
prove the sincerity of their love by a practical consecration. 2. It is the privilege of 
the Christian voluntarily to obey a personal. Divine mil. He sees the Lawgiver behind 
the law. His life is not mere conformity to regulation — to some such abstract standard 
as " the fitness of things." It is subjection to a Being whose will enjoins a course of 
virtue and piety. Religion has too often, like law, like society, summoned men to do 
the will of man — of fallible, fickle man. Christ calls us all away from this endeavour 
to a far nobler and better aim — summons us to do the will, not of man, but of Q<)d 1 
This is a standard with which no fault can be found, no dissatisfaction can be felt. 
3. Jesus loolis for, not a mechanical, but a spiritual, obedience. The description of the 
Christian life is, " doing the will of God from the heart." 4. Christ requires not servile 
hut filial obedience. We know from personal experience the difference between doing 
the will of a master or a ruler and doing the will of a father. It is to this latter kind 
uf obedience that we are called. It is much to believe in the personality and authority 
of God, but it is more to live under the sense of his fatherhood ; for this involves his 
interest in us, his care for us, his love toward us ; and all these are obviously con- 
siderations which make duty both delightful and easy. The motive is not merely 
moral, it becomes nligious. The Christian acts as a child who brings before his mind, 
as a ruling consideration, " my Father's will." 6. Christ desires not occasional or 
fitful acts of obedience, but habitual service. One act is good, both in itself and also 
as making a second act easier. Obedience becomes a second nature, a law recognized 
and accepted ; and perseverance is the one proof of true principle. 

III. The PBIVILEGB OF SPIBITUAL KINDBED ASSURED BY ChBIBT. Men boaSt Oi 

eminent ancestors, distinguished connections, powerful kinsmen ; but such boast is 
'isnally foolish and vain; whereas it is in the power of the humblest Christian U 



OH. m. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINQ TO ST. MABK. 127 



glory In the Lord. The friendship of Jesus surpasses that of the greatest and the 
best of hnman friends. It is closer and more delightful, it is more honourable and 
more ceitun and enduring than the intimacy of human kindred. 1. Participation in 
Christ's character. There is a family likeness ; the Divine features are reproduced. 
2. Enjoyment of the tender affection of Christ. 3. Intimate and confidential intercourse 
with Christ. These two are closely associated. This spiritual relationship imvolves a 
peculiar interest, each in the other. So far from indifference, there is mutual regard 
and concern. The honour of Christ is very near the Christian's heart, and Christ 
engraves his people " upon the palms of his hands." There is a special tenderness in these 
mutual regards, very different from the ceremonial or official respect attaching to some 
relations. " Te are my friends," says the Saviour. Hymns and devotional books have 
sometimes exaggerated this side of piety ; yet with many probably the danger lies on 
the other side. As there is a specially confidential tone in the intercourse of the several 
members of a family, so is there something like this in the fellowship of the Redeemer 
and his redeemed ones. " All things that I have heard of the Father," says he, " 1 
have made known unto you ; '' and, on the other side, the follower of the Lord Jesus 
pours all his intimate thoughts and wishes into the ear of his heavenly Friend and 
Brother. 

IV. The obliqations of spiritual kindred. Of these may be mentioned : 1. 
Reverent regard for his honour. 2. Self-denying devotion to his cause. 3. Eecognition 
of his brethren as ours. 

Fbactical conolubion. Observe the liberality of the language of Jesus, the wide 
invitation virtually given in his declaration: " Whosoever," etc. This is not limited ti> 
the learned or the great ; it is open to us alL 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — I%e man with the withered hand ; or, keeping the sabbath. In the most 
sacred and joyous scenes there may be circumstances of pain and sorrow. There are 
often some iu God's house who are hindered in their enjoyment by personal affliction. 
But even these may be of service in testing the spirit and disposition of God's professed 
people. 

I. It is in spirit alone that the sabbath is truly kept. 1. Outward observances 
are of valtie only as expressing and fostering this. 2. Evil hearts will fail to keep the 
day even whilst seemingly engaged in its special duties. 3. Institutions that toere 
designed for the highest ends may be perverted to the worst. 

II. WoBKS OF MEBCT HONOUR THE SABBATH. 1. Becausc they are alwaya urgent. 
2. Thty exercise the holiest emotions and faculties of human natwre. 3. TMy are the 
service ofOod. 4. They may be the means of others keeping the day and serving him. 

III. The TRUE 8ABBATI0 SPIRIT CONVICTS AND INFLAMES THE FALSE. The hatred 

manifested is all but incredible. Yet it was already in their hearts. They had been 
condemned where they thought to have been judges. False religion (Pharisees) and 
worldliness (Herodians) are united in their hatred of the spirit and work of Christ. 
because they are both exposed by him. — M. 

Ver. 4. — " But they held their peace." " There is much silence that proceeds from 
the Spirit of God, but there is also a devilish silence," says Quesnel ; and it is not 
difficult to pronounce upon the character of this. 

I. What was intended by it. It was evasive. Christ bad propounded a dilemma 
which those who watched him dared not answer, since, had they done so, they would 
either have compromised themselves or committed themselves to approval of his action. 
It was doubtless intended also to suggest that the problem was too difficult for them to 
K^ve, at any rate without due consideration. 

II. What it showed. There was no concealing from his eyes its real meaning, 
which he at once denounced. The circumstances of it and the exposure it received 
made it evident that it was due : 1. To unwillingness to be convinced. The state called 
■ < hardness of heart " it is not easy to resolve into all its elements, but this is undoubtedly 
the (^ef one. These men had come into the synagogue with sinister designs against 
Christ, and so strong was their prejudice that they refused to assent to the most cogent 



128 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, MARK. [oh. m. 1—35. 

evidence. The language used by their intended Victim conveys the impression that 
this "hardening" was in process whilst the scene lasled. It is impossible to dissociate 
religious (ipinion from character. Prejudice and malice incapacitate the mind for the 
reception of truth. Here the most cogent evidence was resisted ; for they evidently 
expected that he would heal the man, and yet were unwilling to attach its due weight 
to the miracle as a proof of Christ's Divine mission. How much of modern scepticism 
is to be attributed to similar causes it is impossible to say ; but that a large proportion 
of it is to be so explained cannot be doubted. The hesitation to reply is the more 
noticeable in this instance as the question is one turning, not upon material evidence, 
but upon moral considerations. 2. To lack of sympathy. The condition of the sufferer 
did not move them to compassion, even in the house of God, A touchstone of the 
religious professions of men may still be found in the poor, the suffering, etc. 3. Tu, 
dishonesty and cowardice. They knew how the question ought to have been answered, 
but they feared the consequences. The question as to killing alarmed their own guilty 
consciences, for they knew that they had come thither not to worship but to compass 
the destruction of a fellow-creature. There is still a great deal of suppressed religious 
conviction amongst men ; how are we to interpret it? When moral obligations are 
evaded, and scepticism is made an excuse for uncertainty of conduct and laxity of life, 
we are justified in attributing such behaviour to the same principles. There are circum- 
stances that demand candour and outspokenness, and in which silence is dishonourable ; 
we ought " to have the courage of our convictions : " occasions when it is wrong to be 
silent ; when religious zeal is made a cloak for murder, cruelty, injustice, and licentious- 
ness ; when the difficulty of theological problems is made an excuse for compromise, or 
inaction, or moral indifference ; when, in the face of the clearest evidence, a man says he 
"does not know." 

III. What it eabned. 1. The anger of Christ. His look must have searched their 
hearts and abashed them. There would be in it something of the awfulness of the 
judgment day. This moral indioination, in which there is surely an element of contempt, 
is still the sentence upon all similar conduct. 2. Consciousness of guilt. They were 
self-convicted, but the condemnation of one so pure and loving would seal their sense of 
nnworthiness and dishonour. 3. Exposwre. No one in that crowd was deceived as to 
their real motive. The same law still prevails ; the moral obliquity which refuses to 
pronounce upon great questions of duty and righteousness will sooner or later be made 
evident to others. Just as there are circumstances which precipitate opinion, so there 
are circumstances in every life which call for decided action, and reveal the manner in 
which one has dealt with one's convictions. At such junctures the man who has been 
true to his best lights and sincere in following out his convictions, will be honest, 
fearless, chivalrous ; the man who has not been truly in earnest, or disinterested in his 
attachment to truth, will be seen to shu£3e, to shirk responsibility, and to shrink from 
■acrifice ; or, worse still, he will yield to the lusts and tendencies of his baser nature, 
and act with unscrupulousness, inhumanity, and godlessness. It is the law that 
opiiuons determine character ; and that, in the course of life, character must inevitably 
make itself known. — M. 

Ver. 6. — " Stretch forth thy hand I' L Chbist sometimes enjoins what seems to 

BB niFOSSIBLE. 

II. Faith is bhowh ih doing what he commands, even ween it seems to be 

OiPOSSIBLE. 

IIL Where there ib the " obedience of faith," power wnx be granted. — M. 

Vers. 13 — 19. — The choosing of the apostles. I. The relation between Christ and 
his servants was deliberately entered upon and voluntary in its nature. 1. It 
was fdimally commenced in retirement. We may suppose a season of devotion. The 
absence of public excitement or external interference was evidently desired. 2. The utmost 
freedom existed on both sides. He called " whom he himself would : and they went unto 
him." There was no coercion. The highest principles and emotions were addressed. 
On the one hand, the teaching and the work of the Master were not dominated by the 
influence now associated with him ; nor, on the other, was their service other than the 
firuit of enthusiasm, intelligent conviction, and willing sympathy. 



CH. ni. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. 12!» 

n. Reputation was received from Christ by his servants, not confebebd by 
THEM. The names are all of men in humble life, with no previous distinction of any kind. 
They were names common enough in Palestine. But their connection with Christ has 
immortalized them. How many have come to the Saviour in similar circumstances, 
and have received the reflected renown of his name 1 He makes the best out of the poor 
materials of human nature, and bestows what human nature in its greatest circumstances 
and moods could never of itself have produced. Men are honoured in being made the 
servants of Christ. 

III. The apostles were to be representative in office and oharaoteb fob all 
time. As his first disciples, and because of the marked variety and force of their 
individual natures as influenced by the gospel and developed in Christ's service ; their 
names have wrought themselves into the very texture of the gospel, and we have 
received it with the impress of their varied natures and habits of thought. " He sent 
them forth to preach, and to have authority to cast out devils " — a fundamental work. 
Therefore are they called " the foundation of the apostles and prophets," of whom Jesus 
is the Corner-stone. In serving Christ they laid the world and the ages under 
inestimable obligation. — M. 

Vers. 20, 21. — Chritt hindered hy Ma friends. I. Through ionobanok. Owing 
(1) to tonnt of sympathy with him in his higher aims ; and (2) consequent failure of 
tpiritudl 'perception. 

II. By OHARaiNQ HIM with madness. They had so little of the spirit of self-denial 
In themselves that they could not understand enthusiasm which would not admit of 
his attending to his own wants, " so much as to eat bread." 1. They feared also the 
consequences which might arise from the presence of his enemies. The scribes were there 
" from Jerusalem," on the alert to find accusatiun against him ; and they must have 
been observed. 2. But by this charge they discredited the character of his ministry. 
Who should be supposed to know whether he was sane or not, if not his own family? 
In attributing to maniacy the Divine works and words of Christ, they did him and all 
who might through liim have life and peac«, a cruel, irreparable wrong. So Paul was 
charged with being beside himself; and all who for Christ's sake try to live above the 
maxims and aims of the world will meet with similar judgment. The blow thus struck 
is not at an individual, but at the spiritual prospects and hopes of a whole race. 

III. By unauthorized and untimely interference. 1. A sin of presumption. 
The judgment was hasty and mistaken ; the action was imjustifiable, both foolish and 
wicked. 2. Enmity to Qod. — M. 

Vers. 20 — 22. — The Saviour judged by the world. There were various opinions 
amongst the multitude. They cannot be indifieient to the work and teaching of Christ. 
•" Some believed, and some believed not." Of those who did not believe all were in 
opposition to him. This circumstance was — 

I. A tribute to the influence and importance of the gospel. 

II. It illustrated the impotenoy of the carnal mind in spiritual questions. 

III. It suggests the perils to which the cabnal mind is exposed. " Lest haply 
ye be found to fight against God " (Acts v. 39). 

IV. It suggests the duty undkb such ciBonMSTANCEg of Chbistiah testi- 
mony. — M. 

Vers. 23 — 27. — " How can Satan cast out Satan f" at, the logic of spiritual forces. 
The spirit of Christ's answer to this malicious attack is calm, fearless, and full of light. 
He meets the charge with convincing and irrefutable logic. 

I. The defence. There are two elements in his argument : 1. A dem^nttration. 
It is the familiar redv<:tio ad absurdum, such as one might use with a schoolboy. It is 
so simple and trenchant that it straightway becomes an attack of the most ppwerful kind. 
He treats them as children in knowledge, and convicts them at the same time of diabolical 
malice. 2. An inference. Here the advantage is pushed beyond the point expected. 
He is not satisfied with a mere disclaimer ; he comes to a further and higher deduction. 
If it was true that he did not cast out Satan by Satan, then it must also be true that 
he cast out Satan in spite of the latter ; and that could only mean one thing. Satan, 

ST. MARK. S 



130 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINU IV ST. MakK. [ch. m. 1— 3& 

" the strong man," must have been bound by the Son of man, else he would not suffer 
himself to be so " spoiled." This is at once an assurance full of comfort to his friend* 
and a warning to his enemies. 

IL Positions assumed ik rr. 1. The tolidarity of evil. 2. The irreconcihableneu 
fff tht kingdoms of light and darkness. — M. 

"Vers. 28 — 30. — The unforgivable sin. I. As actual offenob. It Is not mentioned 
again in the Gospel, but the warning was called forth by the actual transgression. There 
is no mere theorizing about it therefore. It is an exposure and denunciation. This 
gives us an idea of the fearful unbelief and bitter hatred of those who opposed him. 
The manifestation of light and love only strengthened the antagonism of some. They 
consciously sinned against the light. 

II. Why is it unfoegivable ? 1. Because of tte majesty of the crime. It identifies 
the Representative and Son of God with the devil — the best with the worst. 2. From 
the nature of the spiritual state induced. When a man deliberately falsifies his spiritual 
intuitions, and corrupts his conscience so that good is considered evil, there is no hope 
for him. Such a condition can only be the result of long-continued opposition to God 
and determined hatred of his character. The means of salvation are thereby robbed of 
their possibility to save. 

m. The likelihood of its being bepeated. As it is an extreme and final degree 
of sin, there is little danger of its being committed without full consciousness and many 

Erevious warnings. 1. It is therefore, a priori, improbable in any. Yet as increasing 
ght and grace tend to throw into stronger opposition the spirit of evil, it must be 
regarded as : 2. ^ possibility of every sinner. Necessity for self-examination and 
continual recoiuse to the cleansing and illuminating power of Christ. — M. 

Vers. 31 — 35.— 2%e mother and the brethren of Jesus. The annoyance and hindrance 
tl a moment are turned to eternal gain to the cause of truth, 

I. Familt influences mat nwtTEB spiniTUAL USEFULNESS. They are powerful 
either way. They operate subtly and constantly. A tendency to narrowness in the 
family tie, which requires to be checked. Much of this influence which is adverse to 
Christian life is unconsciously so. Yet the intensest forms of hatred to truth and 
goodness are exhibited within the family relation. Hence the necessity for clear and 
forcible realization of the distinction between lower and higher obligations. The child 
of God will have recourse to constant prayer fur help and guidance, and for the con* 
version of relatives. 

II. There are cibcumstances in which the natural must tield to the spmrruA-^ 
EELATIONSHIP. This is so whenever they conflict, or when, both being of Divine obliga- 
tion, the latter is manifestly more immediately impressed upon the conscience, and mur» 
evidently calculated for the good of men and the glory of God. 

ni. The nbabest and only pebmanbnt relation to Chbist is spiritual and not 
NATURAL. 1. An invitation to all. 2. An encouragement and irispiration to real disc^ln 
3, A forecast of the communion of saints, — M. 

Ver. 35. — Divine relationships. 1. How fab bebemblino human belationsrifs. 
1. In laying down the condition of Divine relationship, Christ does not absolutely displace 
human relationships. It would have been hard for him so to do, since men were being 
addressed, and the relationships sustained by them would depend upon the religion* 
sanction they might possess for the measure of honour and faithful observance they 
would receive. That the terms of human relationship were still employed showed that 
an analogy at least existed. 2. The terms denoting the distinctions of natural relation- 
ships are used in speaking of the heavenly. The " brother " and " sister " and " mother," 
therefore, express a real distinction in the heavenly family. And there are difierences 
of mutual service and affection which must exist within the common " bond of charity,* 
even as on earth. In the case of those who believe in Christ, then, the beautiful 
variation which God has created in the affection of the domestic circle will have a uie 
and fitness in fulfilling the duties and realizing the ideal of the Divine life. The latter 
has its sphere for the sistsrliness, the brotherliness, etc., even as the human life ; and 
these are modes through which the Divine love will express itself. Indeed, it may b* 



CH. m. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 131 



said that the human affections of father, mother, etc., do not fully manifest or realiza 
themselves in the merely human life ; it is the Divine life in which the ideal of each is 
rendered possihle. 

IL In what bespeots diffebino fbom these. 1. The affections characteristic of the 
human family will spring from a spiritual principle and express Divine love. "The 
will of God," or " the will of the Father," will take the place of blind instinct or selfish 
gratification. Thus springing from a new source they will be transformed, pui ified, and 
fireed from limitation and defect. " The will of God " will be the law according to 
which they will express themselves ; but as that will has been interpreted as salvation 
•nd universal benevolence, so the distinctions of human affection will be brought into 
play in furthering the redemptive scheme of the Father amongst his sinful children ; 
and through them phases of the Divine love will be realized that would otherwise find 
no expression. They will thus, also, be universalized and directed into channels of 
service and helpfulness. 2. The Divine relationship is therefore bnsed upon a new nature. 
It is only those who are born of the Spirit who can do the will of God. It is the life of 
the Spirit in them that changes and adapts them for the unselfish affections of the 
family of God. 3. The Divine relationship is a moral possibility of every one. Every 
woman may become a sister, a mother, of Christ ; every man his brother. — M. 

Ver. 2.— A miracle of healing. The cure of the man with a withered hand was more 
obviously a supernatural work than sudden recovery from a fever, so that we need not 
wonder at the excitement it aroused. But it was only an example of many similar 
works, and as such we propose to consider it. 

I. The mibacle which Jesus did. 1, It was a removal of hodily infirmity. Although 
the Son of God came from heaven to do a spiritual work, much of the time of his earthly 
ministry was spent in curing physical disorders. We might have supposed that, coming 
from a painless and sorrowless world he would have had sparse sympathy with such 
Buffering ; that he would have exhorted to fortitude and self-control, and expectation 
of a time when pain would be no more. It was not so, however. He sympathized with 
all sufferers, and, although he had before him a stupendous spiritual work, he by no 
means confined himself to it. Though sometimes he had " no leisure so much as to 
eat," he found time to heal many bodily diseases ; and he did this without hurrying 
over it as if it were an inferior work, or as if it were necessitated by the hardness of 
the human heart ; but he did it lovingly and constantly, as being an essential part of 
his mission. In some respects, no doubt, this was a lower work than preaching. Th« 
body is inferior to the soul, as the tent is to its inhabitant. The effects of cure were 
only transient, for none were promised exemption in the future from disease or death. 
Yet these lower and temporary blessings were generously bestowed by One who 
habitually stood in the light of eternity. Point out the ministry of mercy which the 
Church has yet to do, in Christ's name, for suffering humanity. 2. It was a miracla 
vfith a moral purpose. The supernatural works of Christ were not mainly intended to 
excite attention. When he was asked "for a sign "with that object, he resolutely 
refused it. Had this been his purpose, he would have flung snowy Hermon into the 
depths of the sea, instead of doing the kind of work which is more slowly done by 
human physicians. He had a better purpose than this. He healed disease because, as the 
Conqueror of sin, he would point out and abolish some of its effects. He rescued a man, 
if only for a time, from the evil that harassed him, to show that he was his Redeemer. 
And besides this, he appeared as the Representative of God, and therefore did what he is 
ever doing in more gradual methods. A modern writer has wisely said, " This, I think, 
is the true nature of miracles ; they are an epitome of God's processes in nature, beheld 
In connection with their source." We are apt to forget God in the processes through 
which he ordinarily works, and this forgetfulness could not be better checked than by 
the miracles in which Christ did directly what is usually done indirectly. For example, 
when we eat our daily bread, we know all that man has done with the corn since 
the harvest, and seldom think of God who gave life to the seed, strength to the hus- 
bandman, and nutriment to the ground. But if we saw the processes condensed into 
one Divine act, as the multitude did on the hillside, when Jesus created bread, there 
would be a recognition of Ood which would afterwards find expression in the more 
ordinary eventa we saw. So with the healing of the diseased. Every such mirflcl* 



i32 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [cH. m. 1—35. 

feT Baled God as the Dispenser of health and the Giver of all blessings. 3. It teas a 
miracle having special significance/or the spectators. By means of it Christ taught more 
«learly the nature and design of the sabbath day. His foes had followed him from 
Jerusalem, with the resolute determination to destroy his influence and, if possible, to 
compass his death. Already they had detected his disciples in the violation of a 
rabbinical rule by rubbing corn in their hands on the sacred day. And the Lord had 
at once thrown over his followers the shield of his authority, as an Achillea would 
have done over the wounded Greeks, and had roundly declared that the " Son of man 
was Lord even of the sabbath day." They hoped now that he would publicly commit 
himself by some action in harmony with this declaration, and that so prejudice might be 
raised against his heresy. Show how bravely, wisely, and victoriously he met this, and 
taught for all generations that " it is lawful to do well on the sabbath day." 

II. The lessons Jesxjs taught. 1. Neglecting opportunitiet for doing good is really 
doing evil. Jesus Christ meant, by the alternative he put in the fourth verse, that if he 
did not do the good he was able to do for this poor sufferer, he did him a wrong. This 
is univeTaally true. If at the judgment seat any appear who have done nothing for 
others and for their Lord, they will not be able to say, " We have done no harm 1 " for 
they have injured themselves and others by neglect. The " wicked and slothful 
servant " was not condemned because he had done harm with his wealth and talent, 
but because he had done no good with them, having digged in the earth and hid his 
lord's money. 2. Loving help is better than outward ritval. The religious leaders of 
our Lord's day thought it of vital importance that the law of the Jewish sabbath — 
" Thou shalt do no manner of work " — should be observed with scrupulous exactness. 
But on that holy day Chiist freely cured disease, and so taught the people the meaning 
of JeJiovah's words, " I will have mercy, and not sacrifice." We are bound so to use our 
sacred day, associating acts of love and mercy with the services which sanctify its hours. 
3. Fear of personal consequences should never hinder the true servant of God. What our 
Lord did on this occasion so aroused anger that we read in St. Luke's Gospel, " They were 
filled with madness ; " and " straightway they took counsel with the Herodians against 
him, how they might destroy him." Foreseeing this, he did not hesitate for a moment 
May the fear of God in us also cast out all fear of man 1 — A. B. 

Ver. 6 (first part). — The Saviour's view of sin. Describe the scene in the synagogue; 
the wickedness of the plot formed by the Pharisees ; the compassion of our Lord, 
breaking through it as a mighty tide over a flimsy barrier ; the nobility of his teaching 
cuuoerning the right use of the sabbath ; the healing of the man with the withered 
hand, etc. Our text graphically describes the feeling with which our Lord regarded his 
adversaries, and this deserves earnest consideration. At first the bold declaration, "He 
looked round about on them with anger," startles us ; for it seems in contradiction to 
his meekness and patience, which were perfect. But the explanation follows, " Being 
grieved for the hardness, of their hearts." This shows the nature of his feeling. It 
reminds us of another occasion (Luke xiii. 34), when he spoke of Jerusalem in a tone 
of reproachful indignation ; but at once added the gentle words, " How often would I 
have gathered thy children together, as a hen doth gather her brood under her wings 1 " 
On both occasions there was a blending of feelings which too often appear to us 
cotra-lictory and incompatible. But it is possible to be "angry and sin not." 
Christ looked on the Pharisees, and was indignant at their hypocrisy and unscrupulous 
hatred; but at once the feeling softened into pity as he thought of the insidious 

Eroceaa of " hardening," which (as the Greek implies) was still going on, to end in 
opeless callousness. With him waining was mingled with weeping ; as his disciple 
Paul afterwards spoke with tears of those who were " enemies of the cross of Christ " 
(Phil. iii. 18). In this, as in all things else, Christ has left us an example ; therefore 
we will endeavour first to^ 

I. Ukderstard the complex rEELiNO here exemplified. We see in it two 
elements : 1. Indignation against sin. We are constantly coming in contact with 
the faults and sins of men. Our newspapers contain accounts of murders and cruelties, 
of thefts and treasons. Overreaching and fraud meet us in business; slander and 
enmity lurk in society. Sensibility to such sins is not only not wrong, it is right and 
Christlike, »nd will become more keen as we grow in likeness to our Lord. It is an 



CH. m. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARA. 13S 

evil day for a man when he becomes callous even to those wickednesses which will 
never affect him personally ; for this is distinctly contrary to the feeling which moved 
*he Saviour to effect the world's redemption. As his disciples, we must never be good- 
naturedly easy about sin ; we must not put on an air of worldly indifference ; we must 
not attempt to hush feeling to rest, as if men were committed by a resistless fate to do 
" all these abominations " (Jer. vii. 10). The presence and prevalence of sin should 
stir within us strong moral indignation. 2. Indignation tending to pity. Anger 
should be swallowed up in grief. Indignation against wrong-doing, whether it affects 
ourselves or not, must not make us forget the deepest commiseration for the wrong- 
doer. Instead of this, too often, proud of our own virtue, we stand on our small moral 
pedestal, and look with scorn on those below it. Respected and honoured ourselves, 
with our robes to outward appearance unstained, we gather them about us, and sweep 
past some fallen brother or sister, and say, " Come not near unto me ; fur I am holier 
than thou ! " The evil effects of this are manifold. We may drive others into deeper 
sin, because despair takes the place of hope in them ; and we weaken ourselves in the 
service of our Lord. We can never benefit one whom we despise, or over whosj fall we 
secretly exult ; for nothing but love can so grasp the sinner as to lift him out of the 
horrible pit. Nor is it enough that we are indignant and angry with sin, so that as 
passionate parents or denunciatory preachers we administer hasty reproof or indiscrimi- 
nate punishment. Our faults will never conquer the faults of others. We must seek 
to deal with others as our Lord did. He loved the sinner, even when he hated the sin. 
His " gentleness hath made us great." 

n. Inculcation of the duties here suggested. Let us point out a few considera- 
tions which may help us to cultivate the temper of mind we have discussed. 1. 
Semember what sin is and what sin has done. It caused the loss of Paradise; it 
brought about the sickness and sorrows we suffer ; it made our work hard and unpro- 
ductive ; it created discord between man and his fellow, between man and his God ; it 
seemed so woeful in itself and its results, to him who knows all things, that the Son 
of God gave himself as a sacrifice to save us from its power ; it is so stupendous in its 
nature and awful in its issues that it is not a subject for selfish irritation, but one 
respecting which pity should blend with indignation. He who has done you a wanton 
wrong has injured himself far more than he can injure you. Therefore, beware of 
peevish anger and sinful revenge, remembering tlie words of the Master, "Blessed are the 
meek, . . . the merciful, . . . the peacemakers, . . . the persecuted for righteousness' sake." 
2. Reflect on what sin might have done for you. How far character and reputation 
are affected by circumstances we cannot tell. But if we all have the same pMssions and 
evil propensities, our moral victory or defeat may depend largely on the degree of temp- 
tation which is permitted to assail us. We cherish a vindictive feeling against one who 
has offended his country's laws, but possibly our own criuiitiality might have been as 
great but for the good providence of God. Certain classes of sin are so harshly and 
indiscriminately condemned that she who commits them is only lelt to plunge more 
deeply into sin and misery. But perhaps ten)ptations were great, and home defences 
were few and frail, and the first wrong step was taken ignorantly, and then there 
seemed no going back. The story of the weeping penitent at our Saviour's feet is a 
rebukfe to the want of pilifulness shown too often by the Christian Church. 3. See the 
nobility of the feeling here portrayed. To look with scorn, or with indifference, or 
with pleasure on sin, indicates a very low state of moral feeling. To burst forth with 
indignation against it is higher, but it is a siga of the youth of one's virtue, the 
manhood of which is seen in Jesus Christ. Forbearance and gentleness are among 
ihe higher Christian graces. We expect them of the cultured nation rather than of a 
savage horde, of a mature man than of a half-disciplined child. "He who ruleth his own 
spirit is greater than he that taketh a city." To control angry feeling within ourselves 
is the best means of helping us to control the evil deeds of others in our home and in 
the world. — A. B. 

Ver. 5 (latter part). — " Stretch forth thy hand I " There was no kind of pain which 
Jesus could not relieve, no kio? cf grief he could not assuage. Those who were 
regarded as unclean were welcomed, and those whom none oould cure he healed. Like 
the heavenly Father, of whom he was " the express lintige," he waa " kind to th« 



134 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. MARK. [ch. ni. 1— 35, 

unthankful and to the unworthy." We will regard the restoration of the man with th« 
withered hand to health and soundness as a typical example of what our gracious Lord 
is ever doing. It reminds us of the following truths respecting him :— 

L OuK LoED GIVES STRENGTH FOR DAILY LABOUB. The apocryphal " Gospel accord- 
ing to the Hebrews " says that this sufferer was a mason by trade, and represents him 
as beseeching the Saviour to heal him in order that he might no longer be compelled to 
beg his daily bread. Be this as it may, he presented a piteous spectacle, for bis limb 
was wasted, all power in it was gone as completely as if death had seized it, and he was 
without hope of cure. It was no small blessing to have that limb made in an instant 
"whole as the other;" for henceforth honest industry was possible. We too may 
thank God if what we have has been sweetened by the toil which has made it our own. 
He gives us power to get wealth. It is his kindly providence which saves us from 
eating the bitter bread of charity and dependence. 

II. The Loed gives strength fob Christian sehviob. Until we feel his touch and 
hear his voice, we are towards religious work what this man was towards daily work. 
Many in our congregations in this sense have their hand withered. Some cannot put forth 
their hand to give to the poor, to minister to the sick, to lead others to the Saviour, to 
"subscribe with their hands to the Lord," or even to lay hold on salvation. Their hand 
is withered. This paralysis or incapacity has its source in sin, in the selfishness which 
lives without love, in the pride which refuses to alter old habits, in the avarice which 
will hoard all it grasps, in the distrust of God that will make no venture. Only when 
Hod reveals the sin, and by his grace destroys it, can such be fit to serve him. But if 
Christ's voice is heard, there will come the stirring of new strength, the uprising of a 
new purpose in life, and the question will rise to heaven, " Lord, what wilt thou have 
me to do ? " 

IIL The Lobd often effects this in his own house. As once Jesus was found 
in the synagogue, so now he is often found in the assembly of his people. After his 
resurrection he appeared amongst the praying disciples, and it was on those who had 
assembled together with one accord for prayer that the Holy Spirit came on the day of 
Pentecost. How often since, in our congregations, the power of the Lord has been 
l>resent to heal us! Sin-laden souls have been relieved; the perplexed have been 
guided aright; those morally weak have renewed their strength by waiting upon 
God ; hungry souls have been satisfied ; and those dead in trespasses and sins have 
been quickened to new life. Therefore, let us go to his house constantly, reverently, 
expectantly, and he will bless us "above all that we ask or think." 

IV. The Lord connects his higher blessings with prompt and fearless obe- 
BIBNCB TO his Word. Directly Jesus saw the man with the withered hand, he said, 
" Stand forth! " It was a simple command, but not easy under the circumstances to 
obey. Jesus was a comparative stranger; the position of a crippled man, who was 
made the gazing-stock of a congregation, would be painful ; and the Pharisees might be 
angered by obedience. But on the man's part there was no hesitation. To the voice 
of authority he yielded at once, perhaps not without the stirring of new hope in his 
heart. This first act of obedience made the second more easy. After a few words to 
the Pharisees, our Lord spoke to him again, saying, " Stretch forth thy hand ! " He 
might have urged that it was impossible for him to do that, and that the attempt would 
only cover him with ridicule. But faith was growing fast aud courage with it. He made 
the eliort, and with tiie effort came the strength ; believing that through Christ he could 
do it, he did it, and his hand was restored " whole as the other." Many fail now through 
their want of this obedience of faith. They get no blessing because they neglect to 
obey the first command that comes to them. They want the assurance of salvation, 
the certain hope of heaven, and wonder that it does not come, though they have not 
obeyed the command. " Bow down in penitential prayer," or " give up the sin you 
love." Because they do not "stand forth in the midst," they do not hear the com- 
mand, " Stretch forth thy hand 1 " Be true to the impulse God gives, and then "to him 
that hath, to him shall be given yet more abundantly." In that synagogue Christ waa 
both a Stone of stumbling and a sure Foundation, over which some stumbled and otheri 
rose to higher things. We too may leave his presence, like the Pharisees, hardened, or 
like this man who, believing and obeying, became ready for the work God gave him to 
do. Which shall it be?— A. B. 



OH. uu 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCOfiDING TO ST. MAEK. 181 



Vers. 13, 14. — The helpers of Jesus. Our Lord was fulfilling the prophecy Simeon had 
uttered concerning him. From the cradle to the cross he was "set for the fall. and 
rising again of many in Israel, . . . that the thouj^hts of many hearts may he 
revealed." As a new element introduced into a chemical solution will detect and 
separate the elements already there, so did Christ appear in the moral world. With 
growing distinctness his foes and friends became separate communities. " He called 
unto him" those who were ready for service, while those who were hostile became 
more pronounced in their hatred. The Pharisaic party, which began by the denial of 
his authority, tried next to disparage his character, and finally plotted his destruction. 
It is the tendency of sin thus to go onward toward deeper guilt. He who " stands in the 
way of sinners " at last " sits in the seat of the scornful." So unscrupulous had the 
Pharisees become that (ver. 6) they even took counsel with the Eerodians to destroy 
him. Professedly patriotic and orthodox, they united with the friends of the usurper j 
and (as so often since) priests and tyrants combined against the Christ. See how Christ 
met this hostility. He might have overwhelmed his foes by superhuman power, but 
he resolutely refused to use force against them (Matt. iv. 8—10 ; xxvi. 53, 54). He 
might have defied them, and so hastened the crisis which ultimately came ; but " his 
hour had not yet come," for he had a ministry yet to fulfil. Hence he gave himself up 
to more private work, avoiding perils, although he never feared them, and labouring 
amongst the poor and obscure. Around him he gathered a few faithful ones, "that 
they might be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach." This text 
gives us some thoughts. 

L On pbepabation fob sebvice. See how our Lord prepared himself and his 
disciples. " He goeth up into a mountain " — an expression which in the Gospels implies 
the withdrawal of our Lord from the people for the purpose of prayer. This preceded 
all his great deeds and sufierings, as was exemplified in the temptation and in the 
agony. It was fitting that the disciples should be appointed in a place of prayer. 
Apart from the world and near to God, we are ready to hear our Master's words and 
receive his commission. From the height of communion with God we should come 
down to our work (Isa. lii. 7). His requirement of spiritual fitness for spiritual work 
is shown by his constant refusal of the testimony of demons (ver. 12) : " He straitly 
charged them that they should not make him known." This verse, immediately pre- 
ceding our text, makes a suggestive contrast with it. He recoiled from an ambiguous 
confession. As the Holy One, he would not suffer the unclean to bear witness to him. 
The testimony was true, but the spirit that gave it was evil. These disciples were 
" ordained," or more correctly (Revised Version) " appointed," that they might be with 
him, and that he might send them forth to preach. The former was the preparation 
for the latter. Only those who are in communion with Jesus can truly bear witness 
for him to the world. 

II. On advantage in fellowship. The Lord himself cared for the sympathy and 
co-operation of others. Even in his direst agony he would not be without it (ch. 
xiv. 34). Much more was it necessary for his disciples to be associated in a common 
brotherhood ; the beauty of which appears again and again to those who study the Acts 
and the Epistles. In the fellowship of the Church, one supplements the weakness 
of another; numbers increase enthusiasm and afford hope to the timid; intercourse 
with others removes one-sidedness of character, etc. See the teaching of St. Paul about 
the " body of Christ," and " the temple of the Holy Spirit," in which Christians are 
living stones, mutually depeudent, and all resting on Christ. 

IIL On diversities among disciples. Jesus chose " twelve * for special work — a 
number probably selected as a reminder that they were primarily commissioned to be 
ambassadors to the twelve tribes, and as a type of the perfection of the redeemed 
Church (Rev. vii.). But even in that comparatively small company, what diversities 
of gifts I Some of them are indicated even in the brief list of their names given here 
by St. Mark. We see the Eock-man, Peter ; " the beloved disciple," John ; the fiery 
" sons of thunder ; " the guileless Nathanael ; the zealot Simon ; and the traitor Judas. 
Bach had his special gift and sphere. And still there are " diversities of gifts " amongst 
the Lord's disciples. 

rV. On possibilities of pebil. Judas Iscariot lived with Jesus, was called by 
him, possessed miraculous gifts, preached the gospel to others; but he died a traitoi 



136 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. [ch. m. 1—35 



and a suicide. To fill a spiritual office, and yet to be careless of our own spiritual 
life, is fatal. " Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall." 
— A.R. 

Vers. 7 — 35. — Setirement. In the calm and successful prosecution of his work, Jesui 
has excited various feelings in the minds of the different classes around him. He has 
wrought many miracles — all of them miracles of mercy; almost all, so far as recorded, 
miracles of healing. Of necessity his presence is hailed by the throngs of needy and 
suffering ones, and " his name is as ointment poured forth " to the multitudes who have 
proved his power to heal. These cannot be restrained from publishing his fame 
abroad, though he has begged them to be silent, for he sees but too plainly the hindrance 
to his usefulness which a blaze of popularity would cause. In the course of his teaching 
he has made the Pharisees to blush more than once; and the popular movement which he 
seems likely to excite has stirred up the fears or the jealousies of the court party — ^"the 
Herodians," who join their own political antagonists in their opposition to him, and they 
together plot his destruction. His relatives, " friends," including the highly honoured 
one, "his mother, and his brethren," are excited with fear that "he is beside himself," 
for he allows not himself time to " so much as eat bread." " Scribes from Jerusalem," 
learned in the Law, the trained expounders of its sacred truths, and the authoritative 
adjudicators in matters of dispute, pass their judgment and verdict in explanation of 
the astounding facts which they cannot or dare not deny. " He is possessed," they say, 
" by the very ' prince of the devils.' He is the tool, the agent of Beelzebub himself, 
and 'by the prince of the devils casteth he out the devils.'" This is truly a most 
ingenious though the most wicked of all explanations; a very blasphemy, ascribing the 
work of " the Holy Spirit " to " an unclean spirit," and placing Jesus in the lowest 
category of all — lower than the lowest. It affirms him to Iw the agent of the arch- 
demon, working his behests, the servant of the devil of devils. And if possession by 
an evil spirit is the consequence and punishment of evil work, as was the current 
opinion, he is surely the worst of the bad. All this needs adjustment. The anger of 
some, the timidity, the fears, the indiscreet zeal, the error, the false views, and the 
wickedness of others, must all be corrected. For this purpose he, " with his disciples," 
withdraws " to the sea," where, " because of the crowd, lest they should throng him," 
he orders that in future "a little boat should wait on him;" by which means he can 
escape the press, and either teach from the boat or sail away for rest and quiet. At even- 
tide "he goeth up into the mountain," where he continues " all night in prayer to Grod;" 
needful in the midst of so much pressure and excitement, and most fitting in anticipation 
of the great work of the morrow. Then, when the morning breaks, he calls his 
disciples to him, from whom he chooses twelve, " that they might be with him," for his 
own comfort and for purposes of training for future service in his kingdom, "and that 
he might send them forth to preach, and to have authority to cast out devils, and to 
heal all manner of disease, and all manner of sickness." These " he named apostles," 
and " appointed," and " sent forth," and " charged them." Then, with awful withering 
words, he silences the scribes, first by argument, showing that on their own ground the 
divided kingdom "hath an end;" then by pointing to the "eternal sin "which he 
committeth who thus " shall blaspheme against the Holy Spirit," and who "hath never 
forgiveness." And now, turning to his anxious relatives, he asks and answers the ques- 
tion, " Who is my mother and my brethren ?" Breaking loose from the bonds of mere 
natural relationship, he declares that he holds the closest alliance with "whosoever shall 
do the will of God." From all which every true disciple treading in his Master's steps, 
and hearkening to his Master's teaching, may learn : 1. The wisdom of frequent with- 
drawal from the excitements of life into calm, quieting intercourse with God in 
prayer, to the cooling contemplation of the Divine works, and the humbling commu- 
nion with his own soul. 2. The sacredness of holy companionship; and, if he is called 
to teach great truths, the wisdom of gathering around him a few sympathetic spirits, 
and sharing with them his work and honour for the general good. 3. The necessity for 
keeping his mind sensitively alive to the teachings of the Holy Spirit, lest, resisting, 
he grieve him, and quench the only light by which the path of life may be found. 
i. To learn the terrible peril to which he exposes himself who "puts darkness for light." 
6. And joyfully to see the high calling which is of God, the close alliance with the 



CB. HI. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 131 



Lord Christ which is secured to him who keeps the commandments of Gnd, concerning 
whom the Lord says, " The same is my brother, and sister, and mother." — G. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Sallath ohservanee. J. The sabbath mat bb observed to thb 
LETTER WHILE BROKEN IN THE SPIRIT. Here Were men watching to see whether a man 
would dare to do a loving deed 1 The letter, which can never be more than the expres- 
sion of the spirit, must be kept at all costs — except that of the literalists. There are 
pedants who will quarrel with a great writer because he departs from the " rules of 
grammar," forgetting that grammar is but a collection of observations of the best 
that has been written. So there are ritualists who will slander a good man because ha 
neglects rites for the sake of going to the root of all rites. 

IL CeNSOBIOUSNESS the CERTAIN SYMPTOM OF SELF-DISCONTENT. Wh.V do We Want 

to find fault with others ? Because we are not satisfied with ourselves. We must either 
feed on a good conscience or on the semblance of it. And it seems that we are better 
than others whenever we can put them in an unfavourable light. 

III. Emulation and envy are near akin. We are jealous of great successes. 
Jealousy is natural enough. It depends on the will \\ liether the effects be good or evil 
on ourselves. A noble deed! let me seek to imitate it and share the blessedness of it: 
this is good. A noble deed! let me extinguish the author of it, «ho shames me: this 
of the devil, devilish ; of hell, hellish. The ideal Christian and the ideal Pharisee are 
in eternal opposition. Goodness produces one of two effects in us — we long to embrace 
it and posst^ss it, or to kill it. — J. 

Vers. 7 — 12. — Testimony of evil to goodness. I. Its bincebitt. We see many 
coming to Christ who thought they could get an immediate good from him. Others 
kept aloof who doubted what good could come, what evil might come, from the inter- 
course. The devils, whether for good or evil, " rush to Jesus." Whenever there is such 
a " rush," something significant is stirring. 

II. Its ibeesistible character. There are men, there are movements, which are 
advertised by the evil they elicit from the latent depths of the heart. Observe the 
man who is hated, and by whom ; observe the man who is loved, and by whom. Note 
the centre of attraction, and for what sort of people ; the centre of repulsion, and for 
what sort of people ; and you have a clue to important truths. Christ is illustrated 
by all these rules. Who were they who approached him in love then? who now? 
What were the instincts arrayed against him — then and now ? — J. 

Veri. 13 — 19. — Hie need of missionariei. I. Popularizbes of great doctbines 
ARE NECESSART in every branch of science, art, literature, religion. Where would the 
sublime doctrine we call the gospel have been, as an influence, had there not been found 
men to make it " current coin " ? 

II. Second-hand instrumentalitt flats a large part in the spiritual world. 
Few are the leaders or generals, many the officers, multitudinous the rank and file ; 
but every soldier who is in living contact with the Leader's spirit may and will work 
maiTels. 

III. Feebleness becomes strength when inspibed by original force. These 
were humble men, yet their names live. They were reflections of Christ, as he was the 
Keflection of the power and love of God. 

I\ . There is a moral mixture in evert religious movement. A Judas among 
the apostles. Something of a Judas even in every apostle's heart. Liglit contends 
with darkness in the twili>;ht before each great historical dawn. The characters of 
great religious reformers have often been mixed and dubious. There is a traitor in 
every camp, a doubtful element in every good man's life. — J. 

Vers. 20 — 30. — The sin against the Holy Spirit. I. The charge against Jesus. 
He holds to Beelzebub, and by the chief of demons casts out demons. 1. It was 
absurd ; but absurd arguments readily satisfy passion and hate and those who have no 
care for the truth. They accused the Saviour, in short, of a self-contradiction in thought 
and action, which was a moral impossibility. 2. It was wicked. It had the worst 
element of the lie in it — it denied the truth within them. 



138 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. M^tlK. [oh. in. 1—35 

n. The wobst deohee of sin. Sin has its scale, its climax. There are sins ol 
instinct and of passion and of ignorance. When there is little light to he guided by there 
is little light to sin against. 'I'he next step in sin is where there is deliberation before 
the wrong is done. Last and worst is where not only the deliberate judgment is gone 
against, but the attempt is made to deny the principle of judgment in the soul itself. 
The hands of the watch move backwards ; the lamp flags with the very abundance of 
oil ; the man's soul dies. Over against the words " Repent I be forgiven I " stand these, 
" Irreclaimable I unforgivable I "—J. 

Vers. 31 — 35. — Kinship to Jesui. I. First that which is natctbal, afterwabds 
THAT WHICH IS SPiRiTUAli. This is oue order. Our spiritual being is built up on a 
natural basis. Slowly the bud of the higher being unfolds from the plant of earthly 
root. Through the home to the Church ; by the love of mother and brother and sister, 
to the love of God and of alL 

IL Fikst the spiritual, afterwards the natdbai^ This is the order in another 
way. The end of our being is in the spiritual j this is its dignity, its reflection of the 
Divine. It claims the first thought, other things being equal. When friends stand in 
the way of duty, between us and the light of truth, we must be true to the higher self. 
It may seem a stem rule, until we find that every low affection we renounced for the 
higher is given back to us bathed in a new glory.— J. 

Vers. 1 — 6. Parallel passages: Matt. xli. 9 — 14; Luke yi. 6 — 11. — The man with 
the withered hand. I. The natitre of the disease. It was a case of severe paralysis 
of the hand — the right hand, as St. Luke, with a physician's accuracy, informs us. The 
sinews were shrunken, and the hand shrivelled and dried up. And yet we owe to St. 
Mark's great particularity in narration and minuteness of detail a piece of information 
that one might rather have expected from the professional skill of " the beloved physician," 
Luke. St. Luke, as well as St. Matthew, uses an adjective (^irjph, equivalent to dry) 
to describe, in a general way, the state of the diseased member ; but St. Mark employs 
the participle of the perfect passive (i^itpaiiiiivriv, equivalent to having been dried up), 
which furnishes a hint as to the origin of the ailment. While from the expression of 
the former two evangelists we might conclude that the ailment was congenital — that 
the man was born with it ; we are enabled, by the term made use of in the Gospel 
before us, to correct that conclusion, and to trace this defect of the hand as the result of 
disease or of accident. 

II. Variety of diseases. The multitude of " ills that flesh is heir to " is truly 
wonderful; the variety of diseases that afflict poor frail humanity is astonishing. 
Whatever be the place of our abode, or wherever we travel, we find our fellow-creatures 
subject to weakness, pains, physical defects, wasting disease, pining sickness, and 
bodily ailments, too many and too various to enumerate. No continent, no island, no 
zone of earth, is exempt. The greatest salubrity of climate, though it may somewhat 
diminish the number, does not do away with cases of the kind. Though our lot be cast 
amid the mildness of Southern climes, or under the clear bright sky of Eastern lands ; 
though our dwelling-place be — 

" Far from the winters of the West, 
By every breeze and season blest:** 

still we find ourselves within the reach of those infirmities that seem the common lot 
of man. We cannot read far in the Gospels, or trace the ministry of our Lord to much 
length, until we fiud him surrounded by and ministering to whole troops of invalids 
and impotent folk. 

III. Source of all diseases. If there were no sin there would be no sorrow, and if 
there were no sin there would be no sickness. The effects of sin extend to both body 
and soul. Sin has brought disease as well as death into the world, as we read, " By 
one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death hath passed upon 
all men, for that all have sinned." As death has thus passed upon all men, so 
disease, more or less aggravated, at one time or other, has become the lot of all ; for what 
are pain and disease and sickness but forerunners, remote it may be, of death, and for- 
feitures of sin ? The original punitive sentence was not Moth tumath, " Thou shalt ba 



OH. m. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAUK. 138 



put todeath," that is, immediately or instantaneously ; but Moth tamuth, " Thou shalt die," 
namely, by a process now commenced, and, though slow, yet sure; for sin has planted 
the germ of death in the system. It is as though, simultaneously with the breath of 
life, the process of decay and death began, part after part wasting away in consequence 
of disease or in the so-called course of nature, till the vital spark at last becomea 
extinct, and " the dust returns to the earth as it was." A heathen poet preserves the 
remnant ol an old tradition, which, like many of the traditions of heathenism, is 
evidently a dispersed and distorted ray from the light of revelation. He tells us that 
a crowrd of wasting diseases invaded this earth's inhabitants in consequence of crime ; 
while a Christian poet speaks of that lazar-house which sin has erected on our earth, 
" wherein are laid numbers of all diseased, all maladies, , . . and where dire are the toss- 
ings, deep the groans." But for transgression manhood would have remained in all its 
original health and vigour and perfection, like " Adam, the goodliest man of men since 
born his sons ; " and womanhood would have retained all the primitive grace and love- 
liness and beauty that bloomed in " the fairest of her daughters. Eve." 

IV. Time and place of the cube. The time was the sabbath day ; and this was 
one of the seven miracles which our Lord performed on the sabbath. Of these St. Mark 
records three — the cure of the demoniac at Capernaum, the cure of fever in the case of 
Peter's mother-in-law, and the cure of the withered hand ; the former two recorded in 
the first chapter of this Ck>spel, and the last in the passage under consideration. Two 
more of the sabbath-day miracles are recorded by St. Luke — the cure of the woman 
afSicted with the spirit of infirmity, and also of the man who had the disease of 
dropsy; the former in the thirteenth and the laitei- in the fourteenth chapter of St. 
Luke's Gospel. Besides these, two more are recorded by St. John — the recovery of the 
impotent man at the pool of Bethesda, and the restoration of sight to the man bom 
blind ; the former in the fifth and the latter in the ninth chapter of St. John's Gospel. 
Our Lord had vindicated his disciples for pluckiu? the ears of corn on the sabbath ; 
he had now to vindicate himself for the miracle of healing, which he was about to perform 
also on the sabbath. The place where he was going to perform this miracle was the 
eynagogue. 

V. Pbesons present at the peefobmancb of the cube. This is a most important 
item in the narrative, and a most important element in the transaction. There was a 
multitude present, and that multitude consisted of foes as well as friends. It could 
not, therefore, be said that the thing was done in a corner, or that it was done only in 
the presence of friends, with whom collusion or connivance might possibly be suspected. 
The persons, then, in whose presence this cure was effected were the worshippers on 
that sabbath day in the synagogue— a goodly number, no doubt, comprehending not 
only those who assembled ordinarily for the sabbath service, but many more drawn 
together by the rumours about the great Miracle-worker and in expectation of some 
manifestation of his wonder-working power. But besides these ordinary worshippers 
and these curiosity-mongers, as perhaps we may designate them, there were others — 
the scribes and Pharisees, as we learn from St. Luke — whose motive was malignancy, and 
whose business on that occasion was espionage. They kept watching our Lord closely 
and intently (irapET^pouv) to see if he should heal on the sabbath ; not in admiration 
of his wondrous power, nor in gratitude for his marvellous goodness, but in order to find 
some ground of accusation against him. 

VI. Objection to the peefobmancb of the cube on the sabbath. In pursuance 
of their plan, they anticipated our Lord, as we learn from St. Matthew, with the 
question, " Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day ? " Our Lord, in reply, as we are 
informed in the same Gospel, appealed to their feelings of humanity and to the exercise 
of mercy which men usually extend even to a dumb animal — a sheep, which, if it fall 
into a pit on the sabbath, is laid hold of and lifted out. The superiority of a man to a 
sheep justifies a still greater exercise of mercy, even on the sabbath. But to their 
captious and ensnaring question he made further answer, replying, as was his wont, by 
a counter-question, " Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath day, or to do evil ? to save 
life, or to kill?" The alternative here is between doing good and doing evil, or, 
putting an extreme case, between saving a life and d(^stroying it (ijroAeVoi in St. Luke). 
We may observe, in passing, that the received text, which reads ti in this passage of St 
Luke's Gospel, admits one or other of the two following renderings, accordiiig to th« 



140 THE GOSPEL ACCOIlbINQ TO ST. MAKK. [cb. iu. i— 35. 

punctuation : either (1) " I will ask you, further, What is allowable on the sahhath — to 
do pood or to do evil ? " or (2) " I will ask you, further, a certain thing : Is it allowable 
on the sabbath to do good or to do evil ? " The first is favoured by being nearly the 
same as the Peshito-Syriac, which is to the effect, " I will ask you what is it allowable 
to do on the sabbath? What is good or what is bad?" But the critical editors, 
Lachmann, Tischendorf, and Tregelles, read «I, and the latter two have the present of 
the verb, viz. iirepara. Of course the translation of the text thus constituted is, " I 
ask yaa, further, if it is allowable on the sabbath to do good or to do evil — to save a 
life or to destroy ? " With this the Vulgate coincides, as follows : — Interrogo vos, ti 
licet tahbatis b^ntfacere an male : animam salvam facere, an perdere f This was a 
home-thrust to these deceitful, wicked men who, while he was preparing to restore 
a human being to the full enjoyment of life in the unimpeded and unimpaired use of 
all his members, were murderously plotting the destruction of the great Physician's 
own life. No wonder they were silenced, as St. Mark tells us, for they must have 
been conscience-stricken, at least in some measure. At all events, they were confuted 
and confounded, but not converted, though they maintained a stolid, sullen silence. 
The question of our Lord left them in a dilemma. They could not deny that it wag 
disallowable to do evil on any day, still more on the sabbath, for the holiness of the 
day aggravated the guilt ; and yet they were seeking means of inflicting the greatest 
evil — even the destruction of life. They could not deny that it was allowable to do good 
on any day, especially on the sabbath ; for the good deed, if not enhanced by, was fully 
in keeping with, the goodness of the day on which it was done. They found them- 
selves shut up to the inevitable conclusion that it was not unlawful to do good on the 
sabbath day. And so our Lord turns to the performance of that good act on which he 
had determined, but which they in heart disallowed, notwithstanding their enforced 
silence or their seeming to give consent. 

VIL Mode of peepabation fob the cues. He commanded the man who had his 
hand withered to stand forth. This was a somewhat trying ordeal for that poor 
disabled man. Standing forward, he became the gazing-stock of all eyes. He thereby 
made himself and his peculiar defect conspicuous. He thus practically confessed his 
helplessness and eagerness for relief. There he stood, an object of heartless curiosity to 
some, an object of contempt to others ; the scrutinizing looks of some, the scowling 
glances of others, were fixed upon him. Few like to be thus looked out of countenance. 
Besides, in addition to all this, he was publicly expressing confidence in the ability of 
the Physician, and so exposing himself to like condemnation. And then there was the 
contingency of failure. What of that? The man must have had some, yea, much, 
moral courage to brave all this. Thus it is with all who will come to Christ with 
earnestness of spirit and manfully confess him. False shame must be laid aside. The 
scowl of enemies, perhaps the sneer of friends, the scorn of the world, may be calculated 
on and contemned ; much must be done and dared in this direction. Yet the true con- 
fessor will not shrink from all this, and more. His spirit is — 

" I'm not ashamed to own my T.nrd 
Or to defend his cause, 
llaintaiu the glory of his rniaa. 
And honour all his laws." 

VIIL Our Lord's look when proceedino to perform the cure. The man was 
now standing forth in the midst, with the eyes of all present fastened on him. Our 
Lord, before actually speaking the word of healing power, looked round upon the 
persons present — upon all of them, as St. Luke informs us. There was deep meaning 
in that look. The expression of that look needed an interpreter, and so St. Mark tells 
us that the feelings which that intent and earnest look into every man's face gave 
expression to were twofold — there was anger and there was grief at the same time. 
This ariger was righteous indignatien ; as the apostle says, " Be angry and sin not." 
This anger was incurred by the wicked malevolence which the Saviour, in his omni- 
science, read in the dark hearts of those dark-visaged men ; for, as St. Luke reminds us, 
" he knew their thoughts," or rather their reasonings. But there was griff as well, 
1. Though the compound verb iriAAi/Trou/itvoi is interpreted by some as identical with 
the simple form, yet the prepositional element cannot be thus overlooked, but must add 



oa m. 1—85.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 141 



somewhat to the meaning of the whole. 2. This additional significancy, however, 
may be variously understood. The preposition aiv may mean (1) that he grieved with 
and BO within himself — in his own spirit ; or (2) that his grief was simultaneous with 
his anger and accompanied it; or (3) that, angry though he was, he grieved nevertheless 
or sympathized with them. The ground of this complex feeling was the hardness of 
their hearts. The root-word denotes a kind of stone, then a clialkstone, also a 
callus, or substance exuding from fractured bones and joining their extremities ; and 
the derivative noun, which occurs here, is the process of reuniting by a cdUus, then 
hardening, hardness, callousness; while the verb signifies to petrify, harden, or make 
callous. This hard-heartedness is thus a gradual, not an instantaneous, formation. It 
is a process which may commence with some small omission or trifling commission ; 
but in either case it continues unless checked by grace — the once soft becoming hard, 
and the hard yet harder, till it is consummated in fearful obduracy of heart or complete 
callousness of the moral nature. 

IX. The ousb performed. " Stretch forth thy hand I " is the command ; and as the 
aorist imperative, used here, generally denotes a speedy execution of the order given, 
like our phrase, " Have it done!" the command amounted to " Stretch forth thy hand 
at onoe I How unreasonable this command, at the first blush of the matter, appears I 
Many a time the attempt had been made, but in vain ; many a time before he had tried to 
stretch it out, but that withered hand had refused obedience to the volitions of the will. 
Was not the Saviour's command, then, strange and unnatural in bidding him extend 
a hand that had long lost the proper power of motion ; a hand crippled and contracted 
in every joint, shrunken and shrivelled in every part— in a word, completely lifeless 
and motionless? And yet this man did not cavil nor question; he did not doubt nor 
delay. Soon aa the mandate came he made the effort; soon as the command was 
uttered, hard as it must have seemed, he essayed compliance ; and no sooner is com- 
pliance attempted than the cure is eflfected. Divine power accompanying the command, 
or rather both acting with simultaneous effect. Thus his word was a word of power, 
as we read, " He sent bis word and healed them." And now the tendons are unbound, 
the nerves act, the muscles are suppled, the vital fluid flows once more along the 
reopened channel. Thus it was brought back again to what it once was ; in power, 
appearance, and use it was restored to its original condition, whole and sound. 

X. Consequent on the cxjeb was an unnatural coalition. The enemies were 
filled with folly, wicked and senseless folly (ocoioj), but not madness, as it is generally 
understood, for that would properly be /lavlas. They felt humiliated in the presence of so 
many people. Their pride was humbled, for they were silenced ; their logic was shown to 
be shallow, for with them " to do or not to do " — that was the question ; but our Lord 
showed them that "to do good or not to do good, while not to do good was tantamoimt to 
doing erril," was in reality the question ; and so they were put to shame. They were 
disappointed, moreover, for they were deprived of any ground whereon to found an 
accusation, because, in the mode of effecting the cure, there had been no touch, no con- 
tact of any kind, no external means used — nothing but a word, so that even the letter 
of the Law had been in no way infringed. In their desperation they communed one 
with another, held a council, or, as St. Mark informs us more explicitly, " took or made 
coonsel with the Herodians." Misfortune, according to an old saw, brings men intc 
acquaintance with strange associates, and never more so than on this occasion. In 
theology the Herodians, as far as they held any theological opinions, fraternized with the 
Sadducees, the latitudinarians of that day ; in politics they were adherents of Herod 
Antipas, and so advocates of the Boman domination. To both these the Pharisees wei e 
diametrically opposed. Yet now they enter into an unholy alliance with those whc 
were at once their political opponents and religious antagonists. Nor was this the onl.v 
time that extremes met and leagued themselves against Christ and his cause. Herod and 
Pilate mutually sacrificed their feelings of hostility, and confederated against the Loni 
and his Anointed. It has been thought strange that Luke, who from his acquaintance 
with Manaen, the foster-brother of Herod the Tetrarch, had special facilities for know- 
ledge of the Herods, their family relations, and friends, omits this alliance of the 
Herodians with the Pharisees ; while it has been surmised that, from that very acquain- 
tance, sprang a delicacy of feeling that made the evangeUst loth to record theii 
hostility to Christ. 



142 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. m. 1— 3Sk 

XT. Lessons to be lbabnt from this section. 1. The first lesson we learn here ii 
the multitude of witnesses that are watching the movements of the disciples of Christ; 
for as it was with the Master so is it with ourselves. The eye of God is upon us, according 
to the language of ancient piety, " Thou God seest us ; " the eyes of angels are upon us to 
aid us with their blessed and beneficent ministries ; the eyes of good men are upon ni 
to cheer us onward and help us forward ; the eyes of bad men are upon us to mark oui 
halting and take advantage of our errors ; the eyes of Satan and his servants — evil angeli 
as well as evil men — are upon us to entrap us by their machinations and gloat over our fall 
How vigilant, then, must we be, watching and praying that we fall not into, nor succumb 
to, temptation 1 2. In every case of spiritual withering we know the Physician to whom 
we must apply. Has our faith been withering, or has it lost aught of its freshness ? we pray 
him to help our unbelief and increase our faith. Has our love been withering and languish- 
ing ? we must seek from him a renewal of the love of our espousals, and meditate on him 
till in our hearts there is rekindled a flame of heavenly love to him who first loved us. 
Is our zeal for the Divine glory, or our activity in the Divine service, withering and 
decaying? then we must seek grace to repent and do our first works, stretching out at 
Christ's command the withered hand to Christian work, whether it be the resumption of 
neglected duty, or the rendering of needful help, or relieving the wants of the indigent, or 
wiping away the tears of the sorrowing, or usefulness of whatever kind in our day and 
generation, or honest endeavours to leave the world better than we found it. 3. It is well 
worthy of notice that if we are doing no good we are doing evil ; nay, if we are 
doing nothing, we are doing evil ; still more, if we are not engaged at least in helping 
to save, we are guilty of abetting, if not actually causing destruction. Let us, then, be 
" not slothful in business ; fervent in spirit ; serving the Lord." 4. The mercifulness of 
the Saviour is an encouragement to faith and obedience. With his anger against sin was 
mingled grief for sinners' hardness of heart. Many a tear he shed for perishing souls in 
the diiys of his flesh. He dropped a tear at the grave of a beloved friend — only 
drop{«d a silent tear (^iSiKpvaey); but over the impenitent inhabitants of a doomed city 
bis eyes brimmed over with tears and he wept aloud, for we there read iKKavaev. In this 
restoration of the withered hand we have evidence of the Saviour's gracious disposition, 
a warrant to take him at his word, and a guarantee that when he giyes a precept he 
will grant power for its performance. 6. Divine power was here displayed in human 
weakness. The sinner has a warrant to believe, and in responding to that warrant h« 
realizes Divine help ; in his willingness to obey be experiences Divine power; in his 
earnest entreating Christ for strength to believe, he is actually and already exercising a 
reliance on Christ for salvation. Divine power harmonized with the faith of this 
a£3icted man, and the Saviour's strength made itself manifest in his obedience. And 
yet faith lays claim to no inherent power ; it is, on the contrary, human weakness 
laying hold of Divine strength. Its potency is derived entirely from that on which it 
rests ; believing the Word of God, trusting in the Son of God, relying on aid from the 
Spirit of God, it surmounts every obstacle, overcomes every difficulty, and trinmphs 
over every enemy. It is a principle that develops most wonderful potencies for good ; 
in its exercise we cross the borderland that lies between the humanly impossible and 
heavenly possibilities ; for " what is the victory that overcometh the world ? Even our 
faith."— J. J. G. 

Yen. 7 — 12. Parallel passage: Matt. xii. 15 — 21. — Popularity of Christ on the 
increase. I. TiiB populabitt of Jesus. It was ever increasing, as is proved by this 
passage. A great multitude followed him from Galilee in the north ; from Judaea and 
its capital in a central position ; and from Idumtea in the far south, situated as it was 
between Judaea, Arabia, and Egypt ; then from Perasa, east of the Jordan ; the people 
of Tyre and Sidon also in the north-west ; — all these, attracted by the fame of what 
Jesus was doing, flocked unto him. So great were the multitude and pressure that he 
ilirected his disciples to procure a little boat to keep close to him in order to escape the 
crowding (Sii rhu ix^or) and consequent confusion. 

II. Hu FOWEB to heal. This appears to be as yet the main attraction. The miracles 
of healing were abundant, so much so that the afflicted sufferers actually fell against l<im 
{iitmlTTtir), that by the contact their plagues might be removed. Unclean spirits alsa 
wherever they saw him, kept falling down before him, crying out, " Thou art the Sod 
of God." 



OH. m. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. 143 

III. Peculiarity of the Stbiao Version in this place. It strangely combines the 
two last classes in its renderiug, namely, " Those that had plagues of unclean spirits, as 
olten as they saw him, kept tailing down before him." Our Lord, however, invariably 
reprobated and rejected their testimony, as if there were something insidious in it ur 
injurious to his cause. 

IV. The physical health bestobed to so many afflicted bodies was a ouabantee 
OF SPiBinJAL health FOR THE SOUL. In aU the ages, and in all the annals of medical 
science, and in all the countries of the world, we have account of one Physician, and only 
one, who was able to lay his hand on the aching head and diseased heart of suffering 
hummiity, bringing imuiediate cure and effectual relief. No malady could resist his 
healing power, no sickness withstand his touch, and no illness remain incurable once 
he but spoke the word. No disease, however deep-seated in the system, or deadly in 
its nature, or inveterate from long duration, could baffle his skill or defy his power. 
Whether it was palsy, or dropsy, or asthma, or convulsions, or ulceration, or bloody 
issue, or fever, or even consumption, or, what was still worse, leprosy itself, — whatever 
the form of disease might be, he cured it. Persons labouring under organic defects — 
the deaf, the dumb, the blind, the lame — were brought to him, and he removed all those 
defects. Mental ailments also, as lunacy and demoniacal possession, all were relieved 
by him. Sometimes it was a word, sometimes a touch, again some external appliance, 
nut as a remedy but to act as a conductor, or to show a connection instituted between 
the operator and the patient, but, whatever was the plan adopted, the power never failed 
to produce the desired effect. Now, whatever he did in this way to the body is proof 
positive of his ability and willingness to do the same and more for the soul. We may 
be diseased with sin so as to be loathsome in our own eyes and morally infectious to 

' our neighbours and acquaintaE.ces ; we may be leprous with sin so as to be cut off from 
the fellowship of the saints and the communion of the holy; we may be under the ban 
of man and the curse of heaven ; yet if we approach this great Physician of soul as 
well as body, confiding in his power and trusting in his mercy, we shall obtain, and 
that without fail, healing and health for our diseased spirits and sin-sick souls. 
Thousands alive this day can testify from actual happy experience to the healing power 
of Jesus' word, the ciuausing efficacy of his blood, and the renewing, purifying, and 
sanctifying influences ot his Spirit. Millions this day in the realms of bliss above are 
enjoying the health and the happiness, the brightness and the beauty, the purity and 
perfection of that upper sanctuary, though on earth the diseases of their souls had been 
ol the most desperate character — utterly mcurable had it not been for the mercy and 
grace of this great Physician. And he is still the same — " the same, yesterday, to-day, 
and for ever," and able as ever to " save to the uttermost all that come unto God by 
him." 

v. A reconciliation. It is thought by some that a discrepancy exists between the 
fourth verse of tlje fifty-third chapter of Isaiah and the seventeenth verse of the eighth 
chapter of St. Matthew. But if we take the first clause of each verse as referring to 
bodily diseases, and the second clause to the diseases of the mind or soul, we shall have 
ac instruntive harmony in place of an insuperable difficulty or seeming discrepancy. 
The verbo will then be most suitable and appropriate : the nasa of the Hebrew, being 
general in its meaning, to take up in any way, or to take up in order to take away, will 
correspond in its generality of signification to eAoiSe, to take in any way ; while savat, 
for which i^wmuif of St. Matthew is an exact equivalent, is to bear as a burden. 
"Thus," says Archbishop Magee, in his invaluable work on the Atonement, "are 
Isaiah and Matthew perfectly reconciled ; the first clause in each relating to diseases 
removed, and the second to sufferings endured." Thus too there is a close correlation 
between the removal of the diseases of the body and the expiation of the sins of our 
souls. — J. J. G. 

Vers. 13 — 19. Parallel passages : Matt. x. 2 — i ; Luke vi 12— 19.— The choosing of 
the twelve. 1. The choice and its object. The Saviour ascends the mountain that 
was near at hand, probably Karun Hattin, " and calls to him whom he wished." At 
once they went off away (avi), leaving other things, and turning to him as their sole 
object. Of these he appointed, or ordained— though the original word is more simple, 
viz. " he made "—twelve for a threefold purpose : (1) to " be with him," to keep him 



144 THR GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. hi. 1—35. 

company, assisting him and sympathizing with him ; (2) to be his messengers to men, 
heralitiiig the good news of salvation; and (3) to alleviate miraculouslj human misery — 
curing diseases and expelling demons. 

II. The list of names. The order and meaning of the names require only • few 
remarks. The twelve are distributed into three classes. Simon, the Hearer, whom our 
Lord surnamed the Rock-man, heads the first class ; next to him were James, the son of 
Zebedee, and John his brother, both of whom were surnamed Boanerges, "Sons of 
Thunder," that is, hene (pa equivalent to e) regesh; and Andrew. The second class is headed 
by Philip ; then comes Bartholomew, which means the son of Tolmai, the word being a 
patronymic — in all probability the person meant was Nathanael, the proper name of uie 
same; also Matthew and Thomas. The third class begins with James the son of 
Alphseus ; then Judas, surnamed Thaddasus, or Lebbasus, the Courageous ; and Simon 
the Kauanite, that is, the Zealot, not a Canaanite ; wliile Judas Iscariot, that is, the man 
•of Kerioth, the traitor, is the last in every list. — J. J. Q. 

Vers. 20 — 30. Parallel passages: Matt. xii. 22 — 37; Luke xi. 14— 23.— ilftstoAera 
friends and malignant foes. 1. Mistaken friends. 1. The connection. Between the 
appointment of the apostles and the transactions here narrated several important matters 
intervened. There was the sermon on the mount, recorded in the Gospel of St. Matthew, 
«hs. V. — vii. ; and an abridgment or modification of the same repeated in the Gospel of 
St. Luke, ch. vi. 17 — 49. Kext followed the events recorded throughout the seventh 
chapter of St. Luke, and which were as follows : — The cure of the centurion's servant ; 
the restoration to life of the widow's son of Nain ; the message sent by John the 
Baptist ; the dinner in the house of Simon, with the anointing by a woman who had been 
a sinner. Previously to this last had been the doom pronounced on the impenitent 
cities, narrated by St. Matthew in ch. xi. towards the end ; the second circuit through 
■Galilee, of which we read in Luke viii., at the beginning ; while immediately 
before, and indeed leading to, the circumstances mentioned in this section was the 
healing of a blind and dumb demoniac. 2. The concourse. Oar Lord had just returned, 
not into the house of some believer, as Euthymius thinks ; nor into the house in which 
he made his abode while at Capernaum, as this meaning would require the article ; but 
more generally, " to home," as in ch. ii. 1. And no sooner is his return reported than 
he is followed by a great concourse of people. Again a crowd, as on several previous 
occasions, especially that mentioned in ch. ii. 2, when " there was no room to receive 
them, no, not so much as about the door," pressed after him. Such was the curiosity of 
the crowd, and so great their eagerness, that bo opportunity was allowed our Lord and 
his apostles to enjoy their ordinary repasts ; " they could not so much as eat bread." 
This rendering corresponds to that of the Peshito, which omits the second and 
strengthening negative, for, while in Greek a negative is neutralized by a subsequent 
vimpU negative of the same kind, it is continued and intensified by a following 
compound negative of the same kind. The meaning, therefore, is stronger, whether we 
read m<t« or lafii ; thus, " They were able, no, not (Mrs) to eat bread ;" or, stronger still, 
" They could not even (lUijSJ) eat bread," much less find leisure to attend to anything 
else : though, it may bft observed in passing, if niirt were the right reading, the meaning 
would rathe; be that they were neither able nor did eat bread. In fact, the crowd was 
«o great, so continuous, so obtrusive, that no time was allowed our Lord and his apostles 
for their ordinary and necessary meals. Prom this we learn that our Lord's popularity 
was steadily as well as rapidly increasing, and that the excitement, instead of 
diminishing, was daily, nay, hourly, intensifying. 3. The concern of our Lord's kinsfolk. 
Hearing of this wonderful excitement which the presence of Jesus was everywhere 
occasioning, his fiiends or kinsmen were alarmed by the circumstance ; and, dreading 
the effect of such excitement upon his physical constitution — fearing, no doubt, that he 
might be carried away by his enthusiasm and zeal beyond the measure of his bodily 
strength, and even to the detriment of his mental powers— our Lord's relations went 
forth to check his excessive efforts and repress his superabundant ardour. The 
«tatement is either general, that is to say, " they went forth," or it may be understood 
in the stricter sense of their coming out of their place of abode, probably Nazareth, or 
possibly Capernaum. 1'he expression, ol irop' ain-ov, according to ordinary usage, would 
nean persons sent by him or away from him, as oi irtuik to3 Nik/w, in Thucydides, if 



OH. III. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. 145 



" the messengers of Nicia.'!." But the expression cannot mean (1) his apostles, who though 
Bent out by him and selected for this purpose, as we read in ver. 14, were now with him 
in the house ; nor can it mean (2) his disciples, or those about him, for this would 
eonlbund the expression with oi nepl alnSy. It must, it appears, be taken to signify his 
kinsmen — the sense assigned to it by most commentators, ancient and modern. And, 
though this is a rare use of the expression, it is not quite without parallels, as for 
example in Susanna, ver. 33, lK\aiov Si ot -rap' atnrjs, " but her friemis wept ; " and in this 
Gospel, ch. V. 26, t4 wap' aurris wdvTa is " all the things from with her," that is, all her 
resources — " all her living," as we read in the parallel passage of St. Luke. 4. Their 
course of action. We have now to consider their course of action or mode of pro- 
oedure, and the object which they had in view. They went out to lay hold of him, and 
so (1) to put him under salutary restraint, if the literal meaning of supposed 
derangement be adhered to. It may indeed mean (2) to hold him back from such 
superhuman efforts, in consequence of their believing him to be in an unnatural and 
abnormal state of mind or body, or both. But, though the word rendered "he is 
beside himself" is often used in that sense, sometimes elliptioally as here and in 
2 Cor. V. 13, but mostly in conjunction with yov, or yvuiiSis, or ^piv&v, and so equivalent 
to vapcuppoyfiy, still it may be employed figuratively, and merely import that he was 
transported too far. What with the watchings of the preceding night, and the fastings 
of that morning, and his unceasing labours in addressing his newly chosen apostles, 
preaching to the people, and working miracles, all of which we learn, by a comparison 
with the sixth chapter of St. Luke, both mind and body must have been taxed to 
the utmost, the strain was excessive, they thought, and far too great to be long borne ; 
and 80 an earnest but friendly interference was deemed by them to be necessary. There 
is, however, (3) another view of the matter, which some prefer. They understand the 
word i^iiTTTi as equivalent to ^AetiroW/iTjo-e or ^ActirotJdJxrjire, and to denote fainting from 
bodily exhaustion, and consequently the object of his kinsfolk was to support and 
sustain him (icpoTiio-oi). But some resort to the still more questionable expedient of 
changing the object of the verb just mentioned, and so understanding (4) that his 
disciples went out to repress the crowd, for they (i.e. the disciples) said, " It [the crowd] 
is mad." This last (4) view is untenable ; the preceding one (3) is not well supported ; 
the one going before it (2) is plausible, but rather specious than sound ; while the 
first (1) alone, notwithstanding the difBculty it presents in connection with our Lord's 
relatives, is the plain and natural meaning of the expression. 5. Their confined 
notions of religion. It is painfully manifest that the kinsfolk of our Lord entertained 
very contracted and very commonplace, or rather indeed low, ideas of religion. They 
were ''ery imperfectly acquainted with the great object of Jesus' mission ; their notions 
of his work were of the crudest kind ; their faith, if at this period it existed at all, 
must have been in a very incipient state. Their anxiety at the same time for his 
safety, and their alarm at the public agitation and the probable upshot of that 
agitation, all combined to force on them the conclusion that he was on the border 
between fanaticism and frenzy, or that he had actually made the transition into the 
region of the latter. 6. A common experience. We find in this mistake no new or 
very strange experience. The Rev. Rowland Hill, on one occasion, strained his voice, 
raising it to the highest pitch, in order to warn some persons of impending danger, and 
so rescued them from peril. For this he was warmly applauded, as he deserved. But 
when he elevated his voice to a similar pitch in warning sinners of the error and evil of 
their ways, and in order to save their souls from a still greater peril, the same friends 
who before had praised him now pronounced him fool and fanatic. 

II. Malionant foes. 1. The charge of the scribes. The evangelist never sup- 
presses truth ; he keeps nothing back, however harsh or unnatural it may at first sight 
appear. Having shown the effect of the Saviour's ministry on his friends, he proceeds 
to exhibit the impression it made on his foes. A notable miracle had been performed, 
as we learn from St. Matthew's Gospel, ch. xii. 22, a blind and dumb dernoniao — sad 
complication — had been cured. Now, there are two ways in which men diminish the 
merit of a good quality, and destroy the credit of a noble action — denial is the one, 
and depreciation is the other. The scribes, or theologians, of the Pharisaic sect, had 
come down as emissaries from the metropolis, t» dog our Saviour's steps and destroy, u 
they could, his influence. Had denial of the miracle been possible, it is plain thuy 

ST. MARK. * 



146 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oil. in. 1--85. 

would have adopted that course ; but facts are stubborn things, and denial in the face 
of facts is impossible. The miracle was too plain, too palpable, and too public to 
admit denial. The next best thing for their nefarious purpose was depreciation or 
detraction. " He casteth out devils," they say — they could not deny this ; " but he hath 
Beelzebub, and in union (in') with him, or by the prince of the devils casteth he out 
devils," or rather " demons," as we have already seen. Beelzebub was the god of Ekron, 
and got this name from the supposed power which he possessed to ward off flies, like 
the Latin averrunci or the Greek iaroTp6iraMi, who were named averters, wbicti those 
words signify, as though they possessed the power of averting disease or pestilence 
from their worshippers. But the name Beelzebub was changed, contemptuously and 
insultingly no doubt, into Beelzebul, the god of dung ; nor is the afBuity between the 
god of flies and the god of the dunghill di£Scult to discover, while the filth of idolatry 
is not obscurely implied. Now, this name was given to the evil one, whose proper 
name is either Satan the adversary, in Hebrew, or Diabolos the accuser, in Greek. 
Other names he also bears, such as " prince of darkness," " prince of the power of the air," 
" the tempter," " the God of this world," " the old serpent," " the dragon," and Belial. 
All of these, more or less indicate his hostility to God and man, his opposition to all 
good, and instigation to all evil. 2. Confutation. The Saviour refutes this charge by four 
different arguments. The first argument is an appeal to common sense, the second is 
ad aisurdwm, the third is ad hominem, and the fourth from human experience. The 
first (1) points out the fact that the stability of a kingdom, or the success of a family 
depends on unity and peace ; as the proverb has it, " Concordia res parvee crescunt, 
discordia maximsa dilabuntur." So the kingdom or family of demons would perish by 
dissensions. Again (2), " if Satan cast out Satan " — not " if one Satan cast out another 
Satan," which is the rendering of some, but, " if Satan cast himself out," his policy is sui- 
cidal. He had by his demons taken possession of men's bodies, and thereby exercised his 
power over his victims ; but if he countenanced or combined with the Saviour in casting 
out these demons, he was destroying his own subjects and diminishing his own power. 
Thus his kingdom, like many another and many a better, " could not stand," or rather 
" could not be made to stand " (aroBriyai), or, as the other synoptists express it, " it is 
brought to desolation" (^pti/xoSTu) ; and, in that case, "house falletb against h3use,'' ac- 
cording to Meyer's rendering of the parallel expression in St. Luke, or, as it stands in the 
Authorized Version, " a house divided against a house falleth." "The conditional propo- 
sition in reference to kingdom and house is of that kind which denotes probable 
contingency, not a mere supposition; but that applied to Satan rising up against 
himself implies possibility without any expression of uncertainty. Why is this? 
How can we account for this somewhat striking difference ? Because in the former 
case civil commotions may distract a kingdom, and an unhappy feud may divide a 
family or household. Such things have occurred ; and it is likely enough that they 
may occur again, and so their occurrence comes within the limits of probability. But, 
according to the supposition or imputation of the scribes, the thing has already 
actually occurred, and Satan has risen up against himself, and is divided. Such 
suicidal policy it would be utterly absurd to attribute to a power so subtle as Satan, 
unless, indeed, he be supposed to be possessed of less than ordinary worldly prudence. 
He now turns (3) to another line of argument which comes home to them more closely. 
This argument, though omitted by St. Mark, is found in both St. Matthew and St. Luke, 
and is the following : — " And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do yoiir 
children ['sons,' in St. Luke] cast them out?" This they assumed to do, as we leam 
from Acts xix. 13, 14, " Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them 
to call over them which had evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, We 
adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth. And there were seven sons of one Sceva, 
a Jew, and chief of the priests, which did bo." Our Lord, in his reasoning and for 
the purpose of his argument, employs the fact of the assumption which they made, 
without necessarily admitting the reality of their accomplishing what they pretended. 
If they were asked by what power or whose aid their sons cast out or took upon them to 
cast out devils? by Beelzebub or by the Spirit? he knew well what their answer would 
be, and that they would not acknowledge their children to be leagued with Satan in 
easting out devils, but that they would contend for the co-operation of Divine power. 
U, then, OUT Lord would say, you impute that power which I exert to Beelzebub, and 



•0H. in. 1— «5.] The gospel according to ST. MARK. 1« 

that same power of which they claim the exercise toGJod, they will be your judges, and 
condemn you of hostility to me, while you are guilty of such partiality to themselves. 
There was no escaping from this argument. But he urges (4) yet another argument 
—one from human experience: How can I rob Satan of his subjects until I kay* 
conquered him? And how can 1, besides, distribute the spoils of victory unless tlut 
conquest bo complete ? His enemies had accused him of being in alliance with Satan ; 
the argues on the contrary that, instead of being an ally of Satan, he has made open 
war on him and bound him, invaded his dominions, subdued his subjects, having fint 
overpowered their prince. 

HI. PiOTUBK OF Satan. 1. His power. He is the strong man. He is strong In hit 
princedom. He is "prince of the power of the air ; ' that is, chieftain of those powerful 
spirits that have their residence in the air. He is strong in his power to destroy, and 
hence he is called ApoUyon, or Abuddon, the destroyer. By his powerful temptatioM 
he destroyed the happiness of our first parents and ruined their race. He is strong in 
the power of cunning. Oh, how subtle, how insidious, how cunning, in his work of 
-destruction I " We are not ignorant," says the apostle, " of his devices." He is strong 
An the power of calumny, and consequently he is called " the accuser of the brethren," 
while his accusations are founded on falsehood. He maligned the patriarch of Uz, 
upright and perfect though he was, misrepresenting that good man's principles and 
ipractice and patience. He is strong in the sovereignty which he exercises over his 
subjects, and strong in the multitude of those subjects, leading thousands, yea, millions, 
of men and women captive at his will, and enslaving them with his hellish yoke. He 
is strong in the fearfully despotic power with which he controls the souls and bodies of 
^his slaves; and every sinner is his slave, and, what is worse, a willing slave, so that, 
though we urge them by the tenderest motives, address to them the most solemn 
warnings, allure them by the most precious promises, and appeal to them by the moat 
valuable interests, thousands reject all our overtures, preferring to go on and continue, 
to live and die, in slavish subjection to the complete control and terrible power of 
Satan — this strong man. 2, His palace and property. St. Luke is fuller in hif 
-description here. He speaks of his complete armour, his panoply ; he speaks of his 
palace, the other synoptists speak of his house ; he speaks of his goods and of those 
goods as spoils, the other two speak of his vessels. They all tell us of one stronger than 
the strong one. St. Lnke again tells us that, though the strong man is armed oop-A- 
,pie, and stands warder of his own palace, and keeps his goods in security, yet that 
he who is stronger than the strong one, having effected an entrance, overcomes him, 
strips him of his armour in which he reposed such confidence, and distributes his spoils; 
while the other two Evangelists tell us that, having entered the strong man's dwellins, 
he binds the strong man, and plunders, taking as a prey both his house and his vesseu 
— the container and the contained. The groundwork of the description is to be found, 
perhaps, in Isa. xlix. 24, 25, " Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawfiu 
■ captive delivered? But thus saith the Lord, Even the captives of the mighty shall ba 
taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered : for I will contend with him 
that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children." But what are we to under- 
stand by these particulars? The strong man is Satan, the stronger than the strong 
man is our blessed Saviour ; this world is his palace or house ; his goods in general and 
vessels in particular which are made spoils of are inferior demons according to some, 
or men according to others, rather both, as Chrysostom explains the meaning when he 
says, " Not only are demons vessels of the devil, but men also who do his work." In 
a still narrower sense, man or man's heart is the palace, and its powers and affectioni 
are the goods. The heart of man was once a palace, a princely dwelling, worthy of and 
intended for the habitation of God. But that palace is now in ruins. We have gazed 
on a ruined palace; and oh, how sad the sight I Its chambers are dismantled, its 
columns are prostrate, its arches are broken ; fragments of the once stately fabric are 
■scattered about. Ivy twines round its ruined walls, grass grows in its halls, weeds and 
nettles cover the courtyard. Owls look out of the apertures that once were windows, or 
hoot in melancholy mood to their fellows. Mounds of earth or heaps of rubbish occupy 
the apartments once grand and gorgeous. The whole is a sad though striking pictur* 
"«f decay, desolation, and death. Just such a place is the heart of man. It was • 
..palace once; it is a palace still, but the palace is now in ruins, and over these ruina 



148 THE GOSPBL ACCOEDINa TO ST. MARK. [ch. in. 1—35 

Satan rules and reigns. But what are the goods, or vessels, or spoils t If the unrenewed 
heart itself be the palace where Satan resides, and which he has made his dwelling, 
then the powers of that heart — for the Hebrews referred to the heart what we attribute 
to the head — ^its faculties so noble, its feelings so tender, its affections so precious, are 
Satan's goods, for he uses them for his own purposes; they are his vessels, for he 
•mploys them in his work and service ; they are his spoils, for he has usurped authority 
over them. His, no doubt, they are by right of conquest, if might ever makes right. He 
is not only a possessor, but wields over them the power of a sovereign. He is enthroned 
in the sinner's heart, and exalted to a chief place in his affections. Accordingly, he 
receives the homage of his intellect, he claims and gets the ready service of his will, hi 
controls the actions of the life ; and thus over head and heart and life he sways his 
Bceptre, exercising unlimited and incessant control. To one faculty or feeling he says, 
" Come," and it cometh ; to another power or principle of action he says, " do," and it 
goeth. 3, Bia possession, and how he keeps it. In the heart of man there are what 
Ezekiel calls " chambers of imagery." These chambers of imagery in the human heart 
are of themselves dark enough and dreary enough ; but Satfin, if we yield to him and 
resist him not, for he cannot control us without our consent or coerce us against oui 
consent, will curtain those chambers with darkness — spiritual darkness. As long as 
he can keep us in the darkness of ignorance — ignorance of God, of Christ, of the way 
of salvation, of ourselves, of our slavery, of our responsibility, of our danger, and of our 
duty — he is secure in his possession. " The god of this world hath blinded the minds 
of them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the 
image of God, should shine unto them." By subtlety and stratagem, by wiles and 
wickedness, he holds possession of those chambers, actually furnishing them with his 
own hand, while the furniture thus supplied consists of deltuions — strong delusions, 
sinful delusions. Even the pictures on the walls are painted by him ; scenes base and 
bad, wicked and abominable, are there portrayed to pervert the judgment and incline 
it to what is perverse, to debase the imagination with visions foul and filthy, to inflame 
the affections with objects indelicate and impure. Another effectual way in which 
Satan holds possession of the palace of man's heart is by keeping it under the influence 
of sense. He occupies men with the things of sense and sight, to the neglect of things 
spiritual and eternal ; he employs them with material objects and worldly interests ; he 
amuses them with the trifles of the present time, to the neglect of the interests of the 
never-ending future ; he engrosses our attention with worldliness, vanity, and pride — 
things sensual, earthly, and perishable ; thoughts about the body and its wants are 
pressed on men, to the neglect of the soul and its necessities. Such questions as. 
" What shall I eat, or what shall I drink, or wherewithal shall I be cl'/theu ? " arn 
ever present, while the vastly more important question, " What must I do to be 
saved?" is lost sight of or left in abeyance. Present profits and worldly pursuits 
absorb attention, to the neglect of present responsibilities and future realities ; the 
pleasures of sin, short-lived and unsatisfactory as they are sure to prove, divert men's 
thoughts from those " pleasures which are at God's right hand for evermore." But, as 
the Word of God warns us of Satan's devices that we may be on our guard against 
them, it may not be amiss to pay the more particular attention to them. Another 
way by which he holds possession of the palace of what Bunyan calls Mansoul is 
dela;/. This is a favourite method, and one specially successful with the young. 
" Time enough yet," l^atan whispers into the young ear, and the inexperienced heart 
of youth is too ready to believe the falsehood. He persuades them into the belief that 
it is too soon for such grave subjects, too early to engage in such solemn reflections. 
Many other and even better opportunities, they are induced to think, will be afforded ; 
they are yet young and strong, and with a keen zest for youthful pleasures, and the 
world is all before them. Every year the delay becomes more difficult to break away 
from, and the delusion the more dangerous; and while the difiSculty as well as the 
danger incnases, the strength of the sinner, or his power to overcome the suggestions of 
Satan, decreases A more convenient season is expected, and thus procrastination becomes, 
as usual, " the thief of time ; year after year it steals till all is past, and to the mercies 
of a moment leaves the vast concerns of an eternal scene." But to delay succeeds at 
length another means by which he keeps possession, and that other means, in one respect 
tlie opposite, is dupair. Thus extremes meet. Satan had long flattered them with the 



m in. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MA!tK. 14S 

delusive fancy that it was too soon ; now he drives them to the desperate notion that it is 
too Uito. Once he flattered them with the false hope of a long and happy future, with 
death in the remote distance, and with means of grace not only ample but abundant, 
and power at pleasure to turn to God ; now he tortures them with the thought that the 
day of grace is gone, irrevocably gone. Once he made them believe that the time to 
break up their fallow ground and sow to themselves in righteousness had not yei come ; 
now, on the contrary, he induces the belief that " the harvest is past, the summer ended, 
and Aeir souls not saved. Once he deluded them with the thought that sin was only 
a trifle, and they were willing to lay to their soul the false unction that sin was too 
small a matter to incur the wrath of Heaven ; now he prompts the despairing thought 
that their sin is too great to be forgiven, and their guilt too heinous to be ever blotted 
out. 4. The peace he produces. AH the while he produces a sort of peace ; all the 
while " his goods are in peace ; " all the while sinners are promising themselves " peace, 
peace ; but there is no peace,'' saith God, " to the wicked." Satan may promise, and 
even produce, a kind of peace ; but that peace is perilous — it is a false peace. He may 
lead them into a sort of calm, but it is the lull before the storm ; he may amuse them 
with a species of quietude, but it is the sure forerunner of the fast-approaching hurri- 
cane. The only true peace is that which the Spirit bestows — a " peace that p»sseth 
all understanding," a peace which the world with all its wealth cannot give, and with 
all its wickedness cannot take away. This peace is compared to a river : " Then shall 
thy peace be as a river" — ^a river broad and beautiftil, glancing in the bright sunshine 
of the heaven above, and reflecting the varied beauties along its banks; a river 
deepening and widening at every reach, bearing health and fertility throughout its 
course, broadening out and expanding at last into the boundless, shoreless ocean of 
everlasting bliss. 5. Satan's defeat and dispossession. Though Satan be strong, there 
is One stronger than he— One "mighty to save," even from his grasp, and "lead 
captivity captive." That stronger One is the mighty Saviour, whose mission of mercy 
was meant to take the prey from the mighty, to bruise Ms head and destroy his 
works, and so rescue man from the thraldom of Satan and the dominion of sin. Him- 
self mightier than the mighty, he is " able to save to the uttermost all that come unto 
God by him." St. Luke informs us of the manner in which he effects the great 
emancipation. He comes upon him (iveMim) both suddenly and by way of hostile 
attack. He comes upon him suddenly, and so takes him by surprise. Satan's goods 
are meantime in peace, and he fancies he has it all his own way, and that for ever. 
'I 'he Saviour comes upon the heart enslaved by Satan with the sword of the Spirit, 
which is the word and truth of God, and immediately the chains are burst asunder 
and the shackles fall off. Henceforth it enjoys that freedom with which Christ makes 
his people free. He comes upon the sinner's soul with the power of the Spirit, con- 
vincing of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. The Spirit takes of the things of 
Christ and shows them to the sinner, and so the truth is brought home to the heart 
and conscience ; not in word only, " but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in 
much assurance." He comes upon the sinner, whose powers lay dormant, or rather 
" dead in trespasses and sins," and he awakens the powers that thus lay dormant, and 
quickens the soul, it may be long dead, into new spiritual life, and makes it " alive unto 
God through Christ Jesus." But with life comes light. Soon as the life-giving Spirit 
operates upon the mass erewhile chaotic and dead, living forces are developed, and light 
springs up ; the light of the glorious gospel of the grace of God shines through all 
that heart, however dead and dark it had been before. Every soul thus awakened, 
enlightened, quickened, and truly converted to God, is a victory of the Saviour over 
Satan— a trophy snatched from the strong one by him who thus proves himself stronger 
than the strong man. Every such one is evidence of Satan's defeat, and proves the 
destruction of his power, as also his expulsion from his usurped dominion— a thorough 
and blessed dispossession of the spirit of evil. 6. Satan's arnwur. His offensive 
weapons are his snares, his devices, his wiles, his lies, his lusts; of all these we read in 
Scripture But he has other armour; and, as panoply has its root in »»xo», or thing 
moved about," as the shield, from im, according to Donaldson, the reference^ may 
rather he to defensive armour. The parts of this armour may be regarded as consistmg 
of our ignorance of God and hatred of him, our unbelief and ungodliness, hardness of 
heart »nd unricrhteousness. Theophylact explains Satan's armour to be made of om 



160 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINa TO ST. MARK. [oh. m. I— Sfv 

lini tn general ; his words are Tlivra ri efSi) r^t kitaprlat, atSTii yap Sir\a rov Aia;8^\av, 
equivalent to " All forms of sin, for this is the arms of the devil." By such armour ha 
defends his possessions and maintains his interest in them; by such armour he repels 
all attacks on his goods, opposing the impressions of the Divine Word, the influences 
of the Holy Spirit, and the leadings of Ood's providence. Christ captures his arms 
when he enables us to guard against his devices and wiles, to avoid his snares, to dis- 
credit hia lies, shun his lusts, and resist his temptations. Further, he takes from Satan- 
the armour in which he places such confidence when he breaks the power of sin in the 
soul, opens men's eyes to the perils that surround them, regenerates the heart, and 
renews the life, humbles their spirit, rectifies their errors, checks their corruption, and,. 
in a word, braises Satan under their feet. 7. Division of the spoils. This is usually 
the consequence of conquest. When Satan led the sinner captive and made him his 
prey, he took him with all he is and all he has for his spoil, employing all his endow- 
ments of mind and energies of body, his time, his talents, his health, his influence, his 
estate, small or great, in his service. But again, in the day of the sinner's conyersion 
to Gbd, not only is Satan defeated and dispossessed, Christ recovers the long-lost 
possession — all of it for himself. He regains those energies and endowments, that 
time, those talents, that influence ; he restores all to their right use and to the great 
end for which they were intended. The whole man — body, soul, and spirit — is brought 
back to the service of his Maker, and every thought becomes subject to the law of 
Jesus Christ. Further, the Saviour not only regains those spoils and recovers them 
for himself, but also, like a great and good Captain, he divides them among his fol- 
lowers. In every case when he defeats, disarms, and dispossesses Satan, Christ shares 
with his soldiers — his servants — the spoils consequent on victory. The sinner thu» 
rescued is blessed " with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ Jesus ; " but 
he is not only blessed in his own soul, he is made a blessing to all around. He 
becomes a blessing to friend and fellow-man. In this way the spoil is divided and the 
blessing distributed. He becomes a proof of Divine power and a pattern of purity to 
an ungodly world ; while his talents, be they many or few — ten, or five, or one — are 
employed for the good of Christ's Church, " for the perfecting of the saints, for the edifi- 
cation of the body of Christ." To sinners he serves as a beacon-light to warn them of th* 
sunken rocks or breakers ahead, and to direct their course into the haven of heavenly 
rest. A curious and not uninteresting exposition by Theoph^lact of the distributios 
of the spoils is to this effect, that men, being the spoils first taken by Satan, and then 
retaken by Christ, the Saviour distributes them, giving one to one angel and another 
to another angel as a faithful guardian, that, instead of the demon that lorded it over 
him, an angel may now have him in safe keeping — of course, in order to be his guide 
and guard him. 8. Practical lessons, (1) The sinner still in the power of the strong 
man should cry mightily to Christ to rescue him from such base servitude, and 
deliver him from such dreadful drudgery. He, and he alone, can free him from 
enslavement, because he is stronger than the strong man. (2) The saint already 
delivered, while still to be on his guard against Satan, has nothing to fear from his 
assaults. He can never again regain possession, for he is vanquished, and the means of 
retrieving his lost possessions and forfeited power are for ever wrested from him. If he 
goes out of himself without being dislodged, he is sure to return and resume possession 
with increased forces and power, as the parable which follows in St. Luke teaches. (3) 
The believer is bound to bless his deliverer, which he may suitably do in the worda^ 

"Thou hast, O Lord most glnriouo, 

Ascended up on high ; 
And in triumph victorious led 

Captive captivity. . . . 
Blc'ss'd be the Lord, who is to ua 

Of our salvation God ; 
Who daily with his benefits 

Us plenteously doth load." 

C4) Neutrality in thli eanse is criminal. If we an not on Christ's side, oontendiu 
agaiast Satan, we evince our unwillingness that his kingdom should be destroyuil ; and 
if not engaged in seeking to bring subjects into Christ's kingdom, aa a shei^jhard 



Oh. m. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDIXG TO ST. MARK. 161 



eollects hta flock and pens them in the fold, we are scattering the sheep away from and 
leaving them without the place of safety. 

IV. The blasphemy against the Holt Ghost. 1. Patristic explanatum$ of thin 
sin. Some have understood it of apostasy in time of persecution. This was the opinion 
of Cyprian (a.d. 248), who says, in ' Epist.' xvi., that " It was a very great crime which 
persecution compelled men to commit, as they themselves know who have committed 
it, inasmuch as our Lord and Judge has said, ' Whosoever shall confess me before men, 
him will I confess before my Father who is in heaven. But he that denieth mo, him 
will I also deny.' And again, ' All sins and blasphemies shall be forgiven to the sons 
of men : but he that blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost, shall not have forgiveness, 
but is guilty of eternal sin ' {reus est oeterni peccati)." Some understand it of the 
denial of the divinity of our Lord, as Athanasius (a.d. 326), who says that " the 
Pharisees in the Saviour's time, and the Arians in our days, running into the same mad- 
ness, denied the real Word to be incarnate, and ascribed the works of the Godhead to 
the devil and his angels, and therefore justly undergo the punishment which is due to 
this impiety, without remission. For they put the devil in the place of Gk>d, and 
imagiHed the works of the living and true God to be nothing more than the works of 
the devil." And elsewhere the same Father says, " They who spake against Christ, 
considering him only as the Son of man, were pardonable, because in the beginning of the 
gospel the world looked upon him only as a prophet, not as God, but as the Son of 
man : but they who blasphemed his divinity after his works had demonstrated him to 
be God, had no forgiveness, so long as they continued in this blasphemy ; but if they 
repented they might obtain pardon : for there is no sin unpardonable with God to them 
who truly and worthily repent." Others again have understood it to consist in the 
denial of the divinity of the Holy Ohost, Thus Epiphanius (a.d. 368) charged with 
this sin the Macedonian heretics, because they opposed the Godhead of the Holy Spirit, 
making him a mere creature. In like manner Ambrose (a.d. 374) accused these same 
heretics of blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, because they denied his divinity, 

2, The two most important patristic authorities on this subject. These Jvre Chrysos- 
tom (a.d. 388) among the Greek Fathers, and Augustine (a.d. 396) of the Latin Fathers ; 
both near the close of the fourth century. Ths former on the nature of the sin itself 
says, " For though you say that you know me not, you are surely not ignorant of that 
also, that to expel demons and cure diseases are the work of the Holy Spirit. Not only, 
then, do you insult me, but the Holy Spirit also. Therefore your punishment is inevi- 
table both here and hereafter." Again, in reference to the unpardondblenen of this sin, 
he says, " ' Ye have said many things against me — that I am a deceiver, that I am an 
opponent of God. These things I forgive you on your repentance, and I do not exact 
punishment of you j but the blasphemy of the Holy Spirit shall not be forgiven even 
to the penitent.' And how could this have reason, for truly even this sin was forgiven 
to persons repenting ? Many, then, of those who said these things believed afterwards, 
and all was forgiven them. What, then, does he mean ? That this sin above all is least 
capable of pardon. Why at all? Because they were ignorant who Christ was; but of 
the Holy Spirit they had had sufiSoient proof. For truly the prophets spake by him 
what they did speak, and all in the old dispensation had had abundant knowledge oi 
him. What he means then is this : ' Grant it, you stumble at me because of the garb of 
flesh I have assumed ; can you also say about the Holy Spirit that you are ignorant of 
him ? Therefore this blasphemy shall not be forgiven you ; both here and there you 
shall suffer," punishment,' " Further on he proceeds to say, " For truly some men are 
punished both here and there; others only here; others only there; while others 
neither here nor there. Here and there, as these very persons (iji. the Pharisees), for 
truly both here they suffered punishment when they endured those irremediable suffer- 
ings at the capture of their city ; and there they shall undergo the most severe punish- 
ment, as the inhabitants of Sodom, and as many others. But there only, as that rich 
man when tortured in flames was not master of even a drop of water. Some only here, 
OS the person who had committed fornication among the Corinthians. Others again, 
neither here nor there, as the apostles, as the prophets, and as the blessed Job ; for what 
they suffered did not belong to punishment, but was exercises and conflicts," The 
blasphemy against the Holy Spirit is, according to Chrysostom, greater than the sin 
against the Son of man, and, though not absolutely irremisgible to such as repent, yet in 



162 THE GOSPEL AOCOKDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. m. 1—35 

the absence of such timely repen tance it will he punished both here and hereafter. Augus- 
tine has several references to this sin, but his opinion of the matter may be briefly 
summed up in continued resistance to the influeuces of the Holy Spirit by insuperable 
hardness of heart, and in perseverance in obduracy and impenitence to the last. Thus 
in his Commentary on Romans he says, " That man sins against the Holy Spirit who, 
despairing or deriding and despising the preaching of grace by which sins are 
v/ashed away, and of peace by which we are reconciled to God, refuses to repent of his 
sins, and resolves that he must go on hardening himself in a certain impious and fatal 
sweetness of them, and persists therein to the end." He further insists that neither 
pagans, nor Jews, nor heretics, nor schismatics, however they may have opposed the 
Holy Spirit before baptism, were shut out by the Church from that sacrament in 
case they truly repented; nor after baptism in case of falling into sin, or resisting 
the Spirit of God, were they debarred from restoration to pardon and peace on repent- 
ance, and that even those whom our Lord charged with this blasphemy might repent 
and betake themselves to the Divine mercy. " What else remains," he asks, " but 
that the sin against the Holy Spirit, which our Lord says is neither forgiven in this 
world nor in that which is to come, must be understood to be no other than persever- 
ance in malignity and wickedness with despair of the indulgence and mercy of God? 
For this is to resist the grace and peace of the Spirit of which we speak." 

3. Modern expositions of this sin. Some of these reproduce or nearly so the inter- 
pretations of the ancients. They may in the main he divided into three classes. The 
first class consists of those who, like Hammond, Tillotson, Wetstein, understand the sin 
in question to be the diabolical calumny of the Pharisees, in ascribing to the power of 
Satan the miracles which the Savionr by the Spirit given him without measure per- 
formed. Here was evidently the mighty power of God, but these men, maliciously, 
wantonly, and wickedly, as also presumptuously and blasphemously, pronounced the 
miracle just wrought before their eyes and in their presence to be an effect produced by 
the evil one. The connection instituted between the twenty-ninth and thirtieth verses 
of this third chapter of St. Mark by the word Sti, corresponding to the parallel Sick toSto of 
St. Matthew, and the imperfect ^Keyoy, equivalent to " th ey kept saying," are both in favour 
of this interpretation. Under this first class are several modifications, such as that 
which proceeds on the supposed distinction between " Son of man " and " Son of God," 
as though he said that whosoever spake a word against Jesus as the Son of man, having 
his divinity shrouded and veiled in his humanity, might obtain forgiveness ; but blas- 
phemy against him as the Son of God, evidencing his divinity by miracles, could not 
obtain forgiveness. Another modification understands our Lord's warning the Pharisees 
that they were fast approaching an unpardonable sin by wickedly rejecting the Son of 
man as a Saviour; that one step further — one other blasphemy, that of the Spirit who, 
if not then, might hereafter reveal this, or a coming. Saviour unto them, would deprive 
them of the means and agent and so of the hnpe of salvation, and consequently of 
pardon. Yet another modification is that of (ilrotius, following in the steps of Chrysos- 
tom, to the effect that it is easier for any or all sins to obtain forgiveness than that this 
calumny should be pardoned ; and that it will be severely punished both in the present 
and coming age. The second class, to which Whitby, Doddridge, and Macknight 
belong, holds that the Pharisees, by their conduct on this particular occasion or at the 
time then present, were not guilty of the sin referred to, and in fact that the sin against 
the Holy Ghost could not be committed while Christ still abode on earth, and before his 
ascension ; because the Spirit was not yet given. They hold, therefore, that after our 
Lord's resurrection and ascension, when he would send down the Holy Ghost to attest 
his mission, and when his supernatural gifts and miraculous operations would furnish 
incontestable proofs of almighty power, any such calumny or blasphemy uttered 
against the Spirit then would be unpardonable. The reason was plain, because the Son 
of man, while he was clothed in human flesh, and his divinity shrouded from human 
Bight, and while his work on earth was not yet finished, might be slandered by persons 
unwittingly, or, according to the Scripture phrase, "ignorantly in unbelief;" but once 
the Holy Spirit had come down, and shed the light of heaven over the events of the 
Saviour's life from the cradle to the cross, and had illumined with glory unspeakable 
the scenes of Gethsemane and Calvary and Olivet, making plain to every willing 
taind the momentous import of all those marvellous transactions, the blasphemy of the 



«. ni 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST, MARK. 161 

Spirit could not then be in ignorance or for lack of sufficient demonstration ; but pre- 
•umptuous against light and against knowledge, from sheer malevolence and unaccount- 
able malijjnity. The Pharisees were preparing for this — they were approaching the 
brink of this fearful abyss, and our Lord warns them back before it was possible for 
them to take the fatal plunge, and involve themselves in ruin without remedy. A third 
class of interpreters generalizes the sin in question in much the san^e way as we have 
seen Augustine do, and resolves it into continued resistance and obstinate opposition to 
the grace of the gospel, impenitently and unbelievingly persisted in till the end. This 
is the view which Dr. Chalmers elaborates with great eloquence and power in his ser- 
mon on " Sin against the Holy Ghost." In that sermon we read as follows : — " A man 
may shut against himself all the avenues of reconciliation. There is nothing mysterious 
in the kind of sin by which the Holy Spirit is tempted to abandon him to that state in 
which there can be np forgiveness and no return unto God. It is by a movement of 
conscience within him, that the man is made sensible of sin, that he is visited with 
the desire of reformation, that he is given to feel his need both of mercy to pardon, and 
of grace to help him ; in a word, that he is drawn unto the Saviour, and brought into 
that intimate alliance with him by faith which brings down upon him both acceptance 
witb. the Father and all the power of a new and constraining impulse to the way of 
ebedience. But this movement is a suggestion of the Spirit of God, and, if it be resisted 
by any man, the Spirit is resisted. The God who offers to draw him unto Christ is 
resisted. The man refuses to believe because his deeds are evil ; and by every day of 
perseverance in these deeds, the voice which tells him of their guilt and urges him to 
abandon them is resisted ; and thus the Spirit ceases to suggest, and the Father, from 
whom the Spirit proceedeth, ceases to draw, and the inward voice ceases to remon- 
strate — and all this because their authority has been so often put forth and so often 
turned away. This is the deadly offence which has reared an impassable wall against 
tls« return of the obstinately impenitent. This is the blasphemy to which no forgive- 
ness can be granted, because, in its very nature, the man who has come this length feels 
no movement of conscience towards that ground on which alone forgiveness can be 
awarded to him, and where it is never refused even to the very worst and most malig- 
nant of human iniquities. This is the sin against the Holy Ghost. It is not peculiar 
to any one age. It does not lie in any one unfathomable mystery. It may be seen at 
this day in thousands and thousands more, who, by that most familiar and most 
frequently exemplified of all habits, a habit of resistance to a sense of duty, have at 
length stifled it altogether, and driven their inward monitor away from them, and have 
sunk into a profound moral lethargy, and so will never obtain forgiveness — not because 
forgiveness is ever refused to any who repent and believe the gospel, but because 
they have made their faith and their repentance impracticable. . • . The whole mys- 
teriousness of this sin against the Holy Ghost is thus done away. Grant him the office 
with which he is invested in the Word of God, even the office of instigating the 
conscience to all its reprovals of sin, and to all its admonitions of repentance ; and then, 
if ever you witnessed the case of a man whose conscience had fallen into a profound and 
irrecoverable sleep, or, at least, had lost to such a degree its power of control over him, 
that he stood out against every engine which was set up to bring him to the faith and 
repentance of the New Testament, — behold in such a man a sinner against conscience 
to such a woeful extent that conscience had given up its direction of him ; or, in other 
words, a sinner against the Holy Ghost to such an extent that he had let down the office 
of warning him away from that ground of danger and of guilt on which he stood so 
immovably posted." There are some modifications of this view which it may be well 
to notice. One is that which makes the sin against the Holy Ghost to be resistance to 
conscience as the voice of God in the soul — the voice which the Holy Spirit employs in 
testifying to truth and goodness, and in reprobating sin and recommending the Stviour, 
Another modification is that which makes blasphemy against the Holy Ghost to con- 
sist in the expression of malignant unbelief of, and wilful apostasy from, the truth of 
God, and that, because it is the Holy Ghost which illumines the understanding and 
applies the truth to the heart of believers. 

4. Bemarht on the foregoing theories. In our observations on the foregoing theories 
we do not deem it prudent dogmatically to determine which of them is the correct one 
In a case where such diversities of opinion have prevailed, even among the ablest 



154 THE GOSPEL ACCORDIxa TO ST. MARK. cu. in. 1—38. 

scholars and the most eloquent theologians, it is better that every one sbovld be per- 
suaded in his own mind. We may, however, be permitted to state that view which 
has recommended itself most to our mind, and some grounds for the preference to which 
we think it entitled. The view held by the first class above mentioned appears to ua 
on the whole the most tenable, for (1) it is most in harmony with the context, as it 
itftnds both in this Gospel and that of St. Matthew. The Pharisees had witnessed an 
undeniable miracle in the cure of a blind and dumb demoniac ; but, instead of acknow- 
ledging the finger of God in the miraculous cure, they ascribed it to complicity or 
collusion with the power of darkness. This was a gratuitous and malicious calumny ; 
it was a sin of speech as well as of thought — a blasphemy, in fact, in the literal sense. 
The form whidh the sin is represented as taking is that of speech, as appears plainly 
from the contrast between speaking a word against the Sou of man and speaking 
against the Holy Ghost. Again, (2) the allegation of the second class, that the Holy 
Ghost was not given till after the Ascension, though quite true in reference to the 
disciples, does not apply to the Master, to whom the Spirit was given without measure 
from the first. Further, (3) the view of the third class, so ably advocated by Dr. 
Chalmen and many others, and which in substance was that held by Augustine, 
appears too wide in extent and too general in its character; whereas the blasphemy 
against the Holy Spirit is something peculiar and special, and of rare occurrence. 
Besides, if the sin in question consisted in obstinate resistance to the gospel, continued 
till that resistance culminated in final unbelief, it would be little, if anything, difierent 
from sin in general which, by obstinate continuance therein, becomes unpardonable, 
and that, not from lack of cleansing power in the blood of Christ, nor firom any peculiar 
aggravation, but solely on account of continued persistence therein. 

5. Perilous approximations to this sin. That many have been unduly exercised and 
harassed by fancied guiltiness of this .sin, is certain ; that some have despaired or become 
melancholy on this account, is credible ; that many have been driven to insanity by it 
we can scarcely believe. To any who are troubled with anxious though ts about the mat ter 
we may say that, according to the theories of the first and second classes, they could 
not have committed the same sin in kind — as they did not, like the Pharisees, see the 
miracles wrought by our Lord, nor did they witness the supernatural operations of the 
Spirit after his descent at Pentecost — whatever the degree of their sin may have been ; 
while, with respect to the third, the sin being that of continued resistance, they have only 
to abandon their dogged opposition, the abandonment of which their very anxiety proves 
to have become already an accomplished fact. To all, of whatever class of opinion, 
who are apprehensive — earnestly apprehensive and afraid of having committed this sin 
— their very uneasiness on that score is proof of their guiltlessness of the fancied crime, 
for these very upbraidings of conscience prove incompatibility with commission of this 
sin. At the same time, there are approximations to this sin which we should most 
carefully guard against. A rejection of the truth of Scripture wilfully persisted in ; or 
triSing with the operations of the Holy Spirit in the heart ; or ridicule of religion and 
opposition to its ordinances in general ; or hostility to Christianity in particular ; or 
contempt, malevolence, and slander directed against Ood and the things of God, or 
against the Church and people of God ; or mockery of sacred things ; or blasphemous 
suggestions harboured and indulged in — each of these involves an awfulness of crimi- 
nality and a fearfulness of guilt that b«token a considerable similarity or close approxi- 
mation to the heinousness of the unpardonable sin. We do not affirm that any of these 
is actually that lin, but only such an approach to the verge of the precipice as is 
sufBcient to startle men to a sense of danger, and drive them bnck before they venture 
a step further. Alford, who makes the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost to be a state 
of wilful, determined opposition to the present power of the Holy Ghost, in which state 
or at least approaching very near to which the act of the Pharisees proved them to be, 
compares, among other Scriptures, Heb. vi. 4 — 8 and x. 26, 27. But the purport of 
the last-cited Scripture is that, in case the sacrifice of Christ is rejected, there is no 
other sacrifice available, all others having been done away, and consequently no other 
means of escape from the wrath of God ; while the former passage refers to apostasy 
so aggravated as to render restoration impossible, because the persons guilty of it feU 
away in spite of the clearest possible evidence to the truth of the Christian faith. 
Another Scripture frequently compared with that before us is 1 John v. 16. The sia 



OH. !▼. 1—41,] THE GOSPEL ACOOKDIN& TO ST. MAKE. 15S 



there mentioned as tending unto (tls) death is regarded by some to be the act of 
denying Jesus to be the Christ, the Son of God, or the state of apostasy indicated by that 
act; others hold it to be apostasy from Christianity, combined with diabolical enmity, and 
that in the face of extraordinary evidence ; but it appears to be a specific act of sin, of 
the commission of which the evidence is clear and convincing, distinct and precise — 
such an act of apostasy as blasphemes the Holy Ghost by ascribing his operations tu 
Satanic power. This sin unto death is certainly the nearest approach to the unpardon- 
able_ sin, if it be not, as many hold it to be, identical with it. Of the three different 
readings, Kpiireait, KoXitreat, and afiapvlifiaTet, the last is the best supported ; while the 
expression "an eternal sin " signifies either a sin that is not pardoned or a sin of which 
the punishment is not remitted. The connection of the aphoristic expression which 
immediately follows in St. Matthew, viz. " Either make the tree good, and his fruit 
good ; or else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt : for the tree is known by 
his fruit," is briefly but correctly pointed out in the remark of Chrysostom, " Since 
they did not reprove the works, but calumniated him that did them, he shows that thii 
accusation was contrary to the natural sequence of affairs." — J. J. G. 

Vers. 31 — 35. Parallel passages: Matt. xil. 46 — 50; Luke viiL 19 — 21. — The real 
relationship. 1. No blioht intendbd. The crowd that sat around prevented his rela- 
tives reaching him ; they therefore sent a message, to which his reply cannot with any 
propriety be twisted into an expression of contempt. His obedience to his parents in 
the humble home at Nazareth during the years of youth, and his tender solicitude 
for his apparently widowed mother when, as he hung on the cross, he commended her 
to the care of the beloved disciple, preclude the possibility of such a meaning. 

IL HsAVENLT KINSHIP. He lookcd round in a cirde; this expression of the look, 
like that of the sitting posture of the multitude, implies the report of an eye-witness. 
Looking round about him and directly into the face of every faithful follower sitting 
there, he announced a higher and holier relationship than that formed by an earthly tie; 
he acquainted them with the existence of kinship near and dear as that which unites 
th« nearest and dearest of human kindred. The Chiu-ch is Christ's family, and to every 
true member of that family he is bound by the tenderest bonds of love. What a 
privilege to be thus closely united to and tenderly loved by Christ 1 

III. Condition of this belationsbif. It is not the possession of varied knowledge 
of God's will and works and ways, though that is important ; nor is it the possession of 
faith, though that is the root ; nor is it the acceptance of Christ in the exercise of faith, 
though that is indispensable to salvation ; but it is a more practical condition, and one 
more easily known and more readily discernible ; — it is doing the will of God. 

IV. The measure op endeakment belonging to this kinship. The Saviour 
makes his natural affections the measure of his spiritual friendship. When we are 
enjoined to love our neighbour as ourselves, it does not mean that we should love our- 
selves less, but our neighbour more; so here, he does not love his mother and brothers 
and sisters less, but his true disciples more. The poorest and meanest as well as the 
richest may attain to this honour and share this love. We may obtain in this way a 
name better than that of sons and daughters ; we may be honoured with that new, best 
name of love. 

'Behold th' amazing gift of love 

The Father hath bestow'd 
On us, the sinful sons of men. 

To call OS sons of God." TIP 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER IV. 

T«. 1. — And again he began to teaoh by 
the seaside. This return to the seaside is 
mentioned by St. Mark only. From this 



time our Lord's tcaoMng began to be mora 
public. The room and the little courtyard 
no longer sufSced for the multitudes that 
came to him. The Authorized Version says 
that " a great multitude wu gathered unto 



166 



THE GOdPEL ACCORDING TO ST, MARK. [ch. iv. 1—41. 



him." The Greek adjective, according to 
the most approved reading, is KKeiaros, 
the superlative of vo\lis, and shonid be 
rendered " a very great " multitnde. They 
bad probably been waiting for him in 
the neighbourhood of Capernaum. He en- 
tered into a boat — probably the boat men- 
tioned at ob. iii. 9— and sat in the sea, i.e. 
in the boat afloat on the water, so as to be 
relieved of the pressure of the vast multi- 
tude {w\e7<rT0! Sx^os) gathered on the shore. 

Ver. 2. — He taught them many things in 
parables. This was a new system of teach- 
ing, For some months he had taught 
directly. But as he found that this direct 
tenching was met in some quarters with 
unbelief and scorn, he abandoned it for the 
less direct method of the parable. The 
parable (irapo.eoA^) is etymologioally the 
setting forth of one thing by the side of 
another, so that the one may be compared 
with the other. The parable is the truth pre- 
sented by a similitude. It differs from the 
proverb inasmuch as it is necessarily figura- 
tive. The proverb may be figurative, but 
it need not of necessity be figurative. The 
parable is often an expanded proverb, and 
the proverb a condensed parable. There is 
but one Hebrew word for the tTro English 
words " parable " and "proverb," whieh may 
account for their being frequently inter- 
changed. The proverb (Latin) is a common 
sentiment generally accepted. The parable 
(Greek) is something put by the side of 
something else. Theologically, it is some- 
thing in the world of nature which finds 
its counterpart in the world of spirit. The 
parable attracts attention, and so becomes 
valuable as a test of character. It reveals 
the seekers after truth, those who love the 
light. It withdraws the light from those 
who love darkness. And said unto them in 
his doctrine (ev rp SiSaxfi mroS) ; literally, 
in hit teaching, namely, that particular 
mode of teaching which he had just intro- 
duced ; " he taught them " (4SlSa<TKet>). He 
said, " in his teaching " (_iv rfi SiSax? airov). 

Vers. 3 — 8. — Hearken ('AicoiJeTc). This 
word is introduced in St. Mark's narrative 
only; and it is very suitable to the warning 
at ver, 9, "Who hath ears to hear, let him 
hear, llie sower went forth to sow. The 
scope of this beautiful parable is this : 
Christ teaches us that he is the Sower, that 
is, the great Preacher of the gospel among 
men. 1. But not all who hear the gospel 
believe it and receive it; just as some of 
the seed loyra fell by the wayside, on the 
liard footpath, where it could not penetrate 
the ground, but lay upon the surface, and 
so was picked up by the birds. 2. Again, 
not all who hear and believe persevere in 
the faith ; some fall away ; like the seed sown 
on rocky ground, which springs up indeed, 



but for want of depth of soil puts forth na 
root, and is soon scorched by the rising sun, 
and, being without root, withers away. 3. 
But further, not all who show faith bring 
forth the fruit of good works ; like the seed 
sown among the thorns, which, growing up 
together with it, choked it {avvsTrvi^av aixb) ; 
such is the meaning. St, Luke has the 
words ((ri//t(^uei(rai al aKavBniairiTrvi^av), "the 
thorns grew up with it and choked it." 
4. But, lastly, there are those who receive 
the gospel in the love of it, and bring forth 
fruit, not, however, in equal measures, but 
some thirty fuld, some sixty, some a hundred ; 
and this on account of the greater in- 
fluences of grace, or on account of the more 
ready co-operation of the free-will of man 
with the sovereign grace of God. The 
whole parable marks a gradation. In the 
first case the seed produces nothing; iu 
the second it produces only the blade ; in 
the third it is near the point of producing 
fruit, but fails to bring forth to perfection ; 
in the fourth it yields fruit, but in different 
measures. 

Ver. 9. — And he said, Who hath ears to 
hear, let him hear. St. Luke (viii. 8) has a 
stronper word than {tKtyiv) " he said." He 
(viii. 8) has (iipivei) " he cried." Our Lord 
uses this expression, " he that hath ears to 
hear," etc., when the subject-matter is figu- 
rative or obscure, as though to rouse the 
attention of his hearers. He has " ears to 
hear " who diligently attends to the words of 
Christ, that he may ponder and obey them. 
Many heard him out of curiosity, that they 
might hear something new, or learned, or 
brilliant ; not that they might lay to heart 
the things which they heard, and endeavour 
to practise them in their lives. And so it 
is with those - who go to hear sermons on 
account of the fame of the preacher, and 
not that they may learn to amend their 
lives; and thus the words of Jehovah to 
Ezekiel (xxxiii. 32) are fulfilled, "And, 
lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song 
of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can 
play well on an instrument : for they hear 
thy words, but they do them not." 

Ver. 10.— When he was alone. These 
words do not appear in St. Matthew's 
account. He simply says that " the disciples 
came and said unto him," This must have 
been upon some other occasion. It could 
not have been when he was preaching from 
the boat; for St. Mark says, they that 
were about him with the twelve. He is the 
only evangelist who notices this. We must 
not forget that, besides the twelve, there were 
seventy other disciples. They asked of him 
the parables (tos itapa^oXii), according to 
the best reading. The inqiury was a 
general one, although St. Mark here give* 
the explanation of one only. 



Ufa. IV. 1—41.] THE GOSPEL, AUUUKDING TO ST. MAJJK. 



U1 



Vers. 11, 12. — To know the mystery. The 
Greek verb ^j/aicai, to know, is not 
found in the beet manuscripts, in which the 
words are (^ufuv rb fxvariipLov 5e5oraO, unto 
you is given the mystery of the kingdom of 
Ood. Our Lord here explains why he spake 
to the mixed multitude in parables ; namely, 
because most of them were as yet incapable 
of receiving the gospel: some would not 
believe it, others reviled it. Therefore our 
Lord here encourages his own disciples 
to seaioh out his words spoken in parables, 
and humbly to inquire into their full 
meaning, that so they might become able 
ministers and efScient ■ preachers of the 
gospel. Moreover, by this he shows that 
this efficiency cannot be obtained by our 
own strength, but must be humbly sought 
for from God. For it is his own gift which 
he bestows on the disciples of Christ, and 
denies to others, whom lie leaves to the 
blindness of their own hearts. It is as 
though he said, " To you, my disciples, my 
apostles, it is given, since you believe in me 
as the Messiah, to have continually more 
clear revelations from me of the mysteries 
of God and of heaven, by which you shall 
day by day increase in the knowledge and 
love of him. But from the scribes and 
others, because they will not believe in me 
as their own Messiah, God will take away 
even that small knowledge which they have 
of him and of his kingdom. Yea, he will 
deprive them of all the special privileges 
wMch they have hitherto possessed." But 
the words are not limited in their applica- 
tion to those who were living on the earth 
when Christ sojourned here. He says to 
all in every age who come within the reach 
of his gospel, " Those who come to me with 
a sincere heart and a simple desire to 
know the truth, as you, my apostles, are 
doing, to them I will reveal the mysteries 
of my kingdom, and I will help them 
onwards in the path of holiness, by which 
they may at length attain to the heavenly 
kingdom. But they who have not this pure 
desire of truth, but indulge their own lusts 
and errors, from them that little knowledge 
of God and of Divine things will b^ degrees 
be taken away, and they will become alto- 
gether blind." Observe the expression 
(iKeivois Si to7s ^{(v), but unto them that are 
without There were then, just as there are 
now, those who were outbide the realm of 
spiritual things ; not caring for, not under- 
standing, not desirous of spiritual truth. 
Lest at any time they should be converted 
(/I'^irore fTrt<rTp€\f/aa:i) —lest haply they should 
turn again (the verb is active) — and their 
sins should be forgiven them. According to 
the best reading, rh aiioprlifuira is omitted; so 
it runs, and it should be forgiven them. The 
use of the active verb brings out the sin- 



ner's responsibility with respeet to his own 
conversion. 

Ver. 13.— Know ye not this parable 1 
and how shall ye Iniow all the parables 1 
that is, " How, then, can you expect to under- 
stand all parables, as they ought to do who 
are instructed unto the kingdom of heaven ? " 
It is St. Mark alone who recstUs and records 
these words. They are striking and vivid, 
as illustrating the condition of mind of the 
disciples at this time— slow of apprehension, 
and yet desirous to learn, 

Ver. 14. — The sower soweth the word. 
St. Matthew (xiii. 19) calls it "the word of 
the kingdom " — an expression equivalent to 
"the gospel of the kingdom," not merely 
moral truth, but spiritual and etemaL 

Ver. 15. — Straightway Cometh Satan. St. 
Matthew (xiii. 19) says, "then Cometh (< 
TocTjpis) the evU one ; " the same expression 
which our Lord uses in the Lord's Prayer, 
and which helps to justify the English 
rendering in the Bevised Version there. As 
the seed falling by the wayside is refused 
by the bard and well-trodden ground, and 
so is readily picked np by the birds; in 
like manner, the seed of God's Word, falling 
upon a heart rendered callous by the custom 
of sinning, is straightway snatched away by 
" the evil one," urging the heart again to 
its accustomed sins. Well may we pray to 
be delivered from this "evil one." 

Vers. 16, 17. — And these are they likewise 
which are sown on 'stony ground. This 
sentence would be better rendered. And 
these in like manner are they that are sown 
upon the rocky places, where the wor^U 
"likewise," or "in like manner," mean 
"by a similar mode of interpretation." 
This is the second condition of soil on which 
the seed is sown — a better condition than the 
former; for the former plainly refused 
the seed, but this, having some soil favour- 
able to the germination of the seed, receives 
it, and the seed springs up, though but for 
a little while. So the rocky ground is like 
the heart of that hearer who hears the Word 
of God, and receives it with joy. He is 
delighted with its beauty, its justice, its 
purity; and he breaks forth with holyafleo- 
tions. But alas I he has more of the rock 
than of the good soil in his heart. Hence 
the Word of God cannot strike a deep root 
into his soul. He is not constant in the 
faith. He endures but for a time, and in 
the hour of temptation he falls away. 

Ver. 18. — And these are they which are 
sown among thorns. According to the best 
authorities, the words are (koI &\Ai)i fUriv), 
and others are they, eta. This marks a con- 
siderable difference between the two classes. 
This is the third condition of soil ; and it it 
so much better than the former, inasmuch 
as the thorns present less obstacles to th< 



158 



THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST, MAEK. [ch. it. 1— 4L 



frowth of the seed than the rooky groand 
oes. This similitude indicates the heart of 
that hearer who is beset with tlie cares of 
this world and the deceitfulness of riohei 
and the lusts of other things. 

Ver. 19. — The oaroB of the world (roB 
atavoi); literally, of the ag» ; that is, temporal 
and secular cares, incident to the age in 
which our lot is cast, and which are common 
to all. These, like thorns, distress and 
bouble, and often wound tlie soul ; while, 
on the other hand, the care of the soul and 
the thought of beaveuly things compose and 
establish the mind. The deoeitfulsess of 
riohes. Riches ere aptly compared to 
thorns, because, like thorns, they pierce the 
■ouL St. Paul (1 Tim. t1. 10) speaks of 
some who, through the love of riches, "have 
pierced themselves through with many 
sorrows." Biches are deceitful, because they 
often seduce the soul from God and from 
salvation, and are the canse of many sins. 
" How hardly," says our Lord, " shall a rich 
man enter into the kingdom of God 1 " They 
have a tendency to choke the Word of God, 
and to weaken the power of religion. 
"Those are the only true riohes," says 
8t. Gregory, "whioh make ni rich in 
virtue." 

Ver. 20. — ^Those are they that were sown 
npon the good ground. The good ground 
represents the heart which receives the 
Word of God with joy and desire, and true 
devotion of spirit, and which steadfastly 
retains it, whether in prosperity or in ad- 
versity; and so yields fruit, "some thirty, 
some sixty, and some a hundredfold." 8t. 
Jerome remarks that, as of the bad ground 
there were three different kinds — the way- 
side, the rooky, and the thorny ground ; so 
of the good ground there is a threefold 
gradation indicated in the amount of its 
productiveness. There are differences of 
conditions in the hearts both of those who 
believe and of those who do not believe. 

Ver. 21. — Is a candle brought to be put 
under a bushel, eto. ? The Greek is i Kix»os, 
and Is better rendered Ihe lamp. The 
flgmre ia recorded by St. Matthew (v. IS) 
aa nted by our Lord in his sermon on the 
monnt. It is evident that he repeated his 
sayings, and used them sometimes in a 
different connection. The lamp is here the 
light of Divine truth, shining in the person 
of Christ. /« the lamp brought to he put 
under the bushell It comes to us. The 
light in our souls is not of our own kindling ; 
it comes to us from God, that we may 
manifest it for his glory. "The bushel" 
(jUSios), from the Latin modiua, a measure 
containing flour, was the flour-bin, a part of 
the furniture of every bouse, as was the tall 
lampstand with its single light. St. Luke 
(viii. 16) calla it " a vessel " (koX^tci aurbv 



OKeiei). The light ia to be set on " a lamp^ 
stand," and in like manner the light which 
we have received is to shine before men. Al 
Chrislians, we are Christ's light-bearers. By 
this illustration onr Lord teaches that he 
was unwilling that the mysteries of this 
great parable of the sower and of other 
parables should be concealed, but that his 
disciples should unfold these things to 
others as he had to them, although at 
present they might not be able to receive 
them. 

Ver. 22. — For there is nothing hid which 
shall not be manifested. The Greek of the 
latter part of this sentence, according to 
the best authorities, mns thus : iiv iiAi Xva 
(pavfpaS^ ; 80 the true rendering of the 
words is, there i» nothing hid lave that U 
$hould be manifeiUd; that is, there is 
nothing now hid, but in order that it may 
be made known. There is a great prin- 
ciple of the Divine operation* here an- 
nounced by our Lord. Much, veiy much, 
is now hidden from us, in nature, in provi- 
dence, and in grace. Bat it will not 
always be hidden. In natural things more 
and more is revealed as science advances, 
and in providence and in grace the mys- 
teries of the kingdom will one day, and at 
the fitting time, be laid open to all. " What 
I tell you in the darkness, speak ye in the 
light"(Matt. X. 27). 

Ver. S4. — Take heed what ye hear. At- 
tend, that is, to these words which ye hear 
from me, that ye may understand them, and 
commit them to memory, and so be able to 
communicate them effectually to others. 
Let none of my words escape yon. Our 
Lord bids us to pay the greatest attention 
to his words, and so to digest them that we 
may be able to teach them to others. With 
what measure ye mete it shall be measured 
unto you : and more shall he given onto yon. 
Our Lord's meaning is clearly this : If you 
freely and plentifully communicate and 
preach my doctrine to others, yon shall re- 
ceive a corresponding reward. Nay, yoa 
shall have a return in far more abundant 
measure. For thus the fonntains, the more 
water they pour out below, so much the more 
do they receive from above. Here, then, is 
great encouragement to all faithful teachers 
of the Word, of whatever kind ; that by how 
much they give to others in teaching them, 
by so much the more shall they receive of 
wisdom and grace fjom Christ; according 
to those words of the apostle, "He that 
soweth bountifully shall reap also bounti- 
fully " (2 Cor. ix. 6). 

Ver. 25.— For he that hath, to him shall 
be given. He that uses his gifts, whether 
of intellect or of goodness, bestowed upon 
him by God, to him shall be granted aa 
inciease of those gifts. But botu him wke 



CH. IT, 1—41.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



161 



tuei them not, Ood will gradually take 
them away. Chriat here encourages his 
apostles and disciples to diligent and earnest 
preacliing of his gospel, by promising them 
in return yet greater influxes of his wisdom 
•nd grace. 

Vers. 26—28. — ^This pnrabl<> is recorded 
by St. Mark alone. It differs greatly from 
the parable of the sower, althuugh both of 
them are founded upon the imagery of the 
■eed cast into the ground. In both oaees 
the seed represents the doctrine of the 
gospel; the field represents the hearers; 
the harvest the end of the world, or per- 
haps the death of each individual hearer. 
So is the kingdom of Ood, in its progress 
from its establishment to its completion. 
The sower oasts seed upon the earth, not 
without careful preparation of the soil, but 
without further sowing. And then he pur- 
sues his ordinary business. He sleeps by 
Bight ; he rises by day ; he has leisure for 
other employment ; his work as a sower ii 
finished. Meanwhile the seed germinates 
and grows by its own hidden virtues, assisted 
by the earth, the sun, and the air, the sower 
knowing nothiog of the mysterious process. 
First comes the blade, then the ear, then 
the full com in the ear. Such is the 
preaohing of the gospeL Here, therefore, 
the sower represents human responsibility 
in the work. The vitality of the seed is 
independent of his labour. The earth de- 
velops the plant from the seed by those 
natural but mysterious processes through 
which the Creator is ever working. So in 
spiritual things, the sower commences the 
work, and the grace of God perfects it in 
the heart which receives these influences. 
The earUi beareth fruit of herself. In like 
manner, by degrees, the faith of Christ 
increases through the preaching of the 
gospel ; and the Church grows and expands. 
And what is true of the Church collectively 
is true also of each individual member of the 
Church. For the heart of each faithful Chris- 
tian produces first the blade, when it con- 
ceives good desires and begins to put them 
into action; then the ear, when it brings 
them to good efiect; and lastly the full 
com in the ear, when it brings them to their 
full maturity and perfection. Hence our 
Lord in this parable intimates that they 
who labour for the conversion of souls 
ought, with much patience, to wait for the 
fruit of their labour, as the husbandman 
waits with much patience for the precious 
fruits of the earth. 

Ver. 29.— But when the fruit is ripe (8to» 
8i iropoS^ i KopTths). The verb here is 
active ; it might be rendered delivereth up, 
or alUnoelh. It is a peculiar expression, 
though evidently meaning " when the fruit 
is ready." K* putteth forth the siokle, 



heoanse the harvest is oome. As soon aa 
Christ's work is completed, whether in th« 
Church or in the individual, " immediately " 
the sickle is sent forth. As soon ■• a 
Christian is ready for heaven, God calls him 
away ; and therefore we may infer that it is 
unwise, if not sinful, for a Christian, op- 
pressed it may be with sickness or trouble, 
to be eager in wishing to leave this world. 
" It is one thing to be willing to go when 
God pleases ; it is another thing to speak as 
though we wished to hiisten our departure." 
" When the fruit is ripe, tmmediately he 
putteth forth the sickle." If, therefore, the 
sickle is not yet sent forth, it is because 
the fruit is not yet fully ripe. The afflic- 
tions of the faitliful are God's means to 
ripen them for heaven. They are the dress- 
ing which the Lord of the vineyard employs 
to make the tree more fruitful, to make the 
Cliristian more fruitful in grace, and mora 
ripe for glory. 

Vers. SO— 32iF— Whereunto shall we Uken 
the kingdom cf Ood? or with what com- 
parison shall we compare it? In the first 
clause of this verse the best authorities give 
Tras for tIvi, Sou) shall we Uken the kingdom 
of Oodi and in the second clause, inst^ 
of the Greek of whiph the Authorized 
Version is the rendering, the best-approved 
reading is (rivi airijv irapaffoXf B&iiiv}, in 
what parable thaU we let it forth t Our 
Lord thus stimulates the intellect of his 
hearers, by making them his associates, 
as it were, in the search for appropriate 
similitudes (see Dr. Morison, tn loe.). The 
kingdom of God, that is, his Church on 
earth, is like a grain of mustard seed. By 
this image our Lord shows the great power, 
fertility, and extension of the Oburcb ; in- 
asmuch as it started from a very small and 
apparently insignificant beginning, and 
spread itself over the whole world. It is 
not literally and absolutely true that the 
grain of mustard seed is less than all seeds. 
There are other seeds which are less than 
it. But the expression may readily be 
allowed when we compare the smallnes* 
of the seed with the greatness of the results 
produced by it. It is one of the least of all 
seeds. And so the preaching of the Gos- 
pel and the establishment of the Church 
was one of the smallest of beginnings. 
Pel haps the well-known pungency of the 
seed of the mustard plant may suggest the 
quickening, stimulating power of the Gos- 
pel when it takes root in the heart. The 
mustard plant shoots out large branchea, 
which are used as fuel in some countries, 
quite large enough for shadow for the birds. 
A traveller in South America says that it 
grows to so large a tree upon the slopes of 
the mountains of Chili that iie oould ride 
nnder its branches. 



L60 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. Loh. iv. 1—41. 



Vers. 33, 34. — ^With many such paraUes ; 
Buch, that is, as he had just been deliverino; 
— plain and simple illustrations which all 
might understand ; not abstruse and diffi- 
cult similitudes, but sufficiently plain for 
them to perceive that there was heavenly 
and Divine truth lying hidden beneath 
them, so that they might be drawn onwardi 
through that which -they did understand, 
to search into something hidden beneath it, 
which at present they did not know. But 
privately to his own disciples he expounded 

(#7re\ue) all things. Thi.i word IJinKva) 
occurs nowhere else in the Gospels. But it 
does occur in St. Peter's second Epistle (i. 
20), "No Scripture is of any private 
(6iriXi!(rEtt!s) exposition, or interpretation." 
This suggests a connection between St. 
Mark's Gospel and that Epistle, and may be 
accepted as an auxiliary evidence, however 
smaU, as to the genuineness of the Epistle. 

Vers. 35, 36. — And on that day, — the day, 
that is, on which the parables were delivered, 
at least those recordeil by St. Mark — when 
even was come, he saith unto them, Let us 
go over unto the other side. And leaving 
tiie multitude, they take him with them, 
even as he was, in the boat. It was the 
boat bom which he had been preaching. 
They made no special preparation. They 
did not land first to obMn provisions. It 
would have been inconvenient to go ashore 
in the midst of the crowd. They made at 
once, as he told them to do, for the other side. 
And other boats were with him. This 
is another interesting circum^^tance. Pro- 
bably those who were in these boats had 
availed themselves of them to get nearer to 
the great Prophet, the boatmen themselvee 
having seen the vast crowd that was 
gathered on the shore, and so having been 
attracted thither. Thus he had a large 
audience on the sea as well as on the land. 
And now it was so ordered that he was 
surrounded by a fleet and by a multitude of 
witnesses when he stilled the tempest. 

Yer. 37. — And there arose a great storm 
of wind; literally, there ariseih (ylverai 
AaUni/f). St. Mark often uses the historical 
present, which gives vigour and point to his 
narrative. And the waves beat into the 
boat, insomuch that the boat was now filling 
(^St) yeij.i(ecreai). St. Matthew says (viii. 
24), " the boat was covered with the waves." 
St. Luke (viii. 23;, " they were filling with 
water, and were in jeopardy." Bed« and 
others have thought that the buat in which 
Christ was was the only boat that was 
tossed by this storm ; in order that Christ 
might show his power in limiting the area 
of the tempest. But it is far more probable 
that the other boats were subject to it ; for 
they were very near to the boat in which 
Christ was. There must have been some 



reason for the allusion to these boafs ; and the 
wider the reach of tlie tempest, the greater 
would appear the Divine power of Christ in 
stilling it, and the greater the amount ot 
testimony to the reality of the miracle. The 
miracle was wrought to show his power over 
all creation, the sea as well as the dry land ; 
and that they, his disciples, and all who 
were with him might believe in him as the 
Omnipotent God. But further, this tempest 
on the sea of Galilee was a type and symhol 
of the trials and temptations which should 
come on the Church. For the Church of 
God is as a ship in a storm, ever tossed upon 
" the waves of this troublesome world." And 
then, moreover, as the rude storm urges the 
ship onwards, so that it more quickly 
reaches the desired haven, so afflictions and 
temptations quicken Christ's disciples to the 
greater desire of holiness, by which they 
are borne onwards more speedily to "the 
haven where they would be." 

Ver. 38. — And he was in the hinder part 
of the ship, asleep on a .pillow ; more lite- 
rally, he himself was in the stern (V airhs eVi 
Tp Trpiiivri) asleep on the cushion Qitl rh irpoir- 
Ke^iKaiov KoBeiSav), He had changed his 
posture. He was weary with the labour of 
addressing ' the great multitude. He had 
sought the momentary rest which the 
crossing of the lake offered to him. He 
was resting his head upon the low bench 
which served both for a seat and for a pil- 
low. But while he slept as man, he was 
watchful as God. " Behold, he that keep- 
eth Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps." 
Master, carest thou not that we perish? 
This question savours of impatience, if not 
of irreverence. Who so likely to have put 
it as St. Peter? Nor would he be likely 
afterwards to forget that he had put it. 
Hence, probably, its appearance in St. 
Mark's Gospel. 

Ver. 39.— And he aTOse— literally, h» 
awoke (SuyfpBehy—tLni rebuked the wind, 
and said unto the sea. Peace, be still (^Sidira, 
Trftpliamao) ; literally. Be lilent I be muzzled I 
The Greek perfect implies that before the 
word was uttered, the thing was done by the 
simple fiat of his will preceding the word. 
The combined descriptions of the synoptists 
show that the storm was very violent, such 
as no human power could have composed or 
stilled. So that these words indicate the 
supreme authority of Christ as God, ruling 
the sea with his mighty power. Thus 
Christ shows himself to be God. In like 
manner, Christ is able to overrule and con- 
trol the persecutions of the Church and 
the temptations of the soul. St. Augus- 
tine says that " when we allow tempta- 
tions to overcome us, Christ sleeps in us. 
We forget Christ at such times. Let us, 
then, remember him. Let na awake him 



CH. IV. 1—41.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



161 



He will speak. He will rebuke the tempest 
in the soul, and there will be a great calm." 
There was a great calm. For all crealion 
peii^ives its Creator. He never speaks in 
Tain. It is observable that, as in his 
miracles of healing, the subjects of them 
usually passed at once to perfect soundness, 
so here, there was no gradual subsiding of 
the storm, as in the ordinary operations of 
nature, but almost before the word had 
oscaped his lips there was a perfect calm. 



Ver. 40. — And he said unto them, Why 
are ye fearful) have ye not yet faith 1 
Not TTas oiiK EX""*) but oiira ex^'"'^- If they 
bad faith, they would have known tha^ 
though asleep, he could preserve them. 

Ver. 41. — ^And they feared exceedingly, 
and said one to another. Who then is this, 
that even the wind and the sea obey him 1 
This would seem to have been said by the 
sailors, though it was doubtless assented to 
by all. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — ^20. — Spiritual sounng. It is a picturesque and memorable sight. Multi- 
tudes of people, of all classes and from every part of the land, have assembled on the 
western shore of the Gralilean lake, where Jesus is daily occupied in teaching and in 
healing. To protect himself from the pressure of the crowd, and the better to com- 
mand his audience, Jesus steps into a boat, and pushes off a few yards from the beach. 
There, with the fair landscape before him, corn-fields covering the slopes, the birds of 
the air above, winging their flight over the still waters, — the great Teacher addresses 
the people. His language is figurative, drawn from the processes of nature and the 
employments of husbandry, probably at the very moment apparent to his eye. How 
natural that, at this moment and in this scene, our Lord should introduce a new style 
of teaching, should enter upon a new phase of ministry ! The parable, as a vehicle for 
spiritual truth, had indeed been employed by Jewish teachers and prophets ; but it 
was our Lord himself who carried this style of spiritual instruction to perfection. 

I. The sower. Every man, and especially every teacher, is a sower — intellectual, 
moral, or both. Christ is emphatically the Sower. He was such in his ministry on 
earth ; in his death, when the corn of wheat fell into the ground and died, he was 
both the Sower and the Seed ; in the gospel dispensation he continues to be the Divino 
Sower. His apostles and all his ministers have been sowing through the long centuries, 
or rather he has been sowing by their hands. How wise, liberal, diligent, unwearied, 
is Christ in this beneficent work ! 

II. Thb seed. This is the Word of God. All truth is spiritual seed ; the truth 
relating to God — his will and grace — is " the seed of the kingdom." Like the seed, the 
gospel is comparatively small and insignificant; it has within it inherent vitality, 
a living germ ; it is seemingly thrown away and hidden ; its nature is to grow and to 
increase and multiply ; it is tender and depends upon the treatment it meets with 
whether it lives or dies. 

III. The soil. The human heart is adapted to receive and to cherish the spiritual 
seed. But as on the surface of the earth some ground is fertile and some is barren, 
some ground is adapted to one crop and other ground to a crop of different kind, so it 
is in the spiritual husbandry. Whilst all hearts are created to receive the heavenly 
seed, and only fulfil their end when they bear spiritual fruit, we cannot but recognize 
the marvellous diversity of soil into which the gospel is deposited. Yet we must not 
so interpret the parable as to countenance the doctrine of fatalism. 

rV. The sowing. Was the sower in the parable guided, in the manner and measure 
of his sowing, by the likelihood or otherwise that the land would prove fruitful? 
No ; neither should the gospel sower reckon probabilities : his Master did not. The 
sower should be liberal and indiscriminate, should " sow beside all waters," should 
remember that he " knows not which shall prosper, this or that." It is for him to do 
his work diligently and faithfully, and leave results to God ; e.g. the mother and the 
child, the teacher and the class, the master and the pupil or apprentice, the preacher 
and the congregation, the author and the reader. 

V, Thb obowth. This is not universal ; for, as the parable reminds us, it comes to 
pass, both in the natural and the spiritual sowing, that in some cases the seed disappears 
tnd comes to nought Yet the redemption of Christ proclaimed, and the grace of the 

ST. MARE. !• 



162 THE GC8PEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. iv. 1— 4L 

Holy Spirit vouchsafed, co-operate oftentimes to most blessed results, even as in natun 
seed and soil, showers and sunshine, produce a vigorous growth. 

VI. The harvest. What is the end of sowing and tilling, of culture and toil ? It 
is fruit. And, in the spiritual kingdom, what is the aim and recompense of the Divine 
and of all human severs ? It is fruit — of holiness, obedience, love, joy, peace, eternal 
life. It shall not be wanting. " My word shall not return unto me void ; " " They that 
sow in tears shall reap in joy ; " " They shall bring their sheaves with them ; " it may be 
" after many days." There is a harvest in time, and a richer, riper harvest in eternity. 

Practical lessons. 1. One of encouragement for all gospel sowers ; they are doing 
the Master's work, they are following the Master's example, they are assured of the 
Master's support. 2. One of admonition to all to whom the Word is preached. Take 
heed what and how you hear. The seed is heavenly; is the soil kindly, prepared, 
grateful, fruitful ? 

Vers. 4, 15. — The Word stolen from the heart. Young preachers, in the strength 
of their convictions and the ardour of their benevolence, are often inspired with enthu- 
siastic expectations concerning the results of the preaching of the gospel. It seems to 
them that the Word has only to be addressed to men's minds in order to meet with 
an eager, grateful, and immediate acceptance. As their experience enlarges, and as 
they learn in how many cases reason and conscience are silenced by the clamour of 
passion and interest, or disregarded through the power of sinful habit or the influence 
of sinful society, they turn to this parable, and learn how just was the view and how 
tempered the expectations of the Divine Teacher and Saviour, as to the acceptance 
with which his gospel should meet. 

I. The heabt hardened by worldliness and sin is not eeceptivb of TH« 
WoBD, 1. Worldly thoughts and cares preoccupy the mind, so that there is no 
response to the appeals of the gospel. When the attention is absorbed by things seen 
and temporal, spiritual realities appear imaginary and uninteresting. As there was no 
room for the babe Jesus at the inn, so the nature which welcomes every passing guest 
finds no place for the King and for his Word. 2. Sin shuts out the truth. There is 
no fellowship between light and darkness. The sinner's heart is closed against the 
heavenly rays. What preacher could not, from his own observation, offer many a living 
illustration of the saying, "Men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are 
evil"? To revert to the figure of the text, sin loved and unrepented of treads down 
the heart into a hard, impenetrable pathway, where no glebe breaks up, in frost, in 
shower, or in sunshine, to give a welcome, a home, a cradle, to the germ of spiritual 
life. 3. Familiarity with truth unheeded hardens any nature against the gospel. 
Who are the least hopeful in our congregations? Surely they are those who have, 
from habit or through influence, been attending the " means of grace " for many years, 
to whom every statement, every appeal, every remonstrance, every warning, is an old 
familiar sound, " a twice-told tale." The nature becomes not only indifferent, but cal- 
lous ; there is no real heed, no living susceptibility, no response of faith and joy. 

II. The enemy of souls snatches the Word from the hardened heart. The 
condition of the sinner's soul is such as offers to Satan an occasion for frustrating the 
benevolent designs of the Divine Sower. Had the seed fallen into good ground and 
been covered over, there would have been no invitation or opportunity for the birds to 
snatch it away. So it is only the worldly, sensual, or unbelieving nature that, so to speak, 
tempts the tempter himself. By the birds it is usually understood that the great 
Teacher intends to represent evil thoughts and imaginations and desires, such ai 
possess the unspiritual and unthinking. How true to the life is this account 1 How 
many careless and unbelieving hearers of the gospel no sooner leave the church in 
which they have listened to the Word, than common, foolish, selfish, sinful thoughts 
take possession of their mind, and the Word is snatched away — is as though it had not 
been f The necessary result is that there is no fruit. How can there be fruit when 
the Word has not been mixed with faith in the hearer's heart? " Do you take care 
that it falls not on, but in, your souls." " Break up your fallow ground ; for it is time 
to seek the Lord.* 

Vers. 6, 6, 16, 17* — 7%e Word starved in the heart. The Christian preacher ht* 



OT. IV. 1-41.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 163 

Eotaetimes reason to exclaim, "Who hath believed our report?" But sometimes ha 
has occasion to lament over those who apparently have believed but whose goodness 
proves, as time passes, "as the morning cloud and as the early dew, which goeth 
away.'' Our Lord warns us that we shall meet with such cases, which first excite hope 
and expectation, and then cloud the soul of the Christian labourer with disappoint- 
ment and sorrow. Such are compared to the rocky soil, with just a scattering of earth 
upon the surface, where the seed may grow, but where it will never live to produce a 
crop. 

L Growth excites hope. In the cases symbolized by this part of the parable 
there is much to please and encourage the inexperienced sower of the Divine Word. 
We observe : 1. Sensibility and susceptibility. How different from the wayside hearer 
is this ! Here we behold the truth obtaining at once a lodgment and welcome in the 
heart. An impressible nature is affected by the glad tidings which Christ brings from 
heaven. The conscience is aroused, the judgment is convinced, the heart is captivated. 
The first contact of the truth with the soul is of the most hopeful character. 2. Olad- 
neu follows the reception of the Word ; for this is an emotional nature, responsive to 
the joyful tidings. This is indeed what ought to be expected ; yet its occurrence ia so 
rare as to occasion surprise and enkindle the most glowing expectations. It is 
especially in times of " revival " that such instances abound. A general excitement 
heightens the emotion of joy which springs up in the heart of the impressible hearer • 
it is joy as of one who finds a great treasure. 3. Precocity of growth is the natura.' 
consequence. The soil is of a " forcing " character, and yields speedy and surprising, 
if temporary, results. Very diiferent from the slow, steady, gradual growth, which is 
most, on the whole, to be desired, is the rapid development of the religious life In the 
superficial convert of the apparent "revival." Extreme views, extravagant expec- 
tations, thoughtless but ardent resolves, — all testify to the quick, unhealthy growth. 

II. WrrHBEiNG BRiNas DISAPPOINTMENT. 1. After a while a season of trial comes. 
Time tries all, and affliction and persecution arise. This is the providential appoint- 
ment ; it is discipline which Divine wisdom deems necessary. In the early days of 
Christianity this was a common test, and in some form and in some measure it con- 
tinues and will long continue to be so. 2. Before the scorching sun the feeble growth 
is wither^ and destroyed. The furnace which refines the gold consumes the straw. 
The effect at first produced was owing to novelty, excitement, company, enthusiasm. 
Only the surface was reached, below was nothing. The transitory joy is followed by 
depression, carelessness, stolidity, obduracy. Perhaps there is a hope of the renewal of 
excitement, which never comes. It is seen that belief is not faith, feeling is not 
principle, joy is not life. To endure that test there is needed an inward, hidden life, 
hidden with Christ in God. There is needed a soil watered continually by heavenly 
dews and showers. " Blessed is he that endureth 1 " 

Application. 1. Let sanguine preachers and teachers take a iober and scriptural 
view of their work, and guard against being misled by enthusiasm and extravagant 
expectations. 2. Let hearers of the gospel seek grace that the truth may not only 
touch but may penetrate their heart ; let them seek the Holy Spirit's aid that they 
may hear the Word of God, and keep it ! 

Vers. 7, 18, 19. — The Word choked in the heart Thorns make a good hedge but a 
bad crop. The soil here described was in itself rich, good soil. But it could not grow 
both thorns and wht>at, and, when occupied by the one, failed to yield the other. 

I. What abb the thorns that overgrow the boil ? Thorns, thistles, bramble.'!, 
briers, are signs of neglect. They are the emblems of the primeval curse, for the 
garden was by our first parents exchanged for the thorny wilderness. In our parable 
the thorns are explained to represent : 1. " The cares of this world." Cares, whether 
of State or business, of letters or science, of family or calling, may occupy the mind 
which has received tiie truth of QoA, to such an extent as to hinder that truth fruiu 
('rowing up, 

" Care, when it once hath entered in the breast, 
Will have the wliole possession ere it rest" 

Caraa an distractions, and, even when concerning lawful things, if unchecked, are detri- 



164 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDlNa TO ST. MARK. [ch. iv. 1—41 

mental and disastrous. This is the special temptation of the poor and hardworking. 
Well are we directed to be " careful for nothin^:," etc., and " to take no thought for the 
morrow," etc. t. " The deceitfulneas of riches" is depicted under the figure of the thorus. 
The possession of wealth may be a curse to the rich, and the search — the race — aftei 
riches may be a curse to the avaricious and worldly. The unwary are deceived ; fat 
riches promise what they cannot give, and they sometimes draw away the heart from 
the treasure in heaven, which alone can truly enrich and satisfy for over. How 
many, trusting in riches, have failed of the kingdom 1 3. " The lusts of other things " 
have much of mischief laid to their charge. Pleasure is a fair and fragrant flower, but 
tt may hide a thorn. It may be manifestly sinful, it may be doubtful, it may be 
Innocent but unduly absorbing, — and in any such case it may choke the Word. How 
many are the things which men put in the place of religion 1 They are left unnamed, 
that we may supply tliem from our own knowledge of our own hearts and their mani- 
fold and varied snares. To desire aught earthly overmuch is to desire things heavenly 
too little. 

II. How DO THESE THORNS CHOKE THE SEED ? In two ways : 1. By taking up th» 
room which the Woril requires. They occupy the short and fleeting period of time 
allotted for our probation. The leisure for pondering and practically obeying the truth 
never comes. Time flies : the soul dies. They absorb attention and engage the heart. 
The words of the world must be listened to, and Christ must wait until "a more con- 
venient season" — which never comes. But if the world must have our ears, must claim 
our hands, Christ should have our heart. Alas 1 men plan and toil, prosper and grow 
rich, respected, powerful, famous ; and in doing so neglect the Word. Little know they 
of the mind of Paul, " To me to live is Christ." 2. By counteracting the influence of 
the trnth. In the former case (the rocky ground) it was persecution ; in this case it is 
the allurements of the world which prove injurious to the soul. Cares and lusts are 
thorns which must be choked or they choke. So thorn and corn grow side by side 
with a fair show. But gradually the evil gains the victory, and goodness perishes. 
What experienced sower has not seen and mourned over the process ? Warnings are in 
vain. The thorns grow apace ; the soul becomes insensible to all the claims of Christ, 
to all the appeals of the gospel. So the Word is unfruitful as before. 

** Stones mar the root ; 
Thorns spoil the fruit." 

What poor produce there is comes to no maturity, no perfection. Labour ia wasted, 
promise is blasted, hope is clouded, all is lost ! 

Application. None who receive the Word of life are free from the danger here 
described. Search and find out the hindrances to vigour and fruitfulness in the 
spiritual life. Root them all up, that the Word may live and grow and yield abun- 
dance. Look for fruit ; God looks for it as the only proof of life. Else, when the Lord 
comes and finds no fruit, the thorns will indeed be burned, but the ground will be 
exposed as fruitless and worthless, and " nigh unto cursing." 

Vers. 8, 20. — The Wordfruitful in the heart. Most varied results attend the preaching 
of the gospeL Look at our Lord's own ministry. On the one hand, we are told, " He 
did there no mighty works because of their unbelief; " " yet they believed not upon him ; " 
and we find him exclaiming, " Woe unto you, cities I " etc. On the other hand, " the 
multitude heard him gladly ; " of the Samaritans, " many more believed because of his 
word," and sometimes, in their eagerness, " they pressed upon him to hear," etc Nor 
was this fact peculiar to Christ's ministry ; the apostles confessed that they were to 
some a savour of life, to others of death ; and the historian records, as a matter of fact, 
that " some believed, and some believed not." So is it with Christian preachers in every 
age ; there are instances which rejoice and recompense them, and others which disappoint 
and depress them. The great Teacher foretells in this part of the parable that there 
ihall ever be cases in which the Lord's Word " shall not return unto nim void." 

L The pbefabed soil. The good ground was in contrast with the several varietie* 
of poor and bad soiL It was soft and yielding, as distinguished from the trodden earth 
of the wayside. It was deep, as distinguished from the shallow spnnicling of earth upon 
the rock beneath. It was clean, as (Ustinguished from the foul, weedy, thorny luid. 



CH. IT. 1—41.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 161 

Bo with the honest and good heart, prepared by Divine influences and responsive to 
Divine culture and care. There is in this figurative language no countenance given tc 
fetalism. We meet with good ground sometimes amongst those brought up in the 
Christian family and Church, as in Timothy ; sometimes amongst those not specially 
privileged, but candid and guileless, as in Nathanael ; sometimes even among the 
outwardly wicked, who yet may not be hardened, but may be ready to welcome 
deliverance from their evil ways, as in some of the publicans and sinners. Similar 
instances are recorded in the Acts of the Apostles. 

IL The vital pbocbss. In the other cases, the seed sooner or later perishes ; in this 
case it lives. It is neither stolen, nor starved, nor choked. The reason is that the soil 
accepts and retains the seed. So with the heart that not only receives but holds fast 
the Word of life, that cherishes and matures it, that gives it a resting-place, and welcomes 
all heavenly influences which can quicken and strengthen and prosper it. That nature 
will develop into Divine life and immortal fruitfulness which ponders the truth of 
God, assimilates it, keeps for it the place of honour, pre-eminence, and power, gives it 
room and scope and play, watches over it and prays for its vitality, energy, and increase. 
In such a nature the seed germinates and lives and grows, for it finds there congenial soil 
and cordial welcome and sustenance. The power of this life is that of the Holy Spirit • 
" God giveth the increase." 

III. The fruitful harvest. What is meant by " fruit " ? Spiritual result for 
spiritual toil and agency and culture. In the case of the sinner, the first and most 
welcome fruit is that of conversion unto God. But the rich fruits expected are these : 
obedience, righteousness, holiness, Christlikeness, consecration, self-denial, usefulness. 
" The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace," etc. Such fruit is the only proof of life and 
growth. " By their fruits ye shall know them ; " i.e. by the quality, the flavour, and 
tt-agrance of the moral produce. " Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much 
fruit ; " t.e.by abundance alone can the husbandman be satisfied and recompensed. The 
multiplication of the seed is one of the many points of resemblance between the physical 
and the spiritual life. Who has not seen a heart changed by one sermon, a life made 
anew by one utterance or by one lesson of Divine providence ? Seemingly an insig- 
nificant seed, yet a crop of glorious ripeness and luxuriance. And as for variety, every 
congregation of Christians is a living witness to this. Either because the same oppor- 
tunities have been, in some cases, more diligently used, or because different advantages 
have been employed with equal assiduity ; it results that some yield fruit thirty, some 
sixty, and others a hundredfold. 

PBaotical lessons. 1. The responsibility of hearing the Word. God provides the 
seed ; but the preparation of the soil is largely in our hands. 2. The expectation of the 
Sower is great in proportion to the greatness of our advantages. Nothing less than 
much fruit can satisfy him from you. 

Vers. 10 — 13, 21 — 25. — The lamp of parabolic teaching. Probably the opposition, 
malignity, and misrepresentation of the scribes and Pharisees were the occasion of the 
commencement by our Lord of a new style of public teaching. He did not wish at 
present to excite so much turmoil and violence as should lead to the interruption of his 
ministry. His design was to introduce into men's minds new ideas of the spiritual reign 
of God — ideas altogether in contradiction to their own carnal notions and hopes. He 
knww, however, the importance of considering the character and the mental position of 
the learner, in order that the mature might be thoroughly enlightened and instructed, 
in order that the immature might be encouraged to inquiry and to thought, in order 
that, for a season, the doctrine might remain concealed from the unspiritual and the 
unsympathetic. 

I. The lamp of Divine teaching is intended to qiyi light. The Galilean cottage 
had its lampstand, its bed, its corn-measure ; and every peasant could see the absurdity 
of first kindling the lamp and then hiding it under the meal-box or the couch. Let \\ 
be put upon the lofty stand, and it will give light to all. So when Christ came, the 
great Teacher, the great Saviour, he came a light into the world, to be the light of men. 
His words, his character, his deeds, his whole life, were an illumination from heaven. 
When he taught he taught for all humanity and for all time. 

II. The pahabolic form op teaching was no exception. The parable hid tht 



166 IHB GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. it. 1—41 

tiath, made a secret of it, enclosed it like a jewel in a casket. But it was never intended 
that the truth should remain concealed ; the intention was that it should be mani- 
fested, that it should come to light (ver. 22). And, as a matter of fact, the figurative 
and pictorial form has served to display and illumine rather than to hide the great 
truths of Christianity. To how many simple, childlike minds have the parables of oui 
Lord Jesus brought home lessons of wisdom, grace, hope, and consolation ! And what 
materials for reflection, what profound spiritual help and illumination, have they afforded 
to the thoughtful student of the Word I And what themes for the teacher, the preacher, 
the expositor, have these parables ever been found 1 They are " a mystery ; " but a 
mystery is a truth once hidden but now made clear and published abroad. 

III. In fact, parabolic teaching is dakknbss to the unspieitual and light to 
THE SPIBITUAL. Like all good things, it may be used and it may be abused. When 
Christ speaks, there are those who do not perceive, who do not understand. Is this the 
fault of the Word? No, it is the fault of their own inattentive, unreceptive, unsym- 
pathizing nature. It is they, the hearers, who are to blame ; not the truth which they 
will not appreciate (ver. 12). Yet are there those " who have ears to hear ; " and these 
hear. To them the Word is as mu»ic, satisfying their souls, bringing to them the 
thoughts of the Divine mind, the love of the Divine heart, the secret of the Divine 
purposes. To them it is said, " Happy are your ears, for they hear 1 " 

IV. Cheistians lbakn the MrsTEKT THAT THET MAT PUBLISH IT. Speaking especially 
to his apostles, but through them to all who receive the gospel, our Lord bids those who 
welcome and value the truth to proclaim it far and wide. It is light intended for the 
world's illumination; let it be set up on high, that all in this great dark house of 
humanity may see their way to God. It is meal for the hungering multitude ; let it 
be dealt forth to every applicant with no sparing hand, no grudging heart. There is 
light enough for all who are in darkness ; bread enough for all who are in danger of 
starving. It is the office of the members of Christ's Church to hold forth the light o) 
life, to take of the food and, as it multiplies in their hands, to give to the vast multi- 
tude in the barren wilderness. 

V. We ABE ACCOUNTABLE BOTH FOB THE WAT IN WHICH WE RECEIVE AND FOB THE 

WAT IN WHICH WE IMPART DiviNE TRUTH. 1. " Take heed what and how ye hear." 
It is unprofitable and wrong to ofier a willing ear to every teacher, to all tidings. On 
the other hand, it is folly and sin to turn away from him who speaketh from heaven, 
or to listen to him with inattention, with unconcern, with unsympathizing, unbelieving 
hearts. 2. " With what measure ye mete it shall be measured unto you." Be faithful, 
be diligent, fulfil your trust with zeal and wisdom, display benevolence towards the 
untaught and the unblessed, and you shall receive more — more of truth and more of 
spiritual enrichment and joy. On the other hand, the selfish, the unpitying, the 
unfaithful, shall gain nothing by spiritual niggardliness; from them shall be taken 
away even that which they have. 

Vers. 26 — 29. — Spiritual growth. There are common truths and a common interpre- 
tation underlying this and several other parables. In all this group the seed is the 
Word of God, the soil is the heart of man, the life is the spiritual history and develop- 
ment, the fruit is Christian character, and the harvest is eternal result and retribution. 
But the peculiar lesson of this parable is the nature of spiritual growth. It this case it 
is presumed that the seed is sown in good soil. 

I It is HIDDEN, AND CANNOT BE TRACED AND WATCHED. Until It is deposited IB the 
ground, seed may be beheld and examined by the eye. But then it is covered up and 
concealed, and germinates and begins to grow beneath the surface. In like manner you 
may see the truth as written, you may hear it as spoken ; but when once it gets into 
the heart, germinates, and goes to its work, the preacher and teacher fail to follow it, 
and altogether lose sight of it. In the silent soul the Divine seed works in secret, lives, 
strives, moves, grown. Probably those reared in Christian homes cannot recollect when 
the truth, quickened by the Spirit, first began to live in them. Certainly you can only 
very dimly follow the process of growth in others. Years pass ; the youth grows into the 
man, goes about daily duty, takes nightly rest, and all the while the hidden seed is living 
and developing slowly or swiftly, but unpevceived even by those who planted it. How 
littlej in some instances, preachers and teachers and parents can follow tha Word, as it 



OT. IT. 1—41.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. U'l 

does its work vpithin the hearts of those for whom they care ! Yet " the kingdom of God 
comes without observation." Convictions of their own spiritual nature and immortal 
destiny, of the character and government of God, of the love and reign of Christ, are all 
forming within, becoming part of the spiritual being. And the vital growth, though 
unperceived, is giving signs of its reality. 

IL It is mysterious and not to be understood. The husbandman, the gardener, 
" knoweth not how." Even the scientific observer cannot explain the mystery of life 
and growth. There is no caprice ; all is reason and law, yet the process baffles our 
understanding. So in the working of God's kingdom within, there is much that is 
mysterious. How can Divine truth, naturally so unpalatable, gain a hold upon the 
heart? How can it overmaster other principles so that it shall flourish as they fade? 
And, looking to the external, how can we account for it, that the kingdom of God, so 
unworldly, can advance to universal victory ? The power of life must be that of the 
Holy Spirit, acting like the sunlight and the genial warmth, the frequent showers and 
the morning; dew. It is the Lord's doing, invisible, incomprehensible, admirable, 
adorable, Divine ! 

III. It is accokdino to its own laws, not ours. In dealing with vegetation, there 
is much which we can do if we work with nature. We can till the soil, expose the 
seed to moisture and warmth, protect it from unfavourable conditions. But we cannot 
work against laws of nature ; we cannot make pebbles grow, acorns produce elm trees, 
or barley yield a crop of wheat ; we cannot grow the produce of the tropics at the poles. 
Providence has imposed laws upon nature, and with regard to life some things are 
possible, and others impossible. So spiritual life follows laws which we cannot change, 
and much of our interference has no influence or but little. The seed grows "of 
itself," i.e. as God appoints for it. The truth of God is not trammelled by our notions 
or fancies ; the Spirit of God is not hampered by our rules. Men prove their own 
pettiness when they attempt to prescribe how the Divine seed shall grow. The Giver 
of the seed and Lord of the harvest does his work in his own way and time. He 
carries on a heavenly process in the conscience and the heart, in the bosom of human 
society. Vain is our fancy that we can rule the life. " Paul plants, Apollos waters, 
and God gives the increase." 

IV. The process is usually gradual and pkogkessivb. There is a regular law of 
development, "first the blade," etc. We never get the fruit first, the blade last. 
Everything in its season. So in the spiritual kingdom of God. In the child or the 
young convert, we look first for signs of life — the blade which proves that the seed has 
germinated. By Christian nurture, scriptural instruction, and Divine discipline, 
gradual and sure progress is made. The promise is partly realized when the ear is 
formed; it is the time of vigour and manifest growth. Then with the long and 
profitable years comes the full com — the ripeness of Christian knowledge, experience, 
and service. A few favourable years bring the seedling to the sapling, and the sapling 
to the stalwart tree ; a few months cover the broad brown tilth with the golden shocks. 
So in the Church of Christ we see the gradual unfolding of character, the gentle 
ripening of experience, one stage of growth left behind in making way for that which 
succeeds. 

V. The harvest is the end and the recompense op all. If the growth is unob- 
trusive, the harvest is conspicuous. The secret working has prepared for the open 
result. Life ends in fruit. It is so in the spiritual field. When there is ripeness, then 
the time has come for the sickle to be put in. The harvest is gathered, and the gamer 
of God is filled with golden grain. Fruit is yielded upon earth ; and the richest crop 
is reaped hereafter. 

Application. 1. The Christian sower and labourer may learn to think humbly of 
himself, highly of his work. 2. There is encouragement for the " babes in Christ ; " 
their stage of experience is the necessary preparation for the more complete fulfilment 
of the high purposes of God. 3. The glory must be given to God when lile is vigorous 
and when fruit is ripe. 

Ven. 30 — 32. — The mustard seed. The kingdom of God has its intension and its 
extension, its rule over the individual soul, and its sway over human society, its 
invisible work within and its manifest and mighty achievement without ; it tr^nafurms 



I(i8 THE GOSPKL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. [ch. iv. 1— 4L 

character and it renews the world. Perhaps it is fair to regard the preceding parable 
of " the seed growing secretly " as a parable of the history of the Word in the heart j 
and this of the mustard seed as a parable of the fortunes and destiny of the Word in 
the world. Our attention is here directed to — 

I. The small and insignificant beginkixqs of Chbibt'b kinodom. The sugges- 
tions ot nature here are many and striking. Not only does the tree begin with a seed, 
the e,na;le comes from an egg, the river is first a little rill, the fire is ignited by a spark, 
and every day, however gorgeous, begins with a faint and glimmering dawn. 1. The 
Lerd Jesus himself, in his simplicity and humiliation, seemed most unlikely to be the 
Founder of the greatest of all kingdoms. " Despised and rejected of men," cast out, calum- 
niated, and crucified, Jesus was as the grain of mustard seed. 2. The apostles of the 
Saviour were termed " ignorant and unlearned men," and were apparently little adapted 
to revolutionize the world. But in them God chose " the weak things of the world to 
confound the mighty." 3. The early Church may well have seemed to «n observer to 
have had a poor prospect of growing into a world-embracing community. In many a 
thoughtful mind, only doubt and perplexity could arise as to " whereunto this thing 
should grow." Few, feeble, contemned, these little societies were, however, the earnest of 
a universal Church. It was then " the day of small things." 4. The very characteristics of 
Christianity gave little promise of the diffusion of this religion throughout the world. 
Its defiance of worldly principles and powers, its spirituality, its dependence upon 
unseen might, its warfare with prevailing error and sin, — all seemed prejudicial to its 
prospects of progress and victory. 

II. The secret of the peogeess of Christ's kingdom. The figurative language of 
the parable suggests what this is. It is the supernatural life which inspires it. Life 
somes from lile j and the Divine vitality and growth of the Christian Church is owing 
to the indwelling of a heavenly principle and force. A Divine Saviour, a Divine Spirit, 
a Divine Word, — these account for the fact that Christianity lives and grows, expands 
and conquers, day by day and year by year. These alone explain its resistance alike 
of force and of corruption, its endurance amidst all changes of civilization, its permanence 
when all things else fleet, vanish, disappear. 

III. The destined majestic growth of Christ's kinodom. The Oriental mustard 
tree, with its large, strong branches, where the birds settle and eat the pungent seeds, 
beneath the shadow of which men rest, serves as an emblem of the vastness and capacious 
hospitality and ample provision of Christianity in its ultimate perfection. The 
records of our religion tell of noble character, of sublime heroism, of saintly devotion, 
of marvellous patience, of mature wisdom, of boundless benevolence. And all have 
sprung from that seed which fell into the ground and died eighteen centuries ago in 
Judaea. The progress of Christianity during the first centuries of persecution, its con- 
quest of the barbarian conquerors, its purification under the Reformers, its modem 
missions to the East and to the South, — all prove its inherent vitality, and predict its 
ultimate universality of dominion. The predictions alike of the Old and Kew Testa- 
ments are glowing and inspiriting, yet, in our own days, even calm calculation will 
not deem their fulfilment improbable, whilst faith beholds them already realized. The 
" kingdoms of this world shall hicome the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ." 

Application. 1. The discouraged may learn here a lesson of patience. The growth 
of knowledge, virtue, and piety, may be slow, but it is sure. " The husbandman waiteth 
for the precious fruit." 2. All labourers in Christ's cause may be of good cheer ; for 
what has been beheld of progress is enough to inspire with confidence and animate to 
toil : " Your labour will not be in vain in the Lord." 

Vers. 35 — 41. — 7%e storm: the two questions. The scene here depicted by the 
evangelist is an emblem of the condition, of the needs, of the fears, of the Church of 
Christ ; and of the perpetual presence, the brotherly care, the Divine dignity, of the 
Lord, The disciples were on the Sea of Gennesaret ; and we are upon the sea of life — 
of this uncertain world. They took Christ with them in the boat ; and we have him 
with us alway. A storm arose and threatened their safety ; and we, as long as we are 
here, are exposed to the tempests of trial, doubt, and danger. Jesus slept ; and to ui 
it sometimes seems as though he had forgotten and kbandoned us. At the disciples' 
try, Jesus arose and stilled the storm ; and never can we call upon him without 



CH. IV. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 16* 

experiencing his friendly and effectual interposition. He reproaolied the faithless ; and 
for UB too he has often a word of expostulation. His authority impressed tlie disciples' 
minds with reverence ; and never can we contemplate his character and his saving 
might without renewing our faith and adoration. There are two questions in the 
record which represent the two movements of the narrative. 

L The question of the disciples, " Hast thou no care ? " It was the cry ol 
impulse, and a cry which has often sprung from the heart of the Lord's people in their 
griefs and dangers. 1. A cry of /ear. Christians have the same natural passions as 
other men. In times of hodily danger, in scenes of public commotion and disastef, in 
circumstances of threatening and suffering to the Church, the fears of Christ's people 
have often been awakened. " We perish ! " " Carest thou not ? " " Save us 1 " Such 
are the exclamations uttered by imperilled, anxious, and terrified souls. 2. A cry, 
evincing some faith. If the disciples had been altogether without faith, they would not 
have appealed to Jesus, they would not have called him " Master I " they would not 
have entreated him to save them. So, when in our distress we call upon the Lord 
that he will deliver us, we prove that we have some faith in him whose help we seek. 

3. A cry, however, evincing defect of faith. If the disciples' faith in their Master had 
been perfect, they would not have given way to panic, and they would not have been 
rebuked. Our attitude of spirit often proves the deficiency and imperfection of our 
confidence in our Lord. There was want of faith in his knowledge. Did he not, though 
sleeping, understand their danger and their need? A want of faith in his interest and 
care. He did care ; and they ought, even in such circumstances, to have felt assured 
of this. A want of faith in his habitual rule. Though slumbering, he was nature's 
Lord. And how often are we, Christ's people, guilty of overlooking, in our distresses, the 
acquaintance of Jesus with our case, the power of Jesus over our foes, the love of Jesus 
for our souls I 

II. The question op the Christ, " Have ye no faith ? " Well might Jesus appeal 
thus to his disciples. Often had they experienced his power. Always had he justified 
their confidence. Never had he forgotten or forsaken them. How justly may our 
Lord address a similar expostulation to us when we are ready to abandon oxirselves to 
eorrow and to despair 1 1. No faith, when there is such an Object of faith ? Christ 
has shown himself, by his character and his work, to be deserving of all faith ; and 
when we have least confidence in ourselves or our fellow-men we may well have 
all confidence in him. 2. No faith when in human life there is so much need of 
faith t From danger, temptation, sorrow, sin, there is no exemption. If we throw up 
faith in Christ, we throw up all. 3. No faith, when we have so many examples and 
instances to justify faith ? Refer to Old 'Testament history in the light of Heb. 
xi. ; refer to the Gospel narratives of the centurion, of the Canaanite woman, etc. ; 
refer to the instances of our Lord's gracious reply to the appeal and prayer of faith ; — 
and ask if there is any excuse for withholding faith. 4. No faith, when absence of faith 
mutt leave the heart desolate and helpless t What do you lose and forfeit if you are 
without confidence in Christ ? Peace of mind, strength for life's confiicts, hope in 
suffering and in age and in death. Can we forego all these ? 5. No faith, when there 
is such express encouragement to trust in Christ ? He himself invites our confidence : 
" Believe in me ; " " Be not faithless, but believing ; " " Have ye not yet faith ? " 

Applioation. 1. Let the unbelieving repent of their unbelief, and look unto and 
call upon Jesus ; that henceforth, knowing his grace, they may surely trust in him. 
2. Let the doubting Christian be encouraged to put away his fears, and to pray, " Lord, 
increase our faith 1 " 3. Let the believing Christian remember that Christ's people can 
nerer perish. 

•' With Christ in the vessel, 
I smile at the storm." 

4. Let all who experience the Saviour's delivering power and grace unite in adoring hia 
•nd witnessing to him : " What manner of man is this ? " 



170 THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. iv. 1—41, 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1, 2. — TOe nature-preaching of Christ. I. Circumstances oooASiomtia it. 
The order of Matthew and Mark preferable and explanatory. Various considerations 
led him to kdopt this method of teaching. 1. A reasonable prudence. His enemies 
were busy, and scarcely suffered a single opportunity to pass without spying or plan- 
ning means by which to destroy him. Out of doors he would be able to keep the 
crowd at a greater remove, and so hostile listeners would be under better observation. 

2. Sympathy for those who tuere "without." In the small country cottages, where for 
the most part he resided, there was no accommodation for the numbers that thronged to 
his ministry. Stifling heat and inconvenient jostling would ill accord with the dignity 
of his message. Multitudes were unable to hear or see him, and he had compassion on 
their souls, A different class of people, too, might be reached by this new method. 

3. 2%e charm of nature. There are abundant evidences of Christ's poetic and artistic 
sense of nature. He would be drawn forth from the heat and squalor of the small 
cottage to the spaciousness, grandeur, and ever-varying phenomena of the outside world. 
It was his own world. He was present when " the morning stars sang together " at its 
birth, " and without him was not anything made that was made." 

II. Advantages of this mode of tbachinq. 1. It linked the ideas of the spiritual 
world with the real world of every-day experience. 2. By its associating the common 
life of men with the Divine ar.d eternal, the former was refined and elevated. The many 
were thus addressed, and a certain general benefit received by them. 3. 'I'he inner 
meaning of such teaching could only be discerned by the spiritual and devout, and thus 
his safety was secured. His enemies were bafSed and kept in ignorance. 4. This 
teaching was attractive to all. 

IIL What it suggested as to the sphere and function of the " kingdom of 
GrOD." 1. That it was coextensive with the universe. 2. That the heavenly element is 
to penetrate and include the earthly element in Ood^s world. 3. That the tenses, if 
rightly used, are aids to the spirit. — M. 



Vers. 3 — 9 ; 18 — 23. — Hie parable of the sower. The kingdom of God i 

I. A PBINOIPLB of life. Outwardly insignificant ;. exposed to the uncertainties of 
human agency and the vicissitudes of circumstance ; yet embodying vital force, and 
capable under suitable conditions of producing its kind. Ever commencing anew, in 
germ and vital unit. A result as well as a cause, even as the seed is a fruit in the first 
instance. Requiring everything external of itself that is necessary to its being depo- 
sited in the minds of men to be done for it ; yet containing an independent, original 
power of its own, viz. reproduction. 

II. A PROCESS OF growth. Dependent upon : 1. Manner of its reception ; 2. 
Character of the hearer, i.e. whether deep or shallow, thorough or otherwise, like the 
soil; 3. Place which it holds in human regard — whether considered as the chief or 
only as a subordinate interest in life ; 4. ZVm«, — this in all cases. 

III. A CONDITION OF FBUiTFULNESs. The soul, just like the ground, if left alone, 
will be barren or overgrown with weeds. It must be tilled, sown, and tended. Some- 
times these duties are divided, sometimes combined, but all are necessary. 1. AU 
true believers are not alike fruitful. This is analogous to material and mental 
culture. 2. It is enough if each brings forth according to capacity and ability. 8. In 
all cases there is compensating power of increase in the Word, beyond the natural 
qualities and powers of the believer, although a certain relation is always observed to the 
proportion of faith and diligence. The blessing of God is especially manifest in the 
fruits of the Word. — M. 

Vers. 3 — 9 ; 18 — 23. — The parable of the $ower. As iUastrating the purpose of God 
in his Word, 

I. Tbuth IS meant fob all men. 

II. Tbuth is offered to all, 

III. It IS beoeived by many different sobts of people, and n oirvEBKin 

WAYS. 

IV. It is FRUITFUL ONLY WITH A FEW. — M. 



OH. IV. 1—41.] THE GOSPEL ACOORDINQ TO ST. MABK. 171 

Vers. 3 — 9: 18 — 23. — The paraible of the tower. As exhibiting the kingdom ol 
God— 

I. In its BEOIKNIN08. 

II. Its processeb. 

III. Its kesults. — M. 

Vers. 3, 9.— Christ's daim upon the attention of men. " Hearken I" " Who hath ears 
to hear, let him hear! " A frequent peculiarity in Christ's speech. It is well to note 
when he uses it. It is the whisper of Christ. John seems to have caught and repre- 
sented this manner of the Master most closely. 

I. The value of the statements of the gospel. 1, Affecting the persoTial interest 
of every one. Happiness or misery, life or death. 2. Determining the character of 
everyone. 3. The condescension and compassion of infinite love. 

II. The dipfioultt of givino them the attention and oonsidebation thbt 
DESERVE. 1. They appeal to the least-developed side of human nature. 2. They have 
little or no immediate earthly interest to command them. 3. They have commoner and 
more latent meanings, and the latter may not he apprehended. 4. They have many 
counterfeits. " Lo here I Lo there 1 " 6. The earthly life of men is full of dis- 
tractions. 

UI. The besfonsibilitt attachino to them. This remains with the hearer, and 
he caunot free himself. The language of Scripture and the deepest experiences of 
human nature alike assure us of this. 1. Ood has given all men power to understand 
and receive his gospel. That is, of course, provided they have not lost their reason. 
2. Personal moral effort is required with respect to them. (1) To cease delaying. 
(2) To use what faculty and opportunity we have. (3) To suppress prejudice, aversion, 
sin, etc.— M. 

Ver. 11. — The reward of diseipleship. The sense of the word " mystery." Eleusinian 
and other heathen mysteries. Something previously hidden, but revealed in the gospel ; 
or rather, something hidden from certain conditions of the moral nature of man, but 
revealed to other conditions. 

I. It agrees with the manifest end of discipleship. The learner seeks for know- 
ledge. The disciple of any master desires to receive his special doctrine or discovery. 
It is the highest, the esoteric, teaching that is here promised. There are to be no 
secrets or reserves between the Master and his disciples. Eevelation not the mere 
anticipation of experience, but its determining influence and its consummation. 

II. It is beyond the compass of unaided human fagultt. Christ said, " To you it 
is given,." They were not to discover it of themselves. 1. The noblest saints who had 
preceded them were not able to understand (1 Pet. i. 10 — 12). 2. The wisdom of man 
could not discover them. " Eye hath not seen," etc. (1 Cor. ii. 8 — 10 ; of. Eph. i. 15 — 23 ; 
Col. i. 9, seq.). 

III. It IB A DivntB geacb for moral purposes. This appears from the negatives 
of ver. 12. To produce : 1. Repentance and faith. 2. Sympathy with Christ in his 
aims, works, and sufferings, 3. Triumphant superiority to the evil circumstance of the 
world — M. 

Ver. 13. — From one learn aU. L This is a pbinciple not to be universally 
ACTED UPON IN EARTHLY THINGS. Becausc of : 1. Limitation of human powers. 2. 
Uiscurity, complexity, and occasional discontinuity and non-uniformity of nature and 
human life. 

II. To THOSE WHO ABE ILLUMINATED IT IS ABSOLUTELY VALID IN DiVINE THINGS, 

1. Not because the forms and successivi stages of the truth are mere repetitioTis of one 
another. 2. But they are all centred and interpreted in one Person. 3. They all 
require the exercise of the same spiritual faculty. — M. 

Vers. 21, 22. — Revelation and not concealment the final purpose of the truth. L This 
APPEARS from: 1. Its Very nature. That which reveals (e,g. light) is not to be Itself 
hidden. Its whole tendency is and has been towards greater manifestation. Each 
revelation of God has been grander than that which preceded, 2. Its central signifir 



172 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINO TO ST. MARK. [oh. it. 1—41. 

tanee in tJm Divine economy. It has evidently a practical relation to the whole, just ai 
" the lamp " had to the peasant's room, as the general means of illumination. Every- 
thing in the world, in human lives, and in the constitution of tha human soul answen 
to its interpreting light, which is the only, true light by which they can he understood, 
3. The existence inman of a faculty for iti discernment. This may have been overlaid 
or perverted ; but it really exists, and will answer to the believing effort to exercise iU 
It is Satan, not God, who has blinded the minds of those who are lost. 

n. How BTBONO MTJST HAVE BEEN THE REASONS FOB TBMPORART CONCEALMENT I 

1. Hie fearful wickedness of the contemporaries of Jesus. A last time with reference 
to many preceding stages of darkening spiritual consciousness. 2. The revelation of 
that wickedness in convicting it of ignorance of Divine things. 8. The preservation if 
the Personal Truth in humamform until his manifestation should be complete. — M. 

Vers. 24, 25. — " Measure for measure ;" or, the law of equity in its relation to 
Divine knowledge. A wider law (Matt. vii. 2) with special application to spiritual 
learning. One of the phases of the exactitude of relation between God and man, which 
yet admits of grace and blessing. 

I. The Woed of God must be rightly attended to in order to its beino uhdeb* 
STOOD, There is no process of mere mechanical transfer of truth into the nature o( 
man. Experience and progress in truth are subject to the conditions of all intellectual 
inquiry, and also to special moral ones. 

II. ACCORDINO to the PROPORTION OF HEARING WILL BE THE SPIRITUAL BENEFIT. 

1. It i$ to the use of faculties, and not to their mere possession, the reward attaches. 

2. The communication of truth is therefore a spiritual discipline. "Quicquid reci- 
pitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis." Obedience is the gateway of knowledge. 
"Holding the truth in unrighteousness,'' we shall sooner or later lose it; holding 
it "in a pure conscience" and a willing spirit, we shall advance to the fulness of 
truth. — M. 

Vers. 26 — 29. — The seed east upon the earth ; or, the self-development of truth in the 
heart of man. L There is a pbe-establishbd harmony between the truth and 
HUMAN nature. The seed left in the soil germinates because of the mutual adapta- 
tion ; so the Word of God. 

IL The Word of the kingdom has an innate power of development. Dnder 
the appointed conditions it is bound to grow. 

III. God does not interfere with it ob remove it itntil it has produced its 
fruit. 1. It is left to the law of gradualnest. First " the blade," etc. 2. It is taken 
account of and judged in its final result. — M. 

Vers. 26 — 29. — Man used avd then dispensed with. I. What God does by and 
through his servants. The mere sowing of the seed. 1. Eeceiving the seed for one's 
self. 2. Imparting it vitally to other minds. 

II. What God does withoot his servants. The pre-existence and independent 
growth of the seed a great mystery. Its hidden processes provocative of spiritual 
discipline to the sower. In God's hand and the womb of time (Ps. Ixv.). Committing 
it thereto, and leaving it there, a proof and exercise of faith. 

III. Resultant responsibilities. 1. The harvest a living growth, not a dead, 
mechanical effect ; manifold in its producin;, modifying, and enriching causes, one in 
result. 2. Judgment on sower and sown alike. It is in the final product that the 
evidence as to faithfulness, obedience, and diligence is found. — M. 

Vers. 80, 31.—" Whereunto shall we liken it ♦ " An invitation to mutual effort of 
■piritual thought and imagination. An instance of sympathetic condescension. 

L There abb many similitudes of the kingdom of God. 

IL Some abb betteb than otbebs. Either absolutely or relatively to present 
drcumstances. 

III. WK ABE NOT TO BE ONLY PASSIVE RECIPIENTS OF ChRIST's TEACHING. 

IV. Saints enjoy fellowship with Christ in the discovery of tbuth and is 

8PIBITUAL BEALIZATION. — M. 



OH. IV. 1—41.] THE ftOSPBL ACCORDING Tu ST. MARK. 173 

Ver. 34. — " Without a parable spake he not unto them" To be understood of Christ's 
general habit or manner of teaching. It was specially characteristic of him after it 
became evident that the Pharisees were seeking an occasion for his destruction. This 
practice proved — 

I. The VASTNBSS OF HIS spiBiTUAL BBSonRCBS. 1. When prevented from using direct 
statements, he adopted an indirect mode of expression. The truth was not stifled, it 
only assumed another form. There was not the least sign of labour or effort in making 
this transition. He played upon the varying moods and appearances of nature as a 
skilled musician upon his instrument, so as not only to discourse sweet sounds, but to 
suitgest Divine ideas and principles. His supplies of spiritual truth must have been as 
inexhaustible as nature itself. He must have had many modes and digrees of expres- 
sion ill which to clothe the same truth. Restriction of speech in one direction only 
developed a larger liberty in another. 2. In order to this his perception of truth must 
have been of a very deep and vital nature. His parables were not only facile, they were 
felicitous. In them truth lived and breathed. It is not as more or less distant ana- 
logies one reads them, but as one might look at the naked truth itself. How instinc- 
tively must he have discerned the Divine side of things 1 And there is in his figurative 
teaching an imassuming originality, a vigour and vividness that could spring from 
nothing less than inward understanding of spiritual principles — a practical, sympathetic 
familiarity with them in their root and essence. The author of such similitudes cannot 
be conceived of as standing apart from Divine truth, but as one with it ; therefore the 
conclusion, " I am the Truth," is inevitable. 

II. His didactic skill. The parables are beautiful, but it is not as creations of 
artistic genius that they chiefly impress us. Jesus was not the slave of his imagination. 
A careful adaptation of means to ends is perceptible in all his utterances. Tou feel that 
he did not want to paint a beautiful picture, but simply to tell the truth. The latter was 
thus rendered : (1) self-demonstrative ; (2) familiar and forcible ; and (3) memorable. 

III. His pbaotical moral purpose. By his parables our Lord : 1. Demonstrated the 
wiity of creation. The words and works of God were one In their meaning and mes- 
sage. A multitude of phenomena so varied and different, yet so mutually suggestive 
and harmoniously concurrent in testimony, could not be a soulless medley or a resultant 
of blind forces; it must be a system throughout, informed and controlled by one 
governing mind, and moving onward to a worthy if at present inadequately appre- 
hended end. 2. Redeemed nature and human life from base associations. " In every- 
thing there was discernible the idea ; " the humblest thing was suggestive, if rightly 
interrogated, of the Divine. Henceforth nothing was to be considered " common or 
unclean." 3. Rendered human experience a Divine discipline. Every-day events 
and circumstances were charged with spiritual lessons, and revealed as " working 
together for good to them that love God." — M. 

Vers. 30 — 32. — The grain of mustard seed ; or, the growth of the kingdom of Ood 
relatively to its beginnings. I. The BEGiNMNas of the kingdom of God, as compared 

WITH THOSE of OTHER INFLUENCES AFFECTING THE WORLD's LIFE, ARE VERT SMALL AND 

INSI8NIFICANT. A parable and a prophecy. Two plants, either of which might have been 
referred to by Ciirist — Sinapis Orientalis, a garden herb, bushy in habit, with black or 
white seeds, from four to six in a pod , or the Salvadora Fersica, commonly known as 
the tree mustard ; the latter the most likely. The comparison expressed in the phrase, 
" {he least of all seeds," is a free one, and not to be understood absolutely. How minute 
•nd obscure have been the first origins of Christianity 1 The Incarnation ; the upper 
room at Jerusalem. The first throb of repentance ; the dawning power to resist temp- 
tation ; the first acts of faith and charity ; the first words of invitation and appeal. As 
a seed, it has been for the most part hidden ; as a plant, it has seemed in its first 
upspringing like the herbs. This is true of (1) the understanding of the kingdom of God ; 
(2) of interest in spiritual things ; (3) of spiritual influence. 1. It contrasts in this 
respect with powers founded on force, material advantages, prestige, or accidental cir- 
cumstances. Political empire; military aggrandizement; advance of mechanical arts 
and material improvements. 2. In this respect it resembles hut far exueeds the moral 
and intellectual movements that have marked the progress of the world : philosophies, 
civilization, the sentiment of humanity, growth of science, etc. 



XU THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. iv. 1—41. 

n. Its ultimate dimensions will be disproportionately vast. 1. It growt 
according to its own law, yet imperceptibly. As the bud into the rose, the village into 
the city. 2. It becomes comprehensive. Other forces and vital principles are revealed aa 
in relation to it and ultimately included. 3. Its increase is in the direction of beneficence 
and universal blessing. The truth of the epithet, " Mother Church." AH the best 
inteiests of humanity are included and protected. It saves and ennobles whatever it 
affiliates. 4. This is due to its own inherent genius ; not an accident. Circumstances 
have not favoured Christianity, but it has grown in spite of opposition, aad converted 
obstacles into auxiliaries, enemies into friends. It is an absolutely central, and therefore 
the only truly universal, piinciple. — M. 

Vers. 33, 34. — The parable an instrument of mercy and jttdgment. I. Ah insteu- 
MENT OF JUDGMENT. 1. As Concealing more than it revealed to the popular mind. 
2. As convicting men of sinful ignorance and spiritual incapacity. 

II. An instrument op meeot. 1. 'The Word of Ood was not wholly withdrawn. 
2. This, the only practicable form of teaching that remained to Christ, was used with 
constant regard to the benefit of the hearers, 3. The desire for Divine knowledge was 
thereby stimulated. 4. Further instruction was ever attainable by sincere inquirers, — M. 

Vers. 35 — 41. — Christ and his disciples in the storm. The service of Christ — 

I. Consisting in obedience, stmpaiht, and co-operation, 

II. Involving hardship and apparent risk. 

III. A trial and discipline of faith. 1. Left to the realization of imminent 
destruction. 2. Discovering the weakness of the carnal nature. 3. Affording oppor- 
tunity for the moral teaching of the Master. 

IV. A REVELATION OF THE DIGNITY AND POWER OP Christ. " This is the first of a 
second group of miracles. Those before mentioned are cures of bodily disease. These 
are deliverances from other adverse influences — the elements of nature, evil spirits, and 
the sins of men. Christ has authority also over these" (Godwin, on Matt. viii. 23). 
" Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him ? " The great inference : 
Although indefinite, yet practically a complete demonstration of Christ's Godhood. — M. 

Vers. 35 — 41, — The Church in the world. Communion with Christ in— 

I. Separation. 

II. Trial and apparent danger. 
in. Mutual sympathies and cares. 

IV. Pinal victory and attainment.— M. 

Vers. 37 — 39. — The Christian's extremity Chrisfs opportunity. L The Christian 

FREQUENTLY SUFFERED TO ENTER INTO APPARENT PERIL. 1. Outward loSSeS and 

troubles. Persecution in its various phases and degrees. The major calamities of life. 
Everything seems against him, and he is continually disappointed; yet the objects 
sought are reasonable and proper. 2. Inward griefs and fears. Self-questionings as to 
being in a state of grace ; as to whether or not God's favour has been turned away ; 
uv>abts ; prevailing sins. 

II. In THESE CIRCUMSTANCES ORDINARY MEANS OP DELIVERANCE ARB OP NO AVAIL. 

The ordinances of the Church fail to comfort or strengthen. Work for Christ becomes 
distasteful and mechanical. Prayer itself appears to be unanswered, etc. 

IIL The reasons for this. 1. To correct and strengthen character. Besetting 
weakness is discovered; defective principles cf belief are exposed; the backward graces 
of the Spirit are stimulated ; the whole nature is roused to keener sensitiveness, and 
awakened to the solemn responsibility and greatness of the Divine life, 2. A more 
signal and immediate manifestation of Ood is vouchsafed. (1) To create a closer and 
higher communion, and a more vivid sense of the supernatural, and to deepen and 
correct the creed of the believer, A conscious dependence upon his heavenly Father 
takes the place of the former distance and semi-legalism. Self and self-dependence are 
subdued, and practical faith made the daily experience. One such great and signal 
providence may do more than anything else to elevate and confirm the spiritual life. 
(2) To be a sign to them that are without. For a " means of grace," or simply as a 



CH. IV. 1—41.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINQ TO ST. MARK. 176 

warning and an undeniable demonstration, which may make them, with the devils, 
" believe and tremble " even in their rebellion. — M. 

Vers. 38, 40. — Human and Divine remonstrances. Christ and his disciples chide one 
another, yet gently and affectionately. Representative positions — 

I. As BUOOESTINa THE OPPOSITE STANDPOINTS FROM WHICH FBACTIC^L DIFFIOULTm 
or THE BELIOIOUS LIFE MAT BE BEGABDED. 
IL As FUBNISHINO THEIB SOLnTION.— M. 

Ver. l.~Divine teaching from the fisherman's hoat. Matthew gives us, in the thir- 
teenth chapter of his Gospel, a series of seven parables, which correspond with the three 
which Mark records here. They all illustrate the nature and the progress of the 
kingdom of God which Christ sought to establish. The parable of the sower describes 
the founding of the kingdom, and the various difBculties with which it would meet ; 
the parable of the seed growing secretly teaches us that its progress would be natural, 
unostentatious, and cerliiin ; while the parable of the mustard seed declares that in its 
final consummation it would have wide-reaching influence. The second of these is 
peculiar to Mark. We propose to consider, not the parables themselves, but the cir- 
cumstances under which they were uttered, which also suggest and illustrate truths 
concerning the kingdom. Our Lord's teaching from the fisherman's boat suggests the 
following thoughts : — 

I. That hostilitt mat change oub method, but must not be allowed to 
PREVENT OUR woBK. The Pharisees had become openly antagonistic to our Lord. 
Their spies followed him everywhere. Their controversial champions argued with him 
and misrepresented him in the synagogues. This hostility drove the Lord from the 
sanctuaries of his people. He would not suffer his Father's house to be desecrated by 
such tactics. Accordingly, he no longer, as a rule, was found in the synagogues, but in 
the fields and streets, in the homes of the people, or in the fishing-boats that rocked on 
the Sea of Galilee. He thus acted on the principle he laid down for his disciples when 
he said to them, " If they persecute you in one city, flee to another." And that prin- 
ciple still holds good, and may have the widest application. St. Paul acted on it when 
he adapted himself, under varying circumstances, to the conditions of his hearers. If 
he addressed the people of Lystra, he did not argue from the Old Testament, of which 
they knew nothing, but pointed to the mountains and fields, and spoke of the God who 
gave them " fruitful seasons." If he was surrounded by Athenians in their beautiful 
city, he referred to the temples which crowned the Acropolis, and to the statues which 
adorned the Agora. If he was in the synagogue at Antioch, in Pisidia, he argued from 
the sacred Scriptures, the authority of which his hearers acknowledged. He became 
" all things to all men, if by any means he might win some ; " and in this he followed 
in the footsteps of the great Teacher, who, when refused a fair hearing in the synagogue, 
preached beside the open sea. Thus, with the utmost flexibility and freedom, Chris- 
tian workers should alter their methods to meet the changing circumstances in which 
they find themselves; never for a moment losing sight of the object they have set 
before themselves, but seeking to attain that by the most suitable means. This may be 
applied to those who preach or teach, whether amongst the sceptical or the indiflferent, 
among the children or the cultured. 

II. 'I'hAT THERE IS NO PLACE WHERE God's WORK MAT NOT BE DONE. The change iu 

method, indicated by the text, did not trouble our Lord as it would have troubled any 
one to whom place and mode seem everything in worship. All the earth was holy in 
his eyes. The heavenly Father was near him everywhere. The rippling of the sea or 
the rustling of the corn would be more grateful to him than the murmured repetitions 
of formal prayers by the mechanical and unspiritual worshippers in the synagogue. 
Apart from persecution, he would often have chosen, from preference, such a sphere of 
work as this, as indeed he did when he preached the sermon on the mount. Read his 
teaching to the woman of Samaria (John iv. 20, 21), and see how acceptable to God is 
spiritual worship wherever it may be offered. Study the parable that immediately 
follows our text, and yon will notice that the sower threw out his seed broadcast upon 
all kinds of soil. Our Lord would preach in a Pharisee's house, or on a mountain, or 
from a boat, as readily as in a synagogue or in the temple ; for " Holiness to the Lord * 



17« THB GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. iv. 1—41. 

(Zeoli. xiv. 20) was written everywhere, and he accounted " nothing common or 
unclean " (Acts x. 15). Too often Christian workers select their little sphere for service, 
•nd strictly coniine themselves to it, contented that multitudes should be left untouched 
who might easily be brought under their influence. The true sower is willing to scatter 
his seed broadcast. 

m. That thb hose of oxm Lord's teaohino made his dttebakoes uobk widely 
ACOEPTABLB. This was not only true of his own day, but of ours. Publicans, lepers, 
and outcasts, excluded from the synagogue, could hear him on the beach ; and all " the 
common people heard him gladly," for he spake " as one having authority, and not as 
the scribes." It is well for us also that it was so. There is wonderfully little local 
colouring about his words ; a marvellous freedom from such theological technicalities 
as the rabbis were wont to use ; and his teaching, therefore, comes home to us ai it 
never would have done if couched in the phraseology currently used for the interpreta- 
tion of the Law. His utterances are fragrant with the fresh air, and they ring with a 
pleasant freedom, for which we cannot be too thankful ; for what might have been 
Jewish is human, and the words of him who called himself, not " the Son of David," 
but the " Son of man," are so simple and natural, that there is not a fisherman on our 
coasts, not a merchant in our streets, not a housewife in our homes, not a sower in our 
fields, who may not know something of the meaning and beauty of the doctrine of the 
great Teacher who has come from God. 

IV. That cub Lobd'b position in the fishinq-boat is a sign of the tbansient 
NATURE OF ABUSED PRIVILEGES. Christ in the boat has often been regarded as an 
emblem of Christ in his Church. From both he preaches to the world. The Church, 
in comparison with the world it seeks to influence, is small, as the boat with the few in 
it was small compared with the crowds listening upon the beach ; and her comparative 
poverty may be represented by that fisherman's barque, which had about it, we may be 
sure, no costly adornment. But small and poor as the Church may seem, and the 
Christ who is in it, she is free as the Master was, whe could in a moment leave those 
who were hostile or unreceptive, and pass over to the other side (Luke viii. 37). There 
are yet to be found amongst us the impenitent and foolhardy, to whom he will have to 
say, " Because I have called, and ye refused ; I have stretched out my hand, and no 
man regarded; but ye have set at liought all my counsel, and woiUd none of my 
reproof: I will also laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear cometh." — ^A. R. 

Vers. 4 — 8. — Euman hearts tested by truth. " The seed is the Word." Such is the 
interpretation given by the Lord himself, in his exposition of the parable of the sower. 
In other words, the seed represents the truth uttered by Christ and embodied in 
Christ, who is himself declared to be the everlasting Word (John i. 1). This heavenly 
seed is the gift of God. It has life in itself (John v. 26) ; it is the germ of life to the 
world; and, when it is received, it brings forth those "fruits of the Spirit" of which 
St. Paul speaks. The mode in which that seed is received is a test of character, and 
this is illustrated in the words before us. The four kinds of soil upon which the 
sower cast his seed represent four conditions of heart, which we propose to consider. 

I. The hardened heart. Our Lord speaks of some seed falling by the wayside ; 
that is, on the trodden pathway running through the field, which is impervious to 
anything which falls gently, as seed falls. Finding a lodgment there, either the birds 
carry it away or else it is crushed by the foot of the wayfarer. Just as the once soft 
soil becomes hard, so do our moral sensibilities become blunted by the frequent passing 
over them of ordinary duties, and still more of evil words and deeds. We often read 
in Scripture of the hardening of the heart. Pharaoh is said to have " hardened his 
heart " becauM, after being stirred to some thought by the earlier plagues in Egypt, he 
conquered feeling until ho became past feeling. Hence, after the most terrible of the 
plagues, he pursued God's chosen people to his own destruction. The Israelites, too, 
Wdened their hearts in the wilderness. All the issues of this sin recorded in sacred 
history give a significant answer to the question of Job, " Who hath hardened himself 
against God, and prospered ? " This process still goes on, not least amongst regular 
attendants on the means of grace. Address a gathering of outcasts, and though you 
may hear a mocking laugh, you will more probably see the penitential tear as you speak 
of the Saviour's death and of the Father's love ; but speak of this to those who nave 



OH. IV. 1—41.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 177 

often heard the truth, and their calm impassivity will drive you to despair, if it does 
not drive you to God. He who knows all but feels nothing is represented by the 
wayside ; for the truth preached to him is gone as swiftly from his thoughts as though 
evil birds had carried it away. 

II. The sufebfioial heabt is also graphically portrayed. The stony ground is 
not ground besprinkled with stones, but rocky soil covered with a thin layer of eardi, 
such as might often be seen in the rocky abutments which ended the terraces of culR- 
vated soil on a hillside in Palestine. Seed falling there would take root and grow, but 
would soon strike rook, and then withering would begin. This represents those who 
" receive the Word with gladness." They are interested, instructed, impressed ; but they 
have no understanding of its spiritual meaning or of Christ's requirements. They have 
no sense of sin,,and no conflict with it. Their knowledge and experience alike are 
shallow, and they have " no root," because they have no depth of nature. Very sig- 
nificant is the phrase, "They have no root in themselves;" for there is a want of 
individuality about them. Their faith depends upon surrounding excitement and 
enthusiasm, and they are wanting in the perseverance which can only arise from 
personal conviction. Let temptation come to them, and they give up at once their 
poor shreds of faith ; let them go among sceptics, and soon their mockery will be the 
loudest ; let persecution arise, and straightway they stumble to their fill. 

III. The obowdbd heabt. " Some fell among thorns ; " that is, in soil In which 
thorns were springing up. The soil possibly was good, and therefore unlike the last, 
but it was already full. Soon the thorns springing up choke the seed, crowding it 
down, and so depriving it of air and sunshine that the withering stalk can produce no 
fruit. Every one knows the meaning of this who has pondered the words, " Ye cannot 
serve God and mammon," or who understands the warning against " the cares of the 
world, the deceitfulness of riches," and inordinate desires after other earthly things. 
Hisre is such a one. He was once earnest in work for God ; he made time for the 
study of his Word ; he was eager for the quiet hour when he could speak to his Father in 
secret. But this is only a memory to him now. And how came the woeful change? 
There has been no hour when he has deliberately out himself adrift from holy influence, 
nor can he recall any special crisis in his history. But the cares of life, the plans he 
felt called upon to make, thoughts concerning money and the best way to make it or 
to keep it, obtruded themselves more and more, even on sacred times, till holy thoughts 
were fairly crowded out. Thorns have sprung up, and they have choked the seed, so 
that it has become unfruitful. 

IV. The honest heabt. The seed which fell into " good ground " not only sprang 
up into strong stalk, but brought forth fruit in the golden harvest-time, and over it 
the sower rejoiced. Our Lord often spoke of the conditions which are essential to the 
fulfilment of this in the spiritual realm. For example, he said, " He that is of the truth 
heareth my voice ; " and he bade his disciples become as little children, that they might 
rejoice in him. Nathanael was a beautiful example of what Jesus meant. When the 
truth is thus received, in the love of it, it guides the thoughts, rules the affections, 
checks and controls the plans, and sanctifies the whole being of the man. " Christ is 
formed " in his heart " the hope of glory." Abiding in prayer, under the influence o*' 
the Holy Spirit, he experiences a quickening and a refreshment like that which the 
growing corn has when enriched and blessed by showers and sunshine, and " the fruits 
of the Spirit" appear in him, to the glory of God the Father. "Herein is my Father 
glorified, that ye bear much fruit." — A. R. 

Vers. 15 — 20. — The perils and the prospects of the good seed of the kingdom. The 
importance of the parable of the sower is shown by the prominence given to it by the 
evangelists, and by the question of our Lord in the thirteenth verse, " Know ye not this 
parable? and how then will ye know all parables ? " In some respects it was the basis 
of similar teaching, while the key to its interpretation, given by the Lord himself, 
opens the door of other mysteries. 1'he illustration is an analogy, going deeper than 
many suppose. Husbandry was the appointment of God when man dwelt in the bliss 
of paradise, before the Divine order had been interfered with by human sin and self- 
will. Even in man's unfallen state, seed had to be sown and cared for, while the 
blessing of heaven was always essential to its productiveness. He who made the first 

■T. MABK. ■ 



178 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. [oh. tr. 1— 4L 

Adam a sower in things natural, made the second Adam a Sower in what was spiritual. 
Our Lord referred to himself and to all who follow him in his work when he said, 
" Behold, the sower went forth to sow." Now, soil and seed are essential to each other. 
Many a man has the " honest and good heart ; " hut he must not he content with that, 
for, as the richest soil will remain empty unless seed he in it, so even such a heart will 
he unproductive of spiritual results without Christ, the true and living Word. While 
the soil is thus useless without the seed, the seed is unproductive without the soil. 
Hence Christ urged men to receive him, and hence he said of his teaching, " He that 
hath ears to hear, let him hear." Christian truth may be intellectually known and propa- 
gated, hut the world is only the richer for it as it becomes the inspiration of human 
hearts. Christ's words must be translated into men's lives, that they may be read as 
"living epistles." In a sense, the Lord himself must become incarnate in each of his 
followers (Col. i. 27). For the world's sake, as well as our own, may we receive the 
seed of the kingdom 1 This parable speaks of — 

I. The perils which threaten the good seed. Let us seek to recognize them in 
the various thoughts which contend for the mastery with Christ's truth. 1. Evil 
thoughts. They come through companions, from books, etc., but find their source in 
Satan (ver. 15). Often we find that they are most intrusive just after or during our 
holiest hours. They are like the birds of prey which swooped down on Abraham's 
fiacrifice when he was making his covenant with God (Gen. xv.). Like him, we must 
seek by constant watching and effort to drive them away. 2. Vacant thoughts. The 
foolish habit of letting thoughts wander as they list, settling nowhere on what is 
•definite or dignified, is a characteristic of the shallow characters represented by the 
rocky soil. Earnest conviction and the abiding stability which follows it cannot 
belong to these. Well is it when each can say, " I hate vain thoughts, but thy Law 
do I love." 3. Anxious thoughts. " The cares of this world " (ver. 19) are destructive 
of the serenity and rest which Christ's true disciples should always rejoice in. There- 
fore our Lord so urgently warns us against them (Matt. vi. 25 — 34). St. Paul says, 
■" Be careful for nothing ; but in everything by prayer and supplication with thanks- 
giving let your requests be made known unto God," and then " the peace of Gbd . . . shall 
keep your hearts." 4. Adverse thoughts. "The lusts of other things " so absorb some that 
their minds are like a soil fuU of growing thorns. " If any man love the world, the 
love of the Father is not in him." Judas Iscariot was a terrible example of this. It 
would be useless to point out such perils as these if it were not that our hearts are not 
like the soil, which is destitute of will, of effort, and of a voice to cry to Heaven. Onr 
condition largely depends upon our choice, or rather on the prayer which is the outcome 
of it ; so that it is not in vain that we have guarded ourselves against the perils which 
beset the seed. From them let us turn to consider — 

II. The peogeess which awaits the seed in various hearts. 1. Swiftty gone, 
devoured by the birds, i.e. dissipated or destroyed by other thoughts. Warn against 
the flippancy and worldliness of much conversation in Christian homes on the Lord's 
day, and point out the injury which young people may thus receive. 2. Springing 
soon, withering soon. This is specially seen in sentimental natures. There is a 
shallowness in thought and experience from which we should earnestly pray for 
deliverance. It is well when such underlying rock is broken up by the plough of 
afiaiction. 3. Growing, not fruit-bearing. This is the condition of many professed 
Christians, whose homes witness to unconquered tempers and whose Churches mourn 
unattempted service. 4. Producing fruit and increase. All do not bring forth the 
same fruit, either in kind or in degree. Still we see the " thirtyfold," the " sixty- 
fold," and the " hundredfold," according to the gift and capacity of each. God only 
expects of ns according to that which we have, and not according to that which we 
have not. The different talents entrusted to the servants (Matt, ixv.) remind ub of 
this ; yet that every one of them could win the reward of him who had been " good and 
faithful." Allude to various examples of fruit-bearing among Christians, e.g. the quiet 
ministrations in the home, of which no one outside it hears ; the steadfast adherence to 
Christian principle when slight swerving from it would bring an advantage, which as 
a keen man he is quick to see, but as a devout man is swift to spurn ; the privilege of 
writing words which go forth to unseen multitudes, stirring in them loftier though'(s 
of God and of his Word and works ; the pleasantness of the gentle girl who at school oi 



OH. IT. 1—41.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 179 

•t home thinks of every one before herself; the influence of the brave lad whos« 
" wholesome tongue is a tree of life," etc. Bach of these bears fruit, and that fruit is 
the new seed from which future harvests spring. — A. R. 

Vera. 26 — 29. — The progress of Divine life in the soul. Mark alone records this 
parable. It occupies the position of the parable of the tares in Matt, xiii., following 
" the sower," preceding " the mustard seed," but is not to be identified with it. It 
teaches us that Divine life, like ordinary seed, requires time for its development, that 
its growth is unnoticed and but little dependent upon human interference, and that it 
will have a glorious consummation. 

I. The gkowth op the Divike life. 1. It is secret (ver. 27). Man " knoweth not 
how " the seed springs. Our " natural laws " are little more than generalizations of 
observed facts, and afford no adequate explanation of the nature of life and growth. 
While we are busy or are resting the seed is quietly growing up under the care of God. 
We know but little more of the Divine life, even in ourselves. We know that we have 
it and that it produces certain effects, but of its essential nature our keenest analysis 
discovers but little. Still less do we know of the Divine life in others; and, as 
Christian teachers or parents, we must neither intrude upon it, as a child will do on 
growing seed, nor be over-anxious about it, as a foolish husbandman may be. With 
faith in God, leave it prayerfully to him, and " in due season we shall reap, if we faint 
not." 2. It is independent (ver. 28). The meaning of the phrase, " The earth bringeth 
forth fruit of herself," is this, that she has powers of developing life which exclude our 
agency, though they include God's agency. After sowing his seed, man may sleep or 
rise, leaving it to natural influences. We are not taught to be idle, but are reminded 
that we can do but little after sowing. In religious work we must never try to force 
growth by unnatural methods. First religious feelings are too sacred and delicate to 
be treated as they sometimes are. Intrusive and over-anxious teachers may sometimes 
do harm, not least in the confessional. The principle applies to our own life also. A 
morbid brooding over our own spiritual condition, a petty and constant measurement 
of our own feelings, is injurious. " He that observeth the wind shall not sow, and he 
that regardeth the clouds shall not reap." 

II. The manifestation of the Divine life. True seed, under favourable condi- 
tions, cannot keep hidden beneath the soil. It must grow, and, if it grows, it must 
ultimately be seen. Nor can we keep our spiritual life a secret from others if it be 
true; for in holy influence and loving deeds and devout life it must appear. This 
parable describes its gradual progress, representing it in three stages, which correspond 
with those represented by St. John (1 John ii.) in his references to " children," " young 
men," and " fathers." 1. 3%e itocZe represents the "little children" in grace, "whose 
sins are forgiven for his Name's sake." A wise husbandman never despises the blades 
of com. He knows their value, their tenderness, their possibilities. God has provided 
for their safety. When the wind sweeps over the fields they bend before it and are 
uninjured, though much that is stronger is swept away. So young Christians, though 
in .some respects weak, give promise of the future, have a special grace and beauty 
of their own, and, amidst temptations under which those older fall, abide and- appear 
more fresh and fair. 2. The ear represents the " young men," who have " overcome 
the wicked one." Here there is a loss of freshness, but a gain in strength. There is 
less enthusiasm, but more principle. The showers of adversity as well as the sunlight 
of prosperity are necessary to this. Speak of some who in special circumstances of 
temptation have proved the power of the grace of God. 3. The full corn in the ear. 
The " fathers," who have " known him that is from the beginning," are like the full-grown 
wheat, bending its head under the weight of the rich grain it bears, ready to be 
cut down and carried home. Such a one has a fulfilment of the j^romise, "Thou 
shalt come to thy grave in a good old age, like as a shock of com cometh in in his 
season." 

IIL The consummation op the Divine life. (Ver. 29.) Here the reference is to its 
earthly consummation only, for when the ripe com is carried home, though it no longer 
adorns the field in which it grew, it is only beginning to fulfil its true destiny. The 
moment of death is the time when the reaper puts in the sickle, because the harvest 
is come ; and the same sickle which destroys one life gives new energy to another and 



180 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, MARK. [ch. iv. 1—41. 

higher life. Mortality is swallowed up of life. The outcome of time shall be th« 
leed of eternity. — A. K 

Vers. 30 — 32. — Great issues from small beginnings. The lesson which our Lord 
intended to teach by the parable of the mustard seed is stated in the announcement of 
our subject. If he had wished to set forth the splendour of his kingdom, he would have 
chosen as an illustration the stately cedar or the fruitful vine. The mustard in its 
greatest growth is by no means majestic ; but it is large in proportion to its seed, and 
although it was not literally " the smallest of seeds," it was the smallest of those used 
in ordinary husbandry, and was proverbially used to denote what was little and 
despicable. All references to the supposed qualities of the seed, e.g. to its corrective 
power in disease, to its efiBcaoy against venom, to its fiery vigour, to its giving out of 
virtue after being bruised, and so forth, appear to us beside the main purpose of the 
parable, which was to set forth the great issues which, in the kingdom of our Lord, 
would spring from small beginnings. This principle we propose now to illustrate. 

L It IS EXEMPLIFIED IN THE BAKTHLT HISTQKT OP ODB LOBD. In his histOry We 

see, as in a microcosm, the history of his Church. With limitless powers of choice, he 
selected for himself the most humble and obscure modes of ministry. His ways are not 
•s our ways. Man makes a pretentious beginning, and often comes to a disastrous 
ending. The building of the Tower of Babel is a typical instance of this. Our Lord, 
who came to effect the stupendous woi'k of redeeming the world, began by spending 
thirty years in comparative seclusion as a dependent infant, as an obedient child, as the 
son of a village carpenter. During his two or three years of public ministry his convert* 
were few, and for the most part poor and ignorant. At last he died in agony and shame, 
amidst the hooting of a rabble and the hatred of the reputable ; and his body was laid 
to rest in a borrowed grave. As we consider his life on earth, we see that it may be repre- 
sented by a seed less in appearance than many others. But there was a fulfilment of 
his own words about himself, " Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it 
abideth alone ; but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit." 

II. It IS EXEMPLIFIED Dt THE SPECIAL D0CTEINE8 OF Chkistianitt. They Were not 
truths which would commend themselves to sensuous imaginations or to worldly hearts. 
They did not appear in such form and phrase as at once to win popular applause. Notice 
some of our Lord's special doctrines as laid down in the sermon on the mount and else- 
where : e.g. happiness is to be found in the sacrifice of self ; sin is to be hated, not 
because its results are painful, but because it is sin ; outward obedience and large gifts 
and sacrifices are valueless in themselves, etc. After his crucifixion, this fact was still 
more prominent. Paul said, " Wc preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling- 
block, and unto the Greeks foolishness ; but unto them which are called, both Jews and 
Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God." Indicate some of the reasons 
for the non-reception of Christian truth. 

III. It is EXEMPLIFIED Dj THE HISTORY OF THE CHRISTIAN Chukch. Christianity at 
the time of our Lord's crucifixion appeared to be buried in the hearts of a few disciples 
and forgotten by the world. But on the spring day of Pentecost it appeared in a 
vigour and beauty which amazed all onlookers. It was like the bursting forth of 
forgotten seeds where you have been busily employed planting something else. Chris- 
tianity rapidly spread. Give evidences of this from early Christians and from Suetonius, 
Pliny's letter to Trajan, etc. This, humanly speaking, was the work of poor and illiterate 
men. Manifestly the result was due, not to the sower, but to the seed. Describe the 
condition md influence of the Christian Church now : the most powerful and civilized 
nations largely ruled by its authority ; the indirect work it is doing through just laws, 
wholesome literature, philanthropic ajjencies, etc. Draw a contrast between the social 
and religious condition of the peoples now and at the time of Christ's coming. The seed 
has become a tree, " so that the fowls of the air may lodge under the shadow of it." 

IV. It 18 EXEMPLIFIED IN THE EXPERIENCE OF EACH ChKISTIAN. " The kingdom 

of God " is not to be a something outside ourselves. We are not among its subjects 
because we can say, " This nation in which we dwell is Christian." " The kingdom of 
heaven is within you," said our Lord to his disciples. It is within us when we welcome 
Christ, its King, with all that he represents, to our own hearts to love and obey for ever- 
more. That being so, a new life is ours, the test of whose vitality is to be found in growth 



OH. IV. 1—41.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDIJSG TO ST. MABK. 181 

until «very thought and affection and purpose (like the birds spoken of In this parable) 
dwell under its influence. If there has been no growth, let us examine ourselves. Whea 
% flower or plant is fading, drooping, and likely to die, we try to discover the cause. Per- 
haps it wants water, perhaps it is shut off from sunshine, perhaps it has been too long 
coddled under artificial heat and is therefore weakly, or perhaps a worm is gnawing at the 
root. If our spiritual life has no growth, let us ask why this is. We want showers of 
blessing, the sunshine of God's favour, independence of artificial stimulants, and above 
all, freedom from the sin which doth so easily beset us, and then we shall grow like 
plants of God's right hand planting. — A. R. 

Vers. 1 — 25. — The duty of faithfully hearing the Word. He who taught by every act 
of his life, and who had already given many most important lessons with his lips, now, 
after the interruptions just recorded, " began to teach " more formally. It was " by the 
seaside ," the multitude standing " by the sea on the land," and he " entered into a 
boat, and sat in the sea." " He taught them many things in parables." The first of 
these and one of the chief of the parables and the chiefest of all on the subject of " the 
Word," is, with its explanation, the key to many others. The lesson of the whole is 
summed up in the words of ver. 24, " Heed what ye hear." It was not without purpose 
that he spoke of hearing. All dei)ends upon it. Noah, Moses, Paul, Jesus himself, will 
preach in vain if men hear not with care. The parable teaches — 

I. The especial evils against which men must guard in hearing the Woed. 
1. The first evil is losing the Word before faith has made it fruitful. " The parable is 
this : the seed is the Word of God." The kingdom of heaven grows from this seed 
only. By it alone is conviction of sin wrought ; by it is faith begotten ; by it Christ 
is revealed ; by it regeneration is effected ; by it the way of life is defined ; by it are 
men sanctified ; by it hope, and patience, and charity, and all graces are strengthened. 
This great lesson is, by both preachers and hearers, to be pondered. But the Word, by 
whomsoever sown, may be lost before it is fruitful. It may be taken out of the heart, 
out of the memory, from the understanding. " When they have heard, straightway 
Cometh Satan, and taketh away the Word which hath been sown in them." 2. A second 
danger is from a mere temporary faith. There is " no deepness of earth," " no root in 
themselves." They " endure for a while." A little thing turns them away from that which 
they received " straightway with joy," but without counting the cost. 3. A third evil 
is the fruitlessness of the Word through the " cares of the world, and the deceitfulness 
of riches, and the lusts of other things," especially " the pleasures of this life." The 
ground is good ; the seed is good ; it is well received and kept in the heart ; yet is it 
choked. Yea, even God's good Word sown in the heart by Christ's own hand may be 
choked. This is a danger to which every believer is exposed. It is allowing other 
growths to sap this, other things to take up the time and attention, to absorb the 
interest, to steal the affections. "The poor are in danger from " the cares of the world ; " 
the rich from " the deceitfulness of riches." The parable teaches — 

II. The ebwabd op faithful hbabino. " He that hath, to him shall be given," 
To him that hath as the fruit of his diligence, not simply what was given to him — all 
had this — to him shall be added the Lord's increase, over and above the natural con- 
sequences of his_ carefulness. He who so uses Divine truth as to be the better for it is 
in more favourable circumstances to receive and understand. Such know the truth, for 
" the mystery of the kingdom of God is given" to them. Every step in the ascent makes 
the next step possible. Truth grows to its perfection (that is to say, the character which 
is the product of truth) when it is " heard " and held fast in " an honest and good heart ; " 
a heart inwardly good and outwardly honest ; a heart honestly desiring the Word and 
acting honestly by it. To such there is " fruit, thirty fold, and sixty fold, and a hundred- 
fold." This is the truly prepared ground — ploughed, as could not be said of " the 
wayside " or the " stony ground." The parable further teaches — 

III. The condemnation of him who hbarbth not to profit. 1. " He that hath 
not," ».«. hath not any fruit of his careful hearing, hath nothing more than was first given 
to him ; " even that which he hath " — that which was given to him — " shall be taken 
away." Disregarded truth becomes disliked truth, and by him who does not use his 
understanding about it, it is naturally forgotten. So the condemnation takes the form 
•f a removal of the truth. 2. In carelessness he puts the truth away from him. Hij 



182 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. iv. 1—41. 



measure is small, so he metes it to himself. 3. To hear is a duty j to neglect hring: 
God's condemnation. 4. He who does not so receive God's truth as to become a true 
subject of the kingdom of heaven, is in the kingdom of evil, and continued disobedience 
leaves the man further and further from God. 5. So truth assumes the form of a parable 
to him. His eye is dimmed. He sees only the outward word ; of the inward meaning, 
which is experimental, he knows nothing. Even Christ, his work and his gospel, may 
be to men a mere parable. They know not " the things " which are spoken. Thus ii 
to be seen : (1) The terrible and to-be-dreaded consequence of not heeding the Word. 
It becomes a parable, a dark saying, a riddle. " If they hear not Moses," etc. (2) The 
mercifulness of him who would hide truth in a beautiful parable, to tempt the carelesg 
to inquire that they may be roused to effort and be saved. (3) The great lesson, " to 
hear the Word," " to read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest the same, that by patience and 
comfort of the Scriptures we may embrace and ever hold fast the blessed hope of ever 
lasting life, which is given to us in our Saviour Jesus Christ." — G. 

Vers. 26 — 34. — The kingdom of Ood further illustrated hy parableg. No single x>arable 
holds the entire truth in itself; therefore, by " many such parables " Jesus " spake the 
Word unto " the multitude. Of thoife spoken at this time, St. Mark selects only two 
others besides that of the sower, and both of them, as was the first, are drawn from 
seeds. How suitable a simile of that kingdom, whose inherent, vital, self-expanding 
force is one of its most distinguishing features ! These two parables stand related : the 
one leading us to think of the part " the earth " plays in bearing " fruit " — the power, 
as before we saw the duty, of the human heart to receive and to nourish the seed, to 
yield its due results ; the other teaching the history of the little seed when received 
into suitable soil. This parable, the only one peculiar to St. Mark, is simple and very 
beautiful, and full of rich teaching. It embraces all the history of the seed in the heart, 
from its sowing, through its stages of growth, to its ripeness and ingathering. It may 
be summarized as — 

The law of the development of the Christian life. 1. The human heart is the 
suitable " earth " for the heavenly seed. But one kind of seed, " the Word," is named. 
Prom this alone the kingdom grows. Yet the seed is not always sufficiently winnowed. 
The same hand sometimes scatters darnel with the wheat, or the gaudy, bright, but 
useless poppy. But seeds, bad and good, will grow together in the same field. What 
will not grow in the human heart I He who made the warm soil suitable for the growth 
of the useful herb for the service of man, and adapted the seed to the earth, has made 
the heart so that the best and highest truths will grow therein. There, what would 
otherwise be a dead truth — a hard seed — may find the suitable conditions for its nourish- 
ment and growth. There it is quickened. Every holy truth may find a home in the 
heart of man ; the richest, ripest, most wholesome, most abundant fruit may be gathered 
in that Eden. 2. The needful committal of the seed to the earth has its parallel in 
Chriit's committal of his kingdom to the fruit-bearing heart. There it grows, " we know 
not how," though we know so much. There is but one true Sower to whom the field 
belongs, and who provided the one basket of seed. But many sow in his Name and by 
his direction — preachers, parents, teachers, writers, friends. But the truth once sown 
in the heart must be left to Heaven's own influence. Days and nights follow. Patient 
waiting is needed, for the growth of good principles is slow and the perfect fruitfulnesa 
not immediate. And the lesson of patience is silently hidden in the words of the parable. 
He who causes the seeds of the earth to swell and burst and die, and out of the hidden 
germ a new life to spring up, brings the truth to the remembrance, awakens dormant 
thought, stirs the indolent conscience, carries conviction deep within, whence springs 
faith, to be followed by all holiness. The growth retains its own distinctive character, 
being nevertheless affected by the nature of the soil — " the earth which beareth fruit of 
herself." 3. The progression of the spiritual life is as the growth of the field. The truth 
quickly works its way. The first signs are found in a slightly changed manner of life, 
as it submits to the restraining and guiding truth ; the tint on the face of the field is 
slightly altered j a delicate tinge of spring green blades mingles with the russet-brown of 
the soil. All is immature and feeble, but beautiful, as the field in the first days of spring ; 
and it is full of promise. A longer space follows ere the ear appears. It is the time of 
f inwth. The responsibility of the sower is transferred to the earth, save that he may guard 



OH. IV. 1—41.] THE GOSPEL ACUOEDING TO ST. MARK. 183 

it from being trampled by the rude, rough hoof of stray cattle, or from being ploughed up 
wrongfully by careless hands. Now the sower must " sleep and rise night and day." 
He cannot hurry the growth. This is the time of trial, exposure, and danger. It is the 
needful time for Christian culture, for the gradual acquisition of strength and wisdom, 
and the slow building up of character. And what is trae of the individual growth is 
true also of the great wide field which is the world, where all good, and alas 1 all evil, 
may grow, and whose prolonged history goes on slowly towards the great harvest. 
" The full corn in the ear " points to the matured Christian character, the trained, sub- 
dued, chastened spirit. Sunshine and shadow, calm and storm, darkness and light, have 
all passed over the field ; all helpful, each in its own way, in promoting the growth, 
strength, and fruitfulness, alike in the less or the greater field ; and all tending towards 
that moment " when the fruit is ripe." Then, and not until then, " he putteth forth the 
sickle, because the harvest is come." So is it with every believer — every varied growth 
in the wide field ; so is it with the entire history which tends towards that " harvest " 
which " is the end of the world." 

Hence from this parable, which is one long teaching, we learn the wisdom and duty : 
1. Of thankfully receiving the Word into our hearts. 2. Of faithfully cherishing it. 
3. Of patiently waiting for its full fruits. — G. 

Vers. 30 — 32. — The parable of the mustard seed. This parable stands related to 
the former. That pointed to the history of the growth of the seed ; this points to the 
inherent vitality of the seed. That laid the emphasis on the field ; this lays it on the 
seed. The simile is so exact that we are in danger of transgressing a needful canon 
in the interpretation of parables, and to treat it as a realism. The parable illustrates 
ike histm-y of the kingdom of heaven in its outward manifestation, especially the 
•mallness of its beginning; contrasted with the greatness of its results. 

I. The kingdom or God finds its appbopbiatb symbol in a seed with its 
EfHEKENT, VITAL, SELF-EXPANDING FOECB. This is true, whether we interpret the king- 
iom of God to refer to its essential principle — the dominion of the Divine Spirit over 
the human spirit ; or to its outward manifestation in the visible Church of God — 
the gospel developing itself in the heart and life of mankind ; or even to its instrument 
— the Divine Word. Gathering these together as all comprised in the idea of the kingdom 
of God, we must see it to be truly represented by a seed — a living, inherently vital 
power. This parable leads us to think more particularly of the outward manifestation 
of the kingdom of God ; and wherever we see it planted we sooner or later see signs 
of growth and extension. One of the first sentiments stirred in the breast of the 
newly converted is a desire for the conversion of others ; and the first activities evoked 
from the new life are found in efforts to lead others to like blessing. Each believer 
becomes the germ of a Church ; each is a self-propagating seed. From one may spring 
a thousand, nay, as many as the stars of heaven for multitude. So was it with the 
Church in the beginning — the little quickened seed in Jerusalem. So has it been in 
every age. To-day we joyfully witness the signs of this vitality on every hand. 

II. A SECOND FEATURE OF THE KINGDOM OF GoD IS THE EXTREME SMALLNE8B OF ITS 

ORIGIN. iStill thought of as an outward manifestation, how small was its beginning ! 
How little a seed ! Judging Christ's work by the greatness of its aims, how small 
were his means 1 What books did he write ? What organization did he frame ? What 
cities did he build? What armies did he raise ? What did he? Estimated by out- 
ward signs — a mere nothing. A few women and fewer men gathered ; no multitude, 
no Chorch, no foims of worship, no writings. No ; no ; nothing. What then ? Just a 
living seed dropped into the warm heart. Not more than a human heart could 
treasure — not more than Ma*^thc.w could remember. The record of a brief life, with its 
few words ; its few nobie deeds of sincerity, love, and self-denial ; and its sad death 
and marvellous resurrection. All the kingdom of God in that one life, all the heavenly 
kre&sure in that one earthen vessel ; all in a " mustard seed, . . . less than all the seeds 
that are upon earth." But it grew to be " a tree." 

III. This the third feature of the parable : The ultimate extension op the 
KINGDOM OF QoD. And the point of interest seems to be it grows beyond its probable 
limits, " greater than all the herbs ; " yea, it " putteth out great branches, becometh a 
tree, eo that the birds of the heaven " not only " lodge under the shadow " of it, bu' 



184 i THE GOSPEL, ACCORDING TO ST, MARK. [ch. rr. 1—41, 

" in the branches thereof." Its growth is beyond, far beyond, what might have been 
reasonably expected. So we see to-day ; so will it be more and more seen. These 
parables Jesus spake unto the multitude " as they were able to hear ; " and privately 
then, as he now does to them who care to know, " he expounded all things," — O. 

Vers. 35 — 41. — The stilling of the storm: the deliverance of the Church. Th6 
miracles so far recorded were miracles of healing, and demonstrate the dominion 
of Christ in the realm of the human life — he is Lord of the human body. Now he 
declares his equal dominion in the realm of disturbed nature, " even the wind and the 
sea obey him." The Church has found two uses in the miracles of our Lord. 1. In 
an earlier age they were a sign to unbelievers, evidences of the authority of the 
Teacher, attestations to the truth of his message. Christ appealed to them : " The worki 
that the Father hath given me to accomplish, the very works that I do, bear witness 
of me, that the Father hath sent me. Though ye believe not me, believe the works." 
2. In later times they have been found to be a treasure of spiritual teaching, a word of 
revelation and power to believers. Thus they form a part of the Church's inestimable 
possessions. The instruction divides itself into two branches : the positive knowledge 
which they convey — as in this, the lordship of the world's Redeemer over external 
nature ; and the typical and more hidden spiritual lessons. The Church has ever seen 
herself represented in that ship. " The ark of Christ's Church " is a consecrated term, 
and in the sea she has beheld the wild, raging, unfriendly world. So the incident 
becomes typical : (1) of the Church's exposure in the world, as a bark on a stormy sea ; 
(2) of the Church's true safety in the presence of Christ ; (3) of the ever-present and 
final stilling of the rage of the world and the perfect deliverance of his own from all 
surrounding peril. 

I. The histoey of the Chuech or the Lobd Jesus is a histoet of exposure to 
DANGBE. What perils have threatened the holy writings — that ark in which all the 
truth is held 1 At first but a few scattered recollections of men ; Heaven's high 
treasures held in earthen vessels. Then written on a few flying leaves of parchment 
by tremulous human hands in uncertain human letters. Afterwards followed dangers 
from the errors of dim-sighted transcribers, from injudicious interpolators, from the 
destructive ravages of fire. Yet after the long ages it is probable we possess a more 
accurate transcript of the original documents than the Church ever possessed since the 
rery early transcripts were penned. To what perils has the true Society of Jesus — the 
holy Catholic Church — been exposed in her very varying history ! Scarcely had this 
barque left the shores ere the strong surf of Judaism threatened to overturn it. Then 
fitful winds of human wisdom — " the profane babblings and oppositions of the know- 
ledge which is falsely so called." Dangers have arisen from internal contentions — a 
mutinous crew ; from unsteady hands at the helm, and clouded eyes upon the watch ; 
from overlading with worldly goods, gold, raiment, precious stones ; from sunken rocks 
•f pride and worldly glory. False lights have threatened to wreck the vessel upon 
rugged and uncertain coasts, while black darkness has overcast the heavens, when " for 
many days neither sun nor stars have shone and no small tempest lay " on the exposed 
craft. Truly this Galilean boat, this " ark of Christ's Church," has been often in 
perilous seas. But with all she has not sunk. Christ has said, " Let us go over unto 
the other side." A wider view would lead us to think of the exposure of the whole 
spiritual interests of men. Though these have been exposed to dire destruction, they 
still survive, and faith, and hope, and love, and truth, and righteousness abound. 

II. The Church's safety has ever been, is now, and ever will be, ra Christ. 
This no believer will doubt. To all human appearance asleep, he hastily responds 
to the cry of prayer, of fear, and desire. The Church to-day is as truly safe in the 
midst of her many dangers as in that night when the whole Church and the Lord thereof 
were in that one fishing-boat, when all seemed to be risked, and men accustomed to 
the sea cried, being fearful, " We perish." Up out of the evils of this stormy life will 
he lift his own by the miracles of his supremacy. His sweet, calm voice will yet be 
heard above " the raging of the sea and the tumult of the people," above strife and war 
and cruel bate, above ignorance, and sin, and sorrow, and pain. Even to evil he will 
say, " Peace, be still." So that unto him whom winds and seas obey shall be glory and 
honour from the quiet spirits of his whole Church for evermore. — G. 



CH. nr. 1—41.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, 18fi 

Vers. 1 — 20. — The process of truth in the soul. "Word" in the parable stands 
for truth in general. It is the Greek logos, which contains everything relating to 
ideas and the reception of them. 

I. The relation op truth to the sotHi. It is mysterious, because in it th« 
secret of life lies. We know certain things about the seed ; we know certain things 
about the soil; we know that their contact is necessary that germination and 
growth may take place. Sight, experience, teach us this. But the relation itself 
is unseen and defies the grasp of thought. Well may the poet say of the "flower 
in the crannied wall " that he has plucked and holds in his hand, could he know 
its mystery, he should know " man and God and all things." Piety lacks root 
without reverence ; and reverence is begotten of mystery, i.e. of the sense that God ii 
present in every fact of life, in every act of thought. 

II. The reception of truth in the soul. The parable clearly teaches that the 
whole intelligence and will are closely concerned in this. 1. There must be attention. 
The frivolous listener lets the sound of instruction " go in at one ear and out at the 
other." Pictures of life and duty, which need to be seized and fixed in conduct so soon 
as they arise in the inner chambers of imagery, melt away like dissolving views. 
2. There must be retention. Memory depends on attention : " Therefore we ought to 
give earnest heed to the things we have heard, lest at any time they should slip by us." 
Memory is a talent of which some have more, some less ; but in every case it may be 
increased. Truth does not strike all minds in the same way ; the important thing is 
to seize the truth which does strike us, and which we know to be truth by the way in 
which it strikes us. If conscious of the frailty of our memory, let a few things be 
constantly brought before our thoughts. Non multa, sed mulium. 3. There must be 
simplicity of choice. Truth is jealous, and admits no rival. We must be true to her, 
for she alone gives freedom. Passions, cares, excitements of the imagination — ^these 
cannot be avoided in our active life in the world. For a time they may overcloud our 
ideal, cause us to lose sight of our goal. But the cloud will lift again, and directness 
of purpose will dispel these mists and cause the weight of the /xspinvai ^iotikoI (see 
' Ecce Homo 1 ' p. 221) to falL Christ sympathizes with our life-difficulties, but implies 
that we may overcome them. 

III. The progress or truth m the soul. 1. It follows the analogy of plant- 
growth. We can hardly think of spiritual growth under any other image. Herein 
the need of some knowledge of natural science to the theologian. There lie some of 
his beat instructions and illustrations. It is the Divine counterpart in nature of the 
ideal truth of spirit. 2. There is diversity in spiritual as in natural growth. Here th« 
com only is used as an analogy. But we may generalize. The differences in kind 
as well as degree of produce are not less numerous than in the immense plant-world. 
The world of souls is as varied as a garden — as a tropical forest. 'Tis a universe of 
variety. God spiritually unfolding himself in endless forms of beauty and of strength, 
delicacy and vigour. " He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." For the parable is in 
fact a sketch-picture of the ideal world— of God's kingdom of the invisible and etemaL 
We are in this world to be acted upon by him, that we may react upon him in all the 
devout activities of a fruitful life.— -J. 

Vers. 21 — 25. — The use of the spirit. I. The faculties op the human spirit 
COMPARED TO LIGHT. We may take any division of them we please: intellectual, 
emotional, volitional; head, heart, hand; — the comparison holds good. L Light is 
cheering, so is intellect ; sound reasoning, bright fancy, lambent wit, genial humour. 
Bound knowledge. 2. With light goes heat. The sound head is generally associated 
with the large heart. Carlyle said that a great heart was the foundation of talent. 
8. Light promotes morality, purity, progress ; dispels the thoughts and deeds of dark- 
ness. Great is the blessing of the presence and action of the man of high principle 
in the home, the Church, the court, the senate, the judgment seat. 4. It is revealing. 
The beauties of nature exist not for us in the darkness. Nor can we see the wonders 
of God in the spiritual or ideal world without the light shed by the genius of the 
•cientific man, the moralist, the philosopher, and the poet. 

IL Faculties given to be used. 1. If not used they are hardly possessed. They 
iwindle and become enfeebled in disuse. " To him that hath shall be given," etc. bi 



186 THE GOSPEL ACOORDINQ TO ST. MARK. [on. iv. 1—41. 

this lies the important differences between man and man. The seeming stupid becomei 
bright by patient friction with difficulty, while the idle clever man rusts and blonta 
his edge. 

" If GUI virtues go not forth from ns, 'tis all 
As one as though we had them not." 

2. God is an exact creditor. He starts us in life with a certain fixed capital of energy ; 
just such and such a sum or number of talents. The rest is our part. The increase 
may be indefinite, in this world and worlds to come. He " lends not the smallest 
scruple of his excellence, but, like a thrifty creditor, demands both thanks and use." 
Let life be the grateful repayment of the spiritual loan. If we do not " pay our way " 
we shall suffer for it. 

" Wouldst thou seal up the avenues of ill T 
Pay every debt as if God wrote the bill." 

3. In the long run, success or failure, prosperity or ruin, is the reaction of onr own 
deeds. We reap as we sow. A Nemesis presides over all our works. " If you serve, 
or fancy you serve, an ungrateful master, serve him the more. Put God in your debt. 
Every stroke shall be repaid. The longer the payment is withholden, the better for 
you ; for compound interest on compound interest is the rate and usage of this 
exchequer." " The benefit we receive must be rendered again, line for line, deed for 
deed, penny for penny, to somebody. Beware of too much good staying in your hand 
It will fast corrupt and breed worms. Pay it away quickly in some sort." — J. 

Vers. 26 — 29. — The heauty of growth. I. The small beginnino. What smaller 
or more seemingly feeble than the seed — the thought — the word — the volition ? Yet 
in the beginning lies the end, in the acorn the oak. 

II. The immense Divini; powek. We lie on the bosom of nature as the seed lies in 
the earth. For as winds blow and waters move and earth rests, God in his might and 
love bears up and onward the living soul. All things are ours to work onr good. 

III. The secrecy and slowness op the process. God does the best for us while 
we sleep. The Greek artist represented Fortune driving cities into the net of the 
sleeping conquerw Timotheus. Cultivate a wise patience. Enow the power of th« 
word Waitt 

•Think you of all the mighty sum 
Of things for ever speaking. 
That nothing of itself will come, 
But we must still be seeking?" 

" BipenesB is all." Tis worth waiting a lifetime for the fruition of u hour. Each 
hour is a fruition of eternity to him who lives in Gk)d. And we may be reaping when 
we seem ouly to be sowing. — .7. 

Vers. 30 — 34. — The power of ideas. I. The kingdom of God is the kingdom of 
IDEAS. All forms of the true, holy, and good are included in this kingdom. Life 
would be intolerable, amidst the greatest physical comfort, without ideas. Our spirit 
is bom to love and live among them. Novelty of ideas is the condition of change for 
the better in every life-department. 

n. Ideas are SELF-MULTiPLYiNa. Start a beautiful pattern in trade ; it gives birth 
to a whole creation of beauty. Cast in a golden hour a seed of truth or love into the 
general mind ; up springs a flower, whose seed will presently be in all gardens (see 
Tennyson's poeny. Do a noble deed, speak a word from the full voice of the heart ; 
an infinity of echoes will awake ; a thousand imitators will arise. Let us speak in 
these parables of nature to the many ; and for the few let us analyze and elicit their 
wider meaning. For the truths of the seen are less than those of the unseen. Illns- 
trations light up a truth not understood; but their value is transient. The truth 
escapes from this or that clothing into other forms. — J. 

Vers. 35 — 41. — Storm and calm, I. Stobms break unbxpbotedlt upon ub. The 
' ake of GJalilee was peculiarly exposed to them from the north ; the wind rushed an 



OH.IV. 1— 41.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 187 



through a funnel down those cuUeys and ravines. This was known to the sailors, ye* 
the storm was unexpected. Life is the lake ; change may come at any moment, w« 
know ; and yet it is the " unexpected which always happens." 

IL Pbbsenob of mind is needed. To know that the mind is our real place, and all 
that happens elsewhere is not our affair, — this makes us independent of change, calm 
amidst scenes of terror. Nature is for mind. Divine reason subdues the wild forces of 
nature. Faith in that reason is what we need. It is the true and deepest source of 
" presence of mind." 

III. The absence of confidence and coueaqb is blamewoktht. " Why are you so 
fearful ? " You may know at any time the worst. Fear is the reflection in our mind 
of some image of overwhelming power, threatening our existence. With Christ on 
board, our spiritual existence is safe. Perfect abandonment to duty, truth, and God 
alone, lifts above this anxiety. 

" If my bark sinks, 
'Tis to another sea." 

J. 

Vew. 1 — 20. Parallel passages : Matt. xiii. 1 — 23 ; Luke viii. 4 — 18. — Parabolic 
teaching. I. The parable of the sower. 1. Benefit of acquaintance with Scripture 
topography. To the right comprehension of Scripture acquaintance with Scripture topo- 
graphy is indispensable. This is easily obtainable at the present day from several books 
of travels now accessible to all. Much may be gained in this way even by those who have 
not had any opportunity of visiting Bible lands. 2. Peculiarities in this parable. Here 
several things are peculiar, and only such as are to be met with in the East, First, the 
sower went forth (i^v^Sev) from his homestead, for his fields evidently lay at a considerable 
distance from his dwelling. In the next place, the different kinds of soil are represented 
in close proximity. Further, the seed is scattered on the highway as well as on the 
ordinary and proper ground. The produce likewise in one case appears unusually large. 
Now, on turning to Stanley's book on ' Palestine,' or to Thomson's ' The Land and the 
Book,' we get a glimpse at the state of things in the East, which proves all this to be clear, 
correct, and consistent. From those interesting records of Eastern travel, with their graphic 
sketches of Eastern scenes, we learn that the sower has to go forth frequently a distance 
of some miles from his home in order to deposit his seed in the ground. On reaching 
the corn-land, he finds it devoid of fences, a pathway passing through it, thorn bushes 
growing in clumps together, with rocks here and there peering through the surface of 
sparse and scanty soil, while not far off are patches of exceeding fertility ; the produce 
at the same time amounting to the high figure of a hundredfold, but reckoned in the 
following peculiar fashion : — Of three bushels sown one is lost by the birds, particularly 
the crows ; another third is destroyed by mice and insects, but out of the one remain- 
ing bushel one hundred bushels are reaiied. 8. Confirmatory facts. Speaking of the 
verification of the parable with respect to the different kinds of ground, Thomson, in 
his entertaining manner, proceeds thus : " Now, here we have the whole four within a 
dozen rods of us. Our horses are actually trampling down some seeds which have fallen 
by the wayside, and larks and sparrows are busy picking them up. That man, with his 
mattock, is digging about places where the rock is too near the surface for the plough ; 
and much that is sown there will wither away, because it has no deepness of earth. 
And not a few seeds have fallen among the bellan, and will be effectually choked by 
this most tangled of thorn bushes. But a large portion, after all, falls into really good 
ground, and four months hence will exhibit every variety of crop, up to the richest 
and heaviest." Stanley's account, though quite independent, is remarkably similar and 
confirmatory of-the foregoing in all the main particulars. The following extract contains 
the substance of it : — Referring to the plain of Gennesaret, he says, " There was the 
unJulatina; corn-field descending to the water's edge. There was the trodden pathway 
running through the midst of it, with no fence or hedge to prevent the seed from falling 
here and there on either side of it or upon it ; itself hard with the constant tramp of 
horse and mule and human feet. There was the ' good,' rich soil, which distinguishi s 
the whole of that plain and its neighbourhood. . . . There was the rocky ground of the 
billside protruding here and there through the corn-fields. . . . There were the large bushes 
of thorn. th« ' nabk,' that kind of which tradition says that the crown of thorns wa- 



188 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. MARK. [oh. iv. 1— 4L 

woven, springing up in the very midst of the waving wheat ; " while in a note he adds, 
" 1 observed that the same mixture of corn-field, pathway, rook, and thorn extended 
through the whole of this part of the shores of the lake." 4. Naturalness ofowrLord^t 
imagery. The comparisons employed by our Lord are every way appropriate, not 
only suitable to the comprehension and habitudes of the persons addressed, but springing 
naturally out of the circumstances in which he and they find themselves placed, or the 
•cenery by which they are surrounded. His eye rests on a rich pasture-ground of 
Southern Palestine, where a flock of many sheep is grazing amid green herbage or 
reposing by still waters ; or perhaps he sees them following the shepherd, with whose 
kindly voice they are so familiar, as he goes before them, in Oriental fashion, and gently 
leads them along the hillside or down in the deep valley ; or they are returning to the 
shelter of the fold on the sunny slope, and passing through the wicket gate under the 
friendly shepherd's care ; — immediately and naturally the scene suggests the illustration, 
" He that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. ... I am the door : by me 
if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. ... I am 
the good shepherd : the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. And other sheep I 
have, which are not of this fold : them also I must bring, and they shall hear my 
voice ; and there shall be one flock, and one shepherd." Again, among the many once 
vine-clad hills of Judah, he stands beside the steep side of the terraced hill that bears the 
vine ; or he is passing along the street of one of its towns or cities, and he sees the vine 
climbing up the wall or spreading its branches along the trellis-work beside the door of 
a dwelling, or standing by itself alone at the house-side ; — at once the thought is present 
to his mind and finds utterance by his lips, " I am the true vine, and my Father is the 
husbandman. Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away : and every 
branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit." Again, in 
Northern Palestine he gazes on the fertile plain of Gennesaret, with its luxuriant vegeta- 
tion, its rich corn-ground carefully tilled if not highly cultivated, and waving in harvest- 
time with its heavy masses of ripened grain ; — and thence he draws his parables of the 
sower going forth to sow his precious seed and again returning laden, bearing his sheaves 
and rejoicing by the way ; of the tares ; and the secret growth of the seed ; perhaps also 
that of the mustard tree. When he surveyed the blue waters of the Sea of Galilee and 
contemplated its calm expanse, while its waves came gently rippling to the beach or 
slumbered in silence at his feet ; or when the hum of its busy industry sounded in his 
ears, and his attention was turned to the variety of vessels that ploughed its surface, 
and its numerous fishing craft ; — he thence derived the illustration, which is found 
embodied in the parable of the draw-net with its great length and extensive reach, 
gathering within its folds of every kind both bad and good — the valuable and the vile 
alike. Once more, when he gazed on the city of Capernaum, " his own city," so highly 
exalted in religious privilege, and the riches of its merchandise, and the resources of 
its commerce ; — the merchantman with his goodly pearls or with his carefully hoarded and 
cautiously hidden treasures was naturally suggested to his mind. 5. Variety in the 
independent records. In that chapter of parables, the thirteenth of St. Matthew's Gospel, 
no fewer than seven parables are recorded ; in the parallel passage of St. Mark four are 
recorded ; and by St. Luke in the corresponding section only two. Of the seven parables 
in St. Matthew's record, two are also recorded by St. Mark, with two additional ; of the 
four in St. Mark's record, two are recorded by St. Luke. But all three relate the parable 
of the sower contained in this chapter. Accordingly, the seven parables of the chapter 
of St. Matthew's Gospel referred to are — tlie sower, the tares, the mustard seed, the 
leaven, the hidden treasure, the pearl, and the draw-net; of these parables, the first 
teaches the production or founding of the kinjidom; the second and seventh, the 
persons commingling in it or its mixture; the third and fourth, its pr(;gress ; and the 
fifth and sixth, its preciousness. In the corresponding section of St. Mark are the four 
parables — the sower, the mustard seed, the secret growth of the setd, and the candle 
set on a candlestick, if we may properly call it a parable ; in the corresponding portion 
of St. Luke we find the parable of the sower and that of the candle on a candlestick. 

II. Collation of the three eeooeds. 1. A complete whole. By comparing the 
three gospel narratives and piecing them together, as it were, we obtain a complete 
whole. It is often of much importance and always of great interest thus to consolidate 
the narrative by a compar'son, if not » combination, of the text. 2. The seed hy tht 



CH. IV. 1—41.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 18« 

wayside. In the narrative of the seed sown by the wayside, St. Matthew and St. Mark 
both tell us of the fowls, or winged creatures, of the heaven devouring it ; while St. Luke 
states in addition the fact that it was trodden down. In the interpretation which our 
Lord gives of this same portion of the parable, all three agree in informing us that the 
Word that was sown in the hearers' hearts ia taken away by the devil, or Satan, or the 
wicked one, as they severally designate him ; while St. Matthew gives us the additional 
information that this occurs in the case of persons hearing the Word and not understand- 
ing it, and that he snatcheth it away ; and St. Luke subjoins the object for which it is 
thus taken away, " lest they should believe and be saved." 3. The seed en skmy ground. 
In the narrative of the seed sown on stony ground, or on the rock according to St. Luke, 
all three tell us that it withered away ; but St. Matthew and St. Mark add that, before 
withering, it was scorched, after the sun had risen, from want of roof, and that owing 
to lack of soil ; while St. Luke states simply that the withering was due to lack ^ 
moisture. In the explanation, again, all three tell us that those sown on stony ground 
receive the word with joy, but that they have no root, and that they endure or believe 
for a while ; St. Matthew and St. Mark further state that when " affliction or persecution 
ariseth because of the Word, immediately they are offended," or stumble ; but St. Luke 
speaks of such a season more generally as a time of trial, and intimates that they then 
stand aloof, or apostatize altogether. 4. Hie seed among thorns. In the narrative of 
that sown among thorns, all three inform us that the thorns choked it ; but St. Luke 
further informs us that the thorns grew up simultaneously with it ; and St. Mark adds, 
what in these circumstances might be expected, that it yielded no fruit. In the explana- 
tion, all three acquaint us with the fact that it is choked and becomes unfruitful ; they 
trace the unfruitfulness to its being choked ; St. Luke says, by cares and riches and the 
pleasures of this life, as men go on their way in it ; St. Mark uses a more comprehensive 
expression than the " pleasures of this life," which St. Matthew altogether omits, namely, 
" the lusts of other things ; " while both St. Matthew and St. Mark qualify riches by an 
expressive term, adding " the deceitfulness of riches." 5. The seed sown on good ground. 
In the narrative of the seed sown on good ground, we are informed by all three that it bore 
fruit, but on a graduated scale — a hundredfold, sixtyfold, and thinyfold, according to 
St. Matthew ; but in reverse orf^er according to St. Mark ; while St. Luke merely specifies 
the maximum at a hundredfold, as if he had in view Gen. xxvi. 12, " Then Isaac 
sowed in that land, and received in the same year an hundredfold, and the Lord blessed 
him." Here again, in the explanation, all three coincide in the matter of fmitfulness. 
St. Matthew tells that " they understand the Word," St. Mark that " they receive it," 
St. Luke that " having heard it in an honest and good heart, they keep it, and bring 
forth fruit with perseverance." 6. A gradation. Thus the seed by the wayside did not 
even spring up at all ; .that on the rock did indeed spring up, but withered ; that among 
thorns sprang up and grew, but being choked yielded no fruit ; only that on good ground 
•prang up, grew, and brought forth fruit to perfection. 

III. Interpretation of the seed. 1. The seed is the Word of God. The seed is 
that Word of which, as has been well said, " Truth is the substance, salvation the end, 
and God the author." The seed is that Scripture all of which " is given by inspiration 
of God, and ia profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in 
righteousness ; that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good 
works." The signature to a will or other document does not need to be rewritten or 
repeated from time to time; nor does the seal to such an instrument need to be 
restamped once and again ; lo with those miracles which were the sign manual of God 
to the truth of his Word, and the seal afSxed to it in attestation of its Divine author- 
ship. Once wrought, as those miracles were, according to the record of the most authen- 
tic history in the world — and no facts of history were ever more fully or more clearly 
testified, or more carefully and critically scrutinized — they remain to the present hour 
the signature of the Divine Author ; and not only that, but his seal to the reality of the 
Divine origin of Scripture. Thus Heaven has stamped approval on the document 
with its own seal and signature ; while these proofs, authenticated by the most unex- 
ceptionable witnesses, remain permanent and powerful as ever. 2. Proof from 
prophecy. But view Scripture again in the light of prophecy. The Messianic 
prophecies, for example, were delivered by different persons, in different places, at differ- 
ent times, under different circumstances, and on different occasions ; yet these propheciei^ 



190 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MAKE. [ch. rr. 1—41. 

when carefully and correctly put together, portray unmistakably Jesus of Nazareth ai 
the Messiah — the Christ of God. Suppose a painting executed in a somewhat similar 
way — the head painted in Berlin, the hands in Boston, the arms in Paris, the trunk in 
St. Petersburg, the legs in Vienna, and the feet in Rome ; suppose these different parts all 
brought to London and placed together, each in its proper position, and that, when thus 
put together, they present the exact picture of Christ which is seen in the famous " Descent 
from the Cross " as painted by Rembrandt, or by Rubens, or even by Jouvenet : what con- 
clusion would we, or should we, come to from such a phenomenon ? Would it not be that 
some great master painter had presided over and prepared the whole, guiding in some way 
every hand, directing every brush, and inspiring every head so that one of the finest 
specimens of pictorial art was thus wondrousty brought into existence ? In like manner, 
let the Old Testament prophets who foresaw and foretold the sufferings of Christ as well 
as the glory that should follow — let Moses and Malachi, David and Daniel, Isaiah and 
Micah, Jeremiah and Zechariah, be brought together round the cross of Calvary, and let 
their pictures and prophecies meet together there, and they will unite in perfect har- 
mony, and present the exact picture of him whose hands and whose feet were pierced with 
nails, who " was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities," and on 
whom " the chastisement of our peace was laid," and in whose riven side was opened that 
cleansing " fountain for sin and for uncleanness." Though the portions contributed, the 
prophets themselves, the periods at which they lived, the plans they pursued, the pre- 
dictions they delivered, were all different, yet one Spirit testified in them, one God 
inspired them, one imseen but almighty hand superintended them all ; and the picture, 
brought together from so many different quarters and composed of so many different 
parts, is one. 3. Practical proof. But let us take a still plainer and more practical 
test. See yon venerable patriarch whose locks are silvered with years; he resides in a 
remote hamlet, he dwells in a humble cottage. Observe with what reverence he takes 
down the ancestral Bible, and with what grace he reads its sacred page at the hour of 
morning or evening worship. He has never read, perhaps never heard of, any of the 
great writers on the evidences — Butler, or Paley, or Lardner, or Leslie, or Leland, or 
Watson ; and yet, if you ask him how he knows that volume, which he reads so duti- 
fully and devoutly, to be the Word of God, he will at once and unhesitatingly reply 
that he knows it must be the Word of God, for he has felt its power to be Divine, 
bringing, as it has done, pardon to his soul, peace to his conscience, light to his feet 
and a lamp to his path, joy to his heart, and the " sure and certain hope " of eternal life 
and immortal glory to his never-dying spirit. Wherever we find a man of that stamp, 
whether he lives in town or country, in city or village ; whether he is the peer that 
owns a castle or the peasant that is only a tenant in a cottage ; whether he be a native 
of merry England, or broad Scotland, or green Ireland, or gay Prance, or proud Spain, 
or the German Fatherland, or classic Italy ; whatever be his caste, or calling, or country, 
or clime, that man, having God's truth in his heart, the grace of God in bis soul, and 
the Spirit of God to guide his feet in the path of peace — that man, whoever he is, or in 
whatever rank he is found, is a living witness that the seed, of which the Saviour 
speaks in this parable, is the Word of God and the abiding seed of holiness, for " being 
bom of God he doth not commit sin ; for his seed remaineth in him : and he cannot sin, 
because he is born of God." 4. The seed is the Word of the kingdom. The seed is also 
called, and so explained to be, the Word of the kingdom. The King of the coimtry to 
which we travel has issued this Word as a Guide-book to every pilgrim who is travelling 
to the kingdom of glory. It is the Law of him who is anointed to be a King for ever — 
who is enthroned as King upon the holy hill of Zion, yea, who is seated at the right 
hand of the Majesty on high. It is the Word of that kingdom which at its first 
beginnings is as a little stone hewn out of the mountain without hands, but which 
afterwards becomes a great mountain and fills the whole earth. It is the Law of that 
King whose kingdom is to be without bounds, and whose reign is to be without end. 
Of his kingdom it is the Statute-book. Prom that kingdom it comes and to that 
kingdom it conducts, translating the sinner out of the kingdom of darkness into the 
kingdom of light, out of the kingdom of sin into the kingdom of grace, out of the king- 
dom of Satan into the kingdom of God. And no sooner has any traveller set his 
face and turned his feet fi-om the City of Destruction towards the city of the great 
King, than, like Bunyan's pilgrim, he is observed with this Book in his hand, and at 



«H.iv. 1—41.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 191 

every progressive step in his pilgrimage his eye is on the Book, and thus he reads and 
walks, and walks and reads, ever reading as he goes. Like David, "his delight is in th« 
Law of the Lord, and in that Law he meditates day and night." In reference to this 
Law it was said of Israel, " What nation is Ifoere so great that hath statutes and 
judgments so righteous as all this Law which I have set before you this day 1 " We, 
with Law and Gospel in our hands, are surely bound to be grateful, and to feel — 

" How greatly blessed the people aie 
The joyful sound that know I " 

6. Our duty in relation to the Word of the kingdom. The statutes of an earthly 

kingdom are carefully studied as well as frequently perused. How much more ought 

the Word of the kingdom, that is, the statutes of the kingdom of heaven, to be daily 

and diligently read and consulted! If the King of heaven condescends to be at 

pains to teach us his statutes and his judgments, surely the least that we, who are 

"of the earth, earthy" — creatures of a day, worms of the dust, should do, is to be at 

pains to learn those statutes of the Lord. that are right, "rejoicing the heart." 

Again, where the word of a king is there is power, consequently the Word of him 

who is King of kings and Lord of lords should come home to our hearts, not in 

word only, " but in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance." When the 

word or law of an earthly king is transgressed, such transgression is usually visited 

with pains and penalties proportionate to the transgression. Can we reasonably expect, 

then, that the transgressors of Heaven's Law shall escape with impunity ? The King 

who rules in Zion will, we are assured, rule also in the midst of bis enemies. If we 

refuse to touch the sceptre of his mercy, or if we reject the Word of his grace, then 

assuredly we shall be broken with a rod of iron and dashed in pieces like a potter's vesseL 

The Word of the kingdom is the Word of the King of glory ; if we follow its directions 

they will conduct us on the way to glory. It is the Word of him whose kingdom is not 

of this world ; if we walk according to its instructions, then shall our conversation, or 

citizenship, even now be in heaven. 6. This seed is absolutely/ necessary for salvation. 

It is, as we have seen, the Word of God and the Word of the kingdom, but it is still the 

seed ; and what the seed is in the natural world, the Word of God, or of the kingdom, 

is in the spiritual world. Without seed there can be no vegetation — ^neither root nor 

fruit, neither bud nor blossom, neither leaf nor flower, neither stalk nor plant. The 

$oU may be as rich as that of the primeval forest when it is cleared, or as that of the virgin 

prairie when it is for the first time opened by the ploughshare ; there may be gentle 

showers and genial sunshine, reviving heat and refreshing dews. The seasons may b« 

most propitious ; they may follow each other with successive and suitable blessings— 

the purifying winds of winter, the freshness of spring, the sultriness of summer, the 

maturity of autumn; but notwithstanding all this, if the seed be wanting, there cannot 

be a single stalk of grain nor plant of any kind — neither " grass for the cattle nor herb 

for the service of man." So spiritually, the Word of God is seed of regenerating power ; 

for are we born again? Then it is "not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word 

of God, which liveth and abideth for ever." Thus the Word of God is seed — the seed of 

grace in this world, and of glory in the next ; the seed of holiness in time, and of heaven 

through eternity. 7. The seed needs quickening. We have seen that without the seed of 

God's Word there is neither grace nor glory, neither holiness nor heaven ; and therefore as 

much as justifies the inference that all that is good and gracious, all that is really noble 

and truly Christian, every grace and every good work, — aU spring from the seed of 

the V?'ord. In the economy of nature, the vigorous stem, and green leafage, and lovely 

blossom, and abundant fruit are all owing to the seed, and could not possibly exist 

without it ; so in the economy of grace, strong faith, lively hope, and ever-advancing 

holiness, — ^all spring out of the seed which is the Word of God. But granting ali this, 

the seed only contains the material of life — it is the means of life ; but it is dependent 

on the quickening, vivifying, life-giving Spirit of God, By his Spirit he fructifies the 

seed ; by his Spirit he vivifies his Word. The Word of God, the Son of God, and the 

Spirit of God miist all go together in the salvation of ev^ry human soul. The Son of 

God brings salvation, the Word of God reveals it, and the Spirit of God applies it. 8. 

Ther* M vitality in every verse (x well as in the whole volume. Even where the Biblt 



182 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. iv. 1—41 

is not found collectively and in all its component parts, fragments of it may exist in the 
shape of single books, or chapters, or verses. And wherever it is thus met with even m 
dispersed portions, there is seed, there is the germ of life, and, by the blessing of God 
and the operation of his Spirit, there will in due time be the full development of life ard 
fruitfulness. While it is a blessed privilege to possess the whole of God's Word, ard 
gufScient means of understanding it, and abundant material for its enforcement ; still 
persons not so privileged, but having in possession some small portion of God's Word, 
are not without the means of safety and salvation. Paragraphs of the Bible, verses d 
the Bible, sentiments of the Bible, are often blended with the religious compositions d 
human authors ; yet still they retain their vitality, and only want the Spirit of God to 
quicken them into living power. 

IV. The wayside heaeers. 1. Nature of the wayside. By this we may under- 
stand a highway, or byway, or bridle-way, or ordinary footpath ; but whether the way 
be broad or narrow, whether it be a well-constructed road or merely a beaten pad, 
whether it be a public road or pathway, two notions attach to it. We connect with it, 
first, the idea of a pafsage, along which people walk, or ride, or drive, or along which 
traffic is conveyed. But a second idea attached to it, and one which is the conse- 
quence of the first, is that of hardness, because of the constant resort along it. Both 
ideas characterize the hearts of wayside hearers. Just as the highway is that along 
which people travel on foot, or horseback, or in vehicles of whatever kind, and that too 
along which their goods are conveyed and their commerce carried on — along which, in 
fact, their merchandise is transported ; so the heart of the wayside hearer is a highway 
for the passage of worldly thoughts. Such thoughts are constantly passing to and fro 
along it. Temporal things make it their thoroughfare ; unchecked, unhindered, unim- 
peded, and uninterrupted, they pass and repass. Earthly, or sensual and sinful, objects 
are constantly found on the highway of that carnal heart. Passion and pride, avarice 
and ambition, luxury and lust are ever traversing that highway or the byways that 
diverge from it. Memories of the past, anticipations of the future, present reflections 
on worldly things, earthly joys or sorrows, worldly cares and anxieties, schemes ai 
wealth and thoughts of indulgence, or hopes of worldly aggrandizement, — all find free 
passage along the wayside hearer's heart. No foot, however unhallowed, is forbidden 
to enter there. Now, these hearers come to the house of God and seem to hear his 
Word : " They come unto thee as the people cometh, and they sit before thee as my 
people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them. . . . And, lo, thou art unto 
them as a very lovely song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an 
instrument : for they hear thy words, but they do them not." With this free and con- 
stant passage of thousands of earthly, temporal, worldly, and sinful thoughts along the 
open thoroughfare of the wayside hearer's heart there is small space for thoughts of 
God. They come " to hear of heaven and learn the way," but their heart is preoccupied, 
and their thoughts engaged with other objects. Besides, from this constant traffic 
along it, the heart becomes hard as the wayside, and like the common highway. 
When thoughts of what is good or gracious do enter, they pass over it, going out as 
they came in. They never settle on it or sink into it. Any good impressions or 
gracious influences are merely transient. 2. The wayside hearers understand it not. 
They hear the Word, but they understand it not. How could they? Understanding 
requires attention, but worldly thoughts engross the attention that should be given to 
thoughts of God. Not only so, the heart has become so hard by the constant traffic 
upon it that such thoughts, when they do enter, cannot penetrate the surface so as to 
find lodgment in the understanding. What with the crowding together and crushing 
along of worldly thoughts, and the consequent hardness of heart, the understanding 
remains untouched. Instead of minds enlightened by the Spirit of God, such hearers 
come with hearts hardened by the deceitfulness of sin and like a common highway; and 
BO any serious notions that do force an entrance are lost amid the host of other thoughts, 
»nd lie on the hard surface. Any truths or facts not duly attended to cannot be properly 
understood ; when only partially, or imperfectly, or perhaps not at all understood, they 
cannot be retained in the memory. So the wayside hearer neither takes heed to the 
Word nor keeps hold of it, and therefore gets no benefit from it. But another circum- 
stance increases the culpability of the hearer and claims our notice. 3. It is trodden 
■town. Many a precious seed of gospel truth has been thus treated. Many a time have the 



SB. IT, 1—41.] THE GOSPEL ACCOKDINGr TO ST. MARK. 19$ 



trutha of God's Word been trodden down. Many an assurance of Christ's ability and 
readiness '| to save to the uttermost " has been trodden down. Many an offer of grac« 
»nd salvation has been trodden down. Many an " exceeding great and precious promise " 
by which the hearer might be made partaker of a Divine nature has been trodden 
down. Many « Scripture picturing the joys of heaven, inviting and even urging us to 
make those joys our own, has been trodden down. Many a faithful warning of the 
sinner to forsake his ways and flee from present wrath and eternal ruin has been 
trodden down. Thus the Word of God has been despised and despite done to the 
Spirit of grace. The pure precepts of that Word as well as its precious promises, its 
earnest entreaties as well as Its solemn exhortations, its faithful reproofs as well as 
its friendly remonstrances, its gracious invitations as well as its many warnings, have 
all been trodden down, and so treated with carelessness, indifference, and even con- 
tempt. 4. Satan snatches it away, "The fowls of the air came and devoured it up.'' 
Here again we should notice the verisimilitude of onr Lord's representation. " In the 
countless birds of all kinds — aquatic fowls by the lake-side, partridges and pigeons 




- - -- o 16 

observes, " The flocks of birds in the neighbourhood of Gennesaret have been already 
observed. Their number, their beauty, their contrast with the busy stir of sowing and 
reaping and putting into barns visible in the plains below (whether of Hattin or Gen- 
nesaret), must have always courted observation." Never did a bird of the air rush 
with greater swiftness on its prey than Satan rushes to take away the Word of God as 
it lies unheeded and despised — trodden down, in fact, on the sinner's heart. Never did 
the birds that in such multitudes frequent the lake and plain of Gennesaret, whether 
pigeons, or partridges, or aquatic fowls, hasten with greater eagerness to pick up the 
seeds let fall by the sower on the pathway running through the corn-land in the plain 
of Gennesaret, than Satan hurries to take away the seed of truth out of the wayside 
hearer's heart. The wayside was not meant for cultivation nor intended to bo sown ; 
so there are hearers who come to hear the Word from custom, or fashion, or from con- 
formity to a respectable observance, or for sake of appearance, or perhaps from a slight 
twitching of conscience, but not out of a sense of duty, or feeling of privilege, or any 
earnest desire to get good from it or profit by it. When they do come, their minds 
detach themselves, as it were, from their bodies and wander miles away ; their thoughts 
wander on the mountains of vanity, or are absorbed in their worldly plans, or prospects, 
or purposes. Thus the seed lies on the beaten pathway, and is trodden down. Satan 
is " the prince of the power of the air," and multiplies himself in his emissaries, here 
represented by fowls, or winged creatures (ireTciyi), of the air. He turns away their 
thoughts from the truth that is being proclaimed and engrosses them with some 
worldly object: he amuses them, it may be, with some peculiarity of the preacher, or 
engages their attention with some article of a neighbour's dress ; he prejudices their 
minds against the truth, or preoccupies them with thoughts widely different from 
those that should be suggested by the subject in hand ; he may rob them of the seed 
by an after-sermon critic, or by the sarcasm of some worthless witling, or the sneer of 
a sceptically inclined friend. He has thousands of little birds of the air to carry away 
any thoughts of God, of the soul, of sin, of salvation, of heaven, of hell, of death, of 
judgment, of eternity, that might lie as seeds of truth on the heart. 6. The immediate- 
ness of his arrival. St. Mark draws attention to this point by the word fiiBeas, which 
occurs so often in his Gospel ; but much the same thing is implied by the word which 
St. Matthew employs to represent Satan's method of taking away the seed. It is not 
oipn, equivalent to " taketh it away," used by both the other evangelists who record the 
parable ; but apnitfi, equivalent to " snatcheth it away " in hot haste, and in the eager- 
ness of his desire to prevent any possibility, however remote, of its growth. This is a 
very remarkable feature in the narrative. Was it not enough that, from the continuous 
stream of other thoughts passing through the mind, and the myriad multitude of such, 
the seed had been neglected ? Was it not enough that it was let lie on the surface of 
a heart that had contracted a sort of highway hardness ? Was it not enough at least 
that it was trodden underfoot, trampled on, and despised ? Strange that all this was 
not BufiBcient for Satan's purpose! But Satan knows too well the living energy of th« 

BT. MABK. a 



194 THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. iv. 1—41. 

Divine 'Word; and, however neglected or jostled aside, however trodden down « 
trampled on it may be, however Imrd and impervious that wayside hearer's heart may 

be, Satan, fully alive to the vitality of the seed of Divine truth, apprehends danger 

from its presence to his own sovereignty over his subjects. If he allowed the seed some 
time to lie on the heart it might, after all, recover from the trampling and root itseU 
downwud, and in the end bear fruit upward. He therefore comes immediately. And 
though he came immediately, still the seed had been already trodden down ; and we 
therefore infer that the seed had no sooner fallen on the heart than it was instantly 
trodden down. 6. Satan's object in all this. This object is plainly stated in the words, 
" lest they should believe and be saved," or, as the Revised Version renders them," that 
they may not believe and be saved." Here we have the whole plan of salvation in 
the briefest form ; here we have the system of Divine grace for saving the souls of men. 
Here, too, we have the subject, the object, the instrument, and the result. The subject 
is every one on whose heart the seed of Divine truth is sown ; the object to be accepted 
by faith is that truth ; that faith, again, is the instrument ; while salvation is the grand 
result. The object offered for our belief is the Word of God; the means by which we 
embrace that Word is faith ; and the final and blessed end is salvation. Reader, this 
Word is now presented to you, and even pressed on your acceptance ; if you prefer 
remaining in ignorance of it, or refuse to believe it, or neglect to apply it, and so fail 
to feel its saving efficacy, and obey, and enjoy it ; then do you judge yourself unworthy 
«f everlasting life, reject the offer of mercy, and put away from you the means — the 
only means of salvation. If when the truth of God, with its sanctifying and saving 
influences, is sown on your heart, you allow Satan to snatch it away, or, what amounts 
to the same thing, to occupy your mind with other topics, or divert your attention torn 
it, or perhaps provoke your hostility against it, then will the end which should be tha 
salvation of your soul remain unattained I 

V. Fbaotioal lessons. 1. We learn from all this the great sin of carelessness, 
heedlessness, and thoughtlessness, or rather thinking of other things, when the Word 
of God is being read or preached. 2. We learn the necessity of careful preparation for 
Divine ordinances. If we would hear the Word of God with profit, we must supplicate 
the Spirit of God to prepare our hearts to receive the Word, and to enlighten our 
minds to understand it, and to bring it home to our souls in demonstration and 
power. 3. We learn the importance of withdrawment from worldly thoughts as well 
as worldly business, of spending the morning of the sabbath in religious exercises and 
hallowed engagements, of avoiding idle gossip and all trifling conversation, and also of 
watchfulness against vain thoughts and wandering thoughts and sinful thoughts when 
in the house of God, so that Satan may neither hinder the work of God in, nor snatch 
the Word of God out of, our hearts. 4. Three processes are thus indispensable- 
breaking up the fallow ground by previous preparation, covering the seed sown by 
subsequent meditation and faithful pleading for the dews ol Divine grace to water the 
■eed sown, as well as taking earnest heed that we do not let it slip. 

VI. The btont-gbound hbaeers. 1. Their shallowness. The first characteristic 
of such is their shallowness. This is better expressed by rocky (irerpSSfi), than stony 
ground. The first class of hearers had no receptivity in consequence of their heart 
being so hard, and the trafSc along its thoroughfare so continuous, llie seed falling 
on its surface lay there, was instantly trodden down, and immediately taken away by 
the evil one himself or some of his numerous emissaries. Now, this second class of 
hearers is bo for superior to the former that they possess receptivity, but only to a 
limited extent. The surface of this soil is soft, it is true, but shallow. A soil may 
be stony in the proper sense ; the stones may be small and loose ; they may be tolerably 
close together or considerably apart. In either case the plant makes way in the inter- 
spaces, and roots itself where there is sufiicient depth of earth. The present case is 
different. The ground is in the strict sense rocky ; the rock — the limestone rock which 
prevails so extensively in Palestine — reaches the surface and comes fully into view, or is 
only covered and concealed from the eye by a sparse and shallow sprinkling of earth. 
Seed sown on such soil soon springs up, quickened into vegetation and warmed into 
life by the heat of an Eastern clime ; and all the more so as the plant, when impeded 
in its development downward, would, by curious plant-instiact, the more rapidly 
propagate itself upward. But the very heat that helps the rapid springing of t^ 



M. IT. 1—41.] I'HE GOSPEL ACCOED^G TO ST. MARK. 19« 

seed upward out of that thin, shallow soil, soon becomes hurtful because of that very 
■Bhallowness of soil, where the root has no room for healthy development, and finds no 
moisture to invigorate its growth and counteract the excess of heat. Soon as the 
plant has sprung np and the sun has risen upon it, it is scorched. The sun's heat, so 
'beneficial to a strongly rooted plant, is thus most prejudicial to that of which the root 
is hot sufficiently developed. The whole is a correct representation of those shallow, 
impulsive creatures who at once fall in with any current excitement, or are carried 
away by some shallow sensationalism. 2. Immediate and Jo^ul reception of the Word, 
This is the first particular which our Lorl, in his exposition of this portion of the 
parable, specifies. Those who hear the Word in this way are in advance of that large 
portion of the population, sometimes called the lapsed masses, who never enter the 
house of God, nor wait at the posts of wisdom's doors to hear what God the Lord will 
say to their souls. They are also in advance of those who do indeed frequent the 
bouse of God, but who, like the wayside hearers, from carelessness, heedlessness, in- 
difference, inattention, and the indulgence of vain, wandering, and sinful thoughts, are 
entirely irreceptive, never admitting the Word into their understanding or minds at alL 
They are in advance of those too who, though they attend the public worship of God, 
do so only as a matter of form, and regard it as a piece of decent drudgery, to which 
the force of public opinion, or compliance with the wishes of friends, or a notion of 
respectability, obliges them to submit. The persons referred to hear the Word with • 
large amount of satisfaction, and so far they are considerably ahead of multitudes 
of mankind and of many of their neighbours ; yet they fail miserably at the end, and 
fall short of heaven. They receive it anon, at once, and without hesitancy or delay ; 
but they are somewhat precipitate in their reception of it ; they do not take time to 
" mark, learn, and inwardly digest " it. They receive it readily, neither " proving all 
things " nor " holding fast that which is good." They receive it with pleasure, but without 
profit. They receive it as an intellectual treat or literary enjoyment, but there Iti 
influence is at an end. They receive it with mental approbation, hut, though gratified 
with it, they are neither guided nor governed by it. They receive it with eagerness as 
tlie good Word of God, and it is sweet to their taste ; but it does not check their 
beloved lusts and besetting sins, nor change their evil habits and ungodly lives. Or, 
>if it do produce any change, that change is merely transient. Their goodness is like 
the morning cloud, now careering it in the vault of heaven, and for a short time visible 
as a rain-cloud, then vanishing without the promised shower — a moment seen, then 
gone for ever ; or like the early dew-drops scattered as pearls upon the grass, and 
sparkling in the morning sun, but brushed away by the foot of the passing traveller before 
it reaches the earth to moisten its surface or fructify its soil. But how or why is this? 
How is it possible that persons may receive the Word with gravity and solemnity, with 
treqiiency and apparent fervour, with eagerness and gladness, and yet without any 
beneficial effect or abiding result ? Because they do not receive it with faith, and 
^therefore " the Word does not profit, not being mixed with faith in them that hear it." 
3. They want root. The secret of unsuccess here is want of root ; " they have no 
■root iu themselves," and so they " endure but for a time," or last only for a season 
:(irp6irKaipoi). The seed falling on the surface soon penetrates the thiu layer of soil, but 
-when it has pierced through that shallow covering, it comes upon the hard, impenetrable 
Tock. It can go no further ; it can neither go round that stratum of rock nor enter it. 
So with the seed of the Divine Word when sown on rocky hearts. It h»s no real root 
in them, and so it dies away and is soon gone ; it has no root in the judgment, and 
«o there can be no fixed principles of life or action ; it has no root in the understanding, 
and so there are no clear conceptions of truth nor correct apprehensions of duty ; it has 
no root in the will, and so the will remains without proper restraint and right direction ; 
it has no root in the affections, and so no habits of goodness are properly formed or 
ol permanent continuance; it has no root in the conscience, and so no regulative 
force is exercised over that vicegerent of God in the heart of man ; it has no root in 
the memory, and, as a matter of course, it is either consigned to oblivion or is only 
remembered as the sound of a pleasant song. The tender plant cannot penetrate the 
iiard rock nor root itself in the unyielding limestone ; it is no wonder, then, that the 
TootlesB plant cannot in any case exist for long, much less resist for any considerable 
time the scorching rays of the midday sun. There is (1) no Jlxiiy in the root and 



1»6 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. vr. 1—41. 

BO firmness in the stem. See the languishing aspect «f that lovely floweret which hat 
been uprooted from the genial soil of its parent earth; how soon it droops and dies! 
Compare it with the plant, or shrub, or tree fast rooted in the earth. Look at yon old 
oak tree deep moored in the rifted rock ; it is subjected to every blast; it is assailed 
by every storm, fretted by every gust of heaven, and exposed to every wind that blows. 
TIm wind has bent it, but never broken it ; the storm has shaken it, but could 
never uproot it ; the tempest assailed it, but it has withstood the shock. Centuries have 
rolled over its aged top and widespread branches, but time has only left it sturdier than 
ever — deeper rooted than before. "Woodman, spare that tree," for the strength of wind 
and the stress of weather have proved its deep-rooted stability — firm as the rock in. 
which it is rooted, and immovable as the everlasting hill of which that rock is a part. 
May the Word of the eternal God take root in our hearts, and, when so rooted, may 
it gradually attain a greater depth of soil ; and may the Spirit of the living God enable 
us, by meditation, prayer, self-examination, and closer communion with Father, Son, 
and Holy Spirit, to maintain to the end such deep-rooted strength and Christian, 
stability I But the root serves another purpose, for not only does it give fixity and 
firmness to the plant, it is (2) the means of conveying nourishment to the plant ; it i» 
the channel of communication between the seed and the soil. Plants need nourish- 
ment as well as animals, and accordingly they are furnished with the apparatus 
necessary for receiving such nourishment. At the extremity of each fibre of a root 
there is a spongiole, or small sponge, to suck up nutriment from the soil. The substancea 
required for the nourishment of plants must be in a state of solution — dissolved in 
many times their own bulk of water; otherwise they could not pass through the 
exceedingly minute apertures or pores of the spongioles. Now, it is obvious that there 
are two ways in which we may make a plant to perish — either by withdrawing the 
moisture from the soil, and the inorganic substances by which the plant is fed cannot 
be made available ; or by destroying the root and those vessels through which the 
small particles of matter in solution are absorbed by the plant. In the former case 
the nourishment designed to sustain life is altogether withheld, or, if present, cannot 
be utilized ; in the latter case that very nourishment tends to accelerate disorganiza- 
tion, for when moisture remains stagnant in the sponges they are soon saturated, and 
disease and putrefaction ensue. Now, in the case which the parable supposes, both the 
nourishment is wanting, and the means of receiving it are absent — both moisture and 
root are deficient, or rather entirely lacking. Where then, or how, can the plant draw 
the supply of nourishment which it requires ? Now, the channel of communication,, 
as well as the means of connection, between the spiritual seed and the spiritual soil — 
the Divine Word and the human heart — is faith. When, therefore, that which is the 
medium of communication and means of life is absent, how or whence can spiritu^ 
Kfe, not to speak of growth or health, be maintained ? The seed and the soil have no 
means of contact ; the root of faith that should bring them into vital union is deficient ;. 
and so there is no nourishment, no development of vitality — in a word, no spiritual life. 
i. A temporary semhlance of life. " For a while they believe," or for a leason they 
endure. We have seen a young twig sprout seemingly verdant and vigorous from the 
lifeless trunk ; and so for a while a plant may appear to have life, while it is virtually 
dead. For a while it may seem even to flourish, where the root is dying or already 
dead, and where the source of life and vigour, as well as the means of communicating 
it, are wanting. Just so is it in things spiritual : men m^ay for a while have a name to 
live, while yet they are dead ; the blade of profession may be green, while the root of 
grace may be withered or wanting ; men may profess much and seem to practise what 
they profess, while that profession is hollow and that practice heartless ; there may 
be a beautiful blossom and a fair flower, and yet no fruit ever come to maturity or 
even come forth at all. Without the power of life in the root there is no vital principle^ 
no genuine practice, and therefore no final perseverance. But to put the case more 
practically, there may be both conviction and confession of sin, and yet no conversion. 
Felix trembled when St. Paul " reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to 
come ; " but yet to St. Paul, after his powerful sowing of the heavenly seed, the answer 
was, " Go thy way for this time ; when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee.* 
There may be a commendable disposition to hear God's Word and so receive the seed} 
tiiere may be many good leiolutinnR formed, and yet the result may be the same aa in 



«H, IV. 1—41.] THK GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAKE. • 191 

the case of Agrippa, when he said to St. Paul, " Almost thou persuadest me to be a 
Ohristian ; " still the almost Christian, as the old divines used quaintly yet truly to 
gay, is only almost saved. Men may not only wait on the ordinances of religion with 
satisfaction, listen to the gospel with pleasure, and receive the preached Word with 
gratification and gladness, hut also refurm much in life and conduct, just as it is written 
of Herod, that he " feared John, knowing that he was a just man and an holy, and 
observed him ; and when he heard him he did many things, and heard him gladly ; " and 
yet the end may he no better than that of that wicked and unhappy monarch. 6. Th« 
testing-time. A time of temptation or trial cometh — " tribulation or persecution ariseth 
because of the Word." Here we have the genus and the species very clearly set before 
us ; the trial in general and its specific kinds. The trial is of a hostile kind (wfipiurfiov), 
and the two sorts of it are distinctly stated, namely, personal afifliction within, and per- 
secution without. The a£9iction or painful pressure is such as comes upon us 'n connec- 
tion with our own individual circumstances, and may affect us in soul, body, or estate. 
The persecution is that which assails us from without. But why is this ? Why doei 
this persecution arise ? " Because of the Word." The world hates God's Word, because 
the noly doctrines of that Word are opposed to and condemn the unholy principles 
of the world, and because the pure precepts of that Word are contrary to and 
rebuke the unrighteous practices of the world. The carnal mind hates the Word, 
for that Word exposes and reprobates its sinful and shocking enmity to God. The 
flesh hates the Word, because that Word denounces " those fleshly lusts that war against 
the soul," and commands men to " crucify the flesh with its affections and lusts." The 
sinner hates the Word, for the principles of that Word are the means which the Spirit 
employs to reprove him, as well as " convince him of sin, of righteousness, and of 
judgment." Every unrenewed heart and every unregenerate soul hates the Word, 
because the Law of God, which it contains, is holy and just and good — exceeding 
" spiritual," and its " commandments are exceeding broad." Satan hates the Word, 
because it is "the sword of the Spirit" by which he is vanquished, by which souls are 
rescued from his grasp, and the destroyer deprived of his prey. Hell hates the Word, 
for where that Word is unknown, or unread, or unpractised, hell enlarges itself beyond 
measure. Hence it is that tribulation and persecution arise because of the Word. 6. Their 
failure in the day of trial. " Immediately they are offended " — soandsilized ; that is 
to say, a stumbling-block is laid in their way, and they fall over it. After a season of 
special privileges and gracious influences, a time of trial may be expected to come, in 
order to prove the sincerity of professors and the genuineness of their religion. After 
•uch a period a testing-time may be looked for, and then it is seen who in reality have 
the root of the matter in them. Persecution is like the heat of the sun's rays, and 
this indeed is the figure which our Lofd himself employs in this parable. If the plant 
be well rooted, the heat of the sun exercises a genial influence on it, promoting its 
growth and bringing it to maturity. Once the Word of God has struck deep root 
and become firmly rooted in our hearts, the clouds of adversity may roll over us, the 
tempest of persecution rage around us, and the storms of temptation beat at our feet ; 
yet the firmness of our attitude shall defy the storm, and the fixity of our root shall be 
strengthened instead of shaken. The tree rooted in the rock may be uptorn, the grey 
rock of centuries may itself be upheaved by the earthquake ; the oaks of Bashan may 
be uprooted, and the cedars of Lebanon may be rent and riven by the lightning of 
heaven ; the mountains may shake with the swelling of the waters, and the solid earth 
itself bo removed from its deep foundations ; yet, with the seed of truth fast rooted in 
the heart, and the heart itself grounded in love, the believer stands unmoved, unterrified, 
and unhurt. He stands like the spectator on the high summit of a lofty mountain 
that seems to pierce the clouds ; he hears the hoarse and dreadful roarings of the storm 
far below him ; he sees the broad and vivid fiashes of the lightning glare beneath him ; 
and listens to the " live thunder as it leaps far along from peak to peak among the 
rattling crags." The eminence he occupies elevates him above the storm ; the firm- 
ness of his position secures him against its fury ; the storms of an angry world may 
rage, but he is rooted. How different it is with plants where there is no deepness or 
depth of earth, wh-re there is lack of moisture, and where the root is deficient or 
defective I The sut's heat scorches them, and they wither. Thus it ever is : the Word ol 
Ood is either " the savour of life unto life," or " of death unto death ; " Christ crucified if 



198 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. iv. 1—41. 

to " the Jews a stumbing-block, and unto the Greeks foolishness ; but unto them which 
»re called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of Grod, and the wisdom of God." So ig 
it with trial, whether tribulation or persecution ; while it only confirms the faithful and 
leaves them more firmly rooted, it becomes an occasion of stumbling and even of final 
apostasy to the unfaithful who have no root in themselves. The trials, that help the 
believer onward to an " exceeding and eternal weight of glory," are such a hindrance in 
the way of the barren professor that he is offended and falls away. " The same fire," says 
Augustine, " turns straw into ashes, and takes away the dross from gold." 7. Finai 
apostasy, "They fall away." How sad this statement 1 " They fall away," that is 
finally. Such is the closing scene ! Many a one runs well for a time, but something 
hinders him, and then he stumbles and finally falls 1 Many a one, who bade fair to be 
the Lord's in the great " day when he maketh up his jewels," thus falls away and sinks 
into apostasy ! Many a one, who appeared to ro so running that he might obtain the 
incorruptible crown in company with the pure and holy, falls away from these high 
hopes and glorious prospects, and perishes for ever ! Alas ! how dreadful the thought 
of having a reward so rich in prospect, a diadem so bright in anticipation, an in- 
heritance so incorruptible to look forward to, and yet of finally and for ever falling 
away and forfeiting all ! 

VIL Praotioai. lessons. 1. Warned by all this, we are surely called on 
solemnly to consider how we hear, and carefully examine our motives as well as our 
manner of hearing. 2. We should ever have in recollection the Scripture admonition 
in reference to such matters, which says, " Therefore we ought to give the more earnest 
heed to the things that we have heard, lest at any lime we should let them slip." 3. We 
must not be content with a certain change of conduct and conversation ; this may last 
for a time, but, unless the heart be changed, there is no permanence in the change. 
Unless there is the root of faith, there can never be the real fruit of righteousness. 
4. We are warned to expect trial. " All who will live godly in Christ Jesus " must be 
prepared for it. But, instead of being discouraged thereby or deterred from the path 
of duty, we must rather rejoice as the apostle directs, saying, " Count it all joy when. 
yo fall into divers temptations [or trials] ; " and again, " Blessed is the man that 
endureth temptation : for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which 
the Lord hath promised to them that love him." 5. We must beware of being turned 
aside from the path of duty, or from the study of God's Word, or from prayer, or from 
the worship of the sanctuary, or from religious service of any kind, either by sneers or 
taunts, or by unkindness or even persecution on the part of the ungodly. By doing so 
we prove ourselves of those here represented by the rocky ground. 6. What need we 
have earnestly to seek the aid of the Holy Spirit to preserve us from an evil and hard 
heart of unbelief, in which the seed of God's Word can neither take root nor grow ! 

VIII. The thobht oeound. 1. Superiority to the two preceding. " Some fell among 
thorns." Now, we have, in the descriptions of the several kinds of ground, an asceudin;^ 
climax. In the first the seed lies on the surface, and never enters the soil at all, and 
by such are understood the unenlightened or unintelligent hearers. In the next the 
seed finds its way into the soil, but that soil is so shallow and so sparse — a mere thin 
coating on a rock — that the progress of the root downward is soon prevented by the 
hard, opposing, impenetrable rock : by these conditions are represented the superficial 
hearers or readers of God's Word. We now enter on a third stage upward. The seed, 
instead of lying on the surface, or remaining rootless in the layer of mould thinly 
spread upon a rock, has good soil to sustain it, and takes root therein ; but the soil 
though of itself good enough and deep enough, suffers from preoccupation ; thorns' 
or roots of thorns, have found a place in it : by this description worldly hearers ars 
meant. 2, The growth of the thorns. We are not to understand full-grown thorns, 
but thorn roots that had been left in the ground through defective tillage. Proper 
culture would have completely eradicated them. On the contrary, these thorns grew 
np along with the sprouting seed {avi>.<pvftiTai), and quite choked it. The thorns over- 
topped the young plant that sprang from the good seed ; in this way they over- 
ahadowed it, shutting out at the same time both light and air; while a still worse 
•onsequence ensued from their roots absorbing the nourishment furnished by tte soil, 
and withdrawing it from the tender plant. The inevitable result was, by robbing it 
of the strengthening nutriment afforded by the richness of the soil and muistur^ 



m. IV. 1—41.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAKK. 199 

to reduce it to a thing of sickly, stunted growth. 3. The signification of the thorns. 
Our Lord, in his interpretation of this part of the parable, shows us that by the thorns 
we are to understand cares and riches, according to the first Gospel ; while a third 
element is added by St. Luke, namely, "the pleasures of life;" and by St. Mark under 
the still more general expression of " the lusts of other things.'' All classes of society 
are comprehended here ; all sides of human life are here exhibited. The poor and rich 
here, as elsewhere, meet together. The third class, embracing such as are devoted to 
the pleasures of life, or who are concerned about lustings after other things, may be 
regarded either as a distinct class, or may be reckoned as a sub-class under either the 
poor or rich; especially the latter, inasmuch as the poor have often as keen a desira 
for pleasure, and as much zest in pleasure, as the rich, but without equal means of 
gratification. 4. Sow thorny cares choke the seed of Ood's Word. The cares referred 
to are distracting cares — anxieties pulling a man like so many cords in different 
directions. When such harassing cares come into conflict with thoughts about the 
things of God, the man in whose breast such a struggle is going on must needs be a 
double-minded man, in the sense of his heart being divided between God and the world. 
The cares here mentioned are more particularly such as distress the poor. With many 
the struggle for daily bread is a severe one — the battle a hard one. To provide food and 
raiment, a suitable place of abode, and proper education for the members of a house- 
hold, with requisite preparation for their business in life or special life-work, whatever 
it is to be, demands a certain amount of careful attention. Nor is this anywhere for- 
bidden in the Word of God ; nay, it is commanded. We are required to " provide 
things honest in the sight of all men ; " to be " not slothful in business, but fervent in 
spirit, serving the Lord ; " while it is added that " if any provide not for his own, and 
especially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an 
infidel." Besides such domestic duties, there are social duties, and personal individual 
duties, which we are bound to discharge as individuals and as members of society, as 
well as those which belong to us in our family relations. For the faithful and efficient 
discharge of such duties care and thought must be employed, time and pains 
expended. 6. Two extremes to le avoided. But, while carelessness about duties of the 
kind specified is sinful, there is another and opposite extreme, which our Lord deemed it 
necessary to rebuke by two most beautiful comparisons — the fowls of the air and the 
%wers of the field ; the birds which in sucn multitudes frequented the lake and plain 
of Gennesarct, and the flowers which in such variety and surpassing loveliness clothed 
with spring beauty the hillsides of Galilee. It is our heavenly Father who clothes 
the one and feeds the other, thus caring for both. How much more will he take 
care of his children by redemption and adoption as well as by creation I " If," says 
an old divine, in his own plain and pithy way, " our heavenly Father feeds his birds, 
he will never starve his babes." God will have us cast our care upon him ; he will 
have us feel convinced that he careth for us ; he will have us to be " careful " — that is, 
anxiously careful — " for nothing, but in everything " — little as well as great, momentous 
or minute — " by prayer and supplication . . . make our requests known unto QoA." 
In this way, avoiding either extreme — that of criminal carelt ssness on the one hand, 
and that of corroding carefulness or over-anxiety on the other, and ever by prayer 
rolling our burden over on the Lord, we get rid of those thorny cares that choke and 
strangle the growth of the good seed in our hearts. Worldly objects do claim a 
due share of attention, worldly duties must not be neglected ; but heavenly subjects 
are of paramount importance, and heavenly interests bear the same ratio to earthly 
that heaven itself does to earth, or eternity to time. Thorns served for fences, and in 
some places separated the fields in Palestine, as we infer from Micah (vii. 4), where the 
prophet uses the comparison of " a thorn hedge." They were useful, therefore, in th( ir 
own way and in their own place for fences in fields, but most baneful when left to 
grow up in fields of corn, or grain, or other crops. So with worldly cares ; they have 
their place. Of course, by worldly cares we do not mean those anxieties which are 
strictly forbidden under ail circumstances, but only that amount of attention that is 
required for the right discharge of the worldly duties that devolve upon us. Anything 
beyond this is injurious to our best and highest interests. Uneasy, anxious cares, like 
the thorns among the growing grain, choke the Divine Word and strangle the springing 
plant of grace. Such cares, when yieMsd to or indulged in, interfere unduly with ^sa 



100 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. it. 1—41. 

thonghts and feelings and affections that are claimed, and justly claimed, by the lessons 
of God's Word. Things present take the place of things everlasting ; anxieties about 
■ur worldly affairs crush out altogether, or leave little room for, spiritual concerns. 
The thorns of this parable are represented as encroaching on the good seed, and 
asurping the place which of right belongs to the useful plant ; so these cares of the 
wesent world, if allowed, are sure to usurp the place that belongs to the world to come. 
The thorns took away from the seed-root, and drew to themselves the nourishment o( 
the rich soil ; so the concernments of a passing and perishing world take away our 
thoughts from God aud heaven and eternity. The things that are seen and temporal 
withdraw our attention from things unseen and eternal. The body and its wants tako 
the place of the soul and its necessities. Exertions and energies that should be 
devoted to higher and spiritual objects are squandered on the trifles of earth and sense. 
Under such conditions and in such circumstances the seed of the Word sown in the 
heart necessarily becomes unfruitful. The soil may be excellent, the seed may be 
carefully sown, the Word faithfully ministered, it may, moreover, take root and grow ; 
but the thorns deprive it of its proper nourishment, its growth is obstructed the 
plant becomes weak and sickly ; without strength or vigour it can yield no fruit. It 
may have stem, and leaf, and bud, and blossom, and growth to a certain extent , but 
it brings no fruit to perfection or maturity (o4 reAeir^opoCo-i). In such hearers of the 
Word there is no fruit of the Spirit, no Christian grace, no works of faith, or deeds of 
charity, or labour of love in any direction ; " it becometh unfruitful." 6. Another dot* 
of these mental thorns. With the cares of this world our Lord classes riches, bm 
Another division of the thorns of this parable. There is nothing sinful in riches when 
honestly acquired or justly inherited, aud when at the same time they are rightly 
used. We read of the father of the faithful himself that he was " rich in cattle, in 
silver, aud in gold." Two circumstances make the possession of riches to be perilous. 
The circumstances referred to are the love of riches and the abuse of riches. "The 
bve of money," we read, " is the root of all evil : which while some coveted after, 
they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows ; " 
or, according to the Revised Version, " The love of money is a root of all kinds of evU : 
which some reaching after have been led astray from the faith, and have pierced 
themselves through with many sorrows;" and hence it is that they occupy the 
thoughts and engross the affections to the exclusion of the lessons of inspired truths 
the precepts of the Law and the promises of the gospel. They pierce and pain, 
moreover, like the pricking of thorns. What sorrow as well as solicitude they 
occasion 1 Men set their minds to work, and perplex themselves with plans to obtain 
them, and minds thus preoccupied have no room left for better objects and holier pur- 
suits; men torture themselves most unwarrantably in order to increase them and 
augment their store ; men are distressed with restless schemes in order to retain secun 
possession of them ; men, again, are so in love with them that they cannot bear to part 
■with them, or share them with others for the noblest purposes — religious, educational, 
or charitable, nor even for the means of profiting their own souls. When the love of 
riches thus dominates the heart, and when such plans and projects regulate its thoughts 
and rule its affections, no wonder that such bushy and prickly thorns choke °ott( 
(inenviiay), or Crushing together suffocate {(rvinrvlyovat) and stifle the seeds or plants in 
their growth. 7. " The deceit/ulness of riches." Both St. Matthew and St. Mark mention 
this characteristic of riches. How often does it occur that men rise up early, sit up 
late, and eat the bread of carefulness with the hope of becoming rich ; but the wealth 
they are in quest of, like some phantom form, eludes their grasp. Wealth, just as the 
meteor of the marsh, leads them till it leaves them in the quagmire, deluded, deceived, 
disappointed. They die neither rich in worldly goods, nor rich toward God. Agwn, 
men struggle long and hard for many years, and at length succeed in amassing wealth 
(»AouTor, from the root w\t entering into the verb " to fill," the noun " multitude," and the 
word " \vealth," in Greek), and in scraping together much of this world's goods ; but scarce 
has thcii' object been attained, their hopes realized, when, lo ! through some untoward 
event, iuch as a conflagration, the breaking of a bank, or a robbery, their riches "make 
to themselves wings and fly away;" and thus they are deceived by a fluctuating, vanish- 
tog pussassion, for the attainment of which they have strained every power of mind and 
body, to the entire neglect of the soul and spiritual things. Once more, we c»u well 



SB. IT. 1—41.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SI. MARK. 801 

suppose the case of men succeeding in the race for riches, and retaining in security th« 
frmts of their labour. But by this time they are no longer young ; desire has failed, thi 

Sower of enjoyment has ceased ; the advance of age, with its accompanying decay and 
ecrepitude, kept pace with the accumulation of wealth ; and now in the end, after 
years of toil, they have no relish for the enjoyments they had anticipated ; they have 
experienced " the deceitfulness of riches," and, what is worse, their heart is now hard, 
their conscience seared, the seed of truth has been so long stifled, and its instructions 
■o long suffocated by the crowding thoughts of wealth. Further, riches deceive by 
their promises. They promise happiness, but instead of happiness they often bring 
miserable apprehensions j they promise peace of mind, but they often prove the chief 
disturbers of that peace ; they promise contentment, but the craving for more produces 
restlessness and dissatisfaction ; they promise to lighten the burdens of life, but they 
frequently superadd a crushing load of care to all its other burdens ; they promise 
relief from care, but it is as true now as in the poet's day, that " black care mounti 
behind the knight." The seed of the Word may be sown on the rich soil of a young, 
warm heart, it may strike root deeply downward, it may develop a tender stem and 
green leaf upward, it may struggle for light and air, but in vain 1 These thorns rob the 
root of nourishment, and shut out the genial sunlight and healthy atmosphere from the 
top ; and though there may be foliage, there is no fruitage. If, then, poverty distresses 
with its cares and distracts by its anxieties, riches may divert the mind by their 
abundance and deceive by their promises ; in either case, the Word may be unfruitful, 
the life barren, heaven missed, salvation lost, and the soul ruined. 8. Other perils to 
profitable hearing. When we reflect on the dangers to our spiritual life and growUi 
attending both poverty and riches, we may well say with the wise man, " Give me 
neither poverty nor riches," or give me grace to bear myself discreetly and devoutly in 
either. But if the I'oor man is in danger from his poverty, and the rich man in danger 
because of his wealth, what of the man of pleasure ? The word fiios differs from ("h 
both in the classics and in the Scriptures ; but the difference thus existing is reversed, 
(0 that in Scripture the latter denotes the higher kind of life, and is the word of moral 
meaning involving moral distinction, while the former is more closely connected with 
natural life, or that life which we have in common with other animals. Accordingly, 
we read of "the pride of life" (flioB), "the affairs of life," and here "the pleasures of life," 
with the same word in each. "The pleasures of life," or of this life — our versions supply- 
ing the pronoun — may be the pleasures of sense and sin, such as the apostle enumerates 
under works of the flesh, when he says, in his Epistle to the Galatians (v. 19), " Now 
the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these ; Adultery, fornication, unclean* 
ness, lasciviousness, . . . drunkenness, revellings, and such like." Or the pleasures here 
referred to may be the less gross and more fashionable pleasures which minister to 
pride, to pomp, to luxiiry, and to ambition. These desires about the remaining or 
other things may refer to gay clothing, costly furniture, rich equipages, stately 
mansions, works of art, broad acres, wide domains, popular applause, worldly advance* 
ment, and whatever else may be comprehended under "the lust of the eye and the pride 
of life." Even lawful desires inordinately pursued, proper objects too eagerly sought 
after, right employments and occupations too keenly followed, even natural affections 
carried to excess, — all these, when they are allowed to interfere with or draw away the 
attention from everlasting verities, the lessons of Scripture, and the concerns of the 
soul, and are not restrained by the grace of God, become spiritual thorns. They choke 
the seed, distract and distress the mind, and in the end " make a death-bed difflcult." 
We have read somewhere that when the famous French cardinal Mazarin drew near 
his end, he caused himself to be dressed, shaved, rouged, and enamelled. Then he 
had himself rolled in an easy-chair through his picture-gallery, exclaiming at times as 
he went along, " See that Correggio, this Venus of Titian, that incomparable Caracal 
Must I quit them all? Farewell, beloved ones! None can know how my heart 
bleeds to leave you." He was next wheeled into the promenade, where the feeble 
hands of the old sinner were actually held up while he joined in a game of cardsl 
And so, it is added, be continued till the papal nuncio came to give him plenary 
indulgence. 

IX. Practical lessons. 1. The first lessson here that presents itself to our attentioa 
may be expressed in that exhortation of the Apostle John, " Love not the world. 



an THE GOSPEL ACCOKiJiNG TO ST. MARK. [ch. jt. 1—41. 

neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the lore of the 
Father is not in him." 2. We are warned so as to beware of the cruel disappointment 
of going on successfully for a time, and then coming short at the last ; of being, in other 
words, an almost Christian, and so only coming in view of but not reaching salvation. 
Here the surface was not hard, as in the case of the wayside, nor was the soil shallow, 
u ia the case of the stony ground ; on the contrary, thure was a soft surface to admit 
the seed, there was soil neither shallow nor stony to retain it ; and yet the seed, though 
well and deeply rooted, was stifled at the top and suffocated at the root, so that it never 
reached maturity. 3. With seeming progress there may be real retrogression. In the 
case of the wayside it is trodden down at once, never penetrating even the surface before 
Satan snatches it away ; in the stony ground the seed finds lodgment in the soil, springs 
up speedily, but for want of root or depth of earth to maintain the root, it is scorched 
and withers away ; in the thorny ground it enters the surface, roots itself in the soil, 
springs up and grows, but after all it remains barren and fruitless. The last state, in 
one point of view, is worse than the preceding, and that, again, than the first ; because 
more progress has been made by the seed among the thorns than by that on the rocky 
ground, and more by that, again, than by the seed cast on the wayside ; and thus to go 
so far as to take root and grow, and then fall short at last, is more disappointing than 
the case of the seed which, though it enters the soil, never takes root, and only endures 
for • time ; and still more than that which never penetrates the surface at all. 4. It 
has been remarked, that the first corresponds to the carelessness of childhood, the 
second to the shallowness of youth, and the third to the worldliness of age ; the first 
also implying inattention, the second impulsiveness or ardour, and the third indulgent 
selfishness. 

X. Thb good obound. 1. Its character. The chief characteristic of the good ground 
is its productiveness; while our Lord, in his explanation, indicates several other interesting 
particulars. The good ground represents an honest and good heart. Absolute goodness is 
out of the question, fur " the heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked ; " 
and so the question comes to be — Is it the comparativegoodness of the natural heart, 
or is it the heart of the believer, in reference to whom we read, that " the preparations 
of the heart in man are from the Lord " ? That there are differences in unregenerate 
men and in the condition of their hearts is, we think, unquestionable. It is so with 
individuals: as Nathanael, of whom, when coming to Jesus according to Philip's 
direction, the Saviour himself said, " Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile ; " 
or as Cornelius, " a devout man, and one that feared Grod, with all his house ; " or as the 
Ethiopian eunuch, who, while he was returning in his chariot, read carefully and pondered 
closely " the prophet Esaias." It was so with the members of the Bereean community, 
who were " more noble than they of Thessalonica, in that they received the Word with 
all readiness of mind." Thus even by nature some are more candid, honest, and upright 
than others ; more earnest and desirous of knowing, as well as more ready to receive, the 
truth. Such natural differences, as well as those made by grace, are due to God, who 
alone makes men to differ. If the reference is to believers, the meaning is perfectly 
plain. The heart of such becomes " honest and good " in the highest human sense, 
when God, by his Holy Spirit, renews the heart and sanctifies the life, having united the 
soul by faith to the Saviour. Hearts thus quickened and purified are in a condition to 
receive, and do receive, the Word in simplicity and godly sincerity. Thus receiving it 
they grow thereby, being nourished and strengthen^, and built up in their most holy 
faith. 2. The reception of the Word by such. Three terms are employed in this regard. 
St. Mark says, irapa5^x<"^"» they receive it, with a feeling of inward satisfaction, it may 
be, or even delight. The stony-ground hearers are represented by the same evangelist 
and by St. Matthew as receiving it (\anPiiiovn\ and by St. Luke (S^xovtoi), with joy. 
The joy with which such hearers received it was a sudden impulse, which soon ceased — 
a quick, joyous efnotion, which played on the surface without stirring to any great extent 
the depths of the heart. But the reception accorded to it by those having an honest and 
good heart is accompanied by a deep, steady, abiding interest. The usage of this word 
in the LXX. seems to imply a cordial reception ; thus, in Isa. xlii. 1 we read, " Israel 
is my chosen, my soul has accepted (irpoireSefaTo) him ; " and in Prov. iii. 12 it is 
written, " For whom the Lord loves he rebukes, and scourges every son whom ha rMelves 
(wafaHxerm)." But wbether this shade of meaning be attributable to the context oi 



CH. IT. 1—41.] THE GOSPJSL ACCOBDING TO ST. MAliK. 20« 

inherent in the word, certain it is that snch hearers receive the Word not wearily nor 
listlessly, nor as a formal duty, but as a matter of privilege, and in order to be instructed 
and edified thereby, and that their souls may he satisfied as with marrow and fatness. 
But, secondly, such hearers understand (avviiiv) the Word. The interest we feel in any 
truth or fact helps us greatly in its right comprehension ; once our interest is fully 
awakened our attention will be excited ; we shall examine its bearings more thought- 
fully. It is thus especially with the Word of God: we snail study it more carefully, 
as well as more prayerfully; while the Holy Spirit, piumised to them that ask him, will 
guide us into all truth, even " the truth as it is in Jesus." A third element in this recep- 
tion of the Word is the retention of i t (icaTixoviri, used by St. Luke) : they keep it. Having 
received the truth in the love of it, and having mingled it with faitb, it becomes the 
ingrafted Word — ingrafted as a fruitful shoot in the wild unfruitful stock, or implanted 
in them, at all events, incorporated with their very being. As a natural and necessary 
consequence, they hold it fast, so that Satan cannot snatch it away, nor vain thoughts 
crush it down, nor worldly concerns stifle it, nor any evil influence destroy it. It 
becomes the subject of regular, constant, daily meditation ; and so it gets linked with the 
thoughts and feelings and affections, while it is reduced to practice in the life. The 
individual so receiving it is " not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the Word," and so 
blessed in the deed. This corresponds exactly with the apostle's statement (1 Cor. xv. 
2), "By which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory [Karex^re, literally, holdfast, as 
here] what I preached unto you." 3. Fruitfulness. Fruit is borne in varying propor- 
tion, according to the talents bestowed and the surrounding circumstances. This fruit is 
borne in patience, that is, enduringly and perseveringly, and to the end ; and not only the 
seed itself, but the fruit — each grain in every ear in turn becoming seed multiplies itself. 
XI. Pbactioal lessons. 1. Eight way of receiving the Word. There must be the 
exercise of attention, understanding, and memory ; as far as possible the attention must 
be lively and earnest, the understanding active and practical, and the memory retentive. 
2. The fruitfulness. The fruit, though it varies in quantity, is a uniform product, 
evidencing the root of the matter, and ministering at once glory to God and grace 
to man.— -J. J. G. 

Vers, 21 — 25. Parallel passage: Luke viii, 16 — 18. — Light and illumination. 
I. Tbmpobabt obscuration. The heathens in their mysteries had esoteric doctrines 
only made known to the initiated, and not designed to be revealed at any time to the 
uninitiated. The obscuration in their case was permanent. Our Lord, at a particular 
period of his ministry and for a special purpose, veiled his teaching in parable. But 
this obscuration was only meant to continue for a time. Our Lord guards against the 
notion that the doctrines thus propounded were designed for perpetual concealment, or 
for revelation only to a select few. Accordingly he asks whether at all (^■^ti) a lamp 
(\ixm) is brought Into an apartment in order to be secreted or to be set on a lamp- 
stand. The lamp is not brought, is it, to be put under a bushel (rather, a peck-measure, 
equivalent to the Eoman modius) or under a bed, and not to be set on a lamp-stand ? 
The light in a dwelling may be concealed for some necessary purpose and for some short 
time, but this is contrary to its regular and proper use. So our Lord here implies that 
the light of his teaching may be partially concealed by parable, and confined for a time 
to a few immediate followers, but shall be manifested, and is meant to be manifested, 
all the more afterwards. The matter is expressed in two ways — first as a prediction, 
and secondly as a pui-pose. As a prediction, " There is nothing hid, that shall not 
be manifested ; " or, more literally. There is not anything hid, that (or whatsoever} 
may not be revealed. As a purpose, " Neither was anything kept secret, but that it 
should come abroad;'' rather. Neither did anything hecome secret, but that it might 
come into open view. Like a lamp placed under some piece of domestic furniture for a 
short space and for some sufBcient reason, the light of our Lord's doctrine was placed 
under the veil of parable or other obscuring medium for a time. But this position 
was never meant to be permanent — nay, the purpose was the very opposite ; that is, to 
promote rather than prevent the future splendour and the further outshining of that 
bright and beautiful light. 

II, Biia.Tioii OF LBAENiNO TO TEACHDto. Our Lord's maxima never undergo • cbani^ 
of meaning, but their application necessarily varies with the context. After enunciating 



804 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAKK. jib. it. 1—41 

ene of these maxims, yiz. " If any man have ears to ear, let him hear," as a safeguard 
against possible error, and to prevent a not unliltely misconception, he proceeds to 
stole another principle of his teaching, and another jiurpose to be accomplished. This 
principle was that the measure of attention given by the disciple to his Master would 
be rewarded with a proportionate measure of improvement ; that in proportion to the 
desire of instruction and the use made of it by the disciple would be the benefit 
bestowed by the teacher. Again, the purpose was that the instructions thus received 
should be utilized for the advantage of others, so that the more the disciples profited 
as learners, so much the n ate they themselves would be able to impart to others, as 
preachers of the gospel and as teachers of the truth. Further, ulterior and higher 
attainments are promised to him who makes a right use of presont attainments ; while 
he " who has not," that is to say, who has not for ready use, and who does not make 
available his present or previous attainments, shall forfeit even what he has, or fancies 
he has. We thus learn that spiritual attainments and spiritual knowledge are never 
exactly at a standstill. They are either increasing by proper applioation and improve- 
ment, or decreasing by misuse and diminishing by neglect. — J. J. G. 

Vers. 26 — 29. — Spiritval vegetation or secret growth, I. Relation to the immedi- 
ately FEECBDING PARABLE. TMs parable, which may very appropriately be called " the 
secret growth," is recorded by St. Mark alone. It is peculiar to his Gospel. Its relation 
to the parable of the sower, which precedes it, is somewhat of the following kind : — ^The 
former parable describes the soil, this one, the seed ; the former the quality of the soil, 
and this the vitality of the seed. 

IL The kingdom op heaven. " The kingdom of heaven " is an expression of &equent 
occurrence in Scripture. Thus we read, " The kingdom of heaven cometh not with 
observation," that is, " outward show," as the margin expresses it ; also, " The kingdom 
of heaven is within you," or " among you," as the margin again has it. The meaning of 
this important expression is sufScieutly plain to every reader of the New Testament, 
and does not, at least in its present connection, require any lengthened explanation. It 
denotes the reign of Heaven's principles in the heart of man, the spread of Heaven's 
principles among thi families of man, and the glory of Heaven's principles as exhibited 
in all their plenitude and in all their power in that new heaven and new earth in which 
dwelleth righteousness. It may be more briefly summed up as the kingdom of grace In 
the heart, of peace in the family, and of glory through all the world. In Luther's 
' Smaller Catechism,* on that petition of the Lord's Prayer, " Thy kingdom come," it is 
asked, " How does this, take place?" and the answer is, " When our heavenly Father 
gives us his Holy Spirit, that through his grace we believe his Holy Word, and live a 
godly life, here in time and yonder in eternity." 

III. Quality op the bkbd. The seed here, as in the former parable, is the Word ol 
God ; thus we read, at the fourteenth verse of this chapter, " The sower soweth the Word : " 
so also in that other Scripture, " Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incor- 
ruptible, by the Word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever." Husbandmen are par- 
ticularly careful about the quality of the seed which they cast into the furrows of the 
field, and very properly so, for the prospect of the harvest depends so much thereon. 
They reject the seed that is mixed, or unhealthy, or dead; otherwise the result would 
be most disastrous. Exactly so should it be with the Word of God. Here is a duty 
incumbent both on those that speak and on those that hear that Word ; it behoves them 
both to see well to it that it is in truth the Word of God which they speak and hear. 
It must be the Word of God — nothing less, and nothing else ; the Word of God in its 
purity, the Word of God without any mix lure, whether oif human error or human passion, 
or doubtful disputation, or unsettling speculation, or tradition of men, or doctrines of 
men, or philosophy and vain deceit. That Word, too, must be faithfully spoken, not 
handled deceitfully ; for we are not to speak as pleasing men, but God, which trieth our 
hearts ; the whole counsel of God must be declared, and no part kept back j its force, 
too, must not be weakened, or its meaning explained away. Thus, " the truth as it is in 
Jesus" must be exhibited faithfully and fully, plainly and openly, just as the apostle 
says, " But as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ." The 
danger of the contrary course is very forcibly pointed out in a remarkable Scripture 
(1 Cor. iii 12), where the apostle, after stating the true and only foundation to be Jesui 



«. iT. 1—41,] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. Ml 



Christ, proceeds to say, "Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, Bilven 
precious stones, wood, hay, stubble," that is, either doctrines more or less sound, or 
practice more or less consistent with profession, " the fire shall try every man's work oJ 
what sort it is. ... If any man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss: but ht 
himself shall be saved ; yet so as by fire." 

IV. Adaptation of the seed to the soil. In natural husbandry men are at pains 
to get seed suited to the soil. Every kind of seed does not suit every kind of soil j 
seed suitable for one kind may not be suitable for another. There is need, there- 
fore, of selection and adaptation. There must be proper discrimination and judicious 
distribution. So with the seed of the Word ; there is enough for all, and something for 
each, but it must be duly and discreetly apportioned. This is the direction of Scrip- 
ture itself, for we are told therein that there are little children, young men, and fathers 
in Christ, and each is to get his portion of meat in due season ; and, again, milk is 
intended for babes, and strong meat for them that are of mature age. Accordingly, the 
careless are to be aroused, the unawakened are to be stirred up, the indifferent to be 
alarmed ; the ignorant, again, are to be instructed, the timid to be encouraged, and the 
presumptuous to be rebuked ; the tempted are to be fortified against temptation, the 
weak are to be strengthened, and the sorrowful to he consoled in their time of trouble ; 
such as have backslidden, or have been overtaken in a fault, are to be restored in the 
spirit of meekness; saints are to be edified, believers built up in their holy faith; the 
lukewarm are to be brought back to their first love, and the graces of all quickened. 
For these various purposes there is enough in the treasury of God's Word, and out of 
that treasury are to be brought forth things both new and old. 

v. The paet which belonqs to human agency. Man's part is to sow the seed. 
This is his plain duty, this is his palpable concern, and his practical part of the busi- 
uaaa. He has not to make the seed, or manufacture the seed, or meddle in any way 
with iae production of the seed ; this were a task far above his ability and beyond his 
power. The seed is ready to his hand, and provided for his use. All he has to do, and 
all that is reqmred of him, is to put the seed into the soil, and deposit it properly in 
the furrows — suiting, of course, as far as may be, the seed to the soil and to the sort of 
previous preparation made for it. We insist on the indispensable necessity of casting the 
seed into the furrow of the field, and likewise of sowing the seed of truth in the human 
heart ; we afiSrm, moreover, the need of diligence in accomplishing this part of the 
operation, which is man's work and man's duty ; we assert the absolute requirement of 
human instrumentality in this part either of natural or spiritual husbandry. The pas- 
sage we are considering sets this duty clearly before us in the words, "As if a man 
should cast seed into the ground." 

VI. Thb necessity for DrviNB influence. There must be Divine influence as well 
as human agency ; for in ver. 27 we read that the husbandman, after sowing the seed, 
mkj sleep by night and rise by day, while the seed springs up and grows he knows not 
how. Here, in the first place, we must take note of the vitality of the seed: it buds and 
lepgthens (p\curT<iirii koI latKianrrcu). God gave it this vital energy at the first, and so 
wonderfully powerful is this energy, that the seed which had lain three thousand years 
in the hand of the mummy' will, when deposited in the earth under the ordinary con- 
ditions, sprout, spring up, and grow. We have seen that the deposition of the seed 
in the ground is necossary for any produce, but it must be added that for the develop- 
ment of the seed itself another distinct and indeed a Divine infiuence is required. Man 
can only go a certain length either in the department of nature or the sphere of 
^taae, " Paul may plant, and Apollos water, but it is God that giveth the increase." 
When the seed has been committed to the earth in the most careful and skilful manner, 
the husbandman must wait for the fertilizing shower to make the seed grow and 
fructify. So in the spiritual sphere ; not only has the seed of troth to be sown in the 
heart, and the lessons of God's Word to be deposited in the soul — and all this may be 
effected by human agency — but the infiuence of the Holy Spirit of God must be added. 
If the Word of Qoi. be the seed, as we are assured it is, then the Spirit of God is the 
rain-shower, the descent of which on the heart, or rather on the seed sown therein, iz 
indispensably required for germination and fructification, or whatever else may be 
included under spiritual growth. Thus two distinct agencies must com* together, 
unite, and blend in this great and important as well as mysterious process of spiritual 



206 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. [ch. it. 1—41. 

vegetation. There must be the Word of Gori — that Is the seed; there must he th« 
Spirit of God — that is the shower. Without the seed and the shower, without the 
Woni and the Spirit, there can be no spiritual vegetation. The soil may be good- 
ie seed both good and suitable j but the dews of heavenly grace — the influences oi 
the Divine Spirit^annot be dispensed with. Again, the influences of the Spirit may 
■be vouchsafed at the proper season, and in sufficient abundance ; but if the seed of truth, 
if the lessons of the Divine Word, have not been sown in the heart, there is no germina- 
tion, no quicl;ening. However favourable the conditions of growth may otherwise be, 
there can be no growth, for the material is wanting. There is no seed, and so no germ 
of life, and consequently no life. The presence of both is absolutely and indispensably 
necessary. There are two elements of growth in the natural world — the seed and the 
«hower ; the deposition of the former in the soil belongs to man's department of work, 
the descent of the latter is God's good gift. The one acts upon the other, while the 
united operation results in healthy vegetation. The seed supplies the material, the 
shower is the fructifying agency ; the shower gives efficacy to the seed, the seed 
expands by the combined action of the sun and shower. In spiritual husbandry the 
seed is the Word, the shower represents the Spirit ; the Word has life, but the Spirit 
is required to develop it. Without the Spirit the Word would remain inert, by the 
Spirit it is made productive ; the Word is the germ of spiritual life, the Spirit unfoldi 
and quickens it ; their mutual action issues in the happiest results. 

VII. The bond of union between the two agencies, Divinb and hduax. The 
absence of either agency would end in disaster. Nothing can supply the place of the 
seed, neither the soil itself nor the stones imbedded in it. Where there are no seeds the 
showers of heaven may fall in abundance, the sunshine of heaven may be bright and 
beautiful, but neither, in the absence of the seed, would be of any avaiL Contemplate 
in the season of harvest a field of golden grain ; the stalks are strong and vigorous; the 
ear is filled with kindly fruit, and bending imder the weight ; the whole is white unto 
the harvest. Let this be the case not in one field, but in all ; not in one district, but 
in many ; not in one part of the country, but in every part where the land is arable 
and under cultivation ; and yet not one particle of the plenty thus supposed sprang up 
without seed having been previously put into the earth. Among all the multitudinous 
stems that constitute that rich, luxuriant crop that waves in the autumn wind, and 
covers with such abundance the face of the earth in the time of harvest, not one is 
found that grew without a root, and not a root that grew without a seed. And just so 
it is with the seed of truth rooted in the heart, and producing the harvest of grace in 
the life of man. But, as we have already intimated, the fructifying energy of the 
Divine Spirit, whether it acts by the dew, or shower, or sunshine, or all combined, is 
equally important, and indeed absolutely necessary in producing the manifold blessings 
of the spiritual harvest. What, then, is the link that brings these two agencies together 
—the seed which man sows in the soil, and the shower or other influence which God 
sends down from the sky ? What means must be used to procuie for the seed, when 
sown in the human heart, the quickening and refreshing power of the Divine Spirit ? 
The only means available to man is the power of prayer, and prayer is a power as well 
in the domain of the temporal as of the spiritual. No doubt man has done his all when 
be has properly deposited suitable seed in fertile soil ; but, though he cannot actually 
and of himself go further or do more, there remains a duty, the proper performance of 
which may carry the work much further, and set other and mightier energies in opera- 
tion ; for " prayer moves the hand that moves the world." Once upon a time, long ago, 
in tlie land of Israel, drought and dearth prevailed ; "Uie prophet prayed, . . . and the 
heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit." So when, in answer to 
bulli'ving prayer, God bestows his Spirit, the seed of truth germinates in the heart, and 
yields the fruits of the Spirit in the life. 

VIIL The fruitful babth and the faithful husbandman. " The earth bringeth 
forth fruit of herself." God, in his wise and powerful organization of our earth, gave it 
this power. In obedience to his original command, and in virtue of power originally 
tinpiirted, the earth brings forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his kind, and the 
tre.- yielding fruit after his kind— the three great divisions of the vegetable kingdom. 
The productive earth still retains the power which God at first impressed on it, and to 
Ood it is still indebted for its productiveness, as we read, " He watereth the hills (torn 



OH. IV. 1—41.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 207 

his chamliers , the earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works. He causeth thf 
grasii to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of man, that he may bring forth 
food out of the earth." We can only follow the process of vegetation a very short 
way. We know, indeed, that the seed dies, and is decomposed, for it is not quickened 
except it die ; and then it germinates, and new life succeeds. But the entire process is 
mysterious as it is invisible ; it is hidden from man's scrutiny, and high above man's 
comprehension; while in those secret processes in the sky above and in the earth 
below we trace the handiwork of God, without which the earth would be barren as the 
graaite and unfruitful as the sea. The faith of the husbandman rests securely on 
the established law of the earth's fertility, produced and promoted as it is by the mighty 
power of God ; while his patience is justified by the uniformity of such natural law, 
" Behold," says James, " the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth, 
and hath long patience for it, until he receive the early and the latter rain." This 
parable affords great encouragement to both faith and patience, and the encourage- 
ment thus afforded forms a main feature of the parable. When, therefore, like the 
husbandman, we prepare the soil of the heart diligently and dutifully, and when we 
sow thereon the seed with carefulness and caution, and duly supplicate the blessing of 
heaven on our spiritual handiwork, looking up and expecting an answer, we have no 
more that we can do, and no more that we need to do. We may then safely leave the 
result to God ; we may commit it quietly and confidingly to his hand, assured that he 
will give the increase in due time and in due measure. This principle is embodied in 
the husbandman sleeping and rising night and day, while the seed springs and grow« 
up, he knows not how. There is much comfort in this assurance, much also to strengthen 
faith and brighten hope. Though all our care will not cause the seed to grow, though 
we cannot give power to the Word, though God alone can make it effectual, though we 
must wait patiently for his influence, though the process is mysterious in itself and 
bidden from the eye of man ; yet we may forbear all hurtful anxiety, and forego all 
unseemly impatience, leaving the issue entirely to God. We niust beware of enacting 
the part of those silly children who pull up their plants or flowers from time to time in 
order to examine the roots and inspect the process of growth. Though we cannot 
nnveil the inward processes of grace any more than of nature, yet we need not dread 
any failure in those processes. What is required of us is to use aright the means, and 
instrumentalities and agencies within our reach, without meddling with what is too high 
above us or too deep below us ; and we may feel fully persuaded that, if we labour in 
the Lord, our labour will not be in vain. 

IX. The obadual obowth. By the earth of herself according to the course of 
nature, and by the concurring power of the God of nature, fruit is brought forth ; " first 
the blade, then the ear, after that the full com in the ear." In like manner, the Word 
of truth received by faith into the heart becomes the work of grace. This the Spirit 
carries on while the preacher sleeps and can do no work, or is engaged in other business, 
or has entered into rest ; for the Word preached not unfrequently does its work even 
after the preacher has been gathered to his fathers. When men sow their seed, they 
sow "not that body that shall be, . . . but God giveth it a body as it pleases him." The 
old dies, but the new blade shoots up; in this we have an emblem of the new nature, for 
" if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature." Next comes the ear, and in this we find 
the promise of, and preparation for, fruitfulness. At length we have the full com in the 
ear ; this is the fruit of righteousness to the praise and glory of God, and this includes 
all the graces of the Christian character, and all the virtues of the Christian life. Thus 
Divine truth, under the teaching of the Holy Spirit, first enlightens the mind, then 
convinces the understanding, gradually quickens the conscience, and convertji the 
heart, while, last of all and best of all, it saves the souL 

X. Tbb harvest. Now the great end is attained. The faithful recipient of tho 
Divine Word has grown in grace; he has added to his "faith virtue; and to virtue 
knowledge; and to knowledge temperance; and to temperance jatience; and to mtience 
godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity ; he has 
attained to deadness to the world, spirituality of mind, heavenly dispositions, resigna- 
tion to the Divine will, conformity to the Divine image, and assimilaiion to the Divina 
character. When, moreover, the Christian has thus borne the fruits of godliness, mada 
himaclf useful in the Church and in the world, having served his generation in both ; 



208 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. v. 1— 4& 

and when the good purposes of his heavenly Father have been fulfilled in him and by 
him ; at length the harvest comes, the sickle is put in ; meetened for heaven, ripened 
for the garner of the skies, he is taken home like a shock of com in his season. Thug 
to the child of God " to die is gain " — the gain of heaven for earth, of rest for labour, 
at glory everlasting instead of the varied sorrows of this present time.— J. J. G. 

Vers. 30 — 34. Parallel passage : Matt. xiii. 31, 32. — 77ie mustard seed, L Differenob 

BBTWEBNTHB PABABLE OF THE MUSTARD SEED AND THE LEAVEN. The latter parable refers 

rather to the growth of grace in the heart, the former to the extension of the Church in 
the world ; the latter to the assimilating power of Divine grace in the human heart, the 
former to progressive development and final establishment of the Church on earth. 

II. The bmallness of the mustard seed. The smallness of the mustard seed, if 
the expression be not proverbial, furnishes at least a striking and frequent subject of 
comparison. Thus, our Lord uses the illustration in reference to faith, "If ye have faith 
M a grain of mustard seed ; " and the present comparison, both here and in the parallel 
passage of St. Matthew, presents the same figure, 

III. The progress of the Church. While this parable may possibly refer to the 
progress of religion in the heart, its best exemplification is found in the constantly and 
rapidly progressive extension of the Church of Christ since apostolic times. When all 
its members met in that upper room in Jerusalem, they numbered only a hundred and 
twenty. Other believers, no doubt, were to be found in the holy city at that early day 
of the Church's history ; but, be that as it may, the number above given included the 
entire membership of those who publicly met together and professed themselves 
disciples of the Nazarene. Ten days after — the interval between the Ascension and 
Pentecost — there took place a_ signal outpouring of the Holy Spirit, and in connec- 
tion with St. Peter's sermon "there were added to the Church about three thousand 
souls. Some short time after this, as we read in Acts iv., " the number of the men " 
who publicly avowed their faith in Christ " was about five thousand." The next notice 
of the numerical progress of the gospel is contained in Acts v., where we are informed 
that " believers were the more added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women." 
In the beginning of the very next chapter we have an incidental notice to the efi'ect 
that " the number of the disciples was multiplied." A further and still fuller notice is 
found in the seventh verse of the same chapter (Acts vi.), where it is stated that " the 
Word of God increased ; and the number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem 
greatly ; and a great number of the priests were obedient to the faith." And all this 
occurred within a period of less than two years, and in the very place where the 
Founder of our holy religion had been put to death as a malefactor. Thus the mustard 
seed, comparatively, if not absolutely, the smallest of seeds, becomes a plant, and the 
plant becomes a tree, and the tree spreads out its branches, and the branches shelter 
with their shadow, and lodge the fowls of the air beneath their umbrageous foliage. 
So with the Church of Christ : it has spread from country to country ; it has exteuded 
from continent to island, and from island to continent; it has enlarged its borders and 
multiplied its members. It has powerfully influenced all civilized nations, and all 
barbarous nations to which it has extended have become civilized. And now king- 
doms many and mighty repose in safety and rest in security under this widespread 
gospel tree, like the birds of the air taking refuge under and nestling among the 
branches of the magnificent mustard tree of this parable. — J. J. Q, 

Yen. 36— ei.— (See on ch. tL 45— 56.)— J. J. G. 

EXPOSITION. 

rwAPTTjp V ^^ *'"" *"'^ reading, from Gerasa, Oen^ 

y.iiAtri.iLa v. „ Kersa. There was another Gerasa, 

Ter. 1. — And they came to the other side situated at some distance from the sea, on 

ot the sea. The other side of the sea would the borders of Arabia Petrsea. The ruins 

be the south-east side of the sea. Into the of the Gerasa, here referred to, have been 

eonntry of the Oadarenes, or rather, Oerti- recently discovered by Dr. Thomson, * The 

whieh is now generally admitted to Land and the Book'), bnmediatelv over 



OB. T. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, 



209 



this spot is a lofty mountain, in which are 
ancient tombs; and from this mountain 
there is an almost perpendicular declivity, 
literally (itpniJ.v6s) corresponding accurately 
to what is required by the description in 
the narrative of the miracle. Dr. Farrar 
(' Life of Christ ') says that in the days of 
Busebius and Jerome, tradition pointed to a 
" steep place " near " Gerasa " as the scene 
of the miracle. The foot of this steep is 
washed by the waters of the lake, which are 
at once very deep. 

Vers. 2— 5.— There met him out of the 
tombs a man with an unclean spirit. St. 
Matthew says that there were two. St. 
Luke, like St. Mark, mentions only one, and 
him "possessed with devils," The one 
mentioned by St. Mark was no doubt the 
more prominent and fierce of the two. This 
does not mean merely a person with a dis- 
ordered intellect. No doubt, in this case, as 
in that of insanity, physical causes may have 
helped to lay the victim open to such an 
incursion; and this may account for cases 
of possession being enumerated with various 
sicknesses, though distinguished fi'om them. 
But our Lord evidently deals with these 
persons, not as persons luffering from insan- 
ity, but aa the subjects of an alien spiritual 
power, external to themselves. He ad- 
dresses the unclean spirit through the man 
that was possessed, and says, " Come forth, 
thou unclean spirit" (ver. 8). There met 
him out of the tombs. The Jews did not 
have their burial-places in their cities, lest 
they should be defiled; therefore they buried 
their dead without the gates in the fields or 
mountains. Their sepulchres were fre- 
quently hewn out of the rook in the sides of 
the limestone hills, and they were lofty and 
".apacious ; so that the living could enter 
them, as into a vault. So this demoniac 
dwelt In the tombs, because the unclean 
spirit drove him thither, where the as- 
sociations of the place would accord with 
his malady and aggravate its symptoms. 
St. Matthew, speaking of the two, says that 
they were " exceeding fierce, so that no man 
might pass that way." The demoniac par- 
ticularly mentioned by St. Mark is described 
as having been possessed of that extraordi- 
nary muscular strength which maniacs so 
often put forth ; so that all efforts to bind 
and restrain him had proved ineffectual. 
No man could any more bind him, no, not 
with a chain (,ovSh axiani). Chains and 
fetters had often been tried, but in vain. 
Frequently too, in the paroxysms of his 
malady, he would turn his violence against 
himself, crying out, and cutting himself with 
stones. 

Yer. 6. — ^And when he saw Jesus from 
afar. These words, "from afar," explain 
the fact of our Lord being immediately met 

ST. UABE. 



by the man as soon as he left the boat 
Vers. 3 — 5 inclusive must be regarded as 
parenthetical. They describe the ordinary 
condition of the demoniac, and his sad wild 
life from day to day. From the high 
ground which he frequented he had seen 
the boat, in which Jesus was, nearing the 
shore. He had seen the other boats. Per- 
haps he had seen the sudden rise of the 
storm and its equally sudden suppression ; 
and he, like others who witnessed it, was 
affected by it. So he hastened to the shore ; 
he ran and worshipped him. He felt the 
power of his presence, and so he Tras con- 
strained through fear to do him reverence, 
for "the devils also believe and shudder 
((pplffffova-t)" (Jas. ii. 19). 

Ver. 7. — He cried with a loud voice : that 
is, the evil spirit cried out, using the organs 
of the man whom he possessed. What have 
I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the Host 
High God? From hence it appears that, 
although at the great temptation of our 
Lord in the wilderness, Satan had bat an 
imperfect knowledge of him ; yet now, after 
the evidence of these great miracles, and more 
especially of his power over the evil spirits, 
there was a general belief amongst the 
hosts of evil that he was indeed the Son of 
God, the Messiah. I adjure thee by God, 
torment me not. The torment which he 
dreaded was that which he might suffer 
after expulsion. So St. Luke says that they 
entreated him that he would not command 
them to depart into the abyss. Great as 
this mystery of evil is, we may believe that 
the evil spirits, althougli while they roam 
about upon this earth they are in misery, 
still it is some alleviation that they are not 
yet shut up in the prison-house of hell, but 
are suffered to wander about and find their 
depraved pleasure in tempting men; so 
that, if possible, they may at last drag them 
down with them into the abyss. For they 
are full of hatred of God and envy of man ; 
and they find a miserable satisfaction in 
endeavouring to keep men out of those 
heavenly mansions from which, through 
pride, they are themselves now for ever ex- 
cluded. 

Vers. 8, 9. — For he said unto him. Coma 
forth, thou unclean spirit, out of the man; 
literally, for he was saying (f\eye). Thp 
unclean spirit endeavoured to arrest, before 
it was spoken, that word of power which he 
knew he must obey. So in what follows. 
He was asking him (iTrrip(l>Ta), What is thy 
name ? Why does our Lord ask this ques- 
tion 1 Clearly to elicit from him an answer 
that would reveal the multitude of the evil 
spirits, and so make his own power over 
them to be fully known. And he saith 
unto him, Uy name is legion ; for we are 
many. The Bomah legion consisted of six 



210 



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MAEK. [oh. v. 1—43. 



thousand soldiers. But the word is here 
used indefinitely for a large number. St. 
Luke so explains it where he says (viii. 30), 
" And he said, Legion ; for many devils were 
entered into him." This revelation is 
doubtless designed to teach us how great is 
the number as well as the malignity of the 
evil spirits. If one human being can be 
possessed by so many, how vast must be the 
host of those who are permitted to have 
access to the souls of men, and if possible 
lead them to destruction I Satan here imi- 
tates him who is " The Lord of hosts." He 
too marshals his hosts, that he may fight 
against God and his people. But " for this 
purpose was the Son of God manifested, that 
he might destroy the works of the devil." 

Ver. 10. — And he besonght him much that 
he would not send them away out of the 
country. It would appear as though this evil 
spirit felt (speaking in the name of the 
other evil spirits) that if they were driven 
out from their present dwelling-places, their 
condition would be changed for the worse ; 
and that until the time should come when 
they were to be cast into the abyss, their 
best relief was to possess some materialism, 
to occupy flesh and blood, and that flesh 
and blood tenanted by a spiritual being, 
through whom they might torment others. 
They could find no rest, no relief, but in this. 
" The unclean spirit, when he is gone out 
of the man, passeth through waterless places, 
seeking rest, and findeth it not " (Matt. xii. 
43). Even the swine were better than 
nothing ; but that dwelling did not serve 
the evil spirits long. 

"Ver. 11. — Now there was there nigh unto 
the mountains — literally, on the mountain 
tide {irphs TO opTj) — a great herd of swine feed- 
ing. St. Matthew says (viii. 30), " There was 
a good way off from them : " our Lord's inter- 
view with the demoniac was on the sea- 
shore. " The herd of swine," two thousand 
in number (as St. Mark tells us, with his 
usual attention to details), were at a dis- 
tance, feeding on the slopes of the moun- 
tain. The Jews were not allowed to eat 
swine's flesh. But Jews were not the only 
inhabitants of that district. It had been 
colonized, at least in part, by the Komans 
immediately after the conquest of Syria, 
some sixty years before Christ. It was in 
this district that ten cities are said to have 
been rebuilt by the Romans, whence the 
territory acquired the name of " the Deca- 
polis." And though the Jews were forbidden 
by their Law to eat this kind of food, yet 
they were not forbidden to breed swine for 
other uses, such as provisioning the Boman 
army. 

Ter. 12. — Send ns into the swine, that we 
may enter into them. And he gave them 
leave. They oonld not enter even into the 



swine without Christ's permission; how 
much less into " the sheep of his pasture " 1 

Ver. 13. — The unclean spirits came out, 
and entered into the swine : and the herd 
ran violently down a steep place (kot& toB 
Kprnivov) — literally, down the steep — into the 
sea, . . . and were choked in the sea. By this 
Christ shows of how little worth are earthly 
possessions when set in the balance with 
the souls of men. The recovery of this 
demoniac was worth far more than the value 
of the two thousand swine. 

Ver. 14. — ^And they that fed them fled, 
and told it in the city, and in the country. 
St. Matthew mentions only the city. St. 
Mark's narrative is more full. No doubt 
many of these swineherds lived in the 
country districts ; and so the fame of the 
miracle was spread far and wide. The 
swineherds would take care that the owners 
should understand that it was through no 
fault or carelessness on their part that the 
swine had perished; but that the destruc- 
tion was caused by a power over Thich they 
had no control. And they— «'.e. the owners — 
came to see what it was that had come to 
pass. Their first care was to see the extent 
of their loss ; and this was soon revealed to 
them. They must have seen the carcases 
of the swine floating hither and thither in 
the now calm and tranquil sea ; and when 
they had thus satisfied themselves as to the 
facts, "they came to Jesus." St. Mark 
here uses the historic present; " they come 
to Jesus," that they might behold him of 
whom these great things were told, as well 
as the man out of whom the evil spirits had 
gone when they entered into the swine. 
They were, of course, concerned to know the 
magnitude of their loss, and the mode in 
which it had happened, that they might see 
whether there were any means by which it 
might be made up to them. 

Ver. 15. — And they come to Jesus, and 
behold him that was possessed with devils 
sitting, clothed and in his right mind, even 
him that had the legion; and they were 
afraid. St. Luke adds that they found him 
sitting at the feet of Jesus. It is likely 
enough that the man, as soon as he found 
himself dispossessed, had oast himself at 
the feet of Jesus, and was worshipping him ; 
but that, when bidden by Christ to sit, he 
chose to place himself at his feet. "He 
was clothed, and in his right mind." What 
a contrast to the previous description I "And 
they were afraid." They dreaded Christ's 
power. They saw that he was almighty; 
but they did not seek to know his love, and 
BO to attain to that love which " casteth out 
fear." 

Vers. 16, 17.— How it befeU him that 
was possessed with devils, and conoemiug 
the swine. The loss of the swine. They 



«H. V. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. 



211 



flould not get over that. They thought far 
more of the worldly loss than of the 
spiritual gain; and they began to beseech him 
to depart from their borders. St. Luke (viii. 
37) says that " they were taken (crmeixo"''''') 
riiterally, were holden] with great fear." 
This was the dominant feeling. They did 
aot entreat him to depart out of humility, 
as though thoy felt themselves unworthy of 
his presence ; but out of servile, slavish fear, 
lest his continued presence among them 
might bring upon them still greater losses. 
They saw that Jesus, a Jew according to 
the flesh, was holy, powerful, Divine. But 
they knew that they were Gentiles, aliens 
from the commonwealth of Israel. Where- 
fore they feared lest he should punish 
them more grievously, both on account of 
their being Gentiles and on account of 
their past sins. It was not, therefore, so 
much on account of hatred, as out of a 
timorous fear, that they besought Jesus that 
he would depart out of their borders. 

Vers. 18—20. — And as he was entering 
into the boat, he that had been possessed 
with devils besought him that he might 
be with him. It was natural that he should 
desire this. It would be grateful and sooth- 
ing to him to be near to Christ, from whom 
he had received so great a benefit and yet 
hoped for more. And he suffered him not, 
but saith unto him, Go to thy house unto 
thy friends, and tell them how great things 
the Lord hath done for thee. Our Lord 
here takes a different course from what lie 
fio often took. He saw, no doubt, that this 
restored demoniac was fitted for missionary 
work ; and there was no reason to appre- 
hend any inconvenience to himself in con- 
sequence from a people who wished to get 
rid of him. And he went his way, and 
began to publish in Deoapolis — In Decapolis, 
i.e. through the whole district of the ten 
cities — how great things Jesus had done for 
him. This would bring liim into contact 
alike with Gentiles and with Jews ; and so 
this dispossessed demoniac became a mis- 
sionary to both Jew and Gentile. Here he 
planted the standard of the cross. 

Ver. 21. — Jesus now crosses over the sea 
again, and apparently in the same boat, to 
the other side, the opposite shore, near to 
Capernaum. St. Matthew (iv. 13) distinctly 
tells us that he had left Nazareth, and was 
now dwelling at Capernaum, thus fulfilling 
the ancient prophecy with regard to Zebulun 
and Nephthalim. The circumstances under 
which he quitted Nazareth are given by 
fit. Luke (iv. 16—31). St. Matthew (ix. 1) 
calls Capernaum his own city. Thus ag 
Christ ennobled Bethlehem by his birth, 
Nazareth by his education, and Jerusalem 
by hii death, so he honoured Capernaum 
by making it his ordinary residence, and 



the focus, so to speiik, of his preaching and 
miracles. When Jesus returned, a great 
multitude was gathered unto him; and he 
was by the sea, St. Luke says that tfie 
people welcomed him, for they were all 
waiting for him. Again he placed himself 
by the sea, probably for the convenience of 
addressing a multitude, and of relieving 
himself of the pressure, as before, by taking 
refuge in a boat. 

Vers. 22, 23.— One of the rulers of the 
synagogue, Jairus by name. He appears to 
have been one of the " college of elders," 
who administered the affairs of the syna- 
gogue. The name Jairus, or " Ya-eiros," is 
probably the Greek form of the Hebrew 
Jair, "he will illuminate." He fell at 
his feet, and besought him greatly ; it is 

literally (Tr/irTet Kal irapeKoiKei), he falleth Oi 
his feet, and heseecheth him. We picture him 
to ouiselves, making his way through the 
crowd, and as he approached Jesus, kneeling 
down, and then bending his head towards 
him, until his forehead touched the ground. 
My little daughter is at the point of death, 
St, Matthew says, " is even now dead ;" St. 
Luke says, " she lay a dying." The broken 
sentences of the father are very true to 
nature. All the expressions point to the 
same conclusion, that she was in artieulo 
mortis. In each narrative the ruler is re- 
presented as asking that Christ would hasten 
to his house. He had not reached the 
higher faith of the Gentile centurion, 
" Speak the word only." 

Ver. 24. — And he went (aal aTrijxfle fier' 
ai/Tov) — literally, and he went away with him 
— and a great multitude followed him, and 
they thronged him (imviBKifiov avTiv) ; liter- 
ally, pressed close upon him, compressed him. 
This is mentioned purposely by St. Mark, 
on account of what follows. St. Matthew 
says (ix. 19), "And Jesus arose, and so did his 
disciples." Observe here the promptitude of 
Christ to assist the afflicted, St. Chrysostom 
suggests that our Lord purposely interposed 
some delay, by healing, as he went, the 
woman with the issue of blood, is order that 
the actual death of Jairus's daughter might 
take place ; and that so there might be full 
demonstration of his resurrection power. 

Vers, 25, 26. — A woman, which had an issue 
of blood twelve years. All the synoptic 
Gospels mention the length of time during 
which she had been suffering. Eusebius 
records a tradition that she was a Gentile, 
a native of Csesarea Philippi. This disease 
was a chronic hcemorrhage, for which she 
had found no relief from the physicians, 
Lightfoot, in his ' Horse HebraicsB,' givei a 
list of the remedies applied in such oases, 
which seem quite sufficient to account for 
St. Mark's statement that she was nothing 
bettered, but rather grew worse. St. Luke, 



212 



THE GOSPEL AOCOKDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. v. 1— 4& 



himself a phyaioian, says that she "had 
■pent all her living upon physicians, and 
eould not be healed of any." 

Vers. 27, 28. — This woman, having heard 
of Jesus — literally (ra irepl toC 'Iijo-oC), the 
(kings concerning Jestu — flame in the oroWd 
behind, and touched his garment, St. 
Matthew and St Luke say "the border 
(toC xpaffTreSov) of his garment." St. Mat- 
thew tells us that " she said within herself, 
If I may but touch his garment, I shall be 
whole." From this it appears that, though 
she had faith, it was an imperfect faith. 
She seems to have imagined that a certain 
magical influence was within Christ and 
around him. And the touching of the 
border of his garment (the blue fringe which 
the Jews were required to wear, to remind 
them that they were God's people)_ was 
supposed by her to conyey a special virtue. 
Yet her faith, though imperfect, was true 
in its essence, and therefore was not dis- 
appointed. 

Ver. 29. — And straightway— St. Mark's 
favourite word — ^the fountain of her blooil 
was dried up ; and she felt (e^ra) — literally, 
ihe knetB — in her body that she was healed 
of her plague (8ti ITotoi owb Tijs /lia-Ttyos) ; 
literally, Smt she hath been healed of her 
tcourge. The cure was instantaneous. 

Ver. SO. — The words in the Greek are 
eiriyvohs 4v kavr^ t^v i^ aurov Swafitv 
f^e\Boi(rav : Jesus, perceiving in himself that 
the power emanating from him had gone 
forth, turned him about in the crowd, and 
said, 'Who touched my garments 1 Christ 
sees the invisible grace in its hidden opera- 
tions ; man only sees its effects, and not 
always these. 

Ver. 31. — St. Luke (viii. 45) adds here, 
"When all denied, Peter said, and they 
that were with him. Master, the multi- 
tudes press thee and crush thee. But Jesus 
said. Some one did touch me; for I per- 
ceived that power had gone forth from me." 
This incident shows the mysterious con- 
nection between the spiritual and the 
physical. The miraculous virtue or power 
which went forth from the Saviour was 
spiritual in its source and in the conditions 
on whioli it was imparted, but it was 
physical in its operation ; and that which 
brought the two together was faith. Multi- 
tudes thronged the Saviour, but only one of 
the crowd touched him. 

Ver. 32. — He looked round about (irepie- 
fiKtwero) — another fovourite word of St. 
Mark. 

Ver. 83. — The woman fearing and trem- 
bling, eta Every word in this verse is ex- 
pressive. It was her own act. She seemed 
to herself aa though without permission she 
had stolen a blessing from Christ ; and so 
•<!'e could hardly venture to hope that the 



faith which had prompted her woold b« 
accepted. Hence her fear and terror, and 
her free and full confession. We thus see 
the gentleness of Christ in his dealings with 
us. Perhaps the woman had intended to 
escape, satisfied with a temporal benefit, 
which would hardly have been a blessing at 
all, if she had been suffered to carry it away 
without acknowledgment. But this her 
loving Saviour would not permit her to do. 
It was the crisis of her spiritual life. It 
was necessary that all around should know 
of the gift which she had endeavoured to 
snatch in secret. Our Lord might have 
demanded from her this public confession of 
her faith beforehand. But, in his mercy, 
he made the way easy to her. The lesson, 
however, must not be forgotten, that it is 
not enough to believe with the heart. The 
lips must do their part, and " with the 
mouth confession must be made onto sal- 
vation." 

Ver. 34. — Dor Lord here reaesnies this 
trembling woman, who feared, it may be, lest, 
because ihe had abstracted the blessing 
secretly, he might punish her with a return 
of her malady. On the contrary, he conSrms 
the benefit, and bids her be whole of hei 
plague. The Greek expression here is 
stronger than that which is given as the 
rendering of what she had used when we 
read that she said within herself, " I shall 
be saved (aaBi\aoiJLai)." Here our Lord says, 
Oo in peace, and be whole (ia9i vyi^s). It is aa 
though he said, " It is not the mere fringe of 
my garment, which you have touched with 
great faith, and with some hope of obtaining 
a ciure — it is not this that has cured you. 
You owe your healing to my omnipotence 
and your faith. Your faith (itself my gift) 
has delivered yon from your issue of blood ; 
and this deliverance I now confirm and 
ratify. 'Go in peace.'" The original 
Greek here (Siroye cis ilf>iiin\v) Implies more 
than this. It means " Go for peace." Pass 
into the realm, the element of peace, in 
which henceforth thy life shall move. It is 
here obvious to remark that this malady 
represents to us the ever-flowing bitter foun- 
tain of sin, for which no styptic treatment 
can be found in human philosophy. The 
remedy is only to be found in Christ. To 
touch Christ's garment is to believe in his 
incarnation, whereby he hag touched us, 
and so has enabled us by faith to touch him, 
and to receive his blessing of peaoe. 

Ver. 35. — Our Lord had lingered on the 
way to the house of Jairus, perhaps, as ha« 
already been suggested, that the crisis might 
first come, and that so there might be foil 
evidence of his resurrection power. The 
ruler must have been agonized with the 
thought that, while our Lord lingered, the 
life of his dying child was fast ebbing away, 



«H. V. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. MARK. 



213 



And now comes the fatal message to him. 
Thy daughter is dead {Imeeave) ; the aorist 
expresses that her death was now a past 
•vent. Why tronhlest thou the Master any 
further 1 (ri In triciWeis rhp SiSdff/caA.oj' ;). 
The Greek word here is very strong. It is to 
vex or weary; literally, (o^^. The messen- 
gers from the ruler's house had evidently 
•bandoned all hope, and so probably would 
Jairus, but for the cheering words of our 
Lord, " Fear not, only believe." 

Ver. 36. — The words of the narrative, as 
they stand in the Authorized Version, are : 
As soon as Jesus heard the word that was 
apoken, he saith unto the ruler of the syna- 
gogue, Be not afraid, only believe. But 
there is good authority for the reading 
wapaKo6ffas instead of eiidetos hco6(rasy 
which requires the rendering, but Jems, 
not heeding, or overhearing. This word 
iitapuKtiia) occurs in one other place in the 
Gospels, namely, in Matt, xviii. 17, " And 
if he refuse to hear them {^hv he Trapaxoiaii 
avTuiv)." Here the word can only have the 
meaning of " not heeding," or " refusing to 
hear." This seems to be a strong reason for 
giving the word a somewhat similar mean- 
ing in this passage. And therefore, on the 
whole, " not heeding " seems to be the best 
renilering. Indeed, it seems to cover both 
meanings. Our Lord would overhear, and 
yet not heed, the word spoken. 

Ver. 37. — ^Here we have the first occasion 
of the selection of three of the apostles to be 
witnesses of things not permitted to be seen 
by the rest. The other two occasions are 
those of the transfiguration, and of the agony 
in the garden. We now follow our Lord 
and these three favoured disciples, Peter 
and James and John, to the house of death. 
They are about to witness the first earnest 
of the resurrection. 

Ver. 38.— St. Matthew here says (ix. 23) 
that when Jesus came into the ruler's house, 
he " saw the minstrels (robs au\TiT&.s')," i.e. the 
flute-players, "and the people making a 
noise." Tliis was the custom 'ooth with Jews 
and with Gentiles, to quicken the sorrow of 
the mourners by funeral dirges. The record 
of these attendant circumstances is impor- 
tant as evidence of the fact of death having 
actually taken place. 

Ver. 39. — Some have regarded the words 
of our Lord, the child is not dead, but sleepeth, 
ai really meaning that she was only in a 
•woon. But although she was actually dead 
in the ordinary sense of that word, namely, 
that her spirit had left the body, yet 
Christ was pleased to speak of death as a 
■leep ; because all live to him, and because 
■11 wiU rise at the last day. Hence in the 
Holy Scriptures the dead are constantly 
described as sleeping, in order that the 
tenor of death might be mitigated, and im- 



moderate grief for the dead be assuaged under 
the name of sleep, which manifestly include* 
the hope of the resurrection. Hence the 
expression with regard to a departed Chris- 
tian, that "he sleeps in Jesus." Then, 
further, this child was not absolately and 
irrecoverably dead, as the crowd supposed, ai 
though she could not be recalled to life; 
since in fact our Lord, who is the Lord of 
life, was going at once to call her back by 
his almighty power from the realms of death 
into which she had entered. So that she 
did not appear to him to be dead so much 
as to sleep for a little while. He says else- 
where, " Our friend Lazarus sleepeth ; but I 
go that I may awake him out of sleep." 
Christ, by the use of such language as this, 
meant to show that it is as easy with him to 
raise the dead from death as ileepers from 
their slumbers. 

Ver. 40. — ^They laughed him to soom. He 
Buffered this, in order that the actual death 
might be the more manifest, and that so 
they might the more wonder at her resur- 
rection, and thus pass from wonder and 
amazement to a true faith in him who thus 
showed himself to be the Besurrection and 
the Life. He now put them all forth ; and 
then, with his three apostles, Peter, James, 
and John, and the father and the mother of 
the child, he went in where the child was. 
The common crowd were not worthy to see 
that in which they would not believe. They 
were unworthy to witness the great reality 
of the resurrection; for they had been de- 
riding him who wields this power. It \» 
remarked by Archbishop Trench that in the 
same manner Elisha (2 Kings iv. 33) cleared 
the room before he raised the son of the 
Shunammite. 

Ver. 41. — The house was now set free 
from the perfunctory and noisy crowd ; and 
he goes up to the dead child, and takes hei 
by the hand and says, Talitha cumi ; literally 
Little maid, arise. The evangelist gives the 
words in the very language used by our 
Lord— the ipiiasima verba, remembered no 
doubt and recorded by St. Peter ; just as he 
gives "Ephphatha" in another miracle. 

Vers. 42, 43. — ^Here, as in other miraclea, 
the restoration was immediate and complete : 
straightway the damsel rose up, and walked. 
Well might the father and tiie mother of 
the maiden and the three chosen apostles be 
amazed with a great amazement {i^ea-Tiitraw 
iKaratret ft.iyd\ji% And then, for the purpose 
of strengthening that life which he rescued 
from the jaws of the grave, our Lord oom- 
manded that something should be given her 
to eat. It has often been observed that in 
the examples of his resurrection power given 
by Christ there is a gradation : 1. The 
daughter of Jairus just dead. 2. The 
widow's son from his biei. 8. Lazaiua txook 



214 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. v. 1—43 

his grave. The more stupendous miracle ig ! pledge, when " all that are in their grave* 
yet to come, of which our Lord's own resur- | shall hear his voice, and shall oome forth." 
rection is at once the example and the I 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 20. — The Lord of spirits. There was for Christ, during his earthly 
ministry, no escape from personal toil — from the claims made upon his benevolence by 
human misery, or from man's ingratitude. He crossed the lake to seek repose, but at 
once, on landinfr, was met by a case of the utmost wretchedness and need, demanding 
the exercise of his compassionate authority. His stay was brief, yet long enough to 
earn the thanks and the devotion of one poor liberated captive, and long enough 
to qualify and to commission that healed one for a sacred ministry of benevolence. 

I. We have here a representation of the wretched state of the sinneb. 
1. That state is attributable to possession by an evil power. This does not, indeed, 
affect man's responsibility, but it affirms the action of supernatural agency. Sinners 
" have fallen into the snare of the devil." 2. The signs of that state are many and 
distressing. Like the demoniac, the sinner is injurious to himself, is harmful to 
others, and consequently is unlit for society. 3. A picture is here painted of the 
sinner's hopeless condition. As the demoniac's possession was manifold ("we are 
legion "), was prolonged, and was so severe that all human efforts had failed to bring 
relief, so was the condition of the heathen world when the Saviour came to earth — a 
condition so debased and so confirmed in its misery that to the human eye no dawn- 
streak of hope was visible. And the heart, abandoned to the control of evil, is in » 
state for which no human relief or help is available. 

IL We have here a representation of the sinner's mighty SAVlotTB. A greater 
contrast than that between the wretched and raving maniac and the calm and holy 
Jesus it would not be possible to imagine. Yet the two came together. Divine 
authority and compassion encountered human sin, foulness, and degradation, and the 
demon was exorcised and the sufferer made whole. 1. Observe the Divine authority 
of the Lord is acknowledged. It is certainly remarkable that from the mouth of the 
demoniac should come the confession that Jesus is " the Son of the Most High God." 
This Christ is ; and, were he not this, his approach would bring no comfort to the 
sinner's heart. 2. In addition to this verbal acknowledgment, we observe an actual 
submission to and experience of Christ's power. "The unclean spirit came out." 
Jesus is "mighty to save." As during his ministry, so wherever the gospel is 
preached, the power of Christ is proved in actual experience. However formidable the 
foe may be, Jesus is the Conqueror. 

IIL We have here a representation of the sinner's salvation. 1. There is com- 
plete deliverance from the tyranny of former enemies. "Taken captive by the Lord's 
servant unto the will of God " — such is the description given by an apostle of the great 
and spiritual emancipation which nevertheless brings souls into a new and better 
bondage. 2. Sanity is a consequence of our Lord's interposition. " When he came 
to himself" is the description of the change which took place in the repenting 
prodigal. Only he who turns to God can be truly said to be " in his right mind." 
3. Tranquillity is a natural sign of a spiritual restoration. The Saviour is the Prince 
of peace, and the gospel is a gospel of peace, and peace is a fruit of the Spirit. True 
religion calms agitation, stills the tempests of the soul, and brings harmony to human 
life. 

IV. We have an example of the witness op the saved sinner to the Savioub. 
The conduct of the healed demoniac is an emblem of the consecrated testimony of the 
ransomed soul to the great Deliverer. 1. It is prompted by grateful affection — 
affection that would fain abide in the valued society of the Redeemer. 2. It is 
appointed and authorized by the Lord himself : " Go to thy house," etc. 3. It is 
borne especially to those nearest and dearest : " thy friends." 4. It consists of per- 
sonal experience : " how great things the Lord hath done for thee." 5. It excites 
interest and wonder. Such testimony from such a witness cannot be without effect 



CH. ▼. i— 43.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MASK. 215 

The saved lead others to the same Saviour whose virtue they have themselrea 
experienced. 

Vers. 21 — 24, 35 — i3.— The maiden's spirit recalled. This narrative is a striking 
example of intercession, and of its appreciation ami reward by the Lord Jesus. The 
suppliant, Jairus, pleaded for his daughter, and he did not plead in vain. Jesus 
wrought upon his behalf one of the three miracles of raising from the dead which have 
been recorded by the evangelists. 

1. Man is troubled, and Jbsds is compassionate. The distress of a father's heart, 
when his child lies at the point of death, is intense indeed. Jesus comprehended and 
entered mentally into all relations and all experiences of humanity, for he was himself 
the Son of man. How touching in ite simplicity is the record of our Lord's response 
to the ruler's appeal : " He went with him " ! He is ever the same, " touched with a 
feeling of our infirmities." He will go with us to the house of mourning, to the 
chamber of sickness, to the bed of death ; and his presence will lighten the sufferer's 
load and soothe the sufferer's heart. 

IL Man ib in haste, and Jesus lingers. The entreaty of the father and the 
concern of the thronging multitude are vividly portrayed. How natural that, in so 
critical a case, there should be a general anxiety to reach the abode where the dying 
maiden lay ! Yet the great Physician pauses to entertain another application for 
relief, to speak words of grace to another — to a timid, downcast spirit. There is no 
haste in Christ's methods. It often seems to those who seek him that he delays his 
succour. In their impatience they may think themselves unheeded. But it is not so ; 
the Divine leisure with which the Lord of grace is wont to act should awaken our 
admiration and our confidence. 

III. Man despairs, and Jesus reassures. There was a limit to the faith which 
was cherished towards Christ. It was thought that he could heal the sick, but it 
was not dreamt that he could raise the dead. When the little maiden had breathed 
her last, the household was abandoned to. hopeless grief. But this was the moment 
when the Divine Friend displayed the deepest tenderness of his nature. " Pear not, 
only believe." Such were his words of comfort, fitted to soothe and to inspire despond- 
ing hearts with heavenly hope. Let us learn the lesson that, where Jesus is, there is 
no place for despair. These words of his come to us when downcast, cheerless, and 
oppressed beneath the cares and woes of life. 

IV. Man is agitated, and Jesus is calm. There is a sublime contrast between the 
demeanour of the friends of Jairus and the demeanour of Jesus. A tumult of weeping 
and wailing is quite in accordance with Eastern manners, and it is in accordance with 
human nature that the same persons who bewailed the maiden's death should, when 
another turn was given to their excited dispositions, have laughed the Lord to scorn. 
How noble and dignified in such a scene appears the demeanour and the language 
of Christ! He rebukes the noisy crowd and puts them forth, and with tranquil 
and authoritative mien leads the parents, with the three favoured apostles, into the 
sad chamber of death. " The world is for excitement, the gospel for soothing." There 
is but One whose presence can banish alarm and disquietude, and can shed a sweet 
calm over the dwelling agitated by iear and anguish. 

V. Man is powerless, and Jesus is mighty to help and save. The anxiety of 
the parents, the lamentations of the mourners, were vain and powerless to save the 
child from death or to recall her to life ; but the touch and the call of Christ summoned 
back the spirit that had fiod. In the deepest woe the grace and might rf Je-sus are 
most conspicuous. He is able to quicken such as are dead in trespasses and sins, to 
breathe upon them the breath of life. The soul that hears his word, " Arise 1" 
awakens from the long, deep lethargy of sin and lives anew. 

VI. Man is amazed, and Jesus is collected and considerate. No wonder that 
the parents of the girl were overwhelmed with astonishment. And how like the Lord, 
to display an interest so tender in the reanimated damsel as to direct that she should 
be supplied with food! And how like him, too, instead of seeking to increase his 
fame and favour with the people, to arrange that the miracle should for the present, as 
far as possible, be concealed I Wisdom, consideration for others, were app&rent in his 
whole demeanour. 



21« THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. IcH. v. 1— 4a 

Practical lessons. 1. The incident gives us a beautiful representation of the 
power and the love of a Divine Saviour. 2. And an example of the necessity and th« 
advantage of faith in Jesus, in order to spiritual life and blessing. 3. And a striking 
instance of the efficacy of intercessory prayer. We may well be encouraged to imitate 
the believing and urgent entreaties of Jairus. 

Vers. 25 — 34. — Faith conquering timidity. Par from withdi awing from scenes of 
distress and woe, our Lord Jesus was found wherever human sin or misery Invited 
his compassion and invoked his aid. On this occasion he was passing towards the 
house of mourning, the chamber of death, and on his way paused to pity and to heal 
a helpless, timid, trembling sufferer. 

L A PICTURE THIS OF HUMAN NEED AND BUFPEBINQ, Amidst the thronging multi- 
tude were persons of various circumstances, character, and wants. In all companies 
there are those who have spiritual ills which only Christ can heal, spiritual desires 
which only Christ can satisfy. Sin and doubt, weakness, sorrow, and fear, helplessness 
and despondency, — these are to be found on every side. The case of this poor woman 
deserves special attention. 1. Her need was conscious and pitiable. 2. It was of long 
continuance ; for twelve years had she suffered and had obtained no relief. 3. Her case 
was heyond human skill and power. She had gone to many physicians, had endured 
much in undergoing treatment, had expended all her means, and yet, instead of being 
better, was worse than before. And now apparently hope was taking flight, and the 
end seemed near. An emblem this of many a sinner's case — conscious of sin and of a 
tyranny long endured, yet helpless and despairing of deliverance. 

II. A PICTURE THIS OF THE APPROACH AND CONTACT OF TREMBLING FAITH. The 

graphic narrative of the evangelist is very suggestive as well as very impressive. 
1. There ■was faith in the woman's coming to Christ at all. She might have questioned 
the possibility of his curing her. She might have fancied that, lost in the crowd, she 
should not gain his notice and help. 2. The faith, however, seems to have been 
imperfect. Something of superstition probably impelled her to seize the hem or sacred 
fringe of his garment, as though there were magic virtue in the bodily presence of the 
Saviour. 3. Yet the venture of faith overcame the natural shrinking and timidity she 
experienced. Doubt and diffidence would have kept her away ; faith drew her near, 
<vnd she stole to him. It was the last resource ; as it were, the dying grasp. 

" I have tried, and tried in vain, 
Many ways to ease my pain ; 
Nfiw all other hope is past. 
Only tliie is left at last : 
Here before thy cross I lie; 
Here I live or here I die." 

4. Faith led to personal contact, to the laying hold of the Redeemer, Jesus often 
healed with a touch, by the laying on of his hand ; and here he acknowledged the 
grasp of trembling confidence. They that come to Jesus must come confessing their 
faults and needs, applying for his mercy, and laying hold upon him with cordial faith. 

III. A PICTURE THIS OP ChBISt'S TREATMENT OF A BELIEVING APPLICANT. The 

conduct of Christ has been recorded in detail, for the instruction and encouragement of 
all to whom the gospel comes. 1. Remark his recognition of the individual. This 
woman was one of a multitude, yet she was not unobserved by the all-seeing and affec- 
tionate Saviour. He never overlooks the one among the many ; his heart can enter 
into every case, and succour every needy soul. 2. Remark the immediate and efficacioui 
exercise of his healing power. What others could not accomplish in long years, the 
Divine Healer effected in a moment. Thus Jesus ever acts. His grace brings pardon 
to the penitent, justification to the guilty, cleansing to the impure. Immediate grace 
is the earnest of grace unfailing. 3. We see our Lord accepting grateful acknowledg- 
ments. Pleasing to him was the courage that, spite of timiditv, "told him all the 
truth." He ever delights in the thankful tribute of his people's praise and devotion 
4. We hear our Lord's gracious benediction. The language is very rich and fulL 
There is an authoritative assurance of blessing ; there is the adoption of the healed one 
into the spiritual family, conveyed in the one word, " Daughter ; " there is the recognl- 



CH.V.1— 43.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 217 

tion of her saving faith ; there is the dismissal in peace ; and there is the assurance that 
the healing is complete and permanent. 

Application. 1. Let this representation of the Saviour induce every heaier of 
the gospel to bring his case to Jesus. 2. Let every applicant to Christ be encouraged 
by the assurance of the Lord's individual regard and interest 3. Let faith lay firm 
hold of Christ, and that at once without delay. 



HOMILTES BY VARIOUS AUTUORS. 

Vers. 1—20. — Legion, General question of demon-possession. An aggravated form 
of Satanic influence. Intelligible enough on the principle of provocation and des- 
peration : light and darkness are strongest side by side. The advent of Christ roused to 
intense activity and excitement the whole demoniacal realm. In this scene there is 
exemplified— 

I. Moral antagonism. (Vers. 2, 6.) 1. Instinctive. Spontaneous ; prescient ; 
yet furnishing no intelligible reason, " An intensified spiritual presentiment " (Lange). 
2. Weakness of the dem,oniac shown by: (1) Excitement. (2) Self-contradiction. 
Attraction and repulsion alternating. (3) Use of borrowed weapons. The exor- 
cism, doubtless so often uttered over him by magicians and ecclesiastics, is all the 
lore he seems to possess in the way of religion. 3. Strength of Christ proved by calm- 
ness and self-possession, and resolute pursuit of his object. 4. Utter and absolute. 
" What have I to do with thee ? . . . Torment me not." 

II. MoBAL ascendancy. (Vers. 9 — 13.) 1. Instant exercise of authority. Calm, self- 
possessed, and fearless. He had already discerned and measured his opponent, and 
decided as to how he would deal with him. 2. Spiritual insight and skill. The great 
Physician had made diagnosis of his case. Mental surgery was needed, based upon the 
most profound truths of psychology. The man had to be discriminated and freed 
from the indwelling demon. The former had little or no sense of his own personal 
identity. A Roman legion had probably been quartered near, and when he saw their 
number and power he felt that they somewhat resembled that which had quartered 
itself within his own nature. With maniacal vanity he readily adopted the title, 
" Legion." Pride and wretchedness were probably both involved in the retention of the 
name; it represented the dominant principle in his confused consciousness. Christ 
asked him, " What is thy name ? " that he might rouse him to a sense of personal 
identity : a wise measure. 3. Bectoral discipline. " He gave them leave : " apparently 
their own suggestion, but granted (1) on principle of highest curative psychology — 
objective disenchantment ; the character and distinctness of the unclean occupants of 
the man's nature being thus outwardly and visibly set forth, his better self, enfran- 
chised, would be the more likely to assert itself; (2) in pursuance of rectoral dis- 
cipline. The unclean, unprincipled habits of the people in violating the Law being 
thus avenged. 

III. Moral decision. (Vers. 14 — 20.) The Gadarenes had to make up their minds 
with respect to the great Stranger. 1. The data. (Vers. 14 — 16.) Material and moral 
stood forth in opposition, as in so many other instances. How was their relative 
importance to be estimated ? 2. The decision. A unanimous petition for him to depart. 
How could such men be expected to judge otherwise ? They had grand ideas of 
Christ, but of the wrong sort. 3. The response. Instant departure. He took them at 
their word. " They believed not on him," and acting upon their unbelief urged their 
request. The conflict of anger and fear, fawning and obstinacy. A word was enough ; 
nay, a wish, even unexpressed, has often secured the same result. Not the storm, not 
the evil repute of the people, not even the horror of the demoniac, could deter him from 
coming ; but a word sent him away ! How careful should men be in their attitude 
to the heavenly Visitant I He went, but not without leaving, in the person of the 
restored maniac, a monument of his saving power and grace. Every tegiou and everr 
heart has its witness to the Bame.— M. 

Vers. 9, 10. — Satanic poisession a destruction of personal identity. I. Instances akb 

D.LITSTRATIONi 



218 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAKK. [ch. v. 1—43. 

TI. Impoktanob of personality fob true religious and mobal lifb. 
III. The restoration of this the geeat work op Christ. — M. 

Vers. 10 ; 12, 13 ; 17 — 19. — Prayers granted and denied. No caprice visible in 
our Lord's decisions. On the contrary, great moral principles are revealed. The 
whole conduct of Christ on this occasion, therefore, is of importance for the practical 
guidance of Christians. 

I. The petition of the demoniac. (Ver. 10.) " He besought him much that he 
would not send them away out of the country." No heed is paid to this request, not- 
withstanding its passionate earnestness. Why ? 1. Hie man himself was not praying. 
He was depersonalized and besotted by the possession of the devils, and not responsible 
for his words or actions. It was to free him from this thraldom Christ had undertaken 
his case. 2. It would have neutralized the intended mercy to the man to inflict the evil 
upon others. 3. There was no real submission in the real petitioners. They were still 
devils, unchanged in their character, and desirous of working further mischief. Power- 
less, they still desired to do evil. 

II. The request of the devils. (Vers. 12, 13.) This was granted, notwithstanding 
the character of those who made it. A marvel, truly ; devils heard and answered by 
Christ! Is he in league with them? 1. It was a choice of a lesser of two evils. It 
seemed necessary that some visible form should receive the dispossessed spirits, that all, 
especially the man himself (cf. on the probable principle of cure, the preceding sketch), 
might be able to realize that the dispossession had actually taken place. As simply 
dispossessed, they might have taken up their abode in some other soul ; but by giving 
direction to them after rlispcssession, they were confined to brutes ; and the catastrophe 
that resulted was probably foreseen by Christ. In the destruction of the swine the 
demons were dismissed speedily right out of the terrestrial sphere. 2. And in that 
destruction a punishment was inflicted upon the Oadarenes, who as yet were sordid, 
neglectful of the Law (forbidding the rearing of swine), and unspiritual. 

III. The entreaty of the Gadarenes. (Vers. 17, 18.) It was at once answered. 
Because : 1. Jt involved a deliberate and intelligent rejection of the Saviour. They had 
seen his wondrous moral triumph and the destruction of the swine ; but in their estimate 
the material loss far outweighed the spiritual gain. 2. There were others elsewhere 
who were " waiting/or him." 3. The healed demoniac might be even more effectual as a 
preacher than himself. He was a lasting monument of his power and grace. Time 
might be needed to let the miracle sink into the popular conscience. 

IV. The prayer of the restored man. (Vers. 18, 19.) A natural desirfinndei the 
circumstances. Pear lest the devils should return if he were left to himsdf, ind 
gratitude and love for his Benefactor, doubtless actuated him. But he is denied ! This 
must have wounded his feelings, and disappointed him. But : 1. It was not pruderdfor 
Christ at that time to have one so clostly identified with devils in his company and 
occupied in his service. The charge had been made (ch. iii. 22) that he was in league 
with Satan. 2. It was not the best life for him to lead in his present condition. Priva- 
tion and excitement were not suited to one who had been emaciated and weakened by 
the devils. 3. A work of greater use and personal obligation awaited him where he was. 
He was the only disciple of Christ in that benighted land. Those who had been scan- 
dalized by his previous life, and had suffered from it, were to be first considered. The 
home that had been desolated was to be revisited, and cheered by the kindly presence 
and saving influence of the redeemed one. 

General lessons. 1. Prayers may be granted in anger, and denied in love. 2. 
Lesser evils may be allowed to prevent greater ones. 3. Duties are to he wnsidered 
before privileges. — M, 

Ver. 14. — Unfriendly heralds of Christ. I. Difficulty of getting thb gospel 

TEUIiT AND faithfully PREACHED. 

n. Contrast this with the rapid spread of false notions about Christ, 
heresies, unsettling alarms, etc. 

III. Compensations. 1. The existence of Christ is made known. By-and-by 
his character will vindicate itself. 2. Curiosity is aroused and feeling excited. 
Almost anything is better than indifference. And the witnesses of his truth and 



OH.T. 1— 43.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO SI MARK. 21S 

grace are everywhere. 8. The disciples of Christ are compelled to vindicate theii 
Master. — M. 

Ver. 15. — Monumental miracles. The tableau — Christ, and the demoniac sitting at 
his feet. More impressive and sublime than even the rebuking of the storm. Such 
trophies are better than sermons, because — 

I. Thet are ak abiding remindeb and example. 

II. Thet are patent to all, and can be understood bt all. " Living epistles, 
known and read of all men." 

III. Thet deft refutation, and demand to be explained. — M. 

Vers. 21 — 34. — Ministries broken in upon. Seldom do we find Christ going straight 
through with a course of teaching or work. Interruptions constantly occurring ; many 
ministries making up the one great ministry. The more intimate connection of ver. 21 is 
given in Matt. ix. 18 (" while he yet spake' these things"). Not that Matthew means 
that Christ was still at table, nor that Mark's order is wrong. The feast of Matthew 
(ch. ii. 15) is not stated by Mark to have taken place in immediate succession to the 
conversion, but is narrated in the second instead of the fifth chapter, because of the 
obvious connection of the two events. Accepting, therefore, the order of the first Gospel, 
we see — 

I. Christ interrupted. 1. In his teaching. (Ver. 21; Matt. ix. 18.) Yet how full 
of interest the subjects — eating with publicans, and fasting ! How significant these 
breaks 1 How natural, in a world so full of disturbing and changing influences as this ! 
2. In his intended mercy. As he goes to the ruler's house the incident of the woman 
in the crowd takes place (vers. 25 — 34), and he is delayed. Yet the prayer of Jairus wag 
urgent, and broken with apprehensive emotion. Only this was still more pressing, for 
it was (1) actual, present, long-endured suffering and shame ; (2) a demand of faith on 
behalf of its own possessor (not, as in Jairus's case, for another). 

II. Fragments that make a grander whole. We have no time to lament the 
breaking off — the seeming incompleteness — ere we are astonished at the commentary 
which is furnished in the incidents that follow. He is the great Physician — to the 
ruler's daughter, the woman with the issue, and the two blind men alike ; the Bringer 
of joy, too, to many by his healing mercies and gracious words. All need him, if they 
only knew it; and, participating in the blessings of his presence, they cannot mourn or 
fast, but must needs rejoice. And so in the case of the ruler ; the delay really rewarded 
his faith by an actual illustration of Christ's power, and so sustained him in the higher 
exercise of faith. " My daughter is even now dead : but come and lay thy hand upon her, 
and she shall live " (Matt. ix. 18). This is a picture of many lives. We cannot escape 
interruptions. Yet are we not therefore to abandon unity of purpose. We may fail to 
finish all we seek to do, or to do it as we would ; but Ood holds the connecting harmony, 
and will reveal it at last — or even sooner. The sermon broken off, the merciful inten- 
tion delayed or frustrated, may prove greater blessings in the event than if suffered 
uninterruptedly to proceed to a visible or immediate completeness within themselves. 
The life or work divinely interrupted, but pursued with unity of faith and purpose to 
the end, will be a grander, more Divine thing than otherwise it could possibly have been 

Lessons. 1. How infinite the resources of the Saviow I 2. His teaching is inseparable 
from action and life. — M. 

Vers. 21 — 43. — Jairits's daughter ; or, the uses of bereavement. I. Discovering the 

NEED OF A Saviour. 

II. Perfecting the spiritual life of the bbbeavbd. 

III. Revealing the infinite mercy, sympathy, and power of Cebist. — M. 

Vers. 21 — 43. — Jairus's daughter ; or, the course of a true faith. I. Originated by 
MANY circumstances EVIDENT AND OBSCURE. The general ministry of Christ. Perhaps 
fairus had been a witness of the centurion's faith. 

II. Called into exercise by great affliction and need. 

III. Triumphing over difficulties. 

IV. Rewarded bt ineffable answers and confirmations.— M. 



220 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINQ TO ST. MARK. [ch. v. 1— 48 

Vers. 25 — 34. — The healing of the issue of blood. The magnifying power of faith. 
Twas but a touch, humanly speaking ; yet was it a means of salvation to the believing 
souL 

I. Teansfobmino little things into meaks of gbaob. 1. Many touches, hut 
only one touch uf faith. This alone was effectual and saving. It is not human effort 
that saves, but the spirit of faith that lays hold of Christ. 2. Only the hem of his 
garment. Yet as effectual as if she had touched the body of Christ. How so ? Because 
she touched him spiritually. All ordinances and outward means of grace are in them- 
selves little — no better than the hem of the garment of Christ. It is the Saviour who 
is great when appealed to by a great faith. 3. Making use of what was within 
reach. . Not perhaps the best means possible. But enough when accompanied by 
faith. 

II. In immediate earthly ends securing ulterior spieitual ones. The trembling 
and fearing woman not only secured the physical boon ; the Saviour said, "Thy faith 
hath saved thee,'' — a word that had a larger meaning than could be exhausted by a 
merely temporal relief or physical wholeness. — M. 

Vers. 25 — 34. — Salvation without money and without price. A figure of the spiritual 
experience of man. 

I. Contrasted with earthly expedients of salvation. These are expensive 
because : 1. They waste the spiritual nature of man. 2. They increase rather thav 
diminish the evil. How forlorn the poor woman I How great the contrast with the 
" sleeping " child ! Death in life is far worse than the natural death. It is not 
mourned for as the latter, and has all the added sorrow of disappointment and despair. 
3. They keep away from the true Saviour. 

II. Yet it must be legitimately sought. The grace of God cannot be stolen. 
The Saviour knows when a sinner receives his " virtue." There is only one way — the 
way of faith. The salvation of God is given, not taken by force or stealth ; graciously 
given, with a benediction and a confirming assurance. 

IIL It costs the sinner nothing, but the Saviour everything. — M. 

Vers. 25 — 34. — The liitle of things of Christ great things for men. How great an 
idea this woman had of Christ ! If there was any fault, it was that she believed in the 
power, but did not trust the love of Christ. Yet her humility, which was as manifest 
as her faith, and her shame may account in great part for the stealth and surreptitious- 
ness of her action. 

I. Means of grace are not to be despised because they appear outwardly insig- 
nificant. Superstition, ritualism, etc., deprecated ; yet an error incident to the opposite 
extreme. We are not saved by works, neither (literally) are we saved by faith. It is 
Christ that saves. This woman was touching Christ. God's sufficiency so different 
from man's. 

II. Not the outward character of any act, but the spirit in which it is done, 
is to be considered chieely. The great end of religious acts is to bring us mto com- 
munion with Christ. This of the woman was a mere touch, scarcely perceptible in the 
pressure of the crowd. The disciples had not observed it. But Christ felt that it had 
taken place, and had been effectual. There are manifold ways in which he reaches 
souls and is reached by them. The common experiences of life may be channels of 
greater blessing than the ordinances of the Church, when they are regarded in a 
believing, pious spirit. 

III. Piety is often apparently out of proportion to advantages and oppor- 
tunities. 1. Small things may often bring people to Christ, or keep them away from 
him. 2. Faith may often discover itself in the midst of ignorance and the absence oj 
conventional religion. 3. Spiritual jirivileyes may hinder instead of helping religious 
progress if they be not spiritually used. This poor woman will rise in judgment against 
many who have made great show of religious observance, and condemn them. We may 
hear too often, if we do not laj' to heart and obey. We require " grace for grace." M. 

Vers. 30—33.—" Who touched me?" I. Christ's s^ visa grace is alwats con- 

pciously exercised. 



.iH. V. 1— i3.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDIEG TO ST. MARK. 221 



II. It is faith which makes effbcttjal and peouliab the sinnbb'3 touch of thb 
Saviouk. 

III. The secret believer is summoned to an open testimony. For the sake of; 
(1) honour ; (2) spiritual health ; and (3) the advantage of others. — M. 

Ver, 35. — " Why troublest thou the Master any further t" A complaint that gives a 
glimpse of the harassing nature of Ohrist's work ; drawn hither and thither by human 
distress and want, he was ever on the march, as men discovered their need of him. 

I. The apparent kbasonablenbss of the question. A complaint very rarely 
oocasioned, still more rarely justified. On the present occasion, however, it seemed 
reasonable enough. For : 1. Would not further urgency he useless ? " Thy daughter 
is dead ; " and there was an end of the matter. Nothing more could be done. The 
suflerer had been taken out of the power of man. Surely it could not be expected 
that death would yield up its prey ? Circumstances like this are constantly occurring 
in human experience. A distinction is made, often must be made, between things in 
which help may be looked and prayed for, and those in which it is inadmissible to 
pray. Are there not desperate cases of unbelief and sin for which we have given over 
praying ? 2. There were others requiring his attention and help. It seemed wrong to 
monopolize Christ, especially when nothing could be done. Our grief may become a 
form of selfishness if it makes us inconsiderate of those who have perhaps suffered more 
than ouvselves. If religion does anything for us, it should take us out of ourselves, 
and make us sympathetic with others. 8. Christ was probably weary. It had been 
an exciting day. The multitude thronged and pressed him. One poor lufferer had 
ventured to touch his garment, and at once he detected the action. Was it because he 
had to husband his force that he had taken such notice of it ? Perhaps there were signs 
of weariness in his features and gait. It was thoughtfulness and respect for him that 
dictated the words. " The Master : there were, therefore, disciples of Jesus in the £»mily 
»f Jairus" (Bengel). 

II. The fallacies it ikvolvbd. It is obvious that a great portion of the previous 
considerations apply only to the human state of Christ, the days of his flesh and feeble- 
ness. But there are many objections to importunate and unceasing prayer that depend 
for their ralidity upon very human and limited conceptions of God the Son. It will 
be evident, therefore, that if the conduct of Jairus can be defended in " troubling the 
Master " when he was on earth, and subject to the conditions and infirmities of our 
nature, much more the urgency of those who besiege the throne of grace night and day 
with their requests. Doubtless Christ was often troubled by suitors for his aid and 
sympathy; but: 1. It troubled him more when men did not care to seek him. He reproved 
the unbelieving Jews : " Ye will not come to me, that ye may have life " (John v. 40). 
Indifference is more hateful to him than the greatest importunity. It is better to have 
a superstitious faith than no faith at all. Let us bless the weakness or the sorrow that 
brings us to him, making us feel our need of him. For, whether we think it or not, we 
cannot do without him. 2. Se himself encouraged men to " trouble " him. What bold 
promises were his 1 — " I am the bread of life : he that cometh to me shall not hunger, 
and he that believeth on me shall never thirst " (John vi. 35) ; " I am the resurrection, 
and the life : he that believeth on me, though he die, yet shall he live " (John xi. 25) ; 
"He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater works 
than these shall he do " (John xiv. 12) ; " All things are possible to him that believeth " 
(ch. ix. 23) ; and how often as here, " Only believe " ! How universal his invita- 
tions ! — " If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink " (John vii. 37) ; " Come 
unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest " (Matt. xi. 
88). " Ask, and it shall be given yon," etc. (Matt. vii. 7). 3. There is no case too 
desperate to bring to Christ. No disease could ba£9e him whilst he was amongst men ; 
even the grave gave up its dead at his potent word. And now " all power in heaven 
and earth " is his. Let us " trouble " him, therefore, with our sorrows and difficulties 
until he gives us relief. The care or desire which is not brought to him will sever us 
from him. We need not fear offending him ; he is the Saviour, and it was that ha 
might comfort and save men he came. Even whilst we think our case desperate, or say 
within ourselves, " It is no use ; it is not seemly to trouble him," we grieve his Spirit 
ind resist his grace. The sinner who has sinned above measure, and is altogether vil^ 



222 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. t. 1—43. 

may come. How is that promise fulfilled in him, " Come now, and let ns reason 
together, saith the Lord : though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow i 
though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool! " (Isa. i. 18.) — ^M. 

Vers. 2 — 6. — The demoniac of Qadara. This is the most detailed and important 
account given in the Gospels of demoniacal possession. Some are content to identify 
this phenomenon with lunacy or epilepsy, and suppose that our Lord used current 
phraseology upon the subject, although it expressed a popular delusion. We are slow 
to accept an explanation which would seem to credit him, who was always true, and 
himself " the Truth," with thus sanctioning error ; especially as he used the same 
language when he was alone with his disciples, to whom he said it was " given to know 
the mysteries of the kingdom " (ch. ix. 28, 29). On the other hand, " possession " was not 
identical with moral degradation. The idea that Mary Magdalene was one of peculiarly 
evil life, because " out of her the Lord cast seven demons," is untenable ; and there is 
little doubt that Caiaphas, who was bhrewd, callous, and self-controlled to the last, was 
morally worse than such sufferers. Yet a weak yielding to animal passions was 
possibly the primary cause of possession by evil spirits, in whose existence we cannot 
but believe. Good was incarnate in those days, and evil also appeared as in a special 
sense incarnate. Buckle shows that there have been ebb and flow in the currents of 
national history ; and so there have been in moral history, and in the days of our Lord 
spiritual forces were at the flood. The more we study the works and the Word of God, 
the more we are convinced that the inexplicable is not to reverently thoughtful men 
incredible or absurd. We enter on the study of this scene not with the hope of 
elucidating all mystery, but with the prayer that we may gain from it some spiritual 
help. Depicted as it is in strong, dark colours, it may enable us to understand the 
nature of Christ's work in the soul. We see here — 

I. A MAN UNDER BONDAGE TO EVIL. The expression an " unclean " spirit, and the 
strange willingness to enter "the swine," denote the nature of the man. By th« 
indulgence of appetite habit had conquered will, and he had no mastery over himself. 
That is the essence of " possession." Modern forms of it are not difficult to find. 
Describe the drunkard in his downward progress. At last, although he knows that ruin 
is before him, if temptation is in his way, his resolutions go to the winds. He is fasci- 
nated, or " possessed." So with the gambler and others. The condition of the demoniac 
resembled theirs. Domestic comfort was gone ; the respect of others was lost ; life was 
laid waste. He could see fingers pointing at him, eyes glaring on him, hell yawning 
lor him, and his foes seemed coming on him resistlessly as the advance of the dreaded 
Roman " legion." Notice also the deranging effects of evil. He was " dwelling in the 
tombs" — a dreary, fearsome place, in harmony with his melancholy state. " AH they 
that hate me, love death." The prodigal must "come to himself" before he returns to 
the Father. As this demoniac cut himself with stones, caring nothing for pain, so 
some destroy their moral sensibility ; as he was a cause of misery or of terror, so is it 
with them ; as he dreaded the near approach of a Judge he could not deceive, of a King 
he could not escape, so do they. Beware of tampering with sin. 

II. A MAN CASTING OFF HUMAN RESTRAINTS. He was uot witliout those who loved 
him. Tht'y had done their best to restrain or cure him. As they saw the growth of 
the evil, his parents would try to make the home attractive, inviting companions who 
would divert his thought ; sisters would give up their innocent pleasure to fall in with 
his wishes ; and when the outburst came, he was " bound with fetters and chains," 
lest he should harm himself or others. All in vain. Human restraint will never 
conquer moral evil. It represses it or alters its form, but does not root it out. The 
disorder and restlessness now seen in society portend serious issues, and indicate a 
breaking down of much in our boasted civilization. Education only changes Biil 
Sykes, the burglar, into Carker, the smooth, lying villain. We may restrain dis- 
honesty, drunkenness, swearing, etc., so that they are no longer in respectable homes ; 
but though we shut our eyes to the fact, the demoniac has only slipped his chains, 
and is there in " the tombs " and dens of our land. Parental restraint does much, 
but a time comes when independence and self-assertion make themselves felt, and the 
fatner or mother can only pray. Speak to those who still remember the old home in 
which they were so different from what they are now. 



OH. T. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. Mak1\. 22i 

in. A MAN MEETING HIS Saviour. With his morbidly quickened sensibility he 
knew who Jesus was, and had a presentiment of what was coming. His abject 
prostration, coupled with his daring misuse of the sacred name, indicate the distraction 
and disorder characterizing him. Christ dealt with him wisely, firmly, lovingly. He 
asked, " What is thy name ? " He tried to summon the man's better self, to bring 
about a severance in his thought between himself and the evil ; he gave him time to 
think what need he had of help, and what hope and possibility there was of it. Then 
to the demons came the decisive word, " Go ! " and in a short time he was to be seen 
" sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed, and in his right mind." In each of us the dominion 
of sin must be broken, and Christ only can break it. Appeal to those who have long 
been under the dominion of sin, not to despair of themselves, on the ground that 
Christ does not despair of them. It was when his friends had given up this demoniac 
as hopeless that his redemption came. So, when self-reform has proved useless, and 
benefactors fail, and friends lose heart, he proves "able to save to the uttermost." 
Dealing pitifully with the sinner, he deals ruthlessly with his sin, and will hurl it into 
the depths of the sea. — A. R. 

Vers. 17, 21. — The rejection and the reception of Jesus. Our text presents us with a 
striking contrast. Only a few miles of sea separated these people physically, but 
morally what a gulf was between them ! On both sides of the lake Christ's words 
had been heard, and his works of power had been seen, but how different were the 
results! If he had been like us, variable in temper and disposition — at one time 
moody, at another genial — we might more easily account for this. For the dispositions 
of sinful men are like the Lake of Galilee — now raging in a storm, and now calm and 
still under the smiling heavens. But there was no such variableness in the Perfect Man, 
He was not cheery when the palm branches were waved on Olivet, and angry when hia 
disciples forsook him and fled. He was not one thing in Gadara, and another in 
Capernaum. " He is the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever." We must look elsewhere 
to account for this phenomenon, and we shall find its causes to be those which sever 
so widely in character and destiny, two hearers who sit in the same church, or two 
children who kneel beside the same mother's knee. 

I. The various aspects in which Christ presented himself. His relations to 
those around him were not simple, but complex. We may be great in one aspect ol 
our character, but he was great in every aspect. 1. He appeared as a Teacher. 
In the synagogue, on the beach, amidst the crowd, he uttered Divine truth, and 
expected on the part of his hearers humble and obedient minds. He assumed that he 
knew what they did not know, respecting the nature of God, the meaning of the old 
dispensation, the phenomena of life, the coming future, etc. He adduced no arguments, 
but demanded (as he still demands), on the ground of what he was and is, the 
acceptation, or the rejection of his words. " He spake as one having authority." 
" This is my beloved Son ; hear him." The acceptance of Christ as a Teacher implied 
much, because he taught no abstract theories, but enunciated principles which would 
revolutionize the views held about the Jewish economy, and would banish popular sins. 
Show what Christ demands of disciples now, and the spirit in which we should receive 
his revelation. 2. He appeared as a Saviour. Thought and action were blended harmo- 
niously in Christ, and should be blended in every Christian. The Teacher of the people 
was the Healer of their bodies and the Purifier of their souls. This complex work is 
entrusted to the Church. Christ cured the demoniac, and restored sight to the blind, 
and health to the leper, as signs of what he had come to effect for men. 3. He appeared 
as a Friend. He entered the homes of the people at Capernaum and elsewhere, to cure 
illness in Peter's house, to bless children in another home, to share festivity in Cana, 
to weep with mourners in Bethany. This friendship the disciples rejoiced in. The 
presence of that Friend had delivered them in the storm. As such he presents himself 
at each heart, saying, " Behold, I stand at the door and knock," etc. 

II. Thb different effects op such presentation on the people. This may be 
illustrated not only by the conduct of the disciples and of the cured demoniac, but by 
contrasting the condition of the people of Gadara with that of the people in Caper- 
oaum This exemplifies : 1. The rejection of Christ. The most astounding miracle 
wil. njt produce faith in those wtio care mure for their possessions than for purity and 



224 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MAEK, [ch. v. 1—43. 

loTe, such a8 Christ had imparted to the man who had the unclean spirit. The loss of 
the swine first awakened terror, hut ahortly afterwards indignation, amongst the 
people, who with mingled fawning and obstinacy " began to pray him to depart out of 
their coasts." He yielded to their wish, and, so far as we know, never returned again. 
Similarly he was rejected at Nazareth (Luke iv. 29) and in Jerusalem (Matt, xxiii. 37). 
In the instance before us the people feared the Holy One more than they had feared 
the demoniac. Their greed was up in arms against the destroyer of their swine ; they 
cared more for them than for the rescue of a brother-man. Even now sometimes 
property is more jealously defended than personal rights. Christ laid down the prin- 
ciple that a man is better than a sheep, and he expressed that principle in his action 
at Gadara. Show how possessions and position are preferred to simple obedience to 
our Lord's will, so that from love to the world he is still rejected. 2. The reception of 
Christ. A right royal welcome was awaiting him on the other side of the lake. 
There the people had seen changes wrought in their homes by his power, and they had 
listened eagerly to his words of wisdom and love. They could not go back to their 
work as if there were no Christ who had come to save and comfort them. When he 
was gone, they prayed that the little boat might again come over the sea ; and when 
the first glimpse of its sail was seen, the news spread swiftly far and wide. Fishers 
left their nets, and ran to call their mates, saying, " Jesus is coming I " old people 
tottered down to the sea because Jesus was coming ; women who were mourning over 
their dear ones thought with thankfulness and love of his sympathy ; and little children 
left their games in the market-place in order to be made glad by his smile. And still 
he comes amongst us in earnest words, in sacred song, in holy thought, in solemn 
memories. Then fling open the door of yonr heart, pour out the treasures of your love, 
wake up the songs of praise, as you say, " Even so, come, Lord Jesus I " — A. E. 

Vers. 18 — 20. — Desire and duty. There was wonderful variety in the methods of 
treatment adopted by our Lord in dealing with those who surrounded him. He 
touched the eyes of the blind; he gave his hand to those prostrate by illneis or 
stricken with death ; he sometimes spoke the word of healing first, and sometimes the 
word of pardon, always suiting himself to the special condition of each, according to 
his perfect knowledge of his deepest need. The same completeness of knowledge and 
of consideration reveals itself in his intercourse with those who had been blessed, and 
were now among his followers. Some were urged to follow him, others were discouraged 
by a presentation of difficulties. A beautiful example of this is given by Luke 
(ix. 57 — 62), in his account of those who spoke to our Lord just before he crossed the 
lake. The same gracious consideration of what was really best for orie of his followers 
is seen here. And his disciples now do not all require the same treatment, nor have 
they all the same work to do or the same sphere to fill. 

L The convbkt's desire. (Ver. 18.) " When Jesus was come into the ship," or, 
more correctly (Eevised Version), " as he was entering into the boat," the delivered 
demoniac prayed that he might be with him. It was a natural desire, and a right one, 
although all the motives whiich prompted it were possibly not worthy. As in us, so 
in him, there was a mingling of the noble with the ignoble. Let us see what actuated 
him. 1. Admiration. No wonder that he sat at the feet of this Mighty One, and 
gazed upon him with adoring love. Angels bow before him; the redeemed cast their 
crowns at his feet. Beverence and awe are too rarely felt now. Proud self-sufficiency 
characterizes the civilized world, and even the professedly Christian Church. It is well 
to know, but it is better to adore. Consciousness of ignorance and weakness, in the 
presence of God, leads to worship. Let reverence characterize our search into the 
Divine Word, our utterances in God's name, our approaches to his throne. 2. Gratitude. 
Having received salvation, this man longed to prove his thankfulness, and he naturally 
thought that an opportunity would be found, while following Jesus, to defend his 
reputation or to do him some lowly service. Under the old economy many thank- 
offerings were presented. The firstfruits of the fields and flocks were ofiered to the 
Lord, and any special blessing received from him called forth special acknowledgment. 
Show how thank-offerings have died out of the Church, and how they might be 
profitably revived. Point out various modes of showing thankfulness to God. 
8. S^-dittrmt. Near the Deliverer he was safe, but might there not be some relapse 



•»«, y. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 225 

wnen ne was gone? A right feeling on his part and on ours. See the teaching of our 
Lord in John xv. on the necessity of the branch abiding in the vine. 4. Fear. The 
people were greatly excited. They had begged Christ to go out of their coasts, lest 
he should destroy more of their possessions. It was not improbable that they would 
Tvreak their vengeance on a man whose deliverance had been the cause of their lost. 
They did not believe, as Christ did, that it was better that any lower creatures should 
perish if only one human soul was rescued. But this is in harmony with all Qod'g 
works, in which the less is being constantly destroyed for the preservation and sus- 
tenance of the greater. The luxuriant growth of the fields is cut down that the cattle 
may live ; myriads of creatures in the air and in the sea are devoured by those higher 
in the scale of creation than themselves ; living creatures are slain that we may be fed 
and clothed. In harmony with all this, the destruction of the swine was the accom- 
paniment of, or the shadow cast by, the redemption of the man. And high above all 
these mysteries rises the cross of Calvary, on which the highest life was given as a 
sacrifice for the sins of the world. In this event we can see glimpses of Divine 
righteousness and pity ; but these people of Gh.dara shut their eyes to them, and were 
angry at their loss. Amongst them this man must "endure hardness as a good 
soldier of Jesus Christ." 

II. The convert's DtrTT. (Ver. 19.) 1. ffis work was to hegin at home. "Go 
home to thy friends." His presence there would be a constant sermon. In the truest 
sense he was " a living epistle." Sane instead of mad, holy instead of unclean, gentle 
instead of raving ; he was " a new creation." All true work for God should commence 
in the home. Self-control and self-sacrifice, gentleness and patience, purity and 
truth, in the domestic circle — will make the home a temple of God. 2. His work wat 
to he found among old acquaintances. Some had scorned him, others had hated and 
perhaps ill-treated him. But resentment was to be conquered in him by God's grace, 
and to those who knew him at his worst he was now to speak for Christ. Such 
witness-bearing is the most difficult, but the most effective. John the Baptist told 
the penitents around him, whether publicans or soldiers, to go back to their old spheres,, 
and prove repentance by changed life and spirit amid the old temptations. 3. Eis 
work was to he quiet and unostentatious. Perhaps Christ saw that publicity would 
injure him spiritually, for it does injure some ; or it may be that the excitement 
involved in following the Lord would be unsafe for him so soon after his restoration. 
For some reason he had assigned to him a quiet work, which was not the less true and 
effective. Luke says that he was to shorn " how great things God had done for him," as 
if the witness-bearing was to be in living rather than in talking. Speak of the quiet 
spheres in which many can still serve God. 4. His work was to spread and grow. 
The home was too small a sphere for such gratitude as his. He published the fame of 
the Lord in " all Decapolis." This was not wrong, or forbidden, for there were not 
the reasons for restraint of testimony in Perjea which existed in Galilee. It was 
a natural and legitimate enlargement of commission. Similarly the apostles were 
to ]ireach to all nations, but to begin in Jerusalem. He who is faithful with a 
few things is made ruler over many things, sometimes on earth, and invariably in 
heaven. — A. R. 

Ver. 22. — The faith, of Jairus. Faith was the one thing which Christ demanded of 
every suppliant who came to him. He asked the blind man the question, " Believest 
thoa that I am able to do this ? " He said to the father of the lunatic child, " All 
things are possible to him that believeth." Here he assured the woman in the crowd 
who had been healed, " Thy faith hath saved thee ; " and to Jairus he said, " Be not 
afraid, only believe." All these are exemplifications of the words, " Without faith it 
is impossible to please God." Faith is the hand which the soul stretches out to 
receivw the blessings of pardon, salvation, and peace. If two men have sinned, and are 
both conscious of guilt, one may walk at liberty, while the other is burdened ; because, 
though he is grieved about his sin, and hates it, and therefore has truly repented, the 
latter fails to believe the assurance, " Thy sins are forgiven thee." Similarly, in trouble 
a Christian may exhibit a serenity which fills onlookers with wonder, not because his 
trouble is lighter or his sensibility less, but because he has faith to believe that God is 
doing good through the trouble, or that he will ultimately bring good out of it. This 

flT MABK. 



228 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. v. 1— 4». 

faith In Christ Jainis had, though imperfectly, and his peace was in proportion to hia 
trust. 

I. Jaibus's pahh was unexpected. He was " the ruler of the synagogue ; " in 
other words, he was the president of one of the synagogues in Capernaum, It was hia 
duty to superintend and direct its services, and to preside over its college of elders. Ae 
a pastor and professor — to use modern terms — he would have strong prejudices against 
a heretical teacher, such as our Lord wag esteemed to he. We all know how difficult it 
is to go out of the usual course in any professional work ; hut although thoas who 
were associated with Jairus were hostile to our Lord, he dared to fall humbly at his 
feet. Sometimes the least hopeful, in human opinion, are the most richly blessed by 
Divine favour. Those who have often been taught and prayed for in our congrega- 
tions may remain untouched, while some poor waif who has drifted in from the sea of 
life may find rest in Christ. Many shall come from the east and from the west, to sit 
down in the kingdom, while those who are favoured by circumstances and birth will 
be shut out. 

II. Jaibus's faith germinated in gbief. He had been shut up with Ms little 
daughter who was ill, and for a time had been cut off from ordinary duties and asso- 
ciations. We can picture him to ourselves sitting beside her, with her little hand in 
his, while her eyes would often seek his with filial love. She had heard of Christ (what 
child in Capernaum h^id not ?) ; possibly she had seen him, and loved him, as most 
of the children did. And while she spoke to her father, when his heart was specially 
tender, he could not but drink in thoughts of the love and power of Jesus, until, daring 
the worst that his friends could say of him, he fell at Jesus' feet. Sometimes those 
who have been associated with Churches or Sunday schools remain untouched by holy 
influence, until, having left their old connections, they fall into sin and shame, and then, 
knowing not whither in the world to turn, they look to Jesus. Sometimes professing 
Christians feel that they are far from God, and that even in their prayers he appears 
vague and unreal ; till trouble comas — illness assails one whose life is precious, and then 
they pray in an agony of earnestness, as Jairus did, when " be besought Jesus greatly, 
saying, My little daughter lieth at the point of death." Faith often springs up in the 
soil of trouble, 

III. Jaibus's faith was sbveeblt teied. His hope was quickened when he saw 
Jesus rise up at once to follow him ; but the crowd would not let our Lord hasten, and 
the poor woman meanwhile stole her blessing, and Christ delayed to speak with hei 
and with others. Looking towards his home with ever-growing anxiety, at last Jairu" 
saw what he dreaded seeing — a messenger, who said, "Thy daughter is dead: why 
troublest thou the Master any further ? " But he had to learn that no one in earnp?t 
was ever a "trouble" to the Lord; that when he seemed to be caring for another 
he was really thinking of him, and preparing him to receive a far greater blessing than 
any he had come to seek. Christ delayed that " the trial of this man's faith, being 
much more precious than that of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire, mighi 
be found to God's glory." We often find that there is delay in the coming of answers to 
prayer. We cry for light, and yet our way is dark, and we see not even the next 
step. We ask for deliverance, but the disaster comes which overwhelms us with 
distress. We entreat the Lord to spare some cherished life, but the dear one is taketi 
away. Nevertheless, " let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and . 
entire, wanting nothing." 

rv. Jaibus's faith was lovingly bncoueaged. The storm tested this tree till its 
roots struck deeper; but when there appeared some risk of its falling, Christ said to the 
tempest, "Peace, be still." When the messengers said, ''Thy daughter is dead," at one e 
Jesus spoke ; and " as soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken, he saith, , , , Be 
not afraid, only believe." Again, when Jairus entered his house, you can imagine how 
the father's heart sank as he saw the mourners for the dead already there. Till then he 
had been hoping against hope, as sometimes we do till we actually enter the darkened 
house where the dead one lies. Again Jesus interposed, saying, " The damsel is not 
dead, but sleepeth ; " for so would he keep alive trust and hope till the blessing came, 
for which they were the preparation " He will not break the bruised reed, nor quench 
the smoking flax," — A. B, 



«H. T. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. MARK'. . 227 



Ver. 24. — The Lord amongst the needy. The two miracles recorded in this psssaga 
were blended both in fact and in narrative, and together they illustrate some of tba 
beauties of our Lord's character and work. Of these we select the following : — 

I. His disinterested kindness. No doubt his miracles were attestation* of Divine 
power, but none of them were wrought with the idea of gaining personal fame. On the 
coutrary, he endeavoured to silence the demands of gaping curiosity, and rebuked those 
who sought for signs and wonders. He refused the worldly homage which the people 
proffered when they wished to make him a king. He checked the spread of his own fame, 
lest men should care too much for material blessings, or should offer him the adulation 
a wonder-worker would have sought. If he had willed it, all the riches of the world 
would have been poured at his feet; but he had not where to lay his head; and although 
Jairus and others would have given all their possessions as the price of the benefits they 
Bought, Christ bestowed the blessing " without money and without price." Herein he 
appeared as the true Representative — "the express Image "of him who delights in mercy 
for mercy's own sake. God gives air and sunshine without any effort, or solicitation, or 
thanksgiving on the part of man. He makes the garden of the cottager as fruitful as 
the fields of the ricu, who can do so much more in return for his gifts. Perns grow in 
shady hollows, and flowers adorn lonely cliffs, and even heaps of refuse. With a lirish 
hand the Creator bestows his gifts. " He is good to all, and his tender mercies are over 
all his works." 

II. His PEESONAL CONSIDERATION FOB EACH SUPPLIANT. If wc are acquainted Tfith 
many subjects, our knowledge of each is often proportionately inaccurate ; if we know 
many persons, our acquaintance with them is but casual. If we concentrate our 
thought upon a person or a thing, that concentration is often exclusive of other persons 
And things, It was never thus with our Lord. Though he rules the worlds, there is 
not a single prayer unheard, or a feeble touch of faith unfelt. One who has been left 
alone to battle with his griefs may still say to himself, " But the Lord cares for me." 
He will no more hurry over a case than over that of the poor woman in the crowd, nor 
will he allow any delay to prevent the full coming of a blessing such as that which 
Jairus had at last. 

IIL His constant desieb fob spiritual bbsults. The temporal was to be the 
channel of the eternal. Healing of the soul often accompanied his healing of the body, 
And for the former he chiefly cared. On this occasion every moment was precious. 
The result of delay would be death and mourning in Jairus's home ; yet he stayed not 
only to cure the woman, but to get her acknowledgment, and to give her and others 
fuller instruction. Had it been only her physical cure he sought, she could have 
waited a few hours ; but the delay was largely for the spiritual good of Jairus. This 
ruler had not the faith of the centurion, who believed that Christ need not touch his 
servant, or even enter his house. Jairus's faith needed strengthening, and it was with 
this end in view that he saw what he did — a woman shut out from the synagogue of which 
he was ruler, who was saved by her simple faith, and this with the greatest possible 
ease on the part of the Lord. Hence it was that when the news came, " Thy daughter 
is dead," Jairus was not utterly dismayed, and under the influence of the cheering 
words of our Lord his faith revived in purer form. It is still true that delay in answer 
to prayer, during which grief and loss comes, ia meant to work in us the peaceable fruit 
of righteousness. 

IV. His beoad sympathies and activities. The love of Christ was not like some 
little stream which is confined between its two banks, and must be so confined if it is 
to be a blessing ; but it was like the sea, which, when the tide rises, floods the whole 
flhore, and fills every tiny creek as well as every yawning bay. He was never so 
absorbed in one mission as to neglect the side opportunities of life. Some of us have a 
tendency to absorption in one single duty, and the temptation is strong in proportion 
to the intensity and earnestness of our nature. But intenscness must not be allowed 
to make us narrow. To set before ourselves a special end is good, but this may lead to 
a neglect of other duties which is unnecessary and sometimes sinful. For example, 
some concentrate their interests in business or in pleasure, and declare that they have 
no time for devout thought; and at last they will find that they have grasped shadows 
and lost the substance. Christians fall into a similar error. Some do public service, 
^nd their names are widely known in the Church, but they have scarcely exercised sny 



828 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. v. 1— i3L 



good influence at home. The Church benefits, bnt the children are neglected. And oftea 
the opposite is true ; fur to many the home is everything, and the Church is nothing. 
Others, again, are so absorbed in one special work (that of the Sunday school, or tem- 
perance reform, for example), that they have little sympathy for their brethren who 
are engaged in other spheres of the manifold life of the Church. And there are others 
more gmlty by far than these, who are absorbed in future work. They are alwayi 
"going to do" this or that; but meanwhile their neighbours are uninfluenced and 
their own children are neglected. As they are not faithful with the few things, it 
would be contrary to God's law if they became rulers over many things. If our Lord 
had been animated by the spirit displayed by any of these, he would have said to the 
woman, " My errand is one of life and death ; there must be no touching even the 
skirts of my garment now. All else must wait till I have discharged this mission." 
But, by the course he took, he taught us this lesson. There is nottjng within the 
range of our power that is beyond the range of our responsibility. In all thes« 
respects Christ has left us an example, that we should follow his steps. — ^A. B. 

Ver. 31. — The toiuih of faith. We may see in this poor woman what our Lord 
expects to see in all who would receive his blessing. 

L The TREMBLina suppliant. There are many legends respecting her: that her 
name was Veronica ; that she maintained the innocency of our Lord before Pilate j 
that she wiped his face on the road to Calvary with a napkin, which received the 
sacred impress of his features; that she erected a memorial to him at Faneas, her 
native town ; etc. Improbable as much of this may be, it indicates that her faith was 
highly esteemed by the early Christians. Tlie evangelists describe her as a certain 
woman who was worn by sufl'ering, haggard from poverty (ver. 26), and ceremonially 
lUMslean, so as to be excluded from the consolations of public worship. She stole into 
the crowd, and by her touch of faith won the blessing she sought. 1. Illness brought 
her to Jesus. Most of those who came to him were afflicted — the blind, the leprous, th* 
bereaved, the hungry, etc. Every sorrow is a summons to us to go to him. 2. i'atjA 
pryaared her for a blessing. Even material gift* are received by the hand of faith. We 
•11 act in daily faith that the laws of God will continue — the farmer, the tradesman, etc. 
When Christ wrought a miracle (which was an epitome of one of God's works) he 
demanded faith. " He could not do many mighty works " where there was unbelief. 
He demanded trust in himself, both of Jairus (ver. 36), of this woman (ver. 34), and of 
us (Acts xvi. 31). If faith was truly exercised, erroneous views, such as this woman 
hai, did not prevent a blessing. 

II. The effectual touch. " The border of the garment," to which Luke with 
more definiteness refers, was a sign of belonging to the chosen people (Numb. xv. 38), and 
Christ blamed the Pharisees for making it specially broad, as if they would assert their 
peculiar sanctity. The woman touched it, not only as the most convenient, but as tha 
most sacred, part of the robe, and her superstition required to be cleansed away. 
1. There may be close outward contact with Christ without the effectual touch (ver. 31). 
The crowd represents many who are in Christian lands and congregations. 2. There 
cannot be living contact between us and him without his knowledge (ver. 30). Though 
there was only one in the crowd who so touched him as to win salvation, that one was 
not uurecounized. So, if in the large congregation one earnest prayer, one praiseful song, is 
offered, it is accepted of him. The garment may represent to us our Lord's humanity, 
which is most within the reach of our understanding and love. St. Paul speaks of 
his "flesh" as a "veil," through which we pass into God's presence. Our Lord him- 
self says, in another figure which sets forth the same truth, " Hereafter ye shall see 
heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.* 
He was the true ladder between heaven and earth, between God and man, of which 
Jacob once dreamed. 

III. The eequirbd confession. To acknowledge the change wrought in us by 
Divine grace is for God's glory, for the development of our own faith, and for the 
encouragement of others. We have responsibilities to the Church as well as to the 
Lord, which even shame and modesty must not lead us to ignore. Our Lord called 
for acknowledgment on this occasion, and it led to fuller instruction and to a deeper 
peace. Ee did not ask his c^uestion because he was ignorant, any more than Elish* 



HE, T. 1— 43.J THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 22» 



did after his heart had gone with Gehazi, or Jeli«vah did when he asked of Adam, 
" Where art thou? " If we know which of our children has done a certain act, we may 
nevertheless ask, " Which of you did this ? " and whether it has been a right act or a 
wrong, the confession on such occasions is for the child's own good. With truer wisdom 
than we ever display Christ Jesus asked, " Who touched my clothes ? " although he 
knew perfectly the life of her whose faith in him had made her whole ; " For with the 
heart man believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto 
salvation." — A. E. 

T'er. 41. — 3[%e dead maiden. There are three instances of Christ's raising the dead 
recorded by the evangelists. In them a suggestive progression may be observed. On 
this occasion, a child had but recently died, and was laid upon the bed in her own 
home, amongst those who could still see the dear face, which was now void and irre- 
sponsive. On another occasion a young man had been dead long enough for hi.' 
funeral to have begun, and he was being carried forth on a bier through the village ir 
which he had lived. On the third occasion we read that when Jesus came to Bethanj 
he found that Lazarus " had been dead three days already," and that the grave had 
closed on him. In all these he gave evidences of his life-givine power, and this with 
ever-growing intensity until that glorious day when he himself, in spite of the San- 
hedrim's seal and the Roman guard, appeared as being in his own person the Conqueror 
of death and the grave. In answer to the prayer of Jairus, and perhaps to the prayer 
of his child before she died, Jesus came into the ruler's house. He found it filled with 
hired mourners, and heard the music of their flutes, the droning of liturgical chants, 
the wails and cries by which they sought, not only to express grief, but further to 
excite it. There was something stern about his utterance — " Give place ! " Such an 
exhibition could not be other than offensive to One so sincere and true and natural 
as he was. And they who have his Spirit would rather be lamented by the few whose 
hearts are really touched with sadness, than by a multitude who offer ceremonial 
lamentation. Christ Jesus " put them all out." And we must get rid of all that is 
artificial and false if we would feel that Jesus is near, and we must be out of the 
company of the mockers who " laugh him to scorn " if we would hear his voice. It is 
in the quiet hour that he speaks, and we then can say — 

** In aeoret silence of the mind, 
My God and there my heaven I find." 

We may look upon that dead maiden — 

I. As AN EXAMPLE OF PHYSICAL DEATH. When .Jesus Said, " She is not dead," he 
did not mean, as some suppose, that she was in a trance. He spoke metaphorically, 
just as he did when he said, "Our friend Lazarus sleepeth," though immediately after- 
wards he said " plainly, Lazarus is dead." A boaster would have l.iid stress on the 
fact of her death in order to exalt his own power in restoring her, but Christ spoke of 
it as a sleep, because he wished, not to magnify himself, luit lovingly to prepare her 
friends for the overwhelming joy that awaited them. Sleep is a true image of death. 
Like it, death follows weariness when the work of life has been hard and its sorrows 
many : it gives quietude of which the stillness of the body is but an outward sign ; and 
it will be followed by a glorious awakening on the morning of the eternal day. 
Clirist is "the resurrection and the life." He who gave this child back to her parents, 
and the lad at Nain back to his widowed mother, and Lazarus back to his sisters, will 
restore to us all those dear ones who now " through faith and patience inherit the 
promises." 

II. A SYMBOL OF BPrBiTUAL DEATH. The child lay there, unconscious that her 
fricds were weeijing for her, and that Jesus Christ was near. But suddenly she felt 
the couch of his hand. She heard his voice in language such as her mother and nurse 

used the language of the children— saying, " Talitha cumi ! " — " Dear child, arise ! " 

and she opened her eyes and saw Jesus, and from that moment her heart was his. As 
truly he speaks now, in the stirring of sacred feeling, in the revival of old memories, in 
the loving influence of Christian friends ; and they who obey his voice begin from that 
moment a happier life than they ever knew before. Very significant is the command 
of Christ "that something should be given her to eat." It wa* a reminder that she 



230 'i'HB GOSPEL ACCORDIN(i TO ST. MAKK. [ch. v, 1— 4b, 

really lived, that she had natural appetite, that he lovingly thought of the little things 
his dear ones needed, and that she was back again in the old life and home, though 
with a new love in her heart. So, many now who are dead to the old life and alive 
unto righteousness are called upon by their Lord to go back to their former work and 
companionship, but to serve him by shedding on these the light of holiness and love. 
From some he demands the public confession that they are on his side which he asked 
of the woman who had been secretly cured ; but there are others to whom publicity 
is painful, whose experience is not to be blazed abroad, lest the beauty of childlike 
trust and the bloom of early piety be destrojied. — A. R. 

Vers. 1 — 20. — A man with an unclean spirit. It is no part of the office of the 
homilist to enter upon the field of apologetics or exegesis. Criticism and inter- 
pretation provide the words with their detinite meanings. Homiletics unfold and 
apply practical lessons. The difficulties of this narrative must, therefore, be discussed 
elsewhere. 

I. Our attention is first arrested by the physical derangement exhibited in this case 
of possession by " an unclean spirit." The sadness of this spectacle is amply exhibited 
in the words of vers. '2 — 5. The overpowering of the entire personality of the victim 
by " an unclean spirit " points to a fearful possibility of the human life. Does sin open 
the door to the spirit of evil ? The man was under the power of an unclean spirit, was 
led to do unclean acts. He dwelt remote from his fellows, " in the tombs." He was 
possessed of imusual physical strength; he could not be bound, "no, not with a 
chain." " No man had strength to tame him." This unusual power was exercised in 
" crying out and cutting himself with stones." Whatever the precise nature of this 
aifliction, the scene exhibits the human life in its uttermost derangement. 

II. On the moral side the attitude of the unclean spirit towards Jesus is expressed 
as one of utter repudiation : " What have I to do with thee, Jesus, the Son of the 
Most High God ? " They had nothing in common. What can the spirit of evil have to 
do with Jesus? They mutually recede; they are mutually opposed. These appear 
before us as representing two kingdoms, wholly diverse in character. The one in » 
kingdom of evil and uncleanness ; the other a kingdom of peace and righteousness. In 
the one the human life is disorganized ; in the other it attains its true dignity, har- 
mony, and blessedness. The one is for it a kingdom of darkness ; the other a kingdom 
of light. In the one is death; life is found in the other. They have nothing in 
common ; they are mutually exclusive, mutually destructive. 

III. The supreme authority of Jesus, " Son of the Most High God," in the sphere of 
the human life is again illustrated, as also his attitude towards all human suffering. 
" With authority he commands," " Come forth, thou unclean spirit, out of the man," and 
in pitifulness he releases the oppressed. Thus is fulfilled that " which was spoken by 
Isaiah the prophet, saying, Himself took our infirmities, and bare our diseases." Else- 
where is this more amply illustrated. 

IV. The changed condition of the life when Jesus has exerted upon it his power, and 
evicted the spirit of uncleanness, is simply and beautifully portrayed in the picture pre- 
sented to the eyes of the multitude who " came to see what it was that had come to 
pass," and beheld " him that was possessed with devils sitting, clothed, and in his right 
mind." With affectionate gratitude he now cleaves to Jesus, beseeching " him that he 
might be with him." The refusal was not in harsh judgment against the redemed one, 
but for the instruction and profit of all others — that he may go and " publish how great 
things Jesus had done for him." Out of this incident let the central words, " What 
have I to do with thee ? " be chosen as a test by which each may prove his nearness to 
Jesus or his recession from him. At one extreme lies this word of utter rejection — the 
word of Satanic repudiation ; at the other, words which express the most complete 
absorption of the life in devotion to him — " To me to live is Christ." This declares the 
perfect identification of the individual life with the person, the mission, the spirit of 
Jesus. The one affirms, "I know no life within the sphere of Christ's kingdom;" 
the other, " I know no life beyond it. His name defines the boundary of my aimi^ 
my activities, my hopes. I am lost, buried, absorbed in him; to all things elw 
I die." 

Bow many are the gradations between these extremes I Let each test himself m to 



OJI. V. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. MAKK. 23; 



the attitude he assumes towards Jesus. 1, As to a supreme submission to hia 
authority as " the Sou of the Most High God." 2. As to a calm and loving reliance 
upon him as " Jesus," the " Saviour, which is Christ the Lord." 3. As to a sincere 

alliance with him in the work of raising men from the dominion of evil casting out 

the spirit of all foulness from the human life. 4. As to a perfect fellowship with 
Christ in the communion of sympathy and love. — G. 

Vers. 21 — 43. — Avowed and hidden faith. The two incidents here grouped 
together show that in the neighbourhood of Capernaum faith in Jesus' power to heal 
has been established; nor is it to be wondered at, seeing the many instances of 
healing with which the people must be acquainted. The picture is striking. The 
" Teacher" has returned from his sail across the lake, whert truly "the power pro- 
ceeding from him had gone forth," even the stormy wind yielding to it. A crowd 
gathers around him. He is standing by the sea speaking, when " one of the rulers 
of the synagogue, Jairus by name," who had come seeking him, " and seeing him, he 
falleth at his feet," making supplication for his " little daughter," who is " at the point 
of death." Yet does he believe that if the hands of the Healer be laid upon her she 
shall " be made whole and live." Therefore his earnest entreaty, " Come thou." He 
who would that children should come to him refused not to go to them — a single child's 
life is precious in his sight. Presently the sad tidings are brought, " Thy daughter is 
dead." Why, therefore, should the Master be troubled any further ? The faith of the 
father might well fail since now all hope of recovery is cut off. Is this man mighty 
enough "in hope" to believe "against hope"? Perhaps not without the strengthen- 
ing word, " Fear not, only believe, and " (as St. Luke caught) " she shall be made whole." 
Truly " belief cometh of hearing, and hearing by the word of Christ." Then, as on 
another occasion (cf. Luke vii. 11 — 17), the word of command — " Arise '' — is uttered 
to the dead by the " Lord of both the dead and the living," and another handful of the 
firstfruits of his resurrection power is plucked by his hand. Thus is the resurrection pre- 
sented to us as the awaking of a little child, for in his view the dead " but sleepeth." 
Who can wonder that " they were amazed straightway with great amazement " ? But 
this instance of open and avowed faith is for ever intertwined with an example of hidden 
faith of equal strength, though less obtrusive. The faith of the woman was hidden 
" within herself," its ingenuity only was showed, in that she came "in the crowd 
behind, and touched his garment." Surely this was not faith in the touch which 
was the supposed appropriate medium, the contact judged to be needful by the many 
that " pressed upon him that they might touch him." This, if a suitable sign, was 
not a necessary one, as the faith at least of one declared ; " but say the word, and my 
, servant shall be healed." All faith in the nostrums of physicians had died out from 
tills woman's heart, for she had " suffered many things " of them, and was " nothing 
bettered, but rather grew worse." But in this Healer she did believe, and her faith, 
which the Lord detected as truly as he " perceived in himself " that the healing power 
which could proceed trom him alone " had gone forth," he amply rewarded. " Who," 
of the many thronging me, " touched me " with that touch of faith ? Faith was 
united with humility and truth ; and " trembling and fearing, she fell down and con- 
fessed all." Once more, and tor the instruction of the needy in all time, Jesus points 
to the " faith " thus honoured : it " hath made thee whole." Yes, the faith instru- 
mentally, as our fathers have said, the touch mediately ; but in reality, " I have healed 
thee in response to thy faith — I, who only can say, ' Go in peace, and be whole of thy 
plague.' " Hence are we to learn : I. The power of Christ to raise the dead and to 
heal the sick, so that we may sleep calmly in death till he bid us arise. 2. His pitiful 
consideration towards even struL'gling faith, whether assailed by the rude doubt, " It 
is too late," or is too timid to declare itself openly. So that they of little faith need 
not doubt. 3. The true attitude of suffering in its confident approach to Christ for 
healing and help ; even patient trustfulness, fearing not, and though persistent, yet 
humble. 4. The real support of all faith, the word of Christ, with such patient con- 
sideration of his works as leads to an apprehension of his Divine ability. May we 
not now stretch out our hand and touch him ? — G. 

Vers. 1 — 20. — Christ, the Eedeemer of the intellect. L I'HS extbemk or mncAi 



232 THE GOtiPKL ACCOKDiKG TO ST. MARK. [ch. v. 1—43 

DEGRADATION AND MISERY. Bondage, impotent violence, suicidal mania. We cannot 
make out a tlieory of the facts ; tlie facts are certain, and sad enough in this as in that 
age. There may be a duplicity in the consciousness of man, so that the being is 
threatened with a rending asunder. There is a certain reflection of this duplicity in 
all of us. 

IL Violent conflict precedes happy changk. There are crises when we dread 
the presence of the power ot good ; it means a sharp struggle at hand in the depths of 
the soul for our very life. Men will sometimes endure the present misery rather than 
undergo the pain which is to cure it. But the su) geon is no cruel tormentor ; nor is 
the faithful teacher of the truth to be feared, but loved. 

III. The blessing op a sound mind. It may be 'ost ; thank God it may be 
recovered. As there are parasites which prey upon the lower forms of animal and 
vcgetiible life, so there are ideas which may possess the imagination and confound the 
whole conscious life of the soul. Nowhere do we find the hope of salvation in all its 
senses, from physical and moral maladies, and those inscrutable to science, so clearly 
held out as in the gospel. 

IV. The Divine power and pity. " Tell thy friends how much the Lord has 
done for thee, and that he pitied thee." Power and pity fused in love : this is the soul 
ot the world, the principle of its redemption. It has infused its strong enchantment 
into nature, and healing is ever open to us if we will yield to its influence on our 
being. — J. 

Vers. 25—34. — The magic, of faith. L The cure of the sick woman eesbmbles 
A magical cure. Magical belief universally prevailed. The principle of it was, an 
operation on the nervous system through the wishes and the imagination. A repre- 
sentation in the mind of a cure is assumed, and acted on as a reality. So mysterious 
and great is the power of imagination over the mechanism of life, that cures might 
occasionally occur without any real cause external to the suflferer's mind. 

II. But here there was a real cadse at work. Coincident with the touch 
of the woman was the knowledge of curing virtue going forth from him, in the mind 
of Christ. Here is something impossible to explain — a connection that defies thought , 
but a real connection. And the great general lesson remains. Every change in the 
mind from sickness to health implies the correspondence of a thought on the sufferer 
with a reality without him. Whenever and however the energy of God is reflected 
as a thought of reality or a faith in us, a change for the better must and will 
oocra.—i. 

Vers. 35 — 43. — Life victorious. I. Life in its fulness knows no fear. Cruel 
anxieties for the life of those we love are hushed by the voice of Jesus. He ignores 
death, being the resurrection and the life. We are under a deception of the senses, 
which Christ saw through. " The child did not die, but is sleeping." From another 
point of view our saddest facts may be lustrous with the significance of joy. 

II. Life is commanding. " I say, Arise 1 " And the words are instantly obeyed. 
Bicher as a parable than as a mere story. The fact is soon exhausted ; the allegory is 
infinite. The voice is ever speaking, and resurrections are ever taking place. Lost 
joys are being recovered, dead forms reanimated. Who knows, as the Greek asked, 
whether what we call dying be not living, and living dying ? But where Christ is, 
there is no death, no loss ; only change from less life to more. — J. 

Vers. 1 — 20. Parallel passages : Matt. viii. 28 — 34 ; Luke viii. 26 — 40. — Gadarent 
•r Oergesene demoniaai. I. Cure of the Gadarbnb demoniac. 1. The district. The 
country called Gilead in the Old Testament, at a later period and in the New Testament 
goes by the name of Persea. It was south of Bashan, and formed a sort of peninsula, 
bounded by the Yarmuck (anciently Hieromax) on the north, Arnon (now Wady el 
Mojeb) on the south, and Jordan on the east. The part of Gilead between the Yarmuck 
and Jabbok at present Wady Tiurka, is now Jehd Ajhm ; while the section south of 
the Jabbok is the Belka. In tl.is region was a district called Decapolis, from the fact 
of its being studded over with ten cities, all, except Scy thopolis, east of the Jordan. 0/ 
these cities one was Gadara, identified with the ruins ul Um Keis, the capital of Perasa; 



CH. T. 1—43.] THK GOSPET, ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 233 



while Gergesa was the name of a little town, identified with the present Kerza, on th« 
Wady Semakh, opposite Magdala. Either the territory adjacent was named after one 
or other of these towns, or St. Mark and St. Luke giv« a general indication of the district 
that was the scene of the miracle, when they call it the country of the Ghidarenes ; 
while St. Matthew gives the exact name, when he places it in the country of the Ger- 
gesenes. Dr. Thomson, in 'The Land and the Book,' says, "The city itself where it was 
wrought was evidently on the shore. . . . And in this Gersa, or Chersa, we have a posi- 
tion which fulfils every requirement of the narratives, and with a name so near that in 
Matthew as to be in itself a strong corroboration of the truth of this identification. It 
is within a few rods of the shore, and an immense mountain rises directly above it, in 
which are ancient tombs, out of some of which the two men possessed of the devils may 
have issued to meet Jesus. The lake is so near the base of the mountain, that the 
swine, rushing madly down It, could not stop, but would be hurried on into the water 
and drowned. . . . Take your stand a little south of this Chersa. A great herd of 
swine, we will suppose, is feeding on this mountain that towers above it. They are 
seized with a sudden panic, rush madly down the almost perpendicular declivity, those 
behind tumbling over aud thrusting forward those before ; and, as there is neither time 
nor space to recover on the narrow shelf between the base and the lake, they are 
crowded headlong into the water and perish." The name Gergesa has led to the suppo- 
Bition that the Girgashites, one of the seven Canaanitish nations, originally occupied 
this territory. Be this as it may, the district was pleasantly situated east and south- 
east of the Sea of Galilee, and the towns of Gadara and Gergesa were flourishing. The 
former was much the larger, and, according to Josephus, was rich — he says, " Many 
of the citizens of Gkidara were rich men " — while that of Gergesa was of considerable 
importance. 2. A sad contratt. We cannot forbear noticing, as we pass, how much 
wretchedness may exist at the same time and in the same place with material wealth 
and mercantile prosperity, and amid all the beauties of natural scenery. This world 
itself all through is a strange mixture of mercy and of wrath ; of the beautiful and the 
terrible ; of plenty and of poverty ; of sorrow and of joy ; of sunshine and of shower. 
No April day was ever more variable. Here, in the country of the Gadarenes, with its 
well-to-do and wealthy inhabitants, and their profitable herds of swine, were two 
wreixhed creatures in extreme misery, both mental and bodily. While others bought 
and sold and got gain, these creatures were a terror to themselves and all around. 
While others occupied comfortable dwellings, these unfortunates tenanted sepulchral 
caverns which abounded in the district, and of which, as we have seen, some remain to 
the present day. While others were decently clad, or even gorgeously attired, these 
miserable individuals refused the decency of raiment. While others went at large, 
enjoying the sweets of life and that liberty which makes life sweet, these demoniacs 
had to be bound with chains »nd fetters (jre'Sois, equivalent to shackles for the feet, and 
aKiireai, equivalent to chains in general). 3. The number accounted for. St. Matthew 
mentions two ; St. Mark and St. Luke speak of one. How are we to explain this? The 
one mentioned by two of the evangelists, was fiercer than his fellow ; he was wilder 
and worse than the other. Or perhaps he had belonged to a higher class in society, 
and had moved in a better rank of life ; or perhaps his position had been in some 
respect more prominent, whether owing to wealth, or prolession, or education; and so 
the calamity that had befallen him was more conspicuous, and he himself better 
known. Something of this sort seems hinted at hy St. Luke, when he speaks of the 
demoniac who met Jesus, as "a certain man out of the city." At all events, from any 
or all these causes St. Luke separates his case from the other, and singles him out from 
his comrade in afSiction. 4. A distinct feature added hy each evangelist. St. Matthew 
tells us that they made the way impassable for travellers ; St. Luke, that he was with- 
out clothing ; aud St. Mark, in the passage specially under consideration, that he cried 
night and day, and cut himself with stones. St. Matthew's narrative of this case is 
somewhat meagre, St. Luke's fuller, and St. Mark's more circumstantial than either 
6. The period in particular of demoniac possession. That demoniac possession was 
distinct from disease, or lunacy, or epilepsy, is sufficiently evident from a single Scrip- 
ture, namely, Matt. iv. 24, where we read that they "brougnt unto him all sick 
people that were taken with divers diseases and torments, and those which were pos- 
lessed with devils, and those which were lunatic, and those that had the palsy ; and ha 



234 THE GOSPEL ACCOKDIAG TU ST. MAilK. [ch. v. 1—43. 

healed them." If asked why demoniac possession so manifested itself at ihp timn of 
our Lord's appearance on earth, and not before, nor at least in the same way since ? wo 
must simply reply, in addition to what we have formerly said on this subject, that we 
can no more tell this than we can tell why small-pox manifested itself as a terrible scourgo 
to our race at a certain time, and not sooner ; or why cholera ravaged Europe at a 
certain period since the beginning of this century, and not before ; or why that fearful 
plague, which the Greek historian has described with such graphic power and thrilling 
effect, never visited them till the time of the Peloponnesian war, and has never 
returned again, as far as history informs us, to renew its work of desolation there. But, 
tliough Scripture does not explicitly specify the cause, we can readily suppose a reascn 
which has the appearance at least of probability. That reason we have already alluded 
to as found in Satan's well-authenticated powers of imitation, and we shall only sub- 
join in this place a few additional circumstances to confirm its probability. In early 
times, when the Lord afBicted Egypt with his plagues, and his servants, Moses and 
Aaron, wrought miracles in the field of Zoan, Satan had his servants there also, and 
Jannes and Jambres either possessed or pretended the power to work miracles too, 
counterfeiting or counteracting to the utmost of their capacity those of Moses and 
Aaron. From time to time, in the subsequent history of Israel, the Lord raised ap 
prophets to instruct and forewarn the people ; but who can be ignorant of the fact that 
Satan at times employed his prophets — false prophets to beguile and mislead ? When 
our Saviour was on earth he warned his disciples that false Christs would arise and 
deceive many. Satan raised them up, and so history confirmed the statement. In like 
manner, when the Lord Jesus Christ had taken to himself a true body and a reasonable 
soul — when the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among men — Satan, by himself or by 
his servants, took possession of the bodies of men, cruelly torturing their flesh and 
agonizing their spiiit. Nor are we prepared to say that demoniac possession has 
altogether ceased. We have seen men so act, and heard men so speak, and have been 
informed of such fiendish atrocity on their part, that we could account for their violent 
and outrageous conduct, or for their mischievous and diabolical acts, or for their horrid 
and blasphemous expressions, in no other way than that some demon, or the devil 
himself, had been permitted to take temporary possession of them. 

II. The past hibtoet ob previous state of this demoniac. 1. Si's madness. 
Wlien we compare and combine the account given of this poor demoniac by St. Mark 
iud St. Luke, as also the brief notice of both demoniacs by St. Matthew, we have a 
most affecting picture. He had lost his senses and become exceeding fierce, so that no 
man could tame him, and no man could m safety pass that way. To the folly of the 
lunatic he had added the furiousness of the madman. Reason had reeled and left the 
helm ; the once goodly ship had lost compass and chart and helmsman ; it was drifting 
along, the sport of furious winds and stormy waves. 2. His wretchedness. This 
wretched man had not lost life, it is true, but all that could make life desirable, or render 
it happy. Unclothed, uncared for, he had fallen back into the condition of savage life, 
and to some extent had sunk lower than the brute. Houseless and homeless, he led a 
vagrant life — now a dweller in the mountains, now a tenant of the tombs. His agony 
of mind was fearful. When not attacking others he acted the part of a self-tormentor. 
His cries waked the echoes of the mountains, or made the gloom of the sepulchre more 
dreadful. But cries were insufficient to vent the deep anguish of his spirit. He cut 
himself with stones, and, by making gashes in his body, sought to transfer his suffering 
from the mind to the body, or at least divide it between them. All this had lasted for 
years, as it would appear from the statement, " he had devils long time." Neither had 
he known much of respite or aught of relaxation; "always night and day" this 
sorrowful and siiflering condition continued ; no lucid interval that we read of; no 
pleasant period of relief, however short, that we know of. At times, moreover, he wa» 
deprived of his liberty. This had frequently occurred. " He had often been bound with 
fetters and chains," until, by a sort of superhuman power, he plucked them asunder or 
broke them in pieces. 3. The lessons to he learnt from all this. There are two lessons 
to be learnt from this part cf the subject. The first lesson we may learn from it is 
the condition of the sinner, and the second is the hostility of Satan. Confining atten- 
tion to the first, while we have examined the condition of the demoniac as s fact — a 
stem fact, and a sad one — we cannot help thinking that it furni.shes us at the sam* 



CH V. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JIARK. 235 

time with a figure of what the sinner more or less is. He may, iodeed, have the use of 
all his facalties, both ot mind and body ; nevertheless, he is a fn..i. " The fool hath 
said in his heart. There is no God." He is beside himself ; for we read of the prodigal, 
on his repentance and return to his father's house, that " he canif; to himself." Was 
ever folly greater than that of the man who prefers the trifles of time to the realities of 
eternity ; who day by day barters the salvation of the soul for some gratification of 
sense ; who, amid all th" uncertainty of life, braves the danger of delay ; who, not- 
withstanding the shortness of time, neglects from one season of opportunity to another, 
from one period of existence to another, the things that belong to his peace ? What 
madness can equal his who treats all these things as though they were cunningly 
devised fables ; who turns his back on God and his Word, on the sabbath and the 
sanctuary, on prayer and praise ; who trifles with the great things of God until death 
stares him in the face, entertaining the vain fancy that a few tears, or prayers, or sighs 
on the bed of death will reverse all the past, make amends for a life of sin, and serve as 
a passport to heaven ? That man is a demoniac in very fact, whom Satan so possesses, 
so leads captive at his will, and whose eyes he so blinds, that, though Providence i» 
speaking with many a solemn voice ; though his own frailty is pleading with him in the 
silence of his chamber, and during the night-watches ; though mortality in sundry ways 
forces itself on his attention; though conscience is upbraiding, until it becomes so 
Beared that it upbraids no longer; though the Spirit of grace is striving, as he has been 
striving long; though the Saviour with outstretched arms is saying, " Come, come and 
welcome," " (/'ome unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you 
rest ; " though the eternal Father is waiting to embrace the returning penitent, and 
swearing, " As I live, I have no pleasure in the death ol the wicked ; " — yet that sinner, in 
spite of all, keeps running; along the downward way to hell, plunging deeper and deeper 
into wretchedness, rushing upon ruin, and rushing at the same time against the thick 
bosses of Jehovah's buckler. If you exhort him, he is sullen ; if you remonstrate with 
him, he is offended ; if you reprove him, he is outrageous ; if you speak plainly, yet 
affectionately, it may be he returns a surly answer, proving himself to be what Scrip- 
ture describes, as " such a son of Belial, that a man cannot speak to him." What though 
he is neither naked, nor houseless, nor dwelling among the tombs, nor bound with 
fetters 1 Are not the fetters of sin the worst that ever bound any man ? " What fruil 
had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed ? for the end of those things 
is death." Has not a course of iniquity clothed thousands in rags, yea, left them with- 
out anything like decent clothes at all ? Has not drunkenness, or lewdness, or idle- 
ness left hundreds without either house or home? Does not wilful waste make woeful 
want ? Who can ever forget the story of the prodigal, when " he would fain have filled 
his belly with the husks which the swine did eat," when " no man gave unto him," and 
when he said, " I perish with hunger " ? Has not the devil's service brought many a man 
to his tomb, humanly speaking, before his time ? for the wicked do not live half their 
days. We need not speak of the misery which the sinner leels when the iron enters 
into his soul, tlie bitter regret, the unavailing; remorse, the terrors of conscience, the 
second death, and the smoke of their torment ascending up for ever and ever. 

III. Thb pnESENT CONDITION OF THE CURED DEMONIAC. 1. The great change. " The 
unclean spirits went out ; " or, as St. Luke expresses it, " Then went the devils out of 
the man." Here was a practical exemplification of the Saviour entering into the strong 
man's house and spoiling his goods. The strong man was expelled by One strouger 
than himself. His terrible hold was loosened, his power paralyzed, captivity led captive, 
and the prey taken from the mighty. It is thus with every one who has been rescued 
from the grasp of Satan, who has been " snatched as a brand out of the burning," who 
has been convinced of sin and its attendant miseries and everlasting wretchedness, who 
has been enlightened with the knowledge of the grace and mercy of the Saviour, whoso 
will has been renewed by the Spirit of God, and who has thus been made willing in 
the day of Divine power. Oh that the time may soon come, when in every land, and 
through all parts of the habitable globe, God in his great mercy shall open the blind 
eyes, and smite the fetters off the gyved limbs, and emancipate the oppressed of Satan, 
setting the captives for ever free ! 2. Evidences of the change. People were curious to 
■ee the mighty miracle that had been wrought, and came to Jesus to see the strange 
Hght about which, no doubt, they had heard much. And, arriving at the place, they 



839 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. [cB. v. 1— 43w 

" see him that was possessed with the devil, and had the legion, sitting" Ah ! there ia 
a change, and clear evidence of it. What a subject for a painting ! The madman 
U come to his right mind; the maniac is tamed; reason, that godlike faculty, ia 
restored ; his fierceness is subdued. The anguish of his spirit has subsided ; his wild 
cries have ceased; his self-inflicted bodily pains — those shocking wounds — are healed. 
People talk of the man who could tame the most savage horses, and hold them for a 
time as if spell-bound ; they speak ol menagerie-men who can tame lions and conquer 
bears ; they laud the poet's comic humour in liis piece entitled 'The Taming of the Shrew;' 
but the taming of shrew, or lion, or bear, or horse is nothing compared with the taming 
of this demoniac man, or of any other man whose fierce passions have been let loose, 
whose soul and body have been subjected to Satan's sway, and whose wicked and 
wayward career has been marked with as bad, if not worse, than demoniac madness. 
There he sits I as though the lion had become a lamb ; as though the tiger had 
forgotten his fury, and laid aside his fierceness ; as though the bear had changed ita 
uature, and become a mild domestic creature — an emblem of that better day when 
all men shall become such, and a foreshadow of that coming time which the prophet 
describes so beautifully, when " the wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the 
leopard shall lie down with the kid ; and the calf and the young lion and the failing 
together." 3. His posture a proof of docility. There he sits, vrith the docility of the 
child and the guileless simplicity of the Christian. There he sits, as Saul did in the 
days of his youth, an apt scholar at the feet of Gamaliel. Rather, there he sits, as 
Mary, at the feet of the same Saviour who bestowed on her the high encomium, " One 
thing is needful : and Mary hath chosen the good part, that shall not be taken away 
from her." There he sits, with thoughtful countenance and attentive mind, and 
listening ear, to drink in every word that falls from the Saviour's lips. There he sits, 
humbly at the Saviour's feet, while his eye rests placidly on that Savioui's face, as 
though he said, " Lord, how I love thee for all thy grace to me I Lord, what wilt thou 
have me to do, that I may express that warm love which glows in my breast, and exhibit 
the effects of that wondrous grace ? " It is thus with every converted sinner. We sit at 
Jesus' feet, and whether he speaks himself to us in his Word, or by his servants who 
preach to us from that Word, or by his Spirit who applies that Word, it is all the same. 
Willingly we will lose no lesson, we will miss no opportunity, we will neglect no 
means of grace, where we expect that Jesus will manifest himself to our souls and talk 
to us by the way, opening to us the Scriptures. The whole of the hundred and 
nineteenth psalm is a commentary on this teachableness of spirit, and willingness to sit 
at the Master's feet; vers. 33 — iO inclusive may be specially rtad in this connection. 
Down to old age we will sit at the Saviour's feet, in order to learn of him. Like Simeon, 
like Anna, like the picture of the righteous set before us in the ninety-second psalm, 
" The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree: he shall grow like acedar in Lebanon." 
Now, who are they, and where are they, that flourish so ? " Those that be planted in 
the house of the Lord shall flourish in the courts of our God." And when and why do 
they flourish so? " They shall still bring forth fruit in old age," and " to show that 
the Lord is upright." We are bound to make all due allowance for the decay of nature 
and such weakness as is incident to the decline of life ; but it is distressing to find at 
times the aged magnifying their infirmities as an excuse for absenting themselves from 
the house of God; worse still, perhaps, when they stay away without pretending 
any excuse. It is one of the worst signs ; for none that ever truly followed the Lord in 
youth or in maturity ever forsook him in old age. We remember well seeing a very old 
man, much above ninety years of age, helped into his pew in church every sabbath ; and 
there was the patriarchal man leaning on his stafi', as he sat at Jesus' feet, a devout 
and venerable and earnest worshipper. Even when age may have blunted the faculties 
and dulled the hearing, it is still our duty to forsake not the assembling of ourselves 
with the people of God. We knew the case of a deaf man who, though he could not 
hear a word preached, came regularly to church, because, as he said, he could see to 
read the psalms and lessons and other parts of the service, and in any case could help 
the attendance by his presence and example. 4. His place of safety was there. This 
demoniac sat at Jesus' feet /or safety. May we suppose that he had heard of the man, 
of whom we read in the parallel passage of another Gospel (Luke xi.), from whom 
the unclean spirit, having gone out, came back »gain with seven other spirits more wicked 



OH. V. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 237 

than himself, and entered in and dwelt there, so that " the last state of that man was 
worse than the first"? At all events, he felt that there was no safety but in nearness to 
Christ ; and this is the proper sentiment for every follower and friend of Jesus to 
entertain. When Peter followed Christ afar off, Peter fell. Nearness to Christ is safety, 
separation or distance from him is insecurity and danger. We need his grace, for by it 
we stand ; his strength, for by it we are fortified against temptation ; his blood, for by 
it we are cleansed, and we need a fresh application of it daily ; his sacrifice, it is the 
ground of our acceptance, and we must look to it always ; his example, it must be our 
iaily pattern ; his faith, " the life which we now live in the flesh we must live by the 
faith of the Son of God, who loved us and gave himself for us ; " his person, " Christ in 
you, the hope of glory ; " his presence, it is our comfort, for he has said, " I will never 
leave thee nor forsake thee ; " his protection, that, where Satan would sift us as wheat, he 
may intercede for us, that our faith fail not; his love, to keep up the flame, that would 
otherwise burn low or go out altogether. 5. Sis clothing evidence of restored sanity. 
He was sitting as a scholar at Jesus' feet, as also for safety, as we have seen ; he was 
clothed, and in his right mind, the former being, as well as his sitting, evidence of the 
latter. We dislike and disapprove of those naked figures which we see in books and 
paintings and statues ; of whatever use they may be to the anatomist or painter or 
statuary, they are, we think, unsuitable to Christian refinement and inconsistent with 
Christian purity. Their usefulness to people in general is questionable. The passions 
of fallen humanity are bad enough of themselves, and in their own nature, without 
exciting them. The demoniac cured by our Lord is clothed ; the sinner converted to 
Christ is clothed likewise. When brought to the loot of the cross, and seated at the feet 
of Jesus, he is clothed. He has on the " fine linen, clean and white," which is " the 
righteousness of saints." He is " found in Christ, not having on his own righteousness, 
which is of the Law, but that which is by the faith of Christ, the righteousness of God by 
faith." He has obeyed the precept, accepted the advice, feeling the benefit of the counsel, 
" I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest be rich ; and 
white raiment, that thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do 
not appear ; and anoint thine eyes with eyesalve, that thou mayest see." A practical 
question is here suggested. Do you, reader, possess that robe ? It is put on by the 
hand of faith. Have you that precious faith ? If not — if you have not already " good 
hope through grace," pray for that faith. Do not be ashamed or afraid to do so. Do 
not neglect or delay to ask it. Ask the Holy Spirit to work faith in your heart, and so 
unite you to Christ, for " if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature ; " and God gives 
his Holy Spirit to them that ask him. 6. Restoration to reason. His mind is right 
about sin, as " that abominable thing which God hates," and hurtful to man as hateful 
to God; right about Satan, "as a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour" — " a 
murderer from the beginning ; " right about the Saviour, as " the chief among ten 
thousand, and altogether lovely ; " and right about holiness, as the way of happiness 
and the way to heaven. 

IV. The power that kesctjed the demoniac from weetchbdness and kuin. 1. The 
greatness of that powe/r. The possession of this demoniac was something singularly 
shocking. It was not one demon, but many, that had made him their prey. " My 
name," he said, " is Legion ; for we are many." The name is a Latin name, and denotes 
a levying or enlisting, then, a body of troops so levied. The full complement of a 
Roman legion was six thousand infantry, and a squadron of three hundred cavalry. 
Each legion was divided into ten cohorts ; each cohort into three maniples ; and each 
maniple into two centuries. Then again, when arrayed in order of battle, there were 
three lines — Principes, Hastati, and Triarii. What a formidable host ! How powerful, 
and how numerous ! The host and the hostility, the multitude and the enmity, the 
strength and the skill thus conveyed by the name here applied to the demons which 
had had possession of this man, are fearful to contemplate. Yet the power of Christ 
expelled them, mighty, multitudinous, and malicious though they were. It was the 
power of Christ did it all. Demons owned that power. They hud faith in him, but 
lot of the right sort; "they believed and trembled." So here tliey fpared he was 
coming to judge them and consign them to torment before the time. Jesus has th« 
self-same power still ; " he is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by 
sim." 2. The miserable home of those demont. They would rather go anywhere than 



288 THE GOSPEL AOCOKDING TO ST. MARK. [<» ▼• 1 -** 



go home. They trembled at the power of Christ, while they dreaded the torments he 
will one day iDflict. They would rather enter into swine, rather go into the sea, rather 
go into the worst and filthiest spot of earth, than go back into tlie deep abyss of helL 
It was not the abyss of earth or the abyss of ocean, but the abysmal depth of that 
unfathomed pit of hell, which they so much dreaded. And oh ! are sinners not afraid 
of rushing with eyes open into that dreadful, deep abyss ? 3. Their fiendish malice. 
Now that they are cast out, and can no lonjier destroy their victim, they are actuated 
by demon-like malevolence, and try to keep others from the Saviour by causing the losa 
of their swine. In this way they seek to prejudice and even enrage them against the 
Saviour. They seem to have succeeded, for the Gadarenes " began to pray him to depart 
out of their coasts." 4. The sufferings of the brute creation. Why, it may naturally 
enough be asked, are poor dumb animals subjected to sufferings ? Or how is it possible 
that the demons could exert any influence of the kind stated upon them ? In reply 
to the latter question, it may be sufBcient to mention the influence which man exerts 
upon animals such as the dog, the horse, the elephant, in the way of training and 
teaching. If animals are thus receptive of human influence, why should they not be 
receptive of other and, in some respects, more powerful influence? Why should tlroy 
not be accessible to, and receptive of, demoniac influence, as well as that of men ? The 
other question stands on different ground. The lower animals, placed under man's 
control at the first, and granted to man for useful service, share to some extent in man's 
varying fortunes, and are entitled to humane and kind treatment at the hands of man ; 
but that they suffered in consequence of man's fall and sin is, we think, unquestionable. 
Their position now is abnormal just as man's own position is abnormal, for does not " the 
whole creation groan and travail in pain together until now"? Besides, they often suffer, 
in common with man, in special disasters — such as conflagrations, shipwrecks, and 
catastrophes of similar kinds. 5. A mixture of mercy and Judgment. While mercy 
was shown to the demoniac in his miraculous cure, judgment was inflicted on the 
owners of the.swine for their sin. Jesus performed the act of mercy, and permitted the 
exercise of the other. The demons could not have moved an inch without his permission. 
This side of the miracle was judgment, and well deserved. Who were these Gadarenes 
or Gfergesenes ? Were they Gentiles or were they Jews ? If the former — if Gentiles, 
they were tempting their Jewish neighbours, and they had no right to do that. If they 
were Jews, they were breaking the Law of God, and they could not long expect to 
prosper, and to continue doing that. If they were Jewish proprietors, who employed 
Gentile swineherds for the purpose of tending and herding their swine, they were both 
sinniijg themselves and tempting others to sin ; and so both partook of the result and 
shared the consequences of their crime. Here, too, we must notice the hardening effect 
of sin long persevered in. These Gadarenes, whatever their nationality, whether Jew 
or Gentile, had become like swine themselves — swinish in spirit and disposition. They 
actually preferred their swine to the Saviour, and " besought him to depart out of their 
coasts 1 " — J. J. G. 

Vera. 21 — 43. Parallel passages: Matt. ix. 18—26; Luke viiL 41— 56.— Tomc^- 
ing in the throng. I. The woman with an ibsue of blood. 1. A painful disease. 
The woman mentioned in this section had been a sorely afflicted sufferer. For 
twelve long and weary years she had suffered from a painful and weakening malady 
(iv fiiSati, the preposition iv here resembles the heth essentice of Hebrew, denoting 
in the capacity, character, or condition of, i.e. in the condition of an issue). During 
that time, we may well suppose, she had sought every means of cure; and found 
none. During that time she had applied to various physicians; but obtained no 
relief. During that time she had, no doubt, taken many a bitter draught and many 
a nauseou* drug ; but all to no purpose. During that time she had, doubtless, sub- 
mitted to many severe experiments or even some harsh operations ; but all in vain. 
During that time she had expended much, yea, all her means ; she " had spent," 
we are told, " all her living upon physicians," and that in addition to her sufferings, 
as is implied by the prepositional element in the word (TrpovavoKiia-curcC) employed 
by St. Luke ; while St. Mark tells us plainly in this passage that sht " had suffered 
ma ly things of many physicians, and had spent all that she had." And now she 
cemains poor and destitute, diseased and w°ak, and miserable as ever ; for she " was 



ra, ▼. 1— 4a.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 239 

nothing Twttered, but rather grew wotm ; " " neither could be healed of any." What 
13 ehe now to do? Where is she to seek relief? To whom can she further go? la 
there any application she can yet make ? Or is there any remedy still remaining to 
be tried? 2. One resource yet remains. She has tried all the physicians; she has 
tried all means of cure that have been prescribed, or suggested, or that she Las ever 
heard of; she has, besides, spent her all in quest of health. Still one, and only one, 
remains to be tried. She has heard of a wondrous Man who goes about continually, 
doing good; she has been told of most wonderful cures he has effected; of diseases, 
previously deemed incurable, which he has healed ; of sufferers whom, when all else 
failed, be has relieved. She has never seen him, it is true — she has only heard of him ; 
but what of that ? Though she has not seen him, she has no reason to doubt the 
reports she has heard of him ; she has no reason to doubt the greatness of his power 
and the might of his mercy, in accordance with these reports ; she believes the 
accuracy of these reports, she has somehow confidence in their correctness. She has 
schooled herself into faith in his power to effect her cure and heal her disease. 
3. Obstacles to be overcome. A difBculty here presents itself. Her disease is peculiar — 
such a one as she is loth to name in public. She cannot bring herself to talk of it 
in presence of so many people ; womanly delicacy forbids her. Besides, it was such a 
disease as caused ceremonial uncleanness, so that her contact was polluting. . People 
would, not without reason, upbraid her for coming among them, or thrust her away 
from them, as impure and contaminating. 4. A happy thought. A happy thought 
occurred to her in her difScult position — a thought which we may regard at once as the 
outcome of strong faith, and the suggestion of deep aflBiction. It flashed on her mind 
as a bright idea. She had heard that the great Physician, to whom her thoughts now 
turned, often accomplished his cures and conferred health by a touch. She naturally 
infers that if she could but touch him even stealthily, her cure would be effected. 
Accordingly she conceived the thought of stealing a cure ; she thought within herself, 
" If I may touch but his clothes," or his garment, or even the border of it, " I shall 
be whole." 5. Pressure of the crowd. Our Lord at this time was on his way to the 
house of jairus, the ruler of the synagogue, in order to cure his daughter. The crowd 
that followed him on the occasion was unusually large. It was drawn together by 
respect for the distinguished official whose daughter was so ill, as also by the remem- 
brance of past miracles, and the prospect of seeing the performance of another. Dense 
as the crowd was, she kept to her purpose, pressing onward through it, and elbowing 
her way till she had got up to his very side. 6. The cure effected, but concealment 
impossible. She attains her object ; she touches the hem of his garment, and all at 
once — strange circumstance 1 blessed relief! — the malady of many years' standing ia 
healed, the issue is staunched, the pain and grief have ceased. But a disquieting 
circumstance still remains ; a matter of some imeasiness has now to be got over. She 
is cured, it is true, but she is struck with terror at her own temerity ; she is filled with 
alarm when she sees Jesus looking round inquisitively (irepie^Xeirero, imperfect, equi- 
valent to " he kept looking all round "), and hears him earnestly asking those about 
him, "Who touched meV" She knew that her touch was polluting; she was well 
aware that it conveyed ceremonial defilement. She had, indeed, only touched the hem 

tljg extreme border of his garment, as if in hope that so slight a touch would defile 

him but little, while it might benefit her so much. 7. Astonishment of the bystanders. 
The persons next our Lord in the crowd were amazed at the question ; some would be 
disposed to say in reply, " All touched thee," and others, again, would be inclined to think 
and to gay, when they gave expression to their thought, " None touched thee." At 
length, after all had denied, Peter as usual, acting as spokesman of the disciples, said, 
" Master, the multitude throng thee and press thee [rvveU^ovra, equivalent to ' pressing 
greatly, or pressing upon on every side '], and sayest thou, Who touched me ?" " Not 
BO " says our Lord ; " all the persons in this large crowd do indeed throng and press arouml 
me and yet but one touched me — ' somebody touched me.' " 8. Surprising gracious- 
ness of the Sa'.-iour, Our Lord looked round to discover the one individual in all that 
crowd who had touched him. At last his eye rested on the abashed, affrighted 
woman ; when, lo 1 instead of a rebuke for her temerity, instead of a sharp reproof for 
her audacity, instead of a harsh reprimand for her polluting touch, instead of blaming 
iier for her presumption, instead ot a single unkind expression of any sort, he commendt 



240 THE GOSi'EL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. t. 1— 4a, 

her faith, confirms her cure, ratifies her desire, and gladdens her heart hj these most 
gracious words, " Daughter, be of good comfort : thy faith hath made thee whole ; go 
in peace." 

II. The rEOTTLiABiTT OF THIS WOMAN'S TOUCH. 1. There must he contact. The first 
thing we are taught by it is that, in coming to Christ and in seeking cure from him, 
there must be not merely contiguity but actual contact, and that of a peculiar kind. 
All the persons in the great crowd that followed our Lord on this occasion were near 
him comparatively, some were quite close to him ; yet only one derived benefit 
from bim. There were, moreover, several, we can scarcely doubt, in that multitude 
who needed some temporal boon or spiritual blessing ; yet only one obtained such a 
blessiiig. There were numbers of persons all around and on every side of him ; yet 
virtue proceeded from him only in one direction. Not only so ; mere contact itself is 
not sufficient. Intelligent connection — special and spiritual contact — is needed. There 
were many crowding on and crushing our Saviour, yet only one touched him in the 
true and proper sense. The motives that moved that multitude were various. Some 
were borne thoughtlessly along with the mass of persons that formed the procession ; 
they went with the crowd. Others, and perhaps the major part, were attracted by 
curiosity — they were desirous of seeing some miracle ; or they had itchiDg ears, and 
hoped to hear some startling statement. Others, again, were, no doubt, drawn into 
the crowd by feelings of admiration for the Saviour. While various motives thus 
actuated the individuals that composed that crowd — the units that made up that 
multitude ; nnly one, it would seem, was influenced by the right motive ; only one 
approached the Saviour in the right way ; only one at that time was healed. 2. Eer 
feelings and her faith. That one individual felt the misery of her condition, the iron 
had entered deeply into her soul ; that one felt intensely her need of health. That 
one, besides, had resolved to overcome every obstacle in order to obtain relief. That 
one, also, was fully persuaded that Christ could confer health and cure. Nay, she felt 
assured that, as he frequently touched the persons cured by him, a touch of his person, 
or even of his clothes, or if it were but of the border of his garment or of the fringe of his 
robe, would make her whole. Now, here was faith — true faith, strong faith ; and this 
faith it was that made the difference between her touch and that of the crowd that pressed 
upon him — between the multitude that thronged him and the woman that touched him. 
Others touched him, but their touch was incidental ; hers was intentional. Others touched 
him, but it was owing to the pressure around ; hers was from a deliberate purpose 
within. Others touched him, not feeling any need of help at his hand, or, if they felt 
any need, yet not expecting any relief in that way ; she touched him, conscious of her 
malady and convinced of his power to effect her cure. Others touched him, but then 
it was curiosity, chance as the world calls it, the crowd, the multitude, the pressure 
that brought them into such close proximity to Christ ; she touched him, but it was 
the result of deliberation on her part, design, earnest purpose, strong desire, anxious 
hope of cure, and confident expectation of deliverance. There was thus all the 
difference in the world between the thronging of that multitude and the touching of 
that invalid. Faith is thus seen to be the means of union with Christ, and union 
not mechanical and physical, but union rational and spiritual. We may approach him 
by ceremonies, by profession, by lifeless prayers, by dead works ; but in none of these 
cases do we really touch him : and not coming mto living contact with him, we cannot 
expect to be recognized by him. 3. An example worth imitation. We may profit by 
the example of this poor invalided woman as contrasted with that great crowd. We 
cannot agree with those who disapprove of thronging the Saviour, while they approve 
of touching him. We approve of both. It is good to be in the throng that crowds 
round Christ, if only one should be healed at a time, for you yourself may be that one, 
while all that are far from him shall perish. It is good to be near the pool of 
Bethesda, for some one is sure to be cured every time the angel troubles the waters, 
and you yourself may be the happy individual. It is good to wait at the posts of 
wisdom's door, for that is the way of duty, and the way of duty is the way of safety. 
But while it is good to be in the crowd that throngs Christ, it is better — far better to 
touch Christ. There must be real union — complete connection with Christ. The 
electric telegraph, one of the greatest wonders of a marvellous age— those wonderful 
wires that pass over lands and unrler seas, connecting Ireland with Britain, and Bri'ain 



<m. T. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. 241 



with the Continent, and one continent with another ; that link the Old World with 
the New, flashing its messages over more than half the glohe, thus facilitating the 
Intercommunion of nations, and expediting the exchange of intelligence from East to 
West and from West to East ; —if those electric wires stretched from one place on the 
«aith's surface to another hundreds of miles remote, and if they reached very near to 
that other place, just within a yard, or a foot, or an inch, and yet stopped short by 
that small interval ; no communion conld he carried on, and no intelligence conveyed. 
Its hundreds of miles of extent would be unavailing ; that yard, or foot, or inch would 
•render the whole useless, and cause all the labour to be lost. It might as well stretch 
only three-fourths of the way, or one-half the way, or one quarter of the way, or no 
part of the way at all. Nothing short of a close and complete uniting of the two 
places, and that without any interval, will do. Alas ! how many come close up to 
Christ, but never close with him. How many are in the throng that never touch him ! 
How many there are like the young man in the Gospel — that amiable young man whom 
our Lord loved, who did so much, and went so far, and yet after all came short I They 
seem to be very close to Christ, and very near his cross ; but there is one link wanting 
— " One thing thou laokest." How many are at the very threshold of the kingdom of 
heaven, and ready to say with Agrippa, " Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian ; * 
and yet they never cross the threshold, nor enter the kingdom, nor become Christians, 
in the true and proper sense, at all 1 How many are on the spot at the very time when 
Christ is passing by, without ever touching so much as the fringe of his garment I 
How many frequent the place where his presence is promised and his blessing Iwstowed ; 
and yet they never feel the one nor enjoy the other ! There is nourishment in food, 
Ibut you must partake of it ; or the most wholesome food will do you no good and giva 
you no strength. There is sweetness in music, but you must have an ear for it and 
give ear to it; else the sweetest music will be but mere noise — an empty sound. 
There is fragrance in the rose, but your olfactory nerves must be sound and sufSciently 
near the odoriferous flower ; or its fragrance will be wasted on desert air I The electric 
current is a potent agency, as we have seen, but it must needs have the electric wire 
to pass along ; or it loses its practical utility. In view of such facts and considerations, 
our duty as well as interest is, by grace, to realize union with Christ ; we should give 
ao sleep to our eyes, nor slumber to our eyelids, until by grace, through futh, we are 
united to Christ, and one with him — Christ in us and we in Christ, Christ our life, and 
our life devoted to Christ. For while Christ is able to save, and waiting and willing to 
save, and while God sent his Son to seek and save that which was lost ; yet there must 
be faith, or we cannot be saved. Let us, therefore, seek the aid of God's Holy Spirit, that 
he may form the link of faith between our soul and the Saviour ; or, if it already exist, 
that he may strengthen and brighten it. 4. How healing virtue is obtainable from 
Gkrist. There was healing power in the Saviour — inherent in him, in him alone, 
and in none besides. This poor invalid drew it forth by the touch of faith. The 
virtue to heal that proceeded from Christ may be compared to the electric current, 
while the faith of the woman may be likened to the wires alon°; which it passed. 
Now, if faith be the gift of God, as it is, and the operation of his Spirit, as we know 
firom his Word, it may be asked, " Why blame any for the want of it?" We do not, 
and cannot with fairness, blame for want of it ; but we may blame persons for not 
asking it, for not wishing for it, for not seeking it, or for not accepting it. If God 
gave his Son before you asked him, and without your asking him, " will he not with him 
also freely give you all things ; " in other words, will he not give you faith in him for 
the asking? If he have given the greater gift, will he withhold or refuse the less? 
If he has promised his Spirit to them that ask him, and if he invites us and presses ua 
to ask him, do we not tempt God when we refuse to ask him, seeing it is the Spirit 
that works faith in the heart of man ? We are far, very far, from ignoring or over- 
looking the sovereign grace of God, whereby he takes one out of a city, and two out of 
« family, and brings them to Zion : but if we refuse the course that God has prescribed 
to ns ; if we reject the conditions on which he offers grace and every mercy ; if we 
neglect the ordinances where he has appointed to meet and bless us, or if, attending 
them, we forget the object for which we are urged to attend them, or if we use the 
means without thinking of the great end we should have in view, or if we are not at 
{Miins to examine our motives, or if we have no care to meet Christ in his ordinanjM^ 
rr. MABK. a 



a-i-3 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [on. v. 1-43. 



no longing for his presence, no thirsting for his grace, no hungering for his righteous- 
ness, no earnest inquiry, "What must we do to be saved ?" and no seeking of the 
fulfilment of the promises ;— in all such, or any such oases, are we not thronging Christ 
instead of touching him ? If custom, or curiosity, or the crowd, or habit, or respect- 
ability, or worldly advantage, or early training, brings us near to Christ, and if we have 
no higher object and no holier end in view, are we not thronging Christ, and yet not 
touching Christ ? " Many," we know from the declaration of God's own Word, " will 
say, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name ? and in thy name have cast 
out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works? And then," adds the 
Saviour, " will I profess unto them, I never knew you." What was all this more or 
better than thronging Christ without touching him? 5. Confession consequent on cure. 
She TOught Christ privately, but was obliged to confess publicly. So with ourselves ; we 
must confess his name before men, and tell of the gracious Saviour we have found ; just 
as the psalmist says, " Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he 
hath done for my souL" " With the heart men believe unto righteousness, and with 
the month make confession unto salvation." 6. Character of the cure. The cure was 
immediatA'; " from that hour." It was complete ; the fountain was staunched. It 
was perpetual ; " Be thou whole." This our Lord probably added lest she should think 
the cure too sudden to continue, too speedy to last, too good news to be true. Not 
so ; it was no transient remedy, no mere temporary relief. All that God does is well 
done ; he does not leave any part of his work unfinished. Having" begun a good work 
in us, he will perform [rather, perfect'] it till the day of Jesus Christ." The testimony 
to the Saviour's work on earth was that " he hath done all things well." 7. Peculiarity 
of expression. The words tit tipiiniy are properly " into peace," which refer more to the 
future than to the present. Peace is not only the present element in which she finds 
herself, but the future sphere in which her life is to move. Brought into peace by the 
great Peacemaker, she is ever after to continue therein. The addition of the words 
Ml tyiiis was not superfluous, but most reassuring, in order to ratify the stolen cure 
and to convince her of its durability and permanence. Further, we may notice the 
relation of the hIittis of the woman to the Siva/ut of the Saviour. The former saved 
her mediately, or instrumentally, that is, as the connecting link between herself and 
Christ ; the latter was the healing power of Chri.st, which, working along the line of 
that faith, saved her as the energetic and efficient cause. 

IIL The bestoration to life of Jaibus's dauohtxb. 1. Position of Jairus. 
The official position of Jairus was highly respectable. He was ruler of the synagogue. 
Though there is some difference of opinion on the subject, yet the officers of the 
synagogue appear to have been the following: — (1) The ruler or president of the 
synagogue, on whom devolved the right ordering and regulation of the service, and with 
whom were conjoined the elders ; (2) the shdiach tsihbor, the angel or messenger of 
the congregation, who offered up the public prayers, and who acted as secretwy to 
conduct the correspondence, or to serve as deputy, when required, between one synagogue 
and another ; (3) the chazzan (imiflrtit), or ordinary reader, who read the appointed 
portions, or who handed the book to an occastional reader ; he also had charge of the 
sacred books ; (4) the SKiKorai, or sexton. 2. The substanti(U harmony of the narra- 
tives. The ruler of the synagogue, according to St. Mark, tells our Lord that his daughter 
(iffX^"' ^X") is extremely ill, " at the point of death " — in fact, tn extremis ; according 
to St, Matthew, that (S/>t« h-fKfirtiirty) she is dead by this time — " even now dead ; " she 
was so ill when he left that he did not now expect to see her again alive when he returned ; 
according to St. Luke, that (iircfli/ijaicd/) she was dying, or" lay a dying ;" — all perfectly 
condstent. 3. The special tenderness of the parent. Though St. Mark very frequently 
employs diminutives with little, if any, difference from the simpler form, yet we see 
good reason for his use of the diminutive evyirpior here. It becomes a term of special 
endearment and affectionate tenderness in this place, from the circumstance, of which 
another evangelist, St. Luke, apprises us, namely, that this little girl was tn only 
danghter (Oyyiirnp itoyoyeviis), perhaps, indeed most probably, an only child. W« can 
eaiinr ims^ne the terrible uneasiness of the &ther, when our Lord had been delayed 
by tne unwelcome incident of the care of the woman with the bloody issue. Jaimi 
must have looked on this as a most provoking and unpleasant intermptinn ; and now 
that th« messengerd bring word that his daughter is duitd, auil m> his worst fean 



OH.Yi 1—66.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



243 



realized, he and they evidently give up all for lost. The great Healer might haT< 
restored her to health, however ill, or however far gone she might have been ; but how 
can he restore her to life now that she is dead ? 4. JesMs' power over death. He had 
heard, or, if we read a compound of the same word, though slightly supported (impaicoivea), 
h9 had overheard the conversation between the messengers and Jairus ; he had heard 
them dissuade the ruler from fatiguing with the length of the journey, or in any other 
way worrying the Physician (mcixxas, root itkvXov, spoils, means " to spoil, despoil, flay, 
trouble, harass, or worry "), as it was only bootless labour — quite useless work — for the 
child was dead. Our Lord tried to revive the father's hopes, encourage his fainting 
heart, and strengthen his weak faith, saying, " Do not be afraid, only believe." The 
mourners, especially the hired mourners, who were making so much ado, and beating 
themselves (^lieSnToyra), in grief more seeming than sincere, began to deride our Lord, 
or laugh him down (KareyiXMv). In fact, they did not wish her restored, lest perhaps 
their occupation would he gone. Taking the maiden by the hand, he addressed her, in the 
vernacular Aramaic of the district, saying, " Talitha cumi, Maid, arise." Straightway 
she arose and walked ; her motion proved strength, and strength and motion belong to 
life ; and so death, after all, is a sleep, from which the Saviour brings awakening. His 
power over every stage of death appears by the restoration of one just departed as this 
maiden ; of one being carried out to burial, as the son of the widow of Nain ; of one 
already in the grave four days, as Lazarus. 5. Practical character of our Lord. When 
Simon's mother-in-law was cured, she turned to her domestic duties ; when this young 
girl of twelve years of age was restored, she walked about (ircpieWTw) — how natural ! 
When others wondered, Jesus thought of the keen appetite of the young ^rl, and 
ordered hstfood. — J. J. G. 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAPTEB VL 



Ver. 1. — Our Lord now left the neigh- 
bourhood of Capernaum, and came into his 
own country, the district of Nazareth, where 
he had been, not born indeed, but brought 
up, and where his kinsfolk after the flesh 
still lived. Nazareth would be about a day's 
journey from Capernaum. This was not the 
first public exercise of liis ministry at Naza- 
reth. Of that and its results St. Luke gives 
us the account (iv. 16). It would seem rea- 
sonable to suppose that, after the fame which 
he had now acquired, he should again visit 
the place where he had been brought up. 
His sisters were still living there. St. 
Mark here again uses the historical present 
Ipxerai, "he Cometh," for which there is 
better authority than for ^K0ev. His dis- 
ciples follow him. Only the chosen three 
had been with Mm in the house of Jairus. 
The presenoe of the whole body of the dis- 
ciples would be valuable at Nazareth. 

Ver. 2. — As usual, he made the sabbath 
the special time for his teaching. And many 
hearing him were astonished. They were 
astonished at the ability, the sublimity, the 
holiness of his teaching, as well as at the 
signs and wonders by which he conflrmed 
it. "Many" hearing him ! not all. Some 
listened with faith ; but " the many " (there 
is some authority for ol iroWol) were envious 
of him. Whence hath this man these things 1 
The expression, "this man," is repeated, 
•ooordingto the best authorities in the next 



clause. What Is the wisdom that is given 
(not "unto him," but) unto this maaf 
There is a contemptuous tone about the 
expression. 

Ver. 3. — Is not this the carpenter? St. 
Matthew (xiii. 55) says, "the carpenter's 
son." We infer from this that our Lord 
actually worked at the trade of a carpenter, 
and probably continued to do so until he 
entered upon his public ministry. We may 
also infer that Joseph was now no longer 
living, otherwise it would have been natural 
for his name to have been mentioned here. 
According to St. Olirysostom, our Lord made 
ploughs and yokes for oxen. CJertainly, he 
often drew his similitudes from these things. 
"No man putting his hand to the plough, 
and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of 
God" (Luke ix. 62). " Take my yoke upon 
you, and learn of me " (Matt. xi. 29). Christ 
was the sou of a carpenter. Yes; but he 
was also the Son of him who made the 
world at his will. Yea, he himself made 
the world. " All things were made by him," 
the Eternal Word. And he made them for us, 
that we might judge of the Maker by the 
greatness of his work. He chose to be the 
son of a carpenter. If he had chosen to be 
the son of an emperor, then men might have 
ascribed his influence to the circumstances 
of his birth. But he chose a humble and 
obscure condition, for this, among other rea- 
sons, that it might be acknowledged that it 
was his divinity that transformed the world. 
Is not this the carpenter, the son of Uary, 



241 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. vi. 1— Sft 



and brother of James, and Joses, and Tndas, 
and Simon 1 Some have thought that these 
were literally brethren of our Lord, sons of 
Joseph and Mary. Otliers have considered 
that they were his legal half-brothers, sons 
of Joseph by a former marriage. This view 
is held by many of the Greek Fathers, and 
has something to recommend it. But, on 
the whole, the most probable opinion is that 
they were cousins of our Lord — sons of a 
Bister of the Virgin Mary, also called Mary, 
the wife of Cleophas, Olopas, or Alphseus. 
There is evidence that there were four song 
of Olopas and Mary, whose names were 
James, and Joses, and Simon (or Symeon), 
and Judas. Mary the wife of Olopas is 
mentioned by St. Matthew (xxvii. 56) as the 
mother of James the Less and of Joses. Jude 
describes himself (Jude 5) as the brother 
of James ; and Simon, or Symeon, is men- 
tioned in Eusebius aa the son of Olopas. 
It must be remembered also that the word 
iSf\<p6s, like the Hebrew word which it ex- 
presses, means not only " a brother," but 
generally " a near kinsman." In the same 
way the " sisters " would be cousins of our 
Lord. According to a tradition recorded by 
NicephoruB (ii. 3), the names of these sisters 
or cousins were Esther and Tamar. And 
they were offended in him. They took it ill 
that one brought up amongst them as a car- 
penter should set himself up as a prophet 
and a teacher ; just as there are those in 
every age who are apt to take it amiss if 
they see any one spring from a trade into 
the doctor's chair. But these Nazarenes 
knew not that Jesus was the Son of God, 
who of his great love for man vouchsafed to 
take a low estate, that he might redeem 
us, and teach us humility by his example. 
And thus this humility and love of Christ, 
which ought to have exulted their admira- 
tion and respect, was a stumbling-block to 
them, because they could not receive it, or 
believe that God was willing thus to humble 
himself. 

Ver. 4. — A prophet is not without honour, 
save in his own country, etc. One reason 
for this is that it is almost natural for per- 
sons to hold of less account than they ought, 
those with whom thsy have been brought 
up and have lived on familiar terms. Pro- 
phets are commonly least regarded, and 
often most envied, in their own country. 
However unworthy may be the feeling, the 
inhabitants of a district, or members of a 
community, do not like to see one of them- 
selves put above them, more especially a 
junior over a senior, or a man of humble 
origin over a man well born. But it should 
be remembered that God abhors the envious, 
and will withhold the wonders of his grace 
from those who grudge his gifts to others. 
TIm men of Nazarutu, when they saw Christ 



eating, and drinking, and sleeping, and 
working at his trade, like others, despised 
him when he claimed respect and reverence 
as a Prophet, and especially because his 
relations according to the flesh were o( 
humble condition ; and Joseph more par- 
ticularly, whom they supposed to be his 
real father, for they could not imagine or 
believe that he was born of a virgin, and 
had God alone for his Father. 

Vers. 5, 6.— And he could there do no 
mighty work. This is a remarkable expres- 
sion. He could do no mighty work there. 
The words imply want of power — that in 
some sense or other he was unable to do it. 
He did indeed perform some miracles. He 
laid his hands upon a few sick folk, and 
healed them ; but he wrought none of his 
greater miracles there. Uf course, even 
tliese less striking miracles ought to have 
sufficed. In a miracle there must be the 
suspension of some knovrn law of nature; 
and one clear instance of such suspension 
ought to be as conclusive as a hundred. 
Then it must be remembered that it is not 
God's method in his dealings with his 
creatures to force conviction upon them 
when the ordinary means prove insufficient. 
For men's actions must be free if they are to 
be made the test of judgment, and they would 
not be free if God constrained men to obey 
his will. The men of Nazareth had sufficient 
evidence had they not chosen to be blinded, 
and a greater amount of evidence wuuld 
only have increased their condemnation. 
So their unbelief thwarted his purposes of 
mercy, and he went in and out amongst 
them like one hampered and disabled, mar- 
velling at their unbelief, oi rather marvel- 
ing beoause of their unbelief (Sict r^y kiria-Tlai' 
avrav). The condition of mind of these 
Nazarenes was what caused amazement to 
the Saviour. At length he turned away 
from Nazareth, never, so far as we know, to 
visit it again; for this was their second 
opportunity, and the second occasion on 
which they deliberately rejected him. What, 
however,'they refused he immediately offered 
to others. He was not discouraged. He 
went round about the villages teaching. 

Ver. 7. — At ch. iii 7 we had the account 
of our Lord's selection of the twelve. Here 
we find the notice of their being first sent 
forth. Their names have already been 
recorded. He gave them authority— mark 
the imperfect (^Si'Sov) — over unclean spirits. 
St. Matthew (x. 1) adds, "and to heal all 
manner of sickness and all manner of 
disease." But St. Mark here Oxes the 
attention upon the great central object of 
Christ's mission — to contend against evil 
in every form, and especially to grariple 
with Satan in bis stmnghold in tbo hnuts 
of man. 



cH. VI. 1 -66.J THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. MARK. 



Ui 



Yet. 8. — They should take nothing for their 
jonmey, save a staff only. St. Matthew says 
(X. ]|D), according to the best authorities 
(uv^i pdpSov), they were not to take a staff. 
Bt. Luke says the same as St. Matthew. 
The meaning is that they were not to make 
any special provision for their journey, but 
to go forth just as they were, depending 
upon God. Those who had a staff might 
use it ; those who had not one were not to 
trouble IJiemselves to procure one. The 
scrip (irlipa) was the wallet for food. They 
were to take no money in their pnrse (jih 
eh riiv (tivnii x"^*'''')! literally, hrast in 
their girdle. St. Mark, writing for Eomans, 
uses this word for money. St. Luke, writing 
for Greeks, uses the term (kfiyipiov) "silver." 
St. Matthew (x. 9) says, "provide neither 
gold, nor silver, nor brass." 

Yer. 9.— But be shod with sandals. This 
is qnite consistent with what St. Matthew 
says (x. 9), that they were not to provide 
themselves with siioes (jutjS^ Sn-oS^^ara). 
According to St. Matthew, shoes are for- 
bidden directly ; according to St. Mark, they 
are forbidden by implication, where he says 
that they were to be shod with sandals. 
Shoes are here forbidden which cover the 
whole foot, not sandals which only protect 
the soles of the feet lest they should be 
injured by the rocky ground. The soil of 
Judtea was rocky and rough, and the climate 
hot. The sandals therefore protected the 
soles of the feet, and yet, being open above, 
kept the feet more cool, and therefore fit for 
the journCT. It is worthy of our notice that, 
after our Lord's ascension, we find St. Peter 
using sandals when the angel, who delivered 
him out of prison, said to him (Acts xii. 8), 
" Gird thyself, and bind on thy sandals." 

Yer. 10. — ^Ihere abide, till ye depart 
thence. They were not to change their 
lodgings in any place. This direction was 
given to them, lest, if they did, they might 
appear to be fickle and restless ; or lest they 
might hurt the feelings of those with whom 
they had first lodged. And they were not 
to stay too long anywhere, lest they should 
be burdensome to any. 

Yer. 11. — Shake off the dust (rhv xoSv) — 
literally, <A« toil — that is under your feet. 
St. Matthew and St. Luke use the word 
{KoriofiThv) " dnst." A very significant action. 
The dnst was shaken off as an evidence 
of the toil and labour of the apostles in 
jonmeying to them. It witnessed that they 
had entered the city and had delivered 
message, and that their message had been 
refused. The very dust, therefore, of the 
place was a defilement to them. "It 
shall be more tolerable," etc. This clause 
is omitted by the best authorities; it was 
probably copied from St. Matthew. 

Tei. 12.— They preached that men should 



repent. This was their great work, to 
which the miraoles were subordinate. 

Yer. 13. —And anointed with oil many that 
were siok, and healed them. It is hardly 
possible to separate this from the reference 
to the use of oil for the sick, in Jas. v. 14. 
Unction was employed extensively in ancient 
times for medicinal purposes. It is re- 
corded of Herod the Great by Josophus 
(' Antiq.,' xvii. 6, 5) that in one of his 
sicknesses he was " immersed in a bath full 
of oil," from which he is said to have 
derived much benefit. The apostles used 
it, no doubt not only on account of its 
supposed remedial virtues, but also as an 
outward and visible sign that the healing 
was effected by their instrumentality in 
the name of Christ, and perhaps also 
because the oil itself was significant of 
God's mercy, of spiritual comfort and joy — 
" the oil of gladness." Neither this passage 
nor that in St. James can properly be 
adduced to support the ceremony of " ex- 
treme unction ; " for in both these cases the 
result was that the sick were restored to 
health. The so-called sacrament of" extreme 
unction " is administered immediately before 
death, when the sick person is t» artieulo 
mortis. 

Yer. 14.— This Heiod is called by St. 
Matthew (xiv. 1) "the tetrarch ;"and sc 
also by St. Luke ,(ix. 7) ; though it should 
be noticed that 8t. Matthew, in the same 
context, at ver. 9, calls him " king." The 
word "tetrarch" properly means the 
sovereign or ruler of the fourth part of a 
territory. He is known as Herod Anti- 
pas, son of Herod the Great, who had 
appointed him "tetrarch" of Galilee and 
Fersea. Herod Antipas had married the 
daughter of Aretas, King of Arabia, but 
deserted her for the sake of Herodias, his 
brother Philip's wife. John the Baptist il 
risen from the dead ; that is, " is risen in 
the person of Jesus Christ." St. Luke 
(ix. 7) says that at first Herod was " muth 
perplexed (Siiyirrfpei) " about him. At length, 
however, as he heSrd more and more of the 
fame of Christ's miraoles, he came to the 
conclusion that our Lord was none other 
than John the Baptist risen again. Such is 
the opinion of St. Chrysostom, St. Augus- 
tine, and others. At that time the views of 
Pythagoras respecting the transmigration 
of souls were generally current, and pro- 
bably influenced the troubled mind of Herod. 
He had put to death an innocent and holy 
man; and it is a high testimony to the 
worth of the Baptist that, under the re- 
proaches of a guilty conscience, Herod should 
have come to the conclusion that he had 
risen from the dead, thus probably giving 
the lie to his own opinions as a Sadducee ; 
and terrified lest the Baptist should now 



ue 



THE GOSPEL .ACCOBDINO TO ST. MARK. [oh. vi 1—56. 



avenge his O'wn murder. "What a great 
thing," exclaims St. Chrysostom, " is virtue I 
for Herod fears him, even though dead." It 
should not be forgotten that this is the 
lame Herod who sat Jesus at nought and 
mocked him, when Filate sent him to 
him, in the hope of relieving himaelf of 
the terrible responsibility of condemning 
one whom he knew to be innocent. 

Ver. 17. — In prison. Josephus ('Autiq.,' 
xviii. 5, 2) informs us that tliis prison was 
the fort of Machaarus, on the confines of 
Galilee and Arabia, and that there John 
was beheaded. Herod's fatlier had built a 
magnificent palace within that fort ; and so 
he may have been keeping the anniversary 
of his birthday there. 

Vers. 18, 19. — For John said nnto Herod. 
The Greek tense (,l\eye) implies more than 
the simple expression, "he said ; " it implies 
a repeated warning. We learn from St. 
Matthew (xiv. 5) that Herod would have 
killed John before, but he feared the people. 
Here St. Mark says that Herodias set 
herself against him, and desired to kill him ; 
and she could not ; for Herod feared John. 
There is no contradiction between the two 
evangelists. The case appears to have been 
this : that at first Herod desired to put John 
to death, because John had reproved him on 
account of Herodias. But by degrees John 
gained an influence over Herod by the force 
of his character, and by his holy life and 
teaching. 

Ver. 20. — The words in the Authorized 
Version are, When he heard him, he did many 
things (7ro\\& iiroiet), and heard him gladly. 
But according to the be^t authorities the 
reading should be (iroKKh iivi/iet), he wat 
much perplexed. In St. Luke, as stated 
above, we have (JSiitir6pti), " he was much 
perplexed." Nor is there any inconsistency 
in the next clause in St. Mark, if we accept 
this reading, Herod waa not utterly de- 
praved. There was to him a charm, not 
only in the character, but in the discourses 
of John the Baptist. But he was an incon- 
sistent man, and was continually the victim 
of a confiict between the good and the evil 
within him, in which evil, alas I triumphed. 
Herodias, on the other hand, had always 
wished to get rid of John, as the stern and 
uncompromising reprover of her adultery 
and incest ; and so at length she persuaded 
Herod to give way. "For," says Bede, 
"she feared lest Herod should at length 
repent, and yield to the exhortations of 
John, and dissolve this unreal marriage, 
and restore Herodias to her lawful hus- 
band." 

Ver. 22. — The words should run thus : 
And when the daughter of Herodias herself 
Oame in (jcaX citrsKQoio'Tjs ttjs duyarphs auT^s 
ri}$ 'HpatiiSos). The intention of the 



evangelist is to point out that it waa 
Herodias's own daughter who danced, 
and not a mere professional danoing-girl. 
Josephus mentions that dancing-women 
were admitted to feasts by the Jews ; and 
Xenophon testiflei to the same custom 
amongst the Greeks, 

Ver. 21. — And she went out, and said imto 
her mother. What shall I ask t (ri aiT^a-a/uu ;) 
— according to the beet authorities (rl 
oiT V^Mi' ;), WTial should I ask t 

Ver. 25. — I will that thou forthwith give me 
in a charger (fVl vivaici) the head of John 
the Baptist. John the Baptist seems to 
have had a presentiment of his speedy end 
when he said, "He must increase, but I 
must decrease." 

Ver. 26. — Andtheking was ezceedingBorry. 
We cunnot suppose that this was a pretended 
grief. The true reason is doubtless to be 
found in the relentless animosity of Herodias. 
Herod must have known well that he could 
not be bound by his oath in reference to' a 
petition so unreasonable and so iniquitous. 
Nevertheless he thought that " the words of 
a king were law." St. Augustine says, 
"The girl dances ; the mother rages. A rash 
oath is made amidst the excitement and the 
voluptuous indulgence of the feast; and the 
savage desires of Herodias are fuliilled." 
For the sake of his oaths (Sia rotis Sokous) ; the 
plural shows that he repeated the rash 
promise once and again. 

Ver. 27. — He sent forth an executioner 
(ffTre/couAeiTiopa) ; literally, a soldier of his 
guard; one of his body-guard, iu constant 
attendance as messenger or executioner. It 
is a Boman word from speculari, to watch. 
St. Jerome relates that when the head of 
the Baptist was brought, Herodias bar- 
barously thrust the tongue through with a 
bodkin, us Fulvia is said to have done over 
and over again, the tongue of Cicero ; thus 
verifying what Cicero liad once said while 
living, that "nothing is more revengeful 
than a woman." Because they could not 
bear to hear the truth, therefore they bored 
through with a bodkiu the tongue that had 
spoken tlie truth. 

Ver. 29. — The taking up of the corpse by 
the disciples would seem to intimate that it 
lay uncared for and uuburied until tlie dis- 
ciples showed their respect for it. Josephus 
says that after the beheading, the mutilated 
remains were cast out of tlie prison and left 
neglected. G od's judgments at lengthfound 
out Herod. For not long after this he was 
defeated by Aretas in a great battle, and 
put to an ignominious flight. Herodias her- 
self and Herod were banished by a decreu 
of the Roman Senate to Lyons, where they 
both perished miserably; and Nicephorua 
relates that Salome, the daughter of Herodias, 
died by a remai kable visitation. Bhe fell 



«■. VL 1—56.] 7 HE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



247 



through iome treacherous ice over which she 
was passing, and fell through it in such a 
manner that her head was caught while the 
rest of her body sank into the water, and 
thus it came to pass that in her efforts to 
MTe herself her head was nearly severed by 
tbe sharp edges of the broken ice. 

Ver. 30. — ^The narrative, which had been 
interrupted by this parenthesis relating to 
John the Baptist, is now taken up again. 
The apostles. This is tbe only place where 
St. Mark calls them apostles. la the 
parallel passage, St. Luke (ix. 10) says that 
they told him all that they had done. St. 
Mark adds, with more detail, and whatsoever 
(Sta) they had tanght. They gave him a full 
•coount of their mission. 

Ver. 31. — Ouz Lord cared for his dis- 
eiples. They required rest after the labour 
•nd excitement of their ministry ; and it 
waa impossible to find the needful refresh- 
ment and repose where they were so 
thronged by the multitude. 

Ver. 32. — And they went away in the boat 
(t$ irAa(r)i) to a desert place apart — ^the 
boat, no doubt, which our Lord had order ] 
to be always in attendance upon him. > >■ 
learn from St. Luke (is. 10) that this desert 
place was near to " a city called Bethsaida." 
It seems that there were two places called 
Bethsaida — one in Galilee proper, and the 
other to the north-east of the Sea of Galilee. 
It was to the neighbourhood of this latter 
place that our Lord here directs the boat to 
take him. The other Bethsaida is men- 
tioned lower down at ver. 45. The word 
Bethsaida means the " fish village." 

Ver. 33. — This is very graphic. The 
Greek in the first part of this verse runs 
thus, according to the best authorities : Kal 
eldov avTohs virdyovras^ Kal i-jreyvairav aiirhtf 
iroKKoi: And they — i.e. the people — saw 
them going, and many knew them. They 
saw them departing, and observed what 
direction the boat took, and then hastened 
thither on foot, and outwent them ; and so 
were ready to meet them again on the 
opposite shore when they landed. The 
distance by land from the place where they 
■tarted would be about tweuty miles. 

Ver. 34. — Our Lord had gone to this 
desert place for retirement and rest ; but 
flnding the multitude waiting for him, his 
compassions were stirred, and he began to 
teaoh them many things. Ue was moved 
with compassion, beoanse they were as sheep 
not having a shepherd. No animal is more 
helpless, more stupid, more in need of a 
shepherd, than the sheep. St. Cbrysostom 
observes that the scribes were not so muub 
pastors as wolves, because, by teach ini; 
errors both by word and by example, they 
ppTverted the minds of the simple. 

v«, K.'i — &nd «beii Lhe day was uow far 



spent. The English, like the Greek, is hera 
veryidiomatic(Ka!ffSi)SpaTiroAX9tYU'o/(^t). 
The English is retained in the Revised 
Version as it came through the Authorized 
Version from Tyndale. The present parti- 
ciple yevo/ienris appears in the Sinaitic Manu- 
script and in the Cambridge Codex. Eia 
disoiples came nnto him, and said. The best 
reading is (sol SX€7ai'),a>i<i were saying. St. 
Matthew ^xiv. 16) says, "They need not 
depart ; give ye them to eat." That on» 
Lord prepared the way for his miracle. He 
detained the multitude till the day was &r 
spent, so that the disciples might be induced 
to pray him to dismiss them. This would 
open the way for him to direct the disciples 
to feed them. And thus the miracle would 
appear all the more evident in proportion 
as they found themselves in a strait, and 
utterly destitute of the needful supplies of 
food for such a multitude in the desert 
St. John's account here is much more fulL 
He tells us (vi. 5) that Jesus, addressing 
Philip, said, '« Whence are we to buy bread, 
that these may eat ? " And he adds, " This 
he said to prove him : for he himself knew 
what he would do." Our Lord, it would 
seem, asked Philip rather than the othen, 
because Philip was simple-minded, sincere^ 
and teachable, rather than clever, and s* 
was accustomed to ask things which ap- 
peared plain to others. We have an instance 
of this simplicity of mind in the question 
which he asks (Juhn xiv. 8), " Lord show 
us the Father, and it sufSceth us." 

Ver. 37. — Two hundred pennyworth ot 
bread. The penny, or " denarius," was th* 
chief Roman silver coin, worth about eight- 
pence halfpenny. Upon the breaking up of 
the Roman empire, the states which arose 
upon its ruins imitated the coinage of the 
old imperial mints, and in general called 
their principal silver coin the " denarius." 
Thus the denarius found its way into this 
country through the Anglo-Saxons, and it 
was for a long period the only coin. Uenw 
the introduction of the word into the Autho- 
rized Version. Two hundred pennyworth 
would be of the value of nearly seven 
pounds. But considering the constant 
fluctuation in the relation between money 
and the commodities purchased by money, 
it is in vain to inquire what number of 
loaves the same two hundred denarii would 
purchase at that time, although it waa 
evidently the representation of a large 
supply of bread. 

Ver. 38.— Five (loaves), and two llihea. 
St. John tells us (vi. 9) that the loaves were 
of barley, and that the fishes were small 
{d<jidpia) ; St. Mark says Sio IxBia^- Bar* 
ley bread was considered an inferior and 
homely kind of food, very inferior t' bread 
luiiJe of wheat fiour. Tliv oompurativa 



Hb 



THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. yi. 1—66. 



faliM of the two kinds of bread U given in 
Bev. vi. ti. " A measure of wheat for a 
penny, and three measures of barley for a 
penny." The psalmist alludes to the greater 
excellence of wheat flour ; " He would have 
fed them also with the finest wheat floor" 
(Ps. Ixxxi. 16). 

Ver. S9. — All were to sit down hy oom- 
panies ((rv/iircJa-ia crv/ixTiJiria) — St. Luke (iz. 14) 
says that the companies were about fifty 
each (oxi irevT^KovTa) — upon the green grass. 
St. John says (vi. 10) that " there was much 
grasi in the place." This indicates the 
time of the year. The grass was growing, 
and it was green. It would not be green in 
that district after April. Thus Bt. Mark's 
account of the state of the grass at that 
time (an account evidently repeated from 
an eye-witness) coincides with the account 
of St. John, who says that " the Passover, a 
feast of the Jews, was at hand " (vi. 4). 

Ver. 40.— And they sat down in ranks 
(ivararov irpairiai irpaaiaX) ; literally, they 
reclined. The Greek word irpairta means 
" a garden plot " or " bed," literally, a bed 
of leiki. They were disposed symmetrically. 
Probably the English word "ranks" ex- 
presses the meaning as clearly as any could 
do. This arrangement was probably mnde, 
partly that the numbers might be better 
known, partly that all things might be done 
in an orderly manner, and that each might 
have his portion. St. Matthew's account 
(ziv. 21) seems to imply that the "men" 
were oeparated firom the " women and 
children. 

Ver. 41. — All the synoptists give our 
Lord's acts in the same words. The taking 
of the food into the hands would seem to 
have been a formal act before the " blessing," 
or "giving of thanks," for it Probably 
our Lord used the ordinury form of bene- 
diction. This is one amongst other in- 
stanoes showing the fitness and propriety 
of " grace before meat." In considering the 
miracnlous action which followed the bene- 
diction, our reason is baffled. It eludes our 
grasp. It is best simply to behold in this 
multiplying of the food, both the bread and 
the flshes, an act of Divine omnipotence; 
not indeed now, as at the beginning, a 
creation out of nothing, for here there was 
the nucleus of the five loaves and the two 
fishes, but an act of creative development of 
the food in its best kind ; for all the works 
of God are perfect. He gave (iSiSoii) would 
be better rendered, he was giving. It was 
in his hands that the miracle was wrought, 
•nd the food continually multiplied. 

Vers. 42, 43. — They did all eat, and were 
filled (ixoprdereTiaay). It might be rendered, 
mere fulfilled, according to the old meaning 
•( " fulfil." It is probable that the women 
and children were ■ eoniidarable number ; 



for they would be, if possible, even more 
eager then the men to see the great Prophet. 
When all had eaten and were satisfied, they 
took np broken pieces, twelve baskei-'nls, 
and also of the fishes. St. John tells us iliat 
this was done by the express command of 
Christ (vi. 12); and the existence of these 
fragments, far more in quantity than the 
original supply, was a striking testimonv to 
the reality of the miracle, and that theie 
was enough and more than enough for all. 
It does not become us to pry too curiously 
into the method of our Lord's working ; but 
the number of these baskets {Kopivovs), 
namely, twelve, seems to suggest that he 
first broke the loaves, and in breaking mnl- 
tiplied them, and distributed them into thra* 
baskets, one for each apostle, and that th« 
food, as it was distributed by the disciples, 
was more and more multiplied, as needed, 
so that at length they brought back to 
Christ as many basketfuls of fragments aa 
they had first received from him, and muoh 
more than the original supply. It is obviont 
here to remark that by this stupendona 
miracle our Lord showed himself to be the 
true Bread of life, by which the spiritufd 
wants of all hungering souls may be sup- 
plied. " For," says St. Augustine, ** he waa 
the Word of God, and all the acts of the 
Word are themselves words for us. They 
are not as pictures, merely, to look at and 
admire ; but as letters which we must seek 
to read and understand." 

Ver. 45. — The other ride. It would seem, 
aa has already been stated, that thi re were 
two Bethsaidas (or " places of fish " — fish- 
villages) — one to the north-east of the Sea of 
Galilee, not far from where the Jordan 
enters it, called Bethsaida Julias ; and the 
other on the western side of the sea itself, 
near to Capernaum. Again and again our 
Lord crossed this sea to escape the crowda 
who followed him about, and now wished 
'* to take him by force and make him • 
king." He desired for a time to be in 
retirement, in order that he might pray with 
the greater earnestness, and b'eedom from 
interruption. He also wished to make 
occasion for the miracle which was to follow, 
namely, the stilling of the tempest. 

Vers. 46, 47.— St Mark is careful, UkeBt 
Matthew, to tell us that when the even 
was come he was alone on the land. Both 
the evangelists desire to call attention to the 
fact that, when night came on, the disciples 
were alone in their boat and Jesus alone on 
the land. It was nighlfall; and St. John 
informs us that "the sea was rising by 
reason of a great wind that blew." Then it 
was that the Lord left his place of prayer 
on the mountain, and walked upon the sea, 
that be might succour his disciples now dis> 
trenard by tli^ storm. It would appear that 



OIL Yi. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



249 



OUT Lord had been oUiged to nse a little 
pressure to induce bis disciples to leave 
him; " He constrained them (^viyxaire robs 
fiaSqrii odrov). 

Vet, 46. — And when he had sent them 
! way (liTOTa^diiepos) — more literally, had 
taken leave of them, that is, the multitude- 
he departed into a moimtain (eii rh Spos) ; 
literally, into the mountain; that is, the 
high table-laud at the foot of which the 
multitude had been fed. Towards the 
north-east of the Sea of Galilee the land 
liaeB rapidly from the shore. To pray 
(vporeiiacrBcu). This is a very full word, 
implying the outpouring of the heart to 
God. Our Lord did this that he might 
teach us in our prayers to shun the crowd, 
and to pray in silence and in secret, with 
eollected mind. There is here, too, a special 
•sample for the clergy, namely, this : that 
when they have preached they shoulJ go 
•part and pray that God would make 
enectual that which they have delivered; 
that he would himself give the increase 
where they have planted and watered, and 
renew their spiritual strength, that they 
may return again to their labour refreshed 
by communion with him. 

Ver. 47. — And when even was oome. It 
was now advancing onwards into night ; the 
wind was rising and blowing against them. 
Then it was that the Lord left his place of 
prayer on the mountain, that he might 
■ucoour his disciples in their difficulties. 

Vers. 48 — 50. — And he saw them toiling 
in rowing. The Greek is, according to 
the best readings, kcH ISiiv (not cTSev) aliTobs 
Batravi^ofifvovs 4y ry i\airfiy. The word 
Pa<ramiofJi4mvs means more than " toiling ; " 
it means literally, tomtented. It is well 
rendered in the Bevised Version by dis- 
treised. It was only by painful effort that 
they could make head against the driving 
storm blowing upon them from the west, 
that is, from the Mediterranean Sea. About 
the fourth watoh of the night he oometh 
unto them, walking on the sea. The Jews 
formerly divided the night into three 
watches; but when Judsea became a Roman 
province they adopted the Roman division. 
The Romans changed the watches every 
three hours, lest through too long watches 
the guards might slumber at their posts. 
These periods were called "watches." If 
the night was short, they divided it into 
three watches ; if long, into four. Therefore 
the fourth watch began at the tenth hour 
of the night, that is, at three o'clock in the 
morning, and continued to the twelfth, that 
is, to six o'clock. It would seem, therefore, 
that this storm lasted for nine hours. 
During that time the disciples had rowed 
about twenty-five or thirty furlongs, that 
i& about tliritu Itomiin milea — eight furlongs 



making a mile. The Sea of Galilee is not 
more than six miles broad at its widest 
part. They were therefore now ^h ii.4<r^ 
TTJj ea\iir<Tvs) " in the midst of the sea," as 
St. Mark expresses it ; so that, after rowing 
for nine hours, they had hardly crossed 
more than half over the sea. The Sea of 
Galilee is, speaking roughly, about twelve 
miles from north to south and six from 
east to west. It may be asked why our 
Lord suffered them to be tempest-tossed so 
long ; and the answer is : 1, It was a trial 
of their faith, so as to urge them to seek 
more earnestly the help of God. 2. It was 
a lesson to accustom them to endure hard- 
ness. 3. It made the stilling of so tedious 
and dangerous a storm all the more grateful 
and welcome to them at last. The Father* 
find a fine spiritual meaning in this. Jerome 
says, " The fourth watoh is the last." Bo, 
too, St, Augustine, who adds that " he who 
has watched the ship of his Church will come 
at length at the fourth watch, at the end of 
the world, when the night of sin and evil 
is ended, to judge the quick and the dead." 
Theophylact says, " He allows his disciples 
to be tried by dangers, that they may be 
taught patience, and does not come to them 
till morning, that they may learn perse- 
verance and faith," Hilary says, " The^«t 
watch was the age of the Law, the uamd 
of the prophets, the third of the gospel, the 
fourth of his glorious advent, when he will 
find her buffeted by the spirit of antichrist 
and by the storms of the woild. And by 
his reception into the ship and the conse- 
quent calm is prefigured the eternal peace 
of the Church after his second coming" (see 
Wordsworth's 'New Testament:' St. Matt. 
xiv.). Be walked on the sea. This he did 
by his Divine power, which he possessed as 
God, and which, when he pleased, he could 
assume as man. Infidelity is at fault here, 
Paulus, the rationalist, revived the ridiculous 
idea that Christ walking on the sea merely 
meant Christ walking on the shore, elevated 
above the sea; but the interpretation was 
rightly denounced by Lavater as " a langh- 
able insult on logic, hermeneutics, good 
sense, and honesty." Was it because our 
Lord simply walked on the shore that the 
disciples "cried out and were troubled"? 
Was it merely for this that they were " sore 
amazed at themselves beyond measure and 
wondered"? Yet such are the shifts to 
which unbelief is reduced when it ventures 
to measure itself against the acts of Omni- 
potence. He would have passed by them. 
An expression something like that in St. 
Luke (xxiv. 28), "He made as though he 
would go further," although there the Greek 
in St. Luke is different (srpoaeiroieiTo vop' 
parifia TopdeaBai). Here it is fi6f\e iraptK' 
ff'y. Uterally. h« triilied to patt by tMemf 



350 



THK GOSIEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. [en. vl 1—56 



BO at least it appeared to the disciples. It 
has t>een suggested that our Lord did this 
that the disciples might more clearly see 
how the wind was stilled in his presence. 
They snppoBed that it was an apparition 
(eSoJoi' Sti (pavTaffiia (hat) ; literally, a phan- 
tom. Why did they suppose this? Partly 
from the idea that spectres appear in the 
Diglit and in the darkness to terrify men, 
and partly because in the darkness they 
could not BO readily recognize that it was 
Jesus, Then the fact that our Lord " would 
have passed by them," flitting past them as 
though he oared nothing for them and had 
nothing to do with them, but was going 
elsewhere; this must have increased their 
terror. But now came the moment for him 
to calm tlieir fears. Straightway he talked 
with them soothingly. Be of good cheer: 
it is I ; be not a&aid. Now, Ctirist did this 
that he might teaoh his disciples to conquer 
fear and temptation, even when they are 
very great, and that so the deliverance and 
the consolation might impress them all the 
more powerfully and sweetly in proportion to 
their former terror. " ' It is I ' — I, your Lord 
and Master, whom you know so well, and of 
whose goodness and omnipotence you have 
already had bo much experience; I, your 
Master, who do not come to mock you as a 
phantom, but to deliver you both from fear 
and frum storm." It will be observed that 
St. Mark omits all mention of Peter's act of 
faith "in going down from the boat, and 
walking upon the waters tu come to Jesus," 
as recorded by St. Matthew (xiv. 28). 
Throughout this Gospel, as already no- 
ticed, St. Peter is kept in the background. 

Vers. 51, 52. — ^The amazement of the 
disciples was very great. Nor was the 
impression confined to them alone. St. 
Matthew (ziv. 33) tells us that they who 
were in the boat came and worshipped him. 
They felt, at least for the moment, that 
they were brought into awful nearness to 
One whose " way is in the sea," and whose 
"path is in the great waters," and whose 



"footsteps are not known." They needed 
not, however, to have been bo amazed, fot 
they had just witnessed his power in the 
miracle of the loaves ; but they understood 
not (_4it\ ToT; Uprois) oonoeming the laaves, 
but their heart was (wampuiiini) hardened ; 
literally, stupefied and blinded. 

Ver. 53. — They came into the land of Clen- 
nesaret; literally (^irl ri)v ynv ^XBov els 
TevvTiaafiT'), they came to the land unto 
Genneiaret. This was the plain on the 
western side of the sea sometimes called 
•' the Lake of Gennesaret." The name Gen- 
nesaret (says Cornelius it Lapide) means 
" a fertile garden." There was a city origin- 
ally called "Chinuereth" or "Cinneroth," 
mentioned in Josh. ziz. 25, which probably 
gave one of its names to this lake. 

Vers. 54 — 56. — Straightway the people 
knew him. Some, no doubt, had known 
him before. He was now the general object 
of interest and attraction wherever he went. 
They began to carry about on their beds 
(Jirl Tois KpaPpdrois) those that were sick, 
where they heard he was. The original is 
very expressive (8iroi; J^Kovav St« ^/cei effn), 
lohere they heard. He it there. But the best 
authorities omit eke?. Villages, or cities, 
or fields (Greek, kypois) ; literally, country, 
where the pursuits of agriculture would be 
going on. They laid the siok in the streets 
(Greek, tV toIs ayopais) — literally, in the 
market-placet; the proper rendering — ^that 
they might touch if it were but the border 
of his garment. The border (^xpiirirtSov) 
means the " fringe " or " hem ; " the garment 
was the outer robe worn over the tunic. 
And as many as touched him were made 
whole (iiroi hv ^^avro aifrov iffti^opro) ; atnov 
might mean either "him" or "it," that is 
"tlie border of his garment." But thf 
difference is of little importance ; for it was 
faith in those who touched which brought 
the healing virtue to the sick, whether they 
touched the Saviour himself or only hi!> 
clothes. 



EOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Unbelief. Our Lord may have had two reasons for learing Capernaum 
and for visiting Nazareth. One, a personal reason — to see his mother and his sisters, 
■who seem to have been married there. The other, a ministerial reason — to escape 
from the busy throngs who resorted to him by the lake, and to take a new centre for 
evangelistic labours on the part of himself and his disciples. It is singular and 
instructive that Nazareth should have perhaps twice furnished a striking instance of 
human unhelief and offence with " the Nazarene." 

1. The UKBEAS0NABLBNEB3 AND INBXCUSABLENES8 OF UNBELIEF IN ChBIST. There 

were several facts, which took away all excuse from the conduct of the inhabitants of 
Nazareth. 1. He was well knowa to them. They had been acquainted with him for 
many years, and they had seen in him nothing but truth and integrity. His claims, 
therefore, should have been fairly and candidly considered. 2. He brought with him 



•H. Ti. 1—56.] THE OOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 251 

a great and acknowledged reputation. In the most populous parts of Galilee he 
had fulfilled a ministry which had excited the deepest interest. His miracles were 
undeniable and undenied. He was the object of general attention and of widespread 
faith. 3. He came to Nazareth and taught publicly, thus giving his townsmen an 
opportunity of judging for themselves of his wisdom and moral authority. They 
confessed with astonishment the extraordinary character of his teaching. Yet they did 
not believe. And how many among us, who have even greater opportunity of forming 
a just judgment concerning Jesus, are found judging falsely, and consequently rejecting 
the Lord of life and of salvation I They judge against the evidence, and their conclu- 
sion — ^in no way damaging to him — is condemnation to themselves. 

II. The grounds op unbelief in Christ. It was unreasonable, but not inexplicable 
or arbitrary. 1. The Nazarenes were prejudiced against Jesus, because of his origin 
and circumstances. The son of so lowly a mother, the brother of sisters in so obscure 
a position, how could Jesus be regarded by his worldly townsmen with reverence ? 
A craftsman himself, and one of an humble family, he was little likely to be received 
at Nazareth as he bad been received elsewhere, even in the metropolis itself. 2. The 
other ground of prejudice was educational deficiency on the part of Jesus. He was the 
Prophet of Nazareth, and had not been trained iu the rabbinical schools of learning. 
Whence had he his qualifications ? What had been the source of his knowledge, the 
inspiration of his wisdom, the secret of his power ? It was all a mystery to them— 
something at variance with their beliefs, and in contradiction to their prejudices. Very 
similar are the objections which men still make to Christ. Had he come a king, 
a conqueror, a philosopher, a scholar, then men might have honoured and welcomed 
him. But he came from God ; and to the unspiritual there could be no more serious 
and fatal ground of offence than this. 

IIL The rebuke of unbelief. " A prophet is not without honour," etc. There 
was sadness in Christ's language and tones. Yet what a reproach was hereby conveyed 
to the unbelieving ! They might be offended ; there were those who would believe, who 
would evince gratitude and render honour. When we think how clearly our Lord 
must have foreseen the stupendous and eternal results of bis ministry, we may 
appreciate the nobility and self-restraint of his attitude and language, and at the same 
time we may recognize the severity of his rebuke. 

IV. The consequences op unbelief. 1. The impression upon the Saviour's mind is 
briefly described : " He marvelled." An expression this, which gives us an insight into 
his humanity, and which reveals to us the depths of moral obliquity into which the 
cavillers had fallen, 2. The results to the people of the town were lamentable. The 
Prophet had come with power to bless, and prepared to heal and help. But he required 
the co-operation of faith; and, when this was withheld, "he could do no mighty work." 
A few sick folk were healed, but many forfeited a blessing within their reach. 3. Yet 
the rejection of Jesus by his fellow-townsmen was the occasion of benefit to others. 
Finding no congenial soil at Nazareth, Jesus proceeded elsewhere, to labour where 
labour might be more appreciated. " He went round about the villages teaching." 
The indifference or contempt of the unspiritual and self-sufficient may be the occasion 
of enlightenment and consolation to the lowly, the receptive, the needy. 

Application. 1. The coming of Christ to a soul, to a community, is a moral 
probation, involving the most serious responsibility. 2. It is the most fatal guilt and 
folly, in considerins; the claims of Christ, to overlook the wisdom and the grace of his 
character and ministry, and to regard circumstances at which the superficial and the 
carnal may take offence. 

Vers. 7 — 13. — The mission of the twelve. The twelve disciples now first became 
apostles. This sending forth was a prelude to their life-long mission, to be fulfilled 
after their Lord's ascension. They had now been long enough with the Master not 
only to have imbibed much of his spirit, but to have learned the nature of his ministry 
and to have entered into its methods. Their evangelistic journey would be disciplinary 
to themselves and profitable to the population of Galilee, and it would increase and 
extend the interest of the people in the ministry of the Lord. ■ 

I. The pebpabation fob the mission. Wisdom and simplicity are here alike 
apparent. 1. The twelve were yrouped into pain. This was for the sak* «/ 



25a THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO 8T. MARK. [oh. vl 1—56. 

companioTisliip, and to secure that none should be unfriended and unsupported ; as well 
M, in all likelihood, to bring about that one should supply the other's lack. 2. They 
were sent as pilgrims. Two things only they were to take with them — their sandals 
and their staves, which were part of their natural equipment as travellers afoot. 3. Yet 
they wereforlidden to provide for their journey. Luxuries and superfluities they must 
not take with them, neither must they provide for their subsistence, but must act 
upon the expectation that the labourer would be deemed worthy of his hire. In all 
these respects the instructions given to the twelve were significant of the method in 
which our Lord desires his people to undertake their spiritual mission to mankind. 
The work is to be done in fellowship and with mutual sympathy and support ; it is to 
oe done in the spirit of those who are in the world but are not of the world, who are 
not entangled in its snares, and who mind heavenly things. 

IL The katueb and pubposb op the mission. Like their Lord, the apostles were 
enjoined to have compassion upon the varied needs of their fellow-men, to address 
themselves to the supply of both spiritual and temporal wants. 1. They were to 
summon men to repentance, the indispensable and universal condition of pardon and 
life to sinful, guilty men. A change of mind and heart alone could prepare men for 
the blessings of the Messianic kingdom. 2. At the same time they were to confront 
the power of evil in its most malignant manifestations, and to cast out demons 
in the name of that stronger One who was binding the spiritual tyrant of mankind. 
8. And they were to heal the sick, both as a symbolic act, and as a proof and exercise 
of true and practical benevolence. All this they did efficiently and successfully, in the 
authority of their Divine Lord. The nature of this commission is parallel with that 
given by our Saviour to his whole Church ; for he has put his people in charge with 
tho welfare of mankind, both socially and temporally, and also spiritually. 

IIL The spibit op the mission. The directions given by the Master as to the 
apostles' bearing with regard to those to whom they ministered were worthy of himself. 
There is a beautiful combination of meekness and dignity in these instructions, very 
like the Lord who gave them. Wherever received with cordiality, the apostles were 
directed to abide with their hosts, grateful for kindness and content with their 
entertainment. Wherever their messa;e was rejected and they were disregarded, the 
twelve were commanded to "shake off the dust under their feet" for a testimony 
against the unbelieving and impenitent. The servants of the Lord Jesus cannot too 
carefully study these counsels, in considering in what spirit they shall fulfil the com- 
mission entrusted to them in human society. On the one hand, all selfish desires, all 
pride and restlessness, must be repressed ; on the other hand, the high vocation 
must be esteemed, the office must be magnified, the authority of the Redeemer must be 
upheld, and the responsibility of rejecting the gospel must solemnly, and with 
appropriate dignity, be cast upon the unbelieving and unspiritual. 

Pbaotioai lessons. 1. All Christians may be reminded of their position in this 
world as the representatives and ministers of Christ. 2. All hearers of the gospel may 
be admonished as to the serious responsibility they incur when a message from heaven 
is brought before their minds. 

Vers. 14 — 29. — Sin-hating righteousnest. The growing fame of JesuR reached all 
parts of the land and all classes of society. Not only the poor and diseased, the 
neglected and the despised, heard of the compassionate heart and the mighty deeds 
of the Son of man ; the learned were jealous of his influence with the people, and 
powerful rulers wondered what was the secret of his power. Many were the expla- 
nations given of the new Teacher's authority. Whilst some traced a resemblance 
between him and the olden Hebrew prophets, others even deemed him the greatest of 
the order— Elijah himself, returning to the land of his ministry, in accordance with wiiat 
was deemed the inspired prediction. But the most singular of all conjectures was that 
of Herod — that John the Baptist, whom he had beheaded in circumstances of atrocioua 
dishonour to himself, had arisen from the dead. Mentioning this conjecture, the 
evangelist is naturally led to relate the incident of the forerunner's violent death— one 
of the most awful, tragic incidents in all history. Simply tracing the narrative, we 
meet with successive embodiments of moral fact and law. 

I. The apfrehenbions op a guilty ookboienob. There seems to hare bein but little 



OH. vu 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. «63 

In the ministry of Jesus to recall that of John. John dil no miracle ; the fame of 
Jesus was largely owing to the miracles by which his ministry was continuously signal- 
feed. The power to attract multitudes was the one point obviously in common. But 
any association was suliticient to revive within Herod's breast the memory of his weak- 
ness and his crime, and to reproach him with the destruction of a blameless and heroic, 
prophetic man. " Thus conscience doth make cowards of us all 1 " 

II. The resentment op the vicious under rebuke. Antipas was guilty of a double 
Incest and a double adultery; he mariied his niece, who was also his brother's wife, 
that brother being still alive ; and drove his own spouse from him by contracting this 
sinful union. Herodias was probably intiuenced by ambition in accepting a position so 
disgraceful. Amidst the silence or the applause of the courtiers, one voice arose to 
condemn this shameless conduct. It was the voice of the upright and dauntless John, 
whose rebuke ,was, " It is not lawful ! " No wonder that the wretched woman set 
herself against the stern prophet; bis presence, his life, must have been to her an 
incessant reproach. Fain would she have killed him, fearing this influence with the 
king, and trembling for her own precarious position. There is no hatred so virulent and 
awful as the hatred of sinners against faithful and righteous rebuke. 

III. The conflict betwkrn conboienob and passion. The unhappy Herod was torn 
by two conflicting forces. On the one band, the malice of Herodias urged him to put 
the fearless John to death, and thus to silence his rebukes ; on the other hand, he 
respected and feared the holy and dauntless prophet, and he was impelled to listen to 
his words, hearing him eagerly, yet with ursolved perplexity of mind. He kept his 
prisoner safely, even from the malice of his paramour, whom he would gladly have 
gratified had not his conscience barred the way. 

IV. Youth and beautt the instrument of vindiotivbness. There is a etrange 
contrast between the frivolous and fascinating performances of youth and loveliness, 
and the dark designs in the background. Herodias watched and delighted to see the 
passions of her sensual husband moved at sight of her daughter's charms, to hear the 
rash promise from those unrighteous lips. Base were the means, and baser still the end. 
When woman's charms are used not only to provoke lust, but to induce to cruelty, can 
there be a more awful instance of the misuse of the fair gifts of the Creator ? Yet 
history tells of many a tale like this, though perhaps of none so utterly and so 
irredeemably mournful. 

Y. False honour and wicked pridb preferred to justiob. Vengeance and malice 
in Herodias are fitly matched witb weakness and unrighteousness in her paramour. 
There can be no question that it is right to break a promise when the promise involves 
in its fulfilment the commission of a crime. Such a promise it is wrong to make, but 
to fulfil it makes one wrong two. The motives of Antipas were vile and mean ; he 
wished to gratify the malice of a woman, and to vindicate his arbitrary authority in the 
presence of his guests. And for such motives he was ready to sacrifice a good man's life. 

VI. Malice triumphant. The foolish word was kept; the wicked woman was 
gratified ; the infamous deed was done. As the Lord expressed it, " Elijah came, and 
they did nnto him whatsoever they listed." Although the world is ruled by a just 
Providence, righteousness does not always prosper; vice and crime are not always 
restrained, or even immediately and manifestly punished. The voice of just rebuke is 
often silenced ; the head of innocence is often laid in the dust ; " the godly man faileth ; " 
the vilest men are exalted. All this is permitted that there may lie scope for the 
exercise of faith ; that virtue may be tried as in the furnace ; that men may learn to look 
forward to a future state, in which grievances shall be redressed, and retribution Bhall 
be made, and the righteousness of the Divine Judge shall be fully vindicated. 

VII. The aooD mourn whom thb bad destroy. During bis brief ministry John 
had made many disciples, had attached to him many friends. During his captivity, his 
admirers had been severed from him. Now came the last opportunity for manifesting 
their reverential afi'ection. When the company of the Baptist's disciples, hearing of 
their master's violent death, gathered themselves together, and carried the mutilated 
body to the tomb, what a contrast they afforded to the company of carousers, in whosf 
])re6ence Herod's foolish oath had doomed a brave, pure man to death I It is well, even 
if " evil entreated " hy the frivolous, sensual, and malicious, to have a pUc* in good 
men's heaiiK, niid after ile»th to live in the remembrance of tli» rignieuua. 



254 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. vl 1—66 

Vers. 30 — 44. — No rest for Jesus. The twelve have fulfilled their brief missioE 
of evaugelization, have returned to their Master, and tell him of the incidents and 
results of their mission. Jesus takes occasion to rest, and to give them rest, and 
with this intent withdraws to a desert place. This passage shows us with what 
result. 

I. The pdrposes foe which the Lord seeks retibembnt. 1. Perhaps to escapi 
from the notice of Herod, who, having heard of his fame, may seek to get him within 
his power, even as before he had imi)risoned John. 2. To secure a brief period of bodily 
repose for himself and for the twelve. Their time and attention have been so occupied, 
that they have had no leisure even for their meals. It is bad economy in Christian 
workers to neglect the claims of the body, which needs to be kept, by food, exercise, 
and repose, in a sound and healthy state, that woik for Christ may be done vigorously 
and cheerfully. 3. To enjo}- leisure for spiritual intercourse. The twelve need to be 
taught that they may teach others ; and this is a kind of work which needs leisure and 
quiet, and uninterrupted hours. The wise and experienced may spend their time to 
advantage in equipping the young and active among Christ's disciples for spiritual cam- 
paigns. 

IL The MtrLTiTUDB invade the Lord's retirement. 1. It is a sign of their eager 
interest to see and hear the great Teacher and Physician. The tidings spread ; the 
people anticipate their Benefactor ; they outrun him, and are ready to meet him when 
he disembarks. 2. They find him willing to sacrifice his ease for the sake of his 
ministry. Having perhaps taken a few hours' repose and slumber as the boat has 
rocked at anchor near the shore, Jesus lands, only to find the peoplei awaiting him upon 
the beach. Instead of pubhiug off again and seeking a remoter seclusion, Jesiis readily 
addresses himself to his work. A lesson this in diligence and zeal I 3. The sad con- 
dition of the people awakens Christ's commiseration. Others might have said, " The 
people are comfortable and cared for." But Jesus sees that spiritually they are as sheep 
without a shepherd, and his heart is touched at the spectacle. It needs the Spirit of 
Jesus to look thus upon the spiritually destitute and famishing, to penetrate through 
their outward guise to their souls' needs. 

III. Jesus provides foe theie spieitiial wants. 1. He teaches them ; he, the 
Source of wisdom, imparts from his abundance to their necessities. 2. He teaches them 
at length and with variety. What the " many things" were in which he instructed 
them we know not, but may judge from the record of his discourses. So the swift 
hours pass on. He speaks as never man spake, and the people hear him gladly. 

IV. Jesus supplies their temporal needs. 1. In this his action is in contrast 
with the spirit of his disciples, who would first have him dismiss the multitude, 
and who then put obstacles in the way of supplying their wants. We have 
no reason to blame the disciples, but we have reason to admire the Master, 2. Jesus 
uses the provision which is at hand. The bread is obviously and utterly insufficient, 
yet the Lord makes use of it, and chooses rather to multiply than to create. Our 
Divine Master here gives us a needed lesson — to turn all things to good account- 
to employ the circumstances, the opportunities, the gifts Providence appoints for 
us, rather than to grieve that we have not other means of usefulness. 3. He acts in 
an orderly method. His directions as to the seemly and convenient arrangement of tlie 
multitude are in consonance with Divine wisdom, and are an example and admonition 
for us. God is not the author of confusion in any Churches ; confusion is the devil's 
work. " Older is Heaven's first law." 4. Jesus sets an example of gratitude. 
" Looking up to heaven, he blessed." A rebuke to such as take their daily food without 
giving of thanks ; an admonition to remember whence the most common and customary 
of our mercies come. 6. He makes use of his disciples. Observe the honour which the 
Divine Lord puts upon human agency and instrumentality. The disciples could not 
provide ; tlat was no reason why they should not distribute. The feeblest can offer 
to his hungering neighbours, the bread of lile eternal. 6. He satisfies the need of all. 
It is a vast crowd ; yet not one is left unfed. There is in Christ " enough for all, 
enough for each, enough for evermore." It is a symbol of the sufficiency of the Divine 
provision for all the spiritual necessities of mankind. The bread of heaven came iowa, 
and " giveth life unto the world." 7. The provision is even superabundant ; it is more 
than enough. How royally and munificentlv the Lord of all provides for his dependent 



OB. ▼! 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. S5S 

creatures I There is yet room at his table, and bread in his store, bounty in his heart, 
tnd blessing in bis bauds. " Come, for all things are ready I " 

Vers. 46 — 52. — " It U /." How picturesque and impressive is the scene ! Jesus baf 
dismissed the multitude, and has sent his disciples away in the boat to the western 
shore. He himself has retired to a mountain, by prayer to calm his spirit and to 
strengthen himself for his ministry. Night comes on ; the wind rises from the west, 
and the waters of the lake are lashed into a storm. By the fitful light of the moon, 
breaking now and again through the drilting clouds, Jesus, as he stands upon the hill- 
top, observes the boat tossed upon the waves. Her sails are down, and the disciples are 
rowing, toiling, but are making no way against the gale. Jesus descends the hill, and, 
in the exercise of his supernatural power, walks upon the water. The superstitious 
fishermen, naturally enough, take the figure approaching them for a spectre— some fore- 
boding spirit of the deep — and they cry aloud in terror. Then come the words, so 
aui horitative and so gentle, " Be of good cheer : it is I ; be not afraid I " The hearts 
of the (iisciples and the waves of the lake alike are calmed. Amazement fills every 
breast, and as they approach the land, the rescued mariners adore with fresh admiration 
their Drliverer and Lord. 

L Christ's people hate bombtimes to pass throuqh a sea or tboubls. 1. 
Circumstances without may conspire with fears within. Christians are in trouble as 
other men, and they sometimes dread lest they should be overwhelmed. 2. Christians 
may encounter trouble in the very act of obeying Christ. Just as the twelve met the 
storm in fulfilling their Lord's directions to return to Gennesaret, so we may meet with 
trials and dangers in the path of obedience. If so, let us not count it strange. 

IL Christ observes and sympathizes with his people in their trouble. They 
may be unconscious and forgetful of this. Little did the twelve, as they toiled in 
rowing, imagine that the eye of their Master was upou them ; but it was. From the 
nill-top he witnessed their struggles ; he, the Lord of the waves, suffered their violence ; 
he, his disciples' Friend, allowed them to come into extremity, and did not prevent their 
fears. So he nr.ay, for good reasons, allow his people to experience distress. Yet he 
is not unmindful and not unmoved. He thinks of them, watches over them, sympa- 
thizes with them. He may seem absent, but he is not. 

in. Christ's presence and voice bring comfort and peace to the hearts of the 
troubled. Faith discerns that presence, though unseen ; that voice, though unheard. 
"' It is 1 1 ' — I, who love you ; I, who died for you ; I, who provide for your wants, and 
watch over your souls ; I, who sent you on life's voyage ; it is I, who am with you 
always, who now come to seek and save you I " When Jesus says, " Be of good cheer ; 
he not afraid I " his are no empty words ; they are words fitted to banish fear, to instil 
confidence, to inspire courage, to awaken hope. 

I V. Christ's power and grace bring deliverance to his troubled ones. We are 
iuilebted to him for more than sympathy. His tender kindness, his strong promises, bis 
unfailing faithfulness, all issue in practical aid, in gracious interposition. He is the 
Lord of all hearts, and can assuage the tempests of the soul. He controls all circum- 
stances, and compels all to co-operate for his people's good. " He maketh the storm a 
ualm ; " " So he bringeth them to the desired haven." Who, upon the troubled sea ol 
time, would be without a Comforter so gracious, a Helper so mighty ? 

V. Christ's interpositions awaken the amazement, reverence, and gratitude 
OF his people. Like the twelve, we have often too much reason, when we experience the 
compassionate interference of our Lord upon our behalf, to blame ourselves because our 
hardness of heart has made Divine deliverance seem strange to us. This is just what 
we ought to have looked for, to have expected with assurance. Oh for grace, that when 
the voice from heaven addresses us, "It is I," we may respond, "It is Thou, indeed, 
I ( Lord, whom we honour, Ujjon whom we call, in whom we trust ! It is thou, whose 
jiosence is ever dear, whose voice is ever welcome, whose heart is never cold, and whose 
lislp is never far I" 

Applioation. 1. An encouragement to obeilience. 2. A rebuke to fear. S. An 
kwiurance of Divine sympathy and aid. 4. A call to grateful ad'>ration. 

Vers. 63 — 56. — The popularity qf the Divine Physician. At this time the tid* oi 



256 THE OOSPEL ACCOlvDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. vl 1—56 

Ghrist'8 popularity was at the flood. In a few verses, the evangelist strikingly depicts 
the general excitement which the presence of the Prophet of Nazareth awakened amidst 
the thronging and busy population. 

I. The presence of the Divine Physician among the people. Jesus sometimes 
retired to desert solitudes ; but, for the most part, he chose to live among the people, 
and to be accessible to all classes and to all characters. This might well be his motive 
for spending so much of his life in the thickly peopled district on the western shores of 
the Lake of Gennesaret. As the Son of man, Jesus mingled freely with the race he came 
to save and bless. 

II. The spread among the people of the good tidings. If Jesus was willing to 
live and work amongst the inhabitants of this district, they, for their part, were eager 
to embrace every opportunity of intercourse with him. Not that they were generally 
influenced by high motives that they resorted to him as to a spiritual teacher. It is 
evident that the interest felt in Jesus was very largely owing to his power and willing- 
ness to heal the sick and suffering. But, from whatever motive, it is of the highest 
importance that the childreu of men should be led to interest themselves in Christ. The 
tidings that Jesus is the ISaviour of the world deserve to be published far and wide, as 
the best news for all mankind. 

IIL The agency employed to bring the needy into the presence of the Saviodb. 
As we read the vigorous language of the evangelist, we seem to see the eager, kiud- 
hearted people, the peasantry and the fishermen, hurrying throughout the district, 
seeking out all the diseased and infirm, carrying them on their couches to the places 
where Jesus is expected, and laying them in the open spaces, that they may be brought 
under the notice of the mighty and benevolent physician. 

IV. The contact op the patients with the Physician. The healing looked for was 
effected, not by means and instruments, but by the great Healer himself. Accordingly, 
what the sufferers desired was, to lay hold upon Jesus, or even upon the hem or friage 
of his garment. An indication this of the method of the sinner's salvation. To come 
to Christ, and spiritually to lay bold upon him, — such is the condition of securing all the 
blesungs which Jesus brings to man. 

v. The experience of healing. It mattered not how many came, by whom they 
were brought, in what place they encountered Jesus, from what disease they suffered ; 
" as many as touched him were made whole." There is no limitation to the healing 
power or to the healing grace of IramanueL He is " mighty to save ; " be saves " to the 
uttermost ; " and his salvation is perfect and eternal. 

Application. 1. This narrative reminds the sinner where to look for deliverance — 
to Christ, and Christ alone. 2. This narrative sets before us the of&ce of the Church ; 
it ii to bring sinful souls to the one Divine, almighty Saviour. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Yen. l—6.—Jetus visiting his own country. By going thither— 
L Hs obatifieo a human yearning. In a previous chapter he is reported to have 
asked, " Wko is my mother and my brethren ? " He now shows that those broad 
human relations he had claimed did not imply the neglect of nearer ones, or indifference 
to them. He sought to benefit his own people in the highest way, even whilst he would 
not suffer the narrow claims of his home to interfere with the wider claims of his kingdom. 
Have we so interpreted home relations, patriotism, local attachment, social ties ? 

II. Hb tLLUBTBATBD AFRESH AN OLO AND FAMILIAR EXPERIENCE. 1. He Was One of 

many, yet by himteff even in this, 2. One of the greatest of griefs to a pious spirit, to he 
hindered from doing good and conferring benefit. 3. A greater humiliatum than his 
human birth, because a moral one consciously experienced. 

III. LIk EXHIBITED Divine uerot. 1. Past offences were forgiven. 2. Although 
conscious of ie!.triction because (^ their unbelief and indifference, he still persisted in his 
works cf rtitixy, — M. 

Ven. 2, 6. — The twofold wonder awakened by the gospel. L Ik mxh. 1. Because of 
■nntroMt between the afiftartnt origin anil the Divine pretensions qf Chritt, 2. Because oj 



OH. Ti. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MARK. 257 

the Iteming disproportion between the results actually prodiiced and t?ie instruments. A 
curious pluue this of human incredulity, as if the works did not speak for theuiselves I 
Failing thediscoreryof an evidently great cause, the results themselves are not credited 
with being what they seem to be. This is characteristic of human nature in all ages. 

n. In Chbist. The unbelief itself, of which the human astonishment at his words 
and works was but the sign, was a still greater marvel to our Saviour. The believing, 
ingenuous soul cannot understand unbelief. And truly there is something unnatural 
and not to be looked for in the incredulity exhibited by men towards truth and good- 
ness, and the proffered mercy of God. — M. 

Vers. 2, 3. — Detracting from the Divine greatness of Christ. I, How this ib Doms. 
1, By attributing to secondary causes Divine effects. 2. Absence of faith and spiritual 
lympathy. 3. By being offended at the mystery of his humiliation, either in himndf or 
hisfullowers, 

IL What rr pboducbs. I. Unsatisfied indecision. Perpetual questioning. 2. 
Hardening of heart. 3. The doubter's own loss. Not only the works of mercy he might 
have wrought, but the Merciful One himself, are thus forfeited. — M. 

Ver. %,— Christ ministering to the villages. I. Bejeoted in one dikbotion, thb 
Sayioub BBOINB A7BE8H ELSEWHEBE. 1. Indomitable Zeal, and inextinguishable love 
for souls. 2. Divine wisdom. The sinning city or individual not altogether abandon^ 
even when left alone. When the Redeemer cannot work within a heart, he will work 
about it. Where faith is not at once forthcoming, evidence is accumulated, and the 
unbelieving are approached from new directions and points of vantage. Every 
sinner is besieged by Christ. The country sends up fi csh elements to the growing 
population of the cities ; how important that it should send godliness and righteousness 
with these I 

II. It is THE SFIBIT OF ChBIBTIANITT TO OABE FOB THOSE WHO ABE AT A DISAD- 

TANTAOK. 1. They were out of the way and apt to be overlooked. 2. They were 
tmfavowably situated for the rapid spread of new ideas. 3. They were for the most 
part humble. " To the poor the gospel is preached " was one of the characteristics of 
Christianity, of which John was to be informed ; and it might have been added, " by 
Christ himself." The moral influence of this example. How ought all ministers of the 
gospel and Christian labourers to eschew self and the love of fame 1 The grandest work 
of the ministry may be performed in the humblest sphere. Men are to be evangelized 
for their own sakes, — ^M. 

Vers. 7 — IZ.—The mission of the twelve. Already the Master had called them more 
than once. He had " many things to say " unto them, and was ever drawing them into 
closer sympathy with himself, and a higher sense of individual responsibility. St. 
Mark is not so full as St. Matthew, but from what he does tell us we are able to understand 
the nature of the work and its reason. The disciples are now to become apostles. 

I. Cebibt pbefabes and authobizes his own uinistebs. There was need for this. 
Many whom he had cured were proclaiming him, not only without permission, but against 
his express command ; and the devils were continually confessing him. This was incon- 
venient on account of danger to his person, because of the fact that he had been charged 
with being in collusion with Beelzebub, and the misrepresentation that took place as to 
the nature and aims of his kingdom. Christ first says, " Come, follow me," ere he says, 
" Qo." He " began to send them forth by two and two," i.e. tentatively, as they were 
ready, and as his purpose demanded. " Great is the authority of conferring authority " 
(Bengel). 1. 2%e representatives of the Christian ministry were qualified for their task 
by the personal instruction of the Master, and communion with Mm in suffering. 2. 
2%08e most highly qualified to proclaim the gospel waited until he authorized them. 3. 
Their appointment had relation to their personal fitness and the exigencies of Christ's 
work. All the disciples do not seem ever to have been away from Chnst at one time. 

IL When Chbist has fbefabed his disciples he has wobe fob them to do. I. 
Their office was not to he a sinecure. The state of society, its rampant evils, its transitional 
character, and the attitude of expectancy exhibited by many, were so many reasons for 
their beins sent forth. 2. There is never a time vihen earnest Christian effort it moi 



E58 THE GOSPEL ACCORUNG TO ST. MAEK. [oh. vl 1—56. 

needed. 3. ITie adaptation of men is to he considered in determining the ministry they have 
to perform. 

III. The AP08TLESHIP INVOLVED TESTIMONY, MOBAL APPEAL, AND BUPEBNATDBAL 

POWBB. (Vers. 7, 11 — 13.) The particular duties of the Christian ministry are determined 
by the demands of the age, etc., in which it is carried on, but in essence they are always 
the same. 

IV. It INVOLVED A Divine communion and a human fellowbhd^. 1. fle sent them 
forth, but his spiritual presence went with them. It was only of what he had given that 
they could communicate to others, and as he accompanied their efforts with his power. 
2. He sent them " hy two and two." For mutual comfort, help, and co-operation. The 
deficiencies of one would be made up in the gifts of the other, 

V. The equipment foe it was bpieitual, not material; Divinb, hot human. 
What they were to take with them is suggested only by the directions as to what they 
were not to take. It was in their message and its spiritual accompaniment their 
influence was to consist. The Master who sent them would provide for them. Chris- 
tianity, which subsidizes all honourable means and influences, is independent of tU, 
" Silver and gold have I none, but what I have give I thee " (Acts iii, 6).— M. 

Vers. 14 — 16. — Accounting for Christ. Interesting as a photograph of contemporary 
opinion. Abrupt, picturesque, graphic. " He said " (" they said," in some ancient authori- 
ties, as in Luke) is to be understood impersonally or of Herod. If the latter, the very 
repetition of Herod's statement, in ver. 16 (which in both Authorized and New Versions 
is worded similarly to the order and style of ver. 14, but which ought to have its inverted, 
twisted character represented in the English, viz. " whom I beheaded — John : he is 
risen "), gives us fresh insight into the workings of Herod's mind. 

I. Thebb IB EVBB A vaeiett OF OPINION IN THE WOBLD ABOUT Chbist. Whenever 
he is heard of human thought is exercised about him. The element of the extraordinary 
is always recognized as attaching to his personality and action. " However great be 
that variety, yet often the truth lies outside of it " (Bengel). 

II. Christ has to be accounixd fob. Very little was as yet known about him in 
Galilee, yet the question as to who he was at once arose. The reason of this is that 
the character of Christ is a challenge to the spiritual nature of man. 1. /( appeals to 
the spiritual hopes of men. Even with the most debased and degraded, it is from the 
unseen that help and salvation are looked for. The common Jewish notion, that Elijah 
should come again, and the more general one, that the prophets were not dead, but 
reappeared at different times to repeat their messages, were but phases of the inextin- 
guishable hope that characterizes the popular mind in all ages. They both start into 
life again at the appearance of Christ. He cannot he thought of by them but religiously 
or spiritually, the religious nature of his work is so pronounced. " The thoughts of 
many hearts shall be revealed." 2, Conscience is addressed. It is the king who fancies 
he detects the ghostly association. The guilty past started up in all its horror. John's 
faithful teachings and lofty example could not be forgotten. Was it the long-slumbering 
national conscience of the Jews that identified Christ with the prophets, whom their 
fathers had killed? It is the guilty conscience that fears him ; the believer hails him 
with rapture and delight. So the Son of man judges the secrets of men all through time, 
and at the judgment day. 

III. Ant but the highest estimate of Chbist will peovb unsatibfaotobt. 
Popular opinion was at variance within itself; it falls below the true dignity of Christ. 
1. There was, of course, an element of truth in their guesses. All true spiritual workers 
are represented by Christ, and their work is identified in greater or less degree with his. 
The kingdom of God is one in all its manifestations through all time. The higher 
personality and office of Christ is inclusive of all lesser ones. He was a Prophet, and 
more. 2. It was an inversion of the true order of reference which they perpetrated. 
Those prophets were but dependents of Christ, owing all their power and illumination 
to his indwelling Spirit. 3. Their error was due to moral causes. Had then: fathers 
received the prophet's message instead of killing him, the generation of Christ's day 
might better have understood his gospel. The laws of heredity and traditional 
mental attitude had much to do with their blunders, but most of all their own rejec* 
tion of John, or supine allowance of his death. It seemed as if the spiritual oonEcioii*< 



•flH.vi.1— 56.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MABK. 861 

neM of the Jews was condemned to stationariness at the very point of Divine revelation 
where John had failed to Tefonn them. And so all men's lack of faith and their 
OBWorthy conceptions of Christ have a moral root also. It is only as Christ himself, 
by his Spirit and teaching, enables at that we can truly say, " Our Lord, and oui 
dod."— IL 

Vers. 17 — 29, — A towVi tragedy. I. False steps. (Ver. 17.) L Unlawftirelatkn*. 
8. Resisting the messenger of Qod. 

II. CoNFMOTDto iNFLUENOES. (Vers. 19, 20.) The fearless court-preacher and the 
woman he denounced. The messenger of Truth and the associate in pleasure and 
▼ice. Representative of the way in which evil and good incarnate themselves, and 
work upon the heart of every man. The temptation to which Herod was subject was 
.great ; but he was not left without moral witness and aid. 

III. Satan's IKSTBUMENT AHD OPPOETDNITT. (Vers. 21 — 25.) 1. The instrument U in 
-a tense telf-prepared, coming as it does out of the very heart of moral complication and 
love of unhallowed pleasure. 2, Yet is it also chosen and armed by the evU one. 
S. It it an instrument calculated to work insidiously, unsuspectedly, and yet ewrdy 
and irrevocably. Who would imagine that a damsel would wield such tremendoiu 
destinies? The weakness of every man is thoroughly understood by the enemy of 
-Muls, and unscrupulously appealed to. The works of Satan are rather hidden than 
manifest. 4. The attack is made when the m^ral sense is drowned in sensual pleasure 
and excitement. Company, wine, the fascination of the dance, and the flattering of 
pride by the presence of the Galilean nobles. What importunity cannot secure, a 
skilful manceuvre may attain by surprise. The end is gained, provisionally, in the 
royal offer to the maid ; a concealed, implicit pledge of what is not at the moment 
realized. Indefinite promises like this are full of danger; they cover so many 
nnthought-of possibilities, and carry with them the illegitimate show of obligation even 
with respect to things not contemplated when the promise is given. The moral sense 
which is insensible to real duties avenges its perversion by manufacturing fictitious 
-obligations, and attributing chief importance to them. "Honour" is the counterfeit 
-of morality in many minds, A promise made as Herod made his is foolish and wrong, 
yet it cannot bind its maker to the performance of a further wrong. If men were only 
« tithe as attentive to their vows to God as to their vain and boastful promises and 
challenges to one another, they need fear no consequences. We bind ourselves with 
our own ropes. It was a birthday on which Herod committed spiritual suicide. Many 
• parallel to this may be found in the lives of men. 

IV. The catastbofhe. The career of sin has been likened to playing the devil 
with his own loaded dice. The thoughtless word of Herod committed him according 
"to his perverted sense of honour, and the sequel was already predetermined and inevi- 
table. 1. In sanctioning. John's death, Herod violated the deepest instincts of his 
nature, and rejected the voice of Qod. 2. Crowned a life of sin by a heinout and 
irrevocable crime. 3. (Humanly speaking) Destroyed hit own hopes of salvation. His 
'history henceforth is one of steady degeneration and ever darker crime. In many lives 
'there are determining circumstances like this of Herod; they put moimtains and 
abysses between the sinner and the God he has dishonoured. " John the Baptist is risen 
from the dead;" "Whom I beheaded — John: he is risen," are discoveries which lighten 
not one whit the burden of his guilt, and bring no hope to his despur. They are the 
wails of a remorse from which has departed the grace and power of repentance. Tet is 
Christ greater than John, and able to save from even greater crimes than the murder 
of John, if he be but recognized and believed. — M. 

Vers. 30, SI.— Telling Jesus. (Cf. Matt. xiv. 12, 13.) Christ the central Figure all 
through the evangelic narrative. His personal importance is never obscured. It is 
rfrom him apostles go forth ; it is to him they return. Kings ncte his presence and 
works, and the people crowd to his ministry. 

I. What the afostIiEb told Jesus. " All things whatsoever they had done, and 
whatsoever they had taught." 1. They narrated their experience. Most of them had 
"to speak of their work and its results. It had exceeded their most sanguine expecta- 
■tiona. The people had received them everywhere with joy, and they had nothing but 



260 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. yi. 1—5^ 

success to relate. A few, however (Matt. ziv. 12), had a tale of personal sorrow to 
pour into his ears. They had been disciples of John the Baptist, whom Herod had 
just beheaded. Their hopes had been dashed to the ground, and they scarcely knew 
what else to do than " tell him." More disquieting still was theii story, for they 
informed him that the tetrarch was anxio\is to see him, as he fancied he was John, 
whom he had beheaded, risen from the dead. So varied is the history of the Christian 
life I 2. It was but imperfectly undentood by themselvet. What they had done (ix. 
miracles and exorcisms) was in their estimation most important, and is naturally 
enough mentioned first by the evangelist. By-and-by they were to learn that it was 
only for the sake of the teaching accompanying them that the " signs" were of any 
value. And so it was with the sorrow and fear of the disciples of John; they knew 
not their real consequence. Both were probably exaggerated. Still they did not feel 
they had to wait until everything was clearly and fully imderstood. All alike are 
drawn towards him. We, too, spontaneously pour forth our sorrow and joy, our fear 
and our confidence, into his ear, sure of sympathy and help. 

II. Why did they tell Jesus ? 1. i sense of responsibility. It was he who com- 
missioned them at the first, and they felt bound to carry back their report. He was 
the subject of their preaching, and of chief importance. And it was only as his power 
was imparted and continued to them that they were able to proceed. 2. A/eeling oj 
interest. The very enthusiasm and excitement brought them back to Jesus — the plea- 
sure of telling him all the wonders and successes of their mission. Points, too, that 
specially struck their attention were referred to him for explanation. 3. A yearning 
for sympathy. They felt that he would most heartily respond to their mood, whether 
of elation or despondency. No one ever came with a- genuine human feeling to Christ,. 
and received a rebufT. 

III. How DID HE BEOEIVB THEM ? He had evidently listened to their whole story. 
Now they met with : 1. Kindly appreciation. 2. Oracious provision for their ntedt. 
3. Precaution* for their mutual safety. — M. 

Ver. 31. — Ghrisfs offer of rest. I. The peouliae gift of Jestts to his sebvastb. 
" Into a desert place ; " only Christ to speak with them, to comfort and to advise. 

IL A MANIFOLD PBOVisioN FOB HIS SEEVANTs' NEEDS. Calm after excitemeut; 
repose after labour ; meditation upon Divine marvels and experiences. Security from 
threatening dangers. 

III. A FBEPABATION FOB FUTDBE SEBVICE. " Rest a while." — M. 

Ver. 31.— 2%e Christian worker's rest. L In a world whebe these ib ho tbck 

BIST. 

II. Pboceedino FBOM THE LoBD. 1. Divinely comnMnded. 2. Divindy prejarti. 
3. Divinely shared. 

IIL To FIT FOB TUBTBEB SeBYICE. — M. 

Ver. 8L— " Coming and going." I. A piotubb of the wobld'b lif& 
H Indicative op the world's spiritual state. 
IIL An occasion of difficulty to the Chubch. — M. 

Vers. 32 — 34. — Chrisfs sympathy for men. I. How it was called forth. 1. Thr 
physical exhaustion and hunger of the people, 2. 2%eir restlessness. 3. Their inortiett- 
late longing for some higher truth and life. 

II. The ohabacter it assumed. Shepherdly anxiety and care. 1. An intense com- 
passion and solicitude. 2. A deep religious sense of the Divine ideal from which they 
had departed. The spirit, the very words of prophecy, occur to him in the connection 
(Numb, xxvii. 17 ; Zech. x. 2). 3. A practical undertaking of their care. 

III. How it expressed itself. He taught them many things. By word and act 
be strove to lift their hearts to God, and to suggest the ineffable mysteriua of U* 
kingdom. The miracle that followed. — M. 

Ver. 34. — The shepherdly emotion of Christ. I. Naturally elicitkdl 
n. ▲ DiTiNX intebpbbtation of human distbess. 



cm. VI. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL AUC0RDIJ!1G TO ST. MARK. 261 

nl. A rULFILMENT OF THE WOBLD's HOPE. 

IV. Ah UN0ON80IOUB PROOF OF HIS BEING THE SaVIOUE OF MANKIND. — M. 

Yen. 85 — 14. — Feeding the five thousimd ; a miracle. One of the most eignaQy 
demoDstratiTe and masterly of Christ's miracles, whether we consider the circumstancei 
in which it was wrought, the details of its carrying out, or the dimensions and abso- 
luteness of the result. How carefully the evidence was accumulated by Christ of the 
truly miraculous nature of this work 1 It was a grand display of — 

I. Wisdom. 1. A practical (flnd symbolical) discipline of the Church in it: great 
function towards the world. 2, A demonstration to the world of the principles and 
order of the kingdom of God. 

II. EowBB. 1. Creative. 2. Multiplying human resources. 

III. Mebot. Wisdom and power co-opevative towards the accomplishing of the 
highest blessing. Mercy the chief work of God as of man. 1. Bodily, in the relief 
of the hunger, consideration for the weariness of the multitude. 2. Spiritual, in giving 
spiritual bread, in teaching dependence upon God, and in enjoining economy of Divine 
gifts.— M. 

Vers. 35 — 14. — Feeding fhefive thousand: a parable. It is no less remarkable in 
this aspect ; perhaps it was its suggestion of spiritual things which was its chief aim. 
It sets forth the physical and spiritual dependence of men upon God, and the Divine 
Father's willingness and power to provide fur his children ; or, the sufficiency of the 
kingdom of God for the sustenance of its subjects. The nature and principles of 
Divine mercy to mankind are also suggested. 

L The povbrtt of the Church. Both discovered and concealed ; discovered to 
itself, concealed from the world. How delicate the consideration and tact of Christ 1 
1. In position. In the desert. Fur its needs no dependence upon the world is suf- 
fered, whose gold and silver and bread are " not convenient." 2. In material supplies. 
Only five loaves and two fishes, and these, as it were, adventitious. 3. In spiritual 
resource. (1) In evangelical sentiment. How callous the suggestion— " Send them 
away"] There is no sense of responsibility for the well-being of the multitude, 
physically or spiritually. The question as to the " two hundred pennyworth of bread " 
is full of selfish dismay ; the sacrifice is contemplated as not only great, but not to be 
«ntertained. " Give ye them to eat " conveys rebuke as well as command. (2) In 
a^ninistrative expedients. They had everything to learn. No spiritual imagination is 
forthcoming to conceive of Divine aid in a grave exigency of the kingdom of God, to 
plan for the supply of those who have been led, by eagerness fur the bread of life, to 
imperil their command of material necessities. Had the true feeling been there, the 
ideas and inspirations required to give effect to it would not have been wanting. Has 
the Church of to-day yet risen to its high vocation? Our missionary enterprise and 
inward institutional development have not been proportionate to our light and privilege. 
Surely the day is at hand when all these half-hearted and disappointing efforts shall be 
left behind and forgotten in more vigorous, comprehensive, and statesmanlike under- 
takings. 

II. The riches of christ. 1. A satisfying, saving fidness, administered through the 
appointed means of grace already existent in hit Church. The material resources of 
fais people can never be of primary consequence ; for : 2. Means rightly used in his name 
will he indefinitely multiplied to satisfy all the demands made upon it. One man, with 
the Spirit of the Lord in him, will be more powerful than Synods and Churches without 
it. And the means used thus must ever appear disproportionately insignificant as 
compared with the result. " What is little becomes an abundance through the blessing 
of God "(Godwin). 

III. Conditions of Divine communication to men. There was an antecedent 
ground for Christ's consideration, viz. that the people had exposed themselves to in 
convenience and danger through desire for bis doctrine ; corresponding to the principle, 
"Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall b« 
added unto you." "He provideth the lower good for those who were seeking the 
higher " (Godwin). But the immediately declared conditions were ; 1. Obedience. The 
disciples wer« to do aa be bade them, and so through them, in turn, the crowd 



S62 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. vt 1— 5ft 

The resources at hand — ^loaves and fishes — were to be sought for, calculated, and brought 
forth. The people are bidden to place themselves in a position most fittingly and 
impressively to receive the benefit to be conferred. 2. Order. There is something 
Tery impressive in the symmetrical arrangement, " by hundreds and by fifties." It 
was manifestly a measure of the highest importance from the point of view of " supply." 
"Order is Heaven's first law." In the kingdom of God all things must "be done 
decently and in order." A settled government, properly appointed ofBcers, and, in 
general, method, system. So in the economy there must be no waste. The saving 
from one season is to be the supply of another. 3. Divinely commissioned service. 
Some have supposed that the multiplication of the bread was effected in the hands of 
Christ ; some, in the hands of the disciples ; some, in the hands of the multitude ; 
others, in all three stages of its administration. Yet are the apostles — the called and 
commissioned servants of Christ — the true " stewards of the mysteries." The qualific»- 
tion, however, is not mechanical, but spiritual. It is the Spirit of Christ in them that 
fits them for their task, and ensures their efiBciency. 4. Prayer. The meal ia ■ 
communion with God. His blessing must be asked. It is sacramental. Only as God 
blesses the provision can it be su£Scient. It is obvious that the grand condition of all 
these requirements ie faith. It is the calling forth and exercising of this which crowna 
the miracle as a consummate grace. — M. 

Yer. 43. — Spiritual economy. From other accounts we learn that this measnrt 
was ordered by Christ. The power and the restraint of Christ are about equally 
demonstrative of his divinity. A strict and immediate economy is demanded in his 
kingdom. We are to appreciate the grace received ; its very fragments are to b« 
precious. The life and work of the Christian have to exhibit a wise and careful 
stewardship. This direction — 

L Is A SOLUXIOM TO ONE OV THB GREATEST DIFFICULTIES IK OONinSCTIOH WITH 

FBATEB. L Answers are apparently luithhdd because they have already heen granted 
and we do not realize it. 2. Further blessing ia denied because that actuaUy received 
Mas been wasted or despised. 

II. Discovers a common bourob of weakness and want in spiritual ur*. 
L We have not enough because there has been carelessness and waste. 2. We have not 
mough (f>r abundance) because we have been selfish. There has been no desire to keep 
what has been received for others. 

III. Teaches ub obeat ''uilitt ado oeatitudb in the use or bfibttuaii 
•DPPUEs. — ^M. 

Vers. 46 — 52.— Jesus walking on the tea. L The servants of the Lobo abb 

BZFOSED TO OPPOSITION AND DANGER IN CABRYIKa OUT HIS COMMANDS. 

II. Without the consciousness of his presence difficult; apfeabs Disra> 

MOUNTABLE. 

III. He 18 byeb at hand to bless those who abb STBivnta to obey hh 
Word. 

IV. When his bebvants arb beadt to beoeivb him he will ooub to theib 

BIBOUE, AND EVERY OBSTACLE WILL BE OVERCOME. 

Y. Such temptations are intended to discover theib need of bih, abd to 

CONFIRM THEIB FAITH IN HIM. — M. 

Vers. 46 — 62. — Jesus wcUking on tht tea : interpreted of the Chwrek, L EvangelioaIi 
TYPES. The vessel and crew represent the Church of Christ ; the sea, the variable 
circumstance of world-life ; the voyage, the commission of the Church from her Lord ; 
the storm, the adverse spirit of the world ; the apparition, the spiritual advent of our 
Lord into the heart and mind of his Church ; Capernaum — Christ's " own city " — the 
city of God, to which the Church brings all true believers. 

II. Spiritual lessons. 1. The Church of Christ, in discharge of her great 
miuion, must be separate from the spirit of worldliness. The crowd left upon th* 
darkening shoie was animated by the unconverted, carnal mind that cannot under- 
stand the things of God ; but it must nevertheless be ministered to. This mind is 
Ml of unapiritual interpretations of the mission and person of Christ (cf. John vi. 14, 



CH. VI 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 261 

15)l But Christ himself, from whom the disciples were parted, was not yet mauifested 
to themselves as the Son of God and Saviour of the world. He was as yet, so fiu* aa 
their conceptions of him were concerned, the " Christ after the flesh " of whom Paul 
spoke, and therefore hut an element or phase of that world-spirit with which he had 
heen associated in the miracle of the loaves and fishes. These together represent, then, 
the forms the world-spirit assumes, and through which it endeavours to work. 2. The 
Church's distretn arises from various causes, external, and internal, hut chiefly the loiter. 
(1) The opposition of the world-spirit, increasing as the direction of the vessel becomes 
more determinate, and developing bitterness, fury, and persecution. Against these the 
Church strives. (2) Inward sources of disquietude and weakness. The conception 
of Christ carried away by the disciples was in large measure a fleshly one, and a 
worldliness struggles within the heart of believers. The first stages of Christian life 
In the individual and in the historic Church are marked by low ideas of the person 
and work of Christ, producing estrangement from him, fear, and weakness. 3. The 
deliverance of the Chwrch consists in receiving Christ " after the spirit" in faith and 
communion. This advent is supernatural. It is out of the eternal calm, spiritual 
elevation, and moral stability of the mountain of Divine communion. Advancing 
to and with his people through the turmoil of world-life, he is at hand to bless 
accordiag to the measure of reception accorded him, ready to reveal himself to them 
that look for him and cry to him, and proving himself the One who " overcometh the 
world." This spiritual Christ (not an apparition, though appearing to the superstitious 
fear and ignorance of the Church as such) is the true, substantial, and eternal Christ, 
who will work out an instant and complete salvation for his people, perfecting their 
spiritual life, and leading them to their journey's end. — M. 

Vers. 45 — 52. — Chrisfs retirement. There are three essential elements discernible- 
withdrawal from man, approach to God, and return to man. 
I. Seasons of peivaot and retirement are essential to thb BPiBmrAL 

WELTABE OF THOSE WHO HAVE MUCH PUBLIC LIFE AND WOBK. 

n. A GEEAT MINISTBT MUST BB SUSTAINED BY CONSTANT, PEOFOUSD DET0TI0H8. 

m. The pbateb of the saint is ab helpful and necessaby to the welfabe 

OF OTHEBS AS HIS FBAOTICAL WOBK. 

Or— 

I. Difficult of attainment. Much publicity jarred and fretted his nature. 
Yet he could not be rude or unkind. The multitude must be sent home ; the 
disciples required to be removed from the dangerous excitement of the scene. " Con- 
strained " — " sendeth the multitude away." Only Christ could do this, and at what 
cost I His rest must be legitimately won, and therefore no duty or kindness is 
neglected. 

II. A necessity of his spibitual natubb. 

III. Utilized in the highest occupations. 

IV. Bboken IK upon BY human sympathies ahd solicitudes. — ^M. 

Vers. 53 — 5B. — Secondary benefits of the gospel, I. These abk geneballt its 
fibst recommendation. 

II. The end they abb meant to sebtk. 1. To draw men to Christ, 2. To 
demonstrate that the gospel — the Christ — blesses the whole man and the whole lift. 

ILL Theib snabx and dangeb. — M. 

Vers. 2, 3. — Jesus, the rejected Teacher. When the evangelist states, In the 
preceding verse, that Jesus " went out from thence," he is referring not so much to 
the house of Jairus as to the town of Capernaum. Thence he went forth to the 
Tillage of Nazareth, in whose fields he had often played as a child, and in whose honses 
and streets he had laboured as a man. In the world, yet not of it. On a certun 
sabbath day he preached in the synagogue (for Nazareth possessed but one), where he 
had worshipped in his childhood with Mary, and which he had afterwards attended as 
a village artisan. St. Luke records the address he delivered, in which he proclaimed 
himself to be the Messenger of comfort of whom Isaiah had spoken. This only led to 
hit rEJecUon and to a brutal attempt upon his life, so that the Nazarenes unconsciously 



264 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. ti. 1—56, 

justified NathanMl's question, " Can any good thing come out of Nazareth ? " In a 
true and lofty sense, the Lord was the Representative of his brethren, the Ideal to 
which they are to be conformed. From what he was and from what he experienced, 
we may constantly learn something respecting ourselves. We are reminded by thii 
scene of the following truths : — 

I. That wb do not always find bncoubaoembnt where we most natuballt 
LOOK FOB it. If there was a place in Palestine where the Lord might have fairly 
anticipated a welcome, it was Nazareth. Other cities might suspect him, when he 
came to them as a stranger, but in Nazareth be had been known for years. There had 
never been an act of unkindness done by him, or a word of evil uttered by his stainless 
lips. With gentleness greater than a woman's, with bravery loftier than a hero's, he 
had walked uprightly and lovingly amongst this people. Cast out elsewhere, he ought 
to find shelter and be surrounded by love and loyalty here. He came as King AlheA 
came among his Saxons : when overwhelmed by superior forces, he yet refused to bate 
one jot of heart and hope. He came, as we come sometimes from places where we have 
been suspected or wronged, to the home where we believe the best will be made of us. 
But even Nazareth cast him out. Truly, he was " despised and rejected of men." It 
is enough for the servant that he be as his Master. Sometimes, like him, we may suffer 
from want of sympathy where we confidently expected it. Possibly, for example, you 
are brought to serious thought ; you feel that the world passes away, and the lust 
thereof; you are conscious that there is around you a spiritual world, for which you are 
utterly unprepared. Filled with anxiety and distress, you venture to open your heart to 
those at home; but, although it is nominally a Christian home, you are laughed at for 
your pains, or are recommended change and cheerful society. But you feel that it is 
aot this you want, when your " heart and flesh cry out for the living God." Whenever, 
under such drcumstances, you are tempted to anger or discouragement, lift -ap your 
thoughts to him who was tempted even as you are, and yet was without sin. 

II. That man ib not the mere cbbatube of circumstances. The Son of God was 
in one sense infinitely removed from us, yet in his human relations he was " made like 
unto his brethren." And he, in all his purity and devoutness, came forth from a town 
notorious for its ignorance and degradation. He grew up there as a sweet flower does 
upon a heap of refuse, drawing nourishment to itself from the reeking soil, and 
tranemuting it into beauty and fragrance by the power of its own life. So has it been 
with many of his followers. No man is absolutely dependent upon the place in which 
he is bom or educated for what he is. He has a God-given individuality. Besides 
the external training, there is also an inward education, which is more productive of 
result. Examples of this are seen in social life. There are some who are envied now 
for their circumstances of abundance, who were not born in them. They have had 
many an effort and many a failure, but have been faithful and hopeful throughout. 
They started with few advantages, were sent early to business, had but slight education ; 
yet, with a sense of independence of man, linked vrith a consciousness of dependence 
upon Qoi, they have risen above their former mean surroundings. Thus is it in the 
moral and religious sphere. You must not suppose that, because you have not a Christian 
home, you are " committed to do " some abominations ; or that, because you live out of 
sight of the worse forms of degradation and irreligion, you are discharged of all respor - 
sibility in regard to these. Circumstances are not to mould you, but you are to rula 
and triumph over them ; and, by the grace of God, may come forth from a despised and 
degraded condition as one of the kingly sons of God. 

III. That no man is degraded by common wobk. "Is not this the carpenter?" 
What right has he to assume the position of a teacher? Yet these Jews were for the most 
part more sensible In their views of manual work than many Englishmen. It was the cus- 
tom amongst them even for rabbis to learn some handicraft. But then, as now, it was one 
thing to be a learned man with power to turn to manual occupations for amusement, and 
quits another thing to earn bread by it, and in the intervals of labour to teach others. 
This is what Jesus did. Whether, as Justin Martyr reports, he made ploughs for the 
husbandmen or not, at least it is certain that the Builder of the heavens and the earth 
humbled himself to so lowly a condition that his neighbours could say of him, " Is not 
thill the carpenter ? " or, as Matthew puts it, " Is not this the carpenter's son ? " He 
had fallen in with Joseph's condition, and had recognized his own as being marked out 



m. VL 1- 56.] THE GOS?EL JLCCORDING TO ST. MABK- 26» 

for him hj his reputed father's choice. Often onr work is so settled for us, and our 
plans and preferences are thus altered by others, or rather through them by him who 
appoints for every man the bounds of his habitation. Sometimes, for example, a young 
fellow has entered on the study of the law ; but his father dies, and leaves a business on 
the continuance of which the livelihood of the widow and younger children depends. 
All the cherished prospects of life are then rightly sacrificed upon the altar of love and 
duty. It would not be right to dissipate the work of another's life, especially if it were 
that of one's own father ; and if the business be one in which you could serve others 
and serve God, let it be undertaken heartily and gladly. Let there be no departqient 
of life-work in which you would be unwilling to bend your back for the heaviest burden. 
All such occupations Christ has touched and sanctified and honoured, so that in them 
" whatsoever you do, you may do it heartily, as imto the Lord." — A. K. 

Vers. 3 — 5. — " They were offended in him." Whether the narratives of the three 
synoptic evangelists refer to one visit to Nazareth or to two visits, is a question which has 
been eagerly discussed. Give suggestions for the settlement of the dispute. Possibly 
such discrepancies were allowed to exist that we might care less for the material, and 
more for the spiritual element in the Gospels ; that we might concern ourselves lest 
with external incidents in the life of Jesus, and more with the Christ who liveth for 
eveimore. Those who rejected our Lord at Nazareth have their followers in the present 
day, who are influenced by similar motives. Let us discover the reasons and the result* 
of their conduct. 

L Indiffebencx to Ghbibt sometimeb abises fbom fauiliabitt with HU 
SUBBOUKDINGS. The inhabitants of an Alpine village live for years under the shadow 
of a snow-clad mountain, or within hearing of a splendid fall which comes foaming 
down its rocky bed ; but they do not turn aside for a moment to glance at that which 
we have come many miles to see. This indifference, bred of familiarity, characterized 
the Nazarenes. They had known the great Teacher as a child, and had watched hJa 
growth to manhood. He did not come upon them out of obscurity, as a startling 
phenomenon demanding attention ; but they knew the education he had received, the 
teachers at whose feet he had been sitting, the ordinary work he had done, etc. Jesne 
himself acknowledged the influence of this, when he said, " A prophet is not without 
bono jr, save in his own country, and among his own kin, and in his own house." We 
warn our bearers against similar peril ; for there are many who have known their Biblea 
from childhood, who remember the old pictures which at first aroused some interest in 
it, who have attended public worship for years, and yet their lives are prayerless, and it 
may be said of them, " QoA is not in all their thoughts." Beware of that familiarity 
with sacred things which will deaden spiritual sensibility. Most of all, let us who think 
and speak and work for Christ pray that our hearts may ever be filled with light and 
love, and may be kept strong in spiritual power. 

IL Contempt fob Chbist sometimes spbinos Fttou association with his fbiebim. 
"Is not this . . . the brother of James, and Joses, and of Juda, and Simon? and are 
not his sisters here with us ? " Possibly there was nothing known about them which 
was in antagonism to the truth and purity Jesus proclaimed, but as there was nothing 
wonderful about them, it was the more difficult to believe there was anything Divine 
about him. Far more reasonably, however, does the world misjudge our Lord because 
of what is seen in us. Earthly, ordinary, and spiritually feeble as we are, we neverthe- 
less represent him. He speaks of truth, and is " the Truth," yet sometimes the world 
asks concerning his disciples, " Where is their sincerity and transparency ? " We pro- 
fess to uphold righteousness, yet in business, and politics, and home-life we sometimes 
■werve from our integrity. Let there be but living witnesses in the world such a« 
by OoA'a grace we might become, and through whom there should be the outgoings of 
spiritual power, and then society would be shaken to its very foundations. When the 
rulers saw the boldness of Peter and John— the moral change wrought in these Galilean 
peasants — ^'they took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus;" and 
" seeing the man who had been cured " standing beside them, as the result of theil 
vork, "they could say nothing against it." 

IIL The bejeotion of Christ BBiNas about a withdrawal of his inflihercb. 
* He eould there do no mighty work." He could not. His power wfw omnipotent, bat 



268 THE GOSPEL ACOOKUliJG TO ST. MAKK. [oh. vi. 1—56. 

it conditioned itself, as infinite power always does in this world ; and by this limitation 
it was not lessened, but was glorified as moral and spiritual power. In Nazareth there 
was an absence of the ethical condition, on the existence of which miracles depended—* 
an absence, namely, of that faith which has its root in sincerity. If we have that, all 
else is simplified ; if we have it not, we bind the hands of the Bedeemer, who cnnnof 
do his mighty work, of giving us pardon and peace, because of our unbelief. Christ 
marvels at it. He does not wish to leave us, but he must ; and old impressions become 
feebler, the once sensitive heart becomes duller, and we become " hardened through the 
deoeitfulness of sin." " To-day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts." 
Nevertheless, he leaves not himself without a witness. If he must quit Nazareth, he 
will go "round about the villages teaching," encircling the town with the revelations of 
power which it will not receive into its midst. And though he "can do no mighty 
work " such as Capernaum had seen, he will lovingly "lay his hands upon a few sick 
folk," who in an unbelieving city have faith to be healed. " Thou despisest not th* 
aghing of a contrite heart, nor the desire of such as be sorrowfuL"— A. B» 

Vers. 7 — 12. — Preparations for preaching. From amongst Ms disciples our Lotd 
selected a few who were to be in a peculiar sense his representatives and ambassador!^ 
and they have had their successors in all the ages of Christendom. Mark significantly 
says, " Then Jesus began to send them forth ; " for ever since that day he has been giving 
similar work, and qualifying similar representatives. A study of their characteristica 
and of their instructions may be profitable to us. 

L Thet were to go forth from the fresenob of Jesus. All the apostles had 
eompanied with him, and so had heard his instructions and been witnesses of his work. 
This qualified them for their mission. They were not to teach dogmas which might be 
read up as for an examination, but they were to tell of a life, of a person, of a death, 
of a man through whom they had known God. Hence Jesus " called them to be witk 
him," and then sent them forth. This principle has always prevailed in the Church. 
Moses would never have proclaimed God's Law, or known it, unless he had gone into 
his presence on Sinai. Elijah would never have dared to attempt what he did, had ha 
not been able to realize the truth of his often-nttered declaration, " The Lord God of 
Israel, before whom I stand 1 " These disciples could not have spoken as they did, 
nsless they had been with Jesus. So, if we merely get up certain facts or theories, and 
rehearse them in the audience of the people, without ever having a sense of our Lord's 
nearness, our work will be a spiritual failure. First let us come and see the Lord in the 
temple, as Isaiah did, and when we hear his voice, and have our tongue touched with 
a live coal from off the altar, we shall be ready to say, " Here am I ; Lord, send me." 

II. They were to be willing to work together. "He began to send them 
forth by two and two," for their mutual encouragement and help. Show th« 
advantage of Christian friendship and fellowship. We lose spiritual culture by the 
isolated condition of Christian life. United work does not always bring pleasure, but it 
always brings discipline, often through the trials which come from incompatibility of 
temperament. Picture to yourself the experience of the disciple who was appointed 
by our Lord to have Judas Iscariot as his companion. Simon the Cananaian would 
see and lament his growing selfishness and avarice; he would fear to weaken his 
influence or damage his reputation among strangers, and yet would feel he must be 
loyal both to Judas, and his Lord. What self-control this would beget 1 what charity, 
which would shut its eyes to evil to the very last! what discipline of self! what 
earnestness of prayer for guidance! And if an unpleasant companionship may be 
thus fruitful, much more may the companionship that is pleasant become so, if it be 
the appointment of the Lord. When two young people agree to link their destinies 
for weal or woe, to bear with each other's failings, and to strengthen one another's 
hands, it is a happy thing when they can say and feel, that " the Lord Jesus sent them 
forth by two and two." 

m. They wkrb to be oontbjst with the use op moral ikflukkox. On entering 
a town, they were not to demand accommodation from strangers by some display of 
musaculous power, but they were to inquire who in the town was worthy, i.t. •who was 
receptive, bemg numbered amongst the devout ones who were " waiting for the conso- 
lation of Israel." The home of such a onu was to be the centre from which the 



OB. vi 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 267 

apostles worked. If their message was rejected, on leaTing the place they were ta 
"shake off the dust under their feet for a testimony against them" — an act symbolis 
of renunciation of influence and responsibility, and of the announcement of coming 
judgment. They were not to attempt to force men to listen and obey. Spiritual work 
is slow, hut sure. We are not to endeavour, by the establishment of a great organize* 
•tion, to embrace all in a nominal Christianity, nor are we to conquer men by physical 
force, as Mahomet did ; but are to seek lovingly and prayerfully to turn one soul from 
darkness to light, that it may become the source of illumination to others. 

IV. They wbbb to exercise sbt.f-denial and oheebful tbubt in God. This wai 
the meaning of the instructions given in vers. 8, 9. They were to make no special 
provision for their journey, but were to go forth prepared to deny themselves ; ready to 
live in the spirit of pilgrims ; burdened with the fewest possible earthly things ; free 
from all cave, because the Father cared for them. When the Church has their spirit, 
she will win their results. — A. R. 

Vers. 21 — 28.— The murdtrert of John the Baptist The name of Herod Antipas Is 
associated with that of our Lord on three occasions. The first is mentioned in thii 
chapter. On the second he sends a threatening message through the t'harisees (Luke 
xiii. 31) ; and on the third, with his men of war, he mocked the world's Redeemer (Luke 
xxiii. 8—12). These together afford an example of the progressive nature of sin. 
Herod passed from superstitious fear to anger, and from anger to mockery and scorn. 
He " walked in the counsel of the ungodly," and " stood in the way of sinners," and at 
last " sat in the seat of the scornful " (Fs. i.). It appears to have been the extension of 
our Lord's influence, doubtless through the work of his newly appointed apostles, 
which aroused the interest and fear of Herod. The miracles which were wrought 
vividly brought before his guilty conscience the terrible crime which he had recentlj 
committed, in the murder of .John the Baptist, of which Mark gives us the most graphic 
and detailed narrative we have. The feast described could hardly have taken place hi 
Tiberias, but probably in some other palace close by the castle of Macheerus, in which 
John was a prisoner. In the scene which is here portrayed we see three types of character, 
represented by the three chief actors iti this tragedy, which are worthy of our study. 

L Consider Herod as an example of moral weakness. He was the son of Herod 
the Great, by Malthace, a Samaritan woman, and inherited his father's vices without 
his vigour. Profligate and luxurious, he had no vestige of moral greatness. Hia 
language was that of a braggart, as we can see in his promise that he would give " the 
half of his kingdom ; " as if he were a mighty Ahasuerus, whereas he was but th« 
subordinate ruler of the small districts of Galilee and Peraea. In the scene before ui 
we notice in him the following faults : — 1. He was disloyal to his convictions. Impressed 
by John's words, he did not forsake his sins. Like Pilate, he acknowledged the 
innocence and dignity of his victim, yet he had not the moral courage to set him 
free. To know the right, and yet to fail in following it, is the germ of grosser 
sins. 2. Ee was easily influenced by circumsta/nces, "A convenient day" came 
St last for Herodias's purpose, a time when the weak king would be inflamed by 
wine and lust. The tempter ever waits and watches for such occasions to effect the 
moral ruin of those who do not resolutely resist him. The opinion of the civil and 
military officials around him also prevented Herod's refbsal of Salome's request. Like 
all moral cowards, he had more fear of the scorn of men than of the wrath of God. 
3. Se was led gradually to the worst crime. There had been a time when he would 
have shrunk from the murder of John ; but he had been gradually prepared for it. 
His sinful connection with Herodias blunted any sensibility to good, as sensuality 
always does. His unwillingness to put her away led him to silence the bold preacher 
who denounced his crime. And when licentiousness had led to persecution, it was not 
i long before persecution led to murder. 4. Se was moulded by the stronger will of hi» 
'■ companion in guilt. The weakness of a vacillating man is easily overcome by on* 
who is resolutely bad. Give examples from Scripture, and illustrations ftom daily life, 
of the perils besetting those who have no moral firmness and strength. 

II. Consider Salome as an example of abused gifts. Physical beauty is as mncb 
God's gift as wealth, or position, or mental talent. Too often it has been used for tha 
(Uik« of display, for the gratification of vanity, or for the excitement of evil passions. 



268 THE GOSPEL ACOOEDING TO ST. MASK. [oh. ti. 1—68. 



Many have hereby been led into moral ruin. Salome degraded herself unspeakably by 
coming forward in this shameless dance. Forgetting all decency and decorum, she 
danced " in the midst," that is, In a circle of half-intoxicated admirers. 1. Eer regoi 
dignity wa$ forgotten. With amazement the historian records that it was tlia 
"daughter of Herodias herself" (not "of the said Herodias") — a princess of royal 
blood. Even social position and family repute may be fairly regarded as defence* 
against sin. 2. Her maiden modesty vxu tacrificed. In modem social life Christians 
should set themselves against all that seems to have the slightest tendency to this. 
3. Her feminine tenderness was repudiated. The twenty-fifth verse indicates that 
she eagerly shared her mother's hatred against John. But her womanly pity should 
have pleaded for the life of a helpless prisoner, and this God-given characteristic of her 
sex being trampled underfoot, made her crime the more revolting when she accepted 
the bleeding head of the murdered prophet. 

III. CoKsiDEB Herodias as an example of imecBnFDLOOS wickedness. She waste 
Herod what Jezebel was to Ahab, or what Lady Macbeth was to her husband. 1. Her 
vices were great. Abandoned licentiousness and malignant cruelty. 2, Her influence 
was disastrouM over both Herod and her own daughter Salome. She ruined herself 
and others too. For all such there will come a terrible awakening and retribution. 
" Who hath hardened himself against God, and prospered ?" — A. B. 

Ver. 31. — Seereative rest. The disciples had been teaching the people, and meeting 
their objections ; they had been curing the sick, and had seen effects startling even to 
the.nselves. Exultant over the work they had done, they were in some danger of 
forgetting its spiritual issues, and needed a reminder that it was more important to have 
one's name in the book of life than to have power to cast out devils. Agitated, 
restless, and weary, they returned to their Lord, and he, understanding their deepest 
wants, bade them follow him into a quiet retreat, that they might rest a while. Each 
sabbath day should bring us also to Jesus, that he may lead us into rest. 

I. Beobeativb best is BECoaNiZED BT GoD AS A NECESSITY fou uan. We are so 
constituted that a constant strain on the same powers will either degrade or destroy 
them. The absence of physical rest would produce madness or death. But if we had 
only physical recreation, if there were no provision for the cultivation of the mind and 
of the affections, if we knew nothing of the quietude of home and the rest of the 
Lord's day, we should soon become little better than the beasts which perish. This 
revelation shows that our " Father knoweth that we have need of these things." The 
Holy Book is not out of the sphere of our human necessities. It is wet with the tears 
of the sorrowful, and thumbed by the homy hands of the toiler, and through it the 
Son of man still cries, " Come unto me, all ye that Ubour and are heavy laden, and I 
will give you rest." The second chapter in the Book of Genesis speaks of rest as well 
•8 of work. One of the fundamental laws given on Sinai ordained that on six days we 
should work, but that on the seventh we should do no manner of work. Prophecy points 
on to a distant future, and declares " there remaineth a rest for the people of God." 
There is, indeed, no true want which God has not met. If the feeblest of his creatures 
requires food of a certain kind, it is placed beside it from the first. The butterfly, 
for example, which we sometimes use as a type of carelessness, deposits her eggs by 
unerring instinct where the young caterpillars may find their proper food. And the 
God who ^veth to each his food sees that we want rest, and provides for it. When 
our day's work is done, and we are tired, weariness provides and fits for repose, and 
" the sleep of the labouring man is sweet." When we are in danger of becoming hard 
and worldly amid the cares of business, God places around us at home restful endear- 
ments and softening influences. And often on the sabbath day he says with effectiuJ 
power, " Oh, rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him." 

II. BeOBEATITE best SHOULD BATE A JUST BELATION TO EABNEBT WOBK. Every- 
thing of value has its own standard. Art, for example, is of value in proportion to 
taste. Best finds its value in proportion to work. The mere pleasure-seeker loses the 
Tery thing he seeks because he seeks it; for pleasure is the complement of effort, toil, 
and sacrifice. Best is the shadow thrown by the substance work, and you reach the 
shadow when you have passed by the substance that throws it. Nothing is more pitiable 
than the sight of a bUue, self-indulgent epicure, who has never dona any genuine workt 



on. TL 1—56.1 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MASK. 2CT 

and vho saunters through life voting everything to be a weariness. How Tivid i* tha 
contrast between his enjoyment and that of the schoolboy who comes home after 
passing his examination ; or the man of business who rejoices to get free and renew the 
foyi of his boyhood ! The same principle applies to things spirituaL Those who have 
known no struggle with doubt or temptation, who have made no sacrifice for the 
Master, know little or nothing of the rapture which comes to others when, as they 
pray, there comes a burst of sunshine through the darkness. There would be more 
enjoyment of God's rest if only there were a more thorough doing of God's work, llie 
converse of all this is true. Legitimate rest prepares for work. If an indulgence or recre- 
ation makes duty distasteful, so that we go back to it with surly discontent, then either 
the pleasure has been of the wrong kind, or it has been indulged in in a wrong spirit. 
The disciples who went into the desert to rest "a while" were soon at work again, and 
their retirement with Christ had increased their knowledge and power. Such should be 
the effect of each sabbath day. Its morrow should find us endued with more courage, 
patience, and hope, in our daily toiL The rest at Elim was as important for Israel aa 
the march from the Bed Sea. 

III. Recreative best is intended to exercisb a wbolesohe raixuEiroB oh 
OHABAOTEB. Many questions are asked concerning various forms of recreation, whether 
for Christians they are legitimate or not. Incidentally some tests have abeady berai 
suggested. What is their effect npon the work of life? Do they fit us for doing it 
better, or do they lead us to turn from it with loathing ? And what is their effect on 
Christian work ? Is that more, or is it less hearty, devout, and spiritual, because of our 
pleasure-taking? But, besides these, there is a more subtle test to be found in the effect 
of recreation on character. Bightly chosen and enjoyed, it may do much to supply our 
personal deficiencies. We are seeking to become men in Christ Jesus — to have aU the 
possibilities of manhood, so far as they are innocent, developed and strengthened, and 
not to have a few characteristics abnormally strong. If we are becoming stem in our 
fight with difficulties, the relaxations of home-life should make ns considerate and 
gentle. It is well that there is a time to laugh, as well as a time to weep ; and that 
God sends us that which will lift us out of the narrow groove in which the uniformity 
of life would keep us. If recreation is to have the effect on character which is highest 
and best, it must be enjoyed in conscious fellowship with Christ. The final test about 
aoy doubtful recreation would be — Would Christ share this ? Is it he who has said, 
"Cx>me ye apart with me, and rest a while"? We rejoice in the belief that he does share 
in our recreations. He is with us under the whispering trees, and beside the sea as it 
rolls in upon the shore. He walks with us, as of old, across the corn-fields, and beside 
the hedgerows, with their marvellous wealth of life and beauty; and as we commune 
together he bids us think of the minuteness and tenderness of our Father's care. To 
many weary disciples he still is saying, " Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, 
and rest a while." — A. B. 

Ver. 41. — Christian care for the needy. Observe the contrast between this feast oa 
the mountain and the festival just alluded to in the palace of Herod. There self- 
indulgence, folly, and guilt prevailed ; here the necessities of the body were generously 
met, and hungry souls were satisfied and gladdened. Describe the scene. Let us learn 
some of the lessons here inculcated by him who on all occasions was an example to his 
disciples. 

I. We should DEVOUTLY BECOONIZK GOD IN THE SUPPLY OF EABTHLT WANTS. 

When our Lord came here he found religion divorced from common things. It had 
become a matter of ceremonies, of place and time, of ecclesiastical fast and feast, and 
therefore one of the main purposes of his teaching and miracles was to associate God 
with everything in men's thoughts. He worked as a carpenter, and lo toil was sancti- 
fied ; he cured diseases, and the work of the physician and of the nurse was ennobled; 
he went to a wedding feast, and hallowed marriage; he blessed little children, and 
directed their joys heavenwud ; he spoke of lilies in the field, of com white unto the 
harvest, of birds nestling in the trees, and so made nature vocal with God's teaching; 
and here, when he took into his hands the bread and fish with which he would provide 
a labourer's meal for the hungry people, he looked up to heaven as the source whence it 
came, and blessed it, so that to the disciples the common meal became a sacrament 



a70 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. vi. 1—56. 

Too often we are nnmindful of this teaching, and attribute our succesges to our owa 
ekill and strength. Therefore God allows some disaster to come, so that in the recog- 
nition of human helplessness Divine goodness may begin to be considered. " Lord, we 
cannot satisfy this great necessity," said the disciples ; and aa they looked despon- 
dently on the handful, he looked hopefully and thankfully to heaven, leading them to 
think of him who satisfies the desire of every living thing. 

IL Wb bhould always cultivate thoughtful considebation fob othebb. These 
{leople, on their way to the Passover at Jerusalem, had turned aside to hear the Prophet 
of Nazareth. They did not profess to be his followers, although they were sufficiently 
interested in what they heard to remain till all their provisions were exhausted. Then 
the disciples thought it was time that they should depart, and were unprepared for the 
command, " Give ye them to eat." Our Lord was not like those Christians who with- 
hold their sympathy from all but their fellow-believers, nor did he argue that the 
hungry people ought to have foreseen the difficulty, and made reasonable provision to 
meet it. He was the " express Image " of him who is kind to the unthankful and to 
the unworthy. God never withholds his beneficence till his creatures deserve it. He 
watches the supplanter leaving his father's house after a shameful sin, and even to him, 
in his merited loneliness, the heavens are opened. He hears the murmuring of the 
people of Israel, yet causes the manna to fall round about their camp. And when he 
sees no sign of the world turning to him, he sends for its redemption his only begotten 
Son ; and "while we were yet sinners, Christ died for the ungodly." The goodness of 
the Lord, as well his chastisement, should lead us to repentance. Through us that 
goodness should reveal itself to others. Jesus said of this undeserving crowd, " I have 
compassion on the multitude ; " and so he sought to inspire his disciples with pitifulnesa 
towards all who are in need. 

IIL We ouoht willinult to uaee sacrifices fob othebb etem whkh cub qiftb 
BEEM inadequate TO THEiB WAiiTTS. The dlsciples themselves were hungry, and all 
that was to be had was this bread and fish which a boy in the crowd was carrying ; but 
of it Jesus said, " Bring them hither to me." At once it was given up, though it was 
evident that what might have sufficed for the twelve disciples was rioiculously insuf- 
ficient if divided between five thousand men, besides women and children. Yet even 
this, which was very small as a gift, but very great as a sacrifice, was by the Lord's 
blessing made enough for all. It is the sacrifice in it which constitutes the value of 
every offering presented to God. We might have supposed that one with infinite power 
would have despised so trivial a supply as this ; but God always uses what man has, as 
far as it will go. Even under the wing of the cherubim the hand of a man must be. 
When man can do nothing, God does all; but when man can do anything, God requires 
he should do it to the utmost. The manna will cease directly it is possible to revert to 
the old law of sowing and reaping. It is thus with Christian enterprise. The world 
shall be won for Christ — ^not independently of human effort, but as a result of God's 
work through it. Concerning all that we can offer of wealth and talent and work, 
though it is inadequate to the world'* necessity, Christ says, "Bring it hither to 
me."— A. B. 

Vers. 45 — 51,— Christ walking on the tm. This miracle was no unmeaning portent, 
but was full of spiritual significance. In Scripture the people are often spoken of under 
the figure of the sea and its waves f Dan. vii. 3 ; Rev. xiii. 1). Christ had just assuaged 
popular passion, and now he calmed the troubled sea, which was symbolic of it. Here, 
then, we may see a sign of the coming dominion of the spirit of Christianity over the 
sea of nations. We content ourselves, however, now with learning a few truths 
respecting our Lord and his disciples which are exemplified here. 

L We leabn bespbctino oub Lobd : 1. Christ's disciples wovld tend away the people 
who were hungry, but Christ himself sends them away when they are too well satisfied, 
(Compare vers. 36, 45.) The reason for dismissing the crowd is given in John vi. 16. 
They were greatly excited by a miracle, repetitions of which would ensure the provi- 
sioning of armies, and the success of a revolution. Hence Christ sent them away. " He 
hath filled the hungry with good things, but the rich he hath sent empty away." The 
prodigal is welcomed when he comes home starving and helpless. We must go to him 
acknowledging sin and weakness, and not confident in ourselves. 2. Chiist uiithdrnt 



CH. ^T. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING 'JO ST. MARK. 271 



himself from earthly honours, whereas too often Ms disciples greedily seek them. Oui 
Lord "constrained" his disciples to go away, for they were evidently loth to do so. 
It was for their good. They were in danger of becoming infected (if they were not 
already infected) with the spirit of the people. To them it seemed that the longed-for 
kingship of their Lord was within reach. But for the second time he resisted the 
temptation — ^"All this will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me." 
And for them he answered in a most unexpected way the prayer, " Lead us not into 
temptation, but deliver us from evil." 3. Christ left us an example of secret and earnest 
prayer. He was alone with God at the close of that exciting day. The quiet of even> 
tide calls us also to secret prayer. Our Lord hereby renewed his strength, and from it 
he came forth to conflict and victory. " Pray to thy Father, which is in secret." 4. 
Christ is often out of our sight, hut we aire never out o^ his. Lost to the sight of hit 
disciples, he nevertheless " saw them toiling in rowing. 

IL We leabn BESPEOTiKa his disciples : 1. We are sometimes left to toU on in dark- 
ness, vnthout Ghrisfs realized presence. He leaves ua alone for a time that we may feel 
uur need of him. Though the wind may be " contrary " to us, it is a good wind if at 
last it brings our Saviour near. 2. Our extremity is his opportunity. It was alx>ut "the 
fourth watch of the night" — ^between three and six in the morning — that Jesus came ; 
and the hours had been so long and weary since they started upon their voyage, that they 
must have been fast losing hope and courage. The darkest hour is just before the dawn. 
;h. ^ our strength is insufficient to bring us to him, hit strength is sufficient to bring 
him to us. It was so when he redeemed the world. He came to earth because we could 
not climb to heaven. It is so in our special occasions of necessity. He sometimes 
comes for our deliverance in unexpected ways — " walking on the sea." 4k. In all owr 
troubles Jesus says, " It it I } be not afraid."— A. B. 

Vers. l—S.—r^ITie carpenter; or, the dignity of honest labour. "In his own country," 
"in the synagogue " where he had learned in bis youth, he now " began to teach." There 
were " many " who knew him, who had seen him pass in and out amongst them, talking 
to them, perhaps like, yet unlike, the other growing youths and the yoimg men working 
for them, an artisan — one of many. These " hearing him were astonished ; " and though 
"the wiadom" of his teaching they could not deny, nor the "mighty works" wrought by 
his hands, yet, as they knew him and his relatives full well, they were " offended in Um," 
and believed not. So easily is the poor frail heart led away from blessing by prejudice. 
How great was the loss of these needy Nazarenes 1 " He could there do no mighty work, 
save" (oh, wonderful reserve!) "that he laid his hands on a few sick folk, and healed them." 
Let us leave this unbelief for the present — it will arrest our attention again and again — 
and let us see the high tribute paid to the honourableness of lowly labour by this Doer 
of « mighty works " — this " Prophet " robbed of his " honour among his own kin, and in 
liis own house." If labour was first imposed as a curse, it is turned truly into a bless- 
ing by this example of him who thus helped to cultivate the fields around. Here pride 
is truly shamed if it looks upon labour as beneath it : it was not beneath him who is 
above us alL Let every son of toil see in this " carpenter " the highest evidence that 
all handicraft ia exalted to a true dignity, and that bard industry, so far from being a 
degradation, is honourable and honoured. Now, since the "prophet is not without 
honour," let not "the carpenter " be ; for in this instance they are one. The occupancy 
of • sphere of lowly industry by Christ henceforth consecrates it as — 

L A BDITABLE ocouFATioN OF TIME. The responsibility of rightly occupjdng onr 
time cannot be evaded. Of it, as of all other talents, an account must be rendered. 
1. Diligent, honest labour is a profitable employment of time. 2. It is healthful. 3. It 
saves from the degenerating influence of indolence. 4. It is a source of pure and beue- 
flcent enjoyment. 

n. As AK EONOUBABLB MEANS 07 MAINTENANCE. 1. There is nothing degrading in 
honest toil. 2. It has its essential value in the world's great market. It deserves its 
fair remuneration ; and, inasmuch as it is in a high degree necessary for the well-being 
of society, its claims are everywhere, if not always justly, recognized. 3. In a man's 
emplojrment of his strength and skill in procuring what is needful for his own life and 
tor those dependent upon him, his independence of character is preserved au<i hix beat 
>i}«ctvopii stirred. 



272 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. vi. 1— 5b. 

ni. As A WOETHY 8EBVI0E TO OTHERS. By the Constitution of human society, it 
is the plain duty of each to promote to the utmost of his ability the well-being of M 
others. The products of industiial toil, especially of handicraft, are useful in the 
highest degree. Without them the comfort of large communities must be greatly 
impaired. He, therefore, who is called to labour, " working with his hands " the thing 
that is good, is a useful and honourable servant of his race. 1. In the lowliest spheres, 
the loftiest powers are not necessarily degraded. The " Christ of God " was a " car- 
penter." 2. In those spheres the holiest sentiments may be cherished, and the holiest 
character remain untarnished. 3. Whilst in them the humblest labourer may know 
that his toil is honoured, for it was shared by his Lord. — G. 

Vers. 7—13. — The apostolic commission, " The harvest truly is plenteous * and'" the 
labourers are few," therefore " the Lord of the harvest " would " send forth labourers 
into his harvest." To this end " he called unto him the twelve," and gave them the 
grandest commission ever entrusted to man. Let us consider that commission in — 

L Its imposed cokditions. 1. In company : " by two and two." Thus for mutual 
encouragement and help. For the heart of the strongest may fail in presence of danger, 
difficulties, and threatened death. 2. In poverty : " He charged them that they should 
take nothing for their journey, save a staff only ; no bread, no wallet, no money in their 
purse." The source of their power and influence with men was thus shown to be not of 
earth, while no false motives were present to draw men to them. And they, the teachers 
of £fkith in God, would be the highest examples of that faith. So in simple wisdom 
were they to go forth, and in every city seeking the man that was worthy, abide with 
Mm, honouring with their prayer of peace the house that judged them worthy to enter. 
3. In danger : " As sheep in the midst of wolves " shall ye be. They whom ye go to 
bless will become your foes. " Up to councils " shall ye be delivered ; " in their 
synagogues they will scourge you ; " " before governors and kings shall ye be brought ; " 
" hated of all men," ye shall be persecuted from city to city. 4. Yet in safety the life 
exposed for truth and righteousness is not wholly undefended. " The Spirit " of the 
" Father speaketh in " them in the hour of need ; the patiently enduring " shall be save<l." 
Even if men " kill the body," they " are not able to kill the soul ; " and the Father, with- 
' out whom not a sparrow shall fall on the ground, watches the minutest incident of the 
imperilled life — " the very hairs of your head are all numbered ; " while at length the con- 
fessor of Christ among men will he also confess before his " Father which is in heaven." 
Moreover, in all this " the disciple " is but " as his Master " — that Master and Lord 
who will reward the least service done to himself, and punish their foes as his own — that 
Master and Lord who declared that the life lost in his cause should be most truly found. 

II. Its tbust ; or, the terms of the commission. How grand, how honourable, how 
precious to the world — the world of ignorant, suffering, sinful men ! " He gave them 
authority over the nnclean spirits." " As ye go," he said (Matt. x. 7, 8), " preach, heal the 
sick, raise the dead, cleanse the lepers, cast out devils." So the great mission has for 
its object the removal of the evils of human life. Its foulness, its suffering, its error, its 
subjugation to evil, are all to be combated. Truly this was " to preach the kingdom of 
God " (Luke ix. 2). Happy are the subjects of so good a King ! 

III. Its limitation. " Not into any way of the Gentiles, not into any city of the 
Samaritans," but solely " to the lost sheep of the house of Israel," may they go. So 
the promises to the fathers are fulfilled. Truly " God did not cast off his people which 
he foreknew." Truly " all the day long " did he " spread out " his " hands " even to 
them who "as touching the election are belovtd for the fathers' sake." Yet " the time 
ia at hand " when " even to the Gentiles also God will grant repentance unto life ; " and 
out of them will he take " a people for his name." But, according to his will ; the order 
must be observed : to " the Jew first," and, seeing he is tJie God of Gentiles, " also to 
the Gentile." Yet, " let the children first be filled." 

IV. Its success. " And they went out, and preached that men should repent," and 
they preached the gospel, and cast out devils, and healed the sick. Few and simple 
are these words ; yet do they declare conquests greater than armies could gain, and 
works of service to men that lift these labourers to a pitch of unapproachable honour. 
When the world is won to true wisdom, these men and their works shall be magnified 
tbove every other ; and when the Church awakes to her true wisdom, she will see that 



OH. VI. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. 278 



herein is the pattern for all time of the chief principles by which the kingdom of Qod 
is to be extended in the earth. — Gr. 

Vers. 14 — 29. — Herod: the disordered consoimce. The fame of the disciples 
reaches the ears of Herod, and has the eflfeot of recalling to him a shameful deed of blood 
with which his memory is charged, and leads him, in contradiction to his Sadduceaa 
professions, to declare, " John, whom I beheaded ; he is risen." 'ITius two diverse cha- 
racters are brought near together. There are others in view, but tley are not prominent. 
There is the royal dancer, with her skilfulness and obedience, sacrificing her high prospects 
— " unto the half of my kingdom " — to the foul wish of her mother. We see her visage 
of corrupt loveliness, over which a cloud gathers, settling on her heated brow, as she 
finds that her whole reward is to be a gory dish ; and we see the half-exposed coarse- 
ness of her unmaidenly spirit, which could receive and carry the bleeding head and lay it 
at her mother's feet. That mother — no. Alas, to what depths can poor human nature 
descend I Few words are needed to describe the two principal figures. The peace, the 

serenity, and the brightness of a heavenly life in the one, standing beside the darkness 

the pitchy black darkness — of evil in the other. One a rough man from the wilderness, 
but the chosen herald of the great King, of whom it was declared that of all bom of 
women a greater than he had not been. A great man, yet humble and meek ; not worthy 
to loose the sandals of his Master's shoes, yet brave enough to reprove a wicked prince 
to his face. This was one. The other is that prince, the representative of a licentious 
court in a licentious age, big with the pride of conquest, yet trembling from fear of 
the people. A mixture of coarse animal courage with the weakness and vacillation 
which indulgence brings. But a man with a conscience. His heart a dungeon, across 
whose dark gloom shoots one ray of light. Little is said of John — very few words ; a 
mere profile. " It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother's wife." What faithful- 
ness ! What brave fearlessness I Good men and brave always bear testimony to the 
authority of law. " It is not lawful " is a prickly hedge on either side of the path of life. 
Once more of John, bringing Herod more into view. " Herod feared John, knowing that 
he was a righteous man and a holy, and kept him safe. And when he heard him, he 
was much perplexed ; and he heard him gladly." So the silent power of a holy life is 
declared by the example of its influence over this reprobate. Into the darkest chambers 
of that dark heart this ray penetrates. And the words of warning and teaching 
alternately please and pain — " he was much perplexed." Herod is evidently a weak man. 
He is impressible, but he lacks firmness of character — the hardness of texture that 
retains the impression of the hand laid upon it. He yields to good, but it is not lasting ; he 
yields equally to evil. He is suflBoiently alive to the claims of holiness to pay them tribute, 
but not sufficiently so to prevent the rage of passion. He is open to the appeals of a holy 
life ; not less to the demands of a dancing-girl. He fears John, and he fears public 
opinion. He is weak — that weakness which is wickedness. He would give half his 
kingdom to a girl whose dance delighted him, and he would give the head of the man 
whom in his heart iie honours to satisfy her demands. True, he was sorry — " exceeding 
sorry ; " " but for the sake of his oaths, and of them that sat at meat, he would not reject 
her." Oh, what noble fidelity ! Oh, what honour ! Yet has he not suflBcient fidelity 
to truth to say, " Over that man's life I have no power ; " nor honour enough to say, 
" That head is not nune to give." What an unbalanced spirit! what a turbulent seal 
This character reveals — 

I. The necessity fob a ruling pkinoiple in lifb ; " the single eye," which, while it 
gives unity to the whole character, preserves by its simplicity horn the entanglements 
of temptation. 

n. The necessity fob fbomft decision, based upon fbinoifles acenowledqed by 

OONSCIENCB. 

III. The duty of an unquestioning submission to thb law op bioht. • 

IV. And it teaches the terrible lesson that the habitual indulgence in onb sin 

WILL undermine THE WHOLE STRENGTH OF MOEAL CONVICTION AND SENSE OF RIGHT.— G. 

Vers. 30 — 44. — The miracle of the loaves. The apostles, having returned to Jesus 
•fter their first tour of healing and preaching, relate to him " all things whatsoever they 
h»A done, and whatsoever they had taught." Touched with consideration for tiiem, 

BT. MARK. T 



274 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK [oh. vl 1—58. 



Jesus withdraws them " apart into a desert place, to rest a while." But they could not 
be hid. The people saw them departing, and gathered, " from all the cities, a great 
multitude." To the eye of the Merciful they were " as sheep not having a shepherd," and 
his deepest sympathies were touched. " He had compassion on them," and he " healed 
their sick," and he became the Shepherd of their souls, and " began to teach them many 
things." So the day passes and the evening draws nigh, and the disciples in their fear 
desire him to send the people away to " buy themselves something to eat," little know- 
ing that the source of all was near at hand. Jesus' demand to the disciples to " give 
them to eat " quickly evoked the demand, " Shall we go and buy ? " for little recked 
they that " five loaveo " and " two fishes " could feed so great a multitude. But he, 
"loQking up to heaven, blessed," and that for which he blessed was blessed; and he 
brake, and still he brake, for probably the increase was in his hands. " And they did 
all eat, and were filled." So the insufBciency of our poor human resources is shown to 
be no hindrance to the accomplishment of the great Divine purposes ; and the folly of 
having r^ard to our means alone is strikingly shown. , Five loaves, with his blessing 
who gives bread daily, are ample.to meet the wants of a multitude. In those five loaves 
were the apostles — so small a band — represented. How could they meet the needs of 
the world? But he would meet that need, and with but a little Church, a few 
apostles, and a few writings ; and this he foreshadowed. The ground of the world's 
hope lies in his compassion and his means of help. But the miracle stands for ever 
to condemn the fear of those who think that the time must come when the fields will 
be insufficient to feed the nations of men. The " compassion " which then saw the 
multitudes will still be awake, and the power which could feed that multitude on a few 
cakes will in all time give daily bread for the asking. To fear in the presence of God 
for our life, what we shall eat, is as grave a fault as to fear him is a lofty virtue. The 
miracle is a doing in an unusual way what at all other times is done by well-known 
and ordinary methods — methods that are so regular in their orderly succession we are 
led to depend upon them as unfailing ; and we call them " laws of nature." 

I. It teaches us (if we did not otherwise know it) that all feeding is from the Divine 
band. 

II. It declares that God feeds men in tenderness and compassion. The bread comes 
to the thoughtful, made savoury with the Divine goodness. 

III. It points us to those many processes of nature which are (like the disciples in 
this account) the hands of the servants of his will to bear to us God's gifts. 

IV. It shows to us that, in aU God's good gifts to us, the littleness of the human 
means and of natural resources is no hindrance to the fullest satisfaction of our wants. 

V. It illustrates to us that in God's house economy reigns, and that with all 
plentifulness there is to be no waste — nothing lost. His gifts are precious in his own 
sight at least. 

VI. And it quietly teaches the duty of a thankful reception of all he bestows— a 
blessing God for his gifts, which speedily returns as a blessing upon the gift. 

But though this miracle met the bodily wants, and though it teaches its good lessons 
concerning the care that in compassion gives daily bread to the needy, yet it has 
its lofty spiritual aspect. It leads our wondering and admiring thoughts up to him 
who is the Bread of life to the world, and the very Life itself. And it demands fi-om 
disciples that they catch the sprit of their Master, and m compassion care for every 
multitude in every place that " is desert." — G. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Christ at home. I. The wondhous in evebt-dat life. When they 
heard him in the synagogue they were " much struck," Mark says. Where did all 
this wisdom come from? So does the parent wonder at the sayings of the child. 
" Where did he get such thoughts ? " The boy goes from the village, and soon comes 
back to' astonish the gossip, with his broad views of life and his easy and confident 
manners. Experience is full of these surprises. Nothing is more astonishing now 
than the empire which the Child of Nazareth sways in the world of thought and 
conduct. 

II. The jBALOtjsT « f homb-cbown greatness. The peonle of Nazareth stumbled 
at Jesus. So are our thoughts under the tyranny of custom. If one should tell ua 
that our little son or brother was great, we should find it hard to believe, Tis warn 



CH. VI. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDIN& TO ST. MARK. 875 

of faith in the living God, who works wherever, whenever, howsoever he wills. Bewar* 
of that narrow egotism which even now may be shutting us out from light and beautj, 
divinity and blessedness. 

III. The most invincible of obstacles is the will of mak. How deep was the 
truth of the saying, that against stupidity even the gods fight in vain I There was 
sarcasm in the saying of Jesus (ver. 4). Often has it been repeated. He " wondered 
at their want of faith." Full of faith and love himself, 'twas hard to understand the 
want of response to it. " He was not able to do any work of power there." Ask, when 
the business of the kingdom does not seem to be going forward (except on a small 
scale, ver. 5), whether the cause may not be want of wish, want of will, want of 
prayer. — J. 

Vers. 7^13. — Missionaries. I. Missionaries must not be, ab a rule, bolitaet 
HEN. For counsel, defence, cheerfulness, " two are better than one." Without arti- 
ficially imitating this example, in natural and quiet ways it will be found good to 
follow. 

n. MissioNABiEB, AS A BULE, MUST BE FRUGAL MEN. No luxuTies ; bare necessarie* 
compose their outfit. It is like the soldier in "marching order," or the exploring 
traveller. Luxury is a relative term, but the Christian minister will always put it in 
a secondary place. 

III. Missionaries, ab a rule, must not be sedentary hen. They are sent with a 
witness. They must deliver a few clear statements, sound a blast upon the trumpet 
that calls to repentance, and then forward again. The rule for the pastor is very 
different. We must try to understand our call. 

IV. MlBSIONABIES, AS A RULE, MUST ACT DIBEOTLY UPON THE 0ON80IKN0K OF MMf. 

This is a great canon, and a mark of distinction between the missionary and the 
pastor. "They, departing, proclaimed that men should repent." A fresh voice, 
delivering this word, "Repent!" with intensity and power, will awaken echoes. But, 
repeated in the same place by the same person, the effect must wear off. Solid and 
continuous instruction then is needed. The teacher must sow where the exhorter haa 
broken up the fallow ground. — J. 

Vers. 14 — 16. — Wonder and fancy. Incidentally how much light on hamaa 
nature do we gain from the Gospels ! 

I. Personal force always attbaotb attention. The man cannot be hidden. 
Even the "lion" of the hour merely is an expression of spiritual force. Who is he? 
Whence came he? 

II. The popular conscience recognizes the force of character. They/eW that 
something new had come into the world of thought and feeling. It is always worth 
while taking note of the direction of popular interest. Herod learned much from the 
people. However wide of the mark their conjectures as to the personality of Jesxu 
might be, their instinctive recognition of his greatness was unerring. 

III. The superstition of the bad man. It is often seen that unbelief and snper- 
Btition, as in the expressive language of the Germans, Unglaube and Aberglauhe, are 
generally found together, springing from one root. The truth is, that in an idle, 
voluptuous mind any sort of thought springs up, rife as weeds in warmth and rain. 
The only way to think truly is to feel purely and act rightly. — J. 

Vers. 17 — 29. — The hero's death. I, Tee hero of conscience oontbabtbd irirH 
»HB voluptuary. The former chooses to be true and loyal to the right rather than 
to live; the latter postpones everything to "life," in the lowest and most sensual 
acceptation of the word. Yet the wicked man involuntarily respects the good 
man. 

II. The blate of spurious honour contrasted with the servant of the truth. 
Herod excuses his violent deed ; nay, he pretends that it is required in order to satitify 
his word as a man of honour. Such a one as his victim would never have given his 
word in such a case. 

III, The true parts of men in life often seem to be reverses. John loses hit 
head at the order of Herod. The sublime hero bows before the weak tyrant. Bo U It 



27« THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. yi. 1— 5a 

in the "whirligig of time." Unless we keep our eye firmly fixed on the unseen and 
spiritual, it may appear that all things are turned upside down. But there is only on« 
relation of things, and that is God's. Herod is really to be pitied. Over John ia 
extended the shield of omnipotence, and in the very moment of his violence Herod it 
most weak. (Compare R. Browning's poem, ' Instans Tyrannus.') — J. 

Vers. 30 — 34. — Best and work. I. Thebe is no tbue best which has not bees 

EARNED BT WORK. 

II. The DtiTy of resting has the same reasons as the dtjtt of wobkino. 

III. Solitude is the proper refreshment after public work, and pbefabatio» 
fob it. 

IV. The spirit can nbveb be at leisure from compassion, sympathy, an» 

LOVE. — J. 

Vers. 35 — 44. — The multitude fed. I. The compassion of Chbibt. It is for the 
body as well as the soul. The foundation of work upon the soul is cure for the body. 
It is contrasted with the disciples' carelessness. Their spirit is that which leads men 
to get rid of irksome duty. " Send them away ! " Let them shift for themselves. 
Christ's example teaches that where a want is seen, those who see it should he the first 
to seek to supply it. 

II. Love is rich in ebsourcbs. It seemed a physical impossibility to feed those 
thousands without bread, without money. This beautiful story, like that of EUjab 
and the widow of Zarephath in the old time, teaches that " a little may go a long way." 
If the best use is made of existing means, they will be fonnd insensibly to multiply ; 
not always by what we term a " miracle," t.e. some process out of the ordinary opera- 
tion of law, but in accordance with law, which may be better. 

HI. Method in beneficence. The multitude is broken up and distributed in 
parties, as if in preparation for a grand banquet. The spirit of love and goodness works 
by method. When we introduce order into our works, we reflect the law of Heaven 
and imitate the thought of God. Waste of material and waste of labour is generally 
for want of this. 

IV. In God's feasts there is ever enough and to spare. The people were not 
only satisfied, but there was enough left to furnish forth a future repast. The whole is 
a parable of the truths and laws of the Spirit. Love is the deepest root of social and 
political economy. It teaches the value of means, in view of the greatness of the ends. 
It stimulates prudence and calculation. For the individual, the complaint is generally 
not sound, that he has " not enough to live on." To reduce wants is the same as to 
increase means, and is a sure secret of wealth. For the community, the far-reaching 
and benevolent wisdom of the legislature may avail more than mere abundance of 
harvests. With order, religious principle, liberality and frugality, the tables of the 
people will be furnished with bread. To cheapen the means of living and oppose war 
is the daty of the Christian politician. — J. 

Vers. 46— 52. — The vision on the lake. L The frailty of faith. 1. In lonelinesK 
Jesus had gone away. The disciples were in the middle of the lake, amidst a stormy 
sea. It is a picture of a life-experience. In loneliness we sink into weakness and 
cowardice, having been brave in the fellowship and under the contagious influence of 
superiors. 2. In the withdrawal of its Object from the field of vision. They could not 
tee Christ. We want to see, when the whole need is that we should trust. We want 
to unite incompatible things ; willing to trust so soon as we see a good prospect of 
safety; oast down with apprehension when the inner sight, kept clear, would open its 
vista of cheering hope. Those men were yet to learn, in the language of one of them, 
to " believe in the Saviour, though now we see him not." 

IL Terbob at the supernatural. They saw Jesus passing, and were terrified, for 
they thought it was a ghost. Involuntary fear in the presence of the supernatural is 
tba symptom of our weak and dependent nature. When Jesus appeared as Jesus, he 
drove all fear away ; when he passed into the chiaro-oscuro of perception, standing as it 
w«e in a region intermediate betwei'n earth and heaven, as here on the lake, as on the 
iluunt of Transfiguration, terror fell upon their souls. Pear in the mind reflects th» 



OH. VI. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MABK. 277 

presence of Gocl. Modified by intelligence, purified from superstition, fear passes into 
that rererenoe which is the ground-tone of religious feeling. 

III. The terrors of God conceal his love. Behind the tempest is his " Bmiling 
hce." The voice of the Comforter and Saviour of man speaks from the dread appari- 
tion of the lake. So from out the mystic scenes of nature, the Alpine tempest and 
avalanche, the mountainous swelling of the sea, and all human changes and turbulences 
of history, speaks a voice, clear, calm, and still, if we will but hearken, like that which 
greeted, Elijah : " Have courage ; it is I. Child of man, I love thee ; rest on me and ba 
at peace." It is when we realize that we are members of the kingdom of spirit and 
under the protection of its Head, that we can defy the " wild deluge of cares." It is not 
because God is not near to us, or that help is not available, that we tremble and fee! 
forlorn ; it is because, like the disciples, our " minds have become dull." — J. 

Vers. 53 — 56. — Commotion in Gennesaret. I. A stir among the biok and their 
friends. We read of " fashionable events" and "arrivals in the fashionable world." 
This was not such. The quality of a movement teaches much as to its origin. The 
poor and sick know their friends, and their thronging is a testimonial to worth. 

II. The progress of healing and pitt. Contrast with the progress of the conqueror 
or the cold pomp of royalty. Wherever Christ goes, and men come into contact with 
him, they are made well. Worth much is the testimony of any suffering one to the 
private Christian: "I am the better for seeii)g you; you do me more good than the 
doctor." There is a contagion of health as well as of disease. — J. 

Vera. 1 — 6. Parallel passage : Matt. xiii. 54 — 58. — The rejection at Nazareth. 
I. Odb Lord's visit to Nazareth. This chapter commences with our Lord's 
removal from the house of Jairus, the ruler of the syna^o^ue, where he had performed 
the miracle recorded at the close of the last chapter ; or rather from Capernaum, where 
the synagogue appears to have been situated. In either case he proceeded to visit his 
fatherlafyi — not in the wide sense of that term, but in the narrower meaning of the 
township where his parents' home had been, and where his own childhood, youth, and 
early manhood had been spent. It is scarcely necessary to remind our readers that, 
while Bethlehem was the place of pur Lord's nativity, and while Capernaum is called his 
own city, as the place of his frequent resort and the scene of so many of his mighty works, 
Nazareth was the place where he had been brought up. In a beautiful, basinrlike 
valley, enclosed by some fifteen bills, was situated this place of world-wide renown. 
The town or village of Nazareth seems to sleep among the hills. The hills around this 
happy valley, as it has been called, have been compared to the petals of a rose, or the 
edge of a shell, with the little town on the lower slope of the western hill which rises 
high above, and which, from its elevation of nearly six hundred feet, commands one 
of the finest prospects in Palestine, with the Great Sea and Carmel on the west, the 
great plain of Esdraelon two miles to the south, Tabor six miles to the south-east, 
and Hermon's snowy summit away to the northward. 

II. Cause of his rejection. A previous rejection, if we mistake not, had taken 
place at Nazareth, and with greater violence than at this time, according to the record 
of St. Luke. On the previous occasion passion had impelled them ; now prejudice 
blinds them. He had begun to address the congregation ; his eloquence and oratory 
amazed them. He had not gone far, however, without interruption. They admit his 
superiority ; they acknowledge his wisdom ; but, in a sinister manner, they question its 
source and character, asking, " Whence is it ? From above or below ? What is it? Is 
it supernal or infernal ? And then such mighty works are wrought by his bands 1 He 
is the instrument of some superior power — not the originating cause or author of them." 
Such seems to be the insinuation. Envy and jealousy were at the root of this 
prejudice. They canvassed the humble position of his family, and the lowly occupation 
of its members. " Is he not," they said, " a carpenter — a common carpenter, and the son 
of a carpenter — the village carpenter? Is he not a carpenter himself?" They were 
ignorant of the dignity of labour, and the nobility of honest toil. They overlooked the 
fact that Jews were wont to learn a trade, and that, according to Jewish ideas, a parent 
who did not have his son taught a trade was regarded as guilty of training him to dis- 
b »n«sty Justin Martyr preserves the tradition of our Lord having made ploughs and 



tin THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. vi. 1— 5(^ 

Tokes and other agricultural implements. Bnt they knew his family and friends— > 
knew them so well that familiarity begat contempt. They knew who Mary was, 
Joseph having in all probability died before this time. They knew his brethren : 
sons of Joseph and Mary ; or jiossibly his half-brothers — sons of Joseph by a previout 
marriage ; if not his cousins, children of Clopas and Mary. They knew his sistetsi 
They could not brook his great and manifest superiority. Verily envy is a green-eyed 
monster ; and so " they were offended in him." Our Lord, no doubt, felt all this acutely, 
but accounted for it by the principle embodied in the proverb, that a prophet is without 
honour in three circles — his neighbours, relatives, and members of his household. No 
wonder he could not do mighty works there; not that there was any physical 
inability in the Saviour himself, but the forth-putting of his power was conditioned 
by the faithful disposition or otherwise of his hearers. Thus Theophylact makes this 
want of ability relative and owing to the want of faith in the recipients. " Not," he 
says, " because he was weak, but because they were faithless." Here there was a 
want of receptivity to such an extent that he marvelled — not at their unbelief, but on 
account of it. It was not the object, but the cause (Sia), of his astonishment. He 
wondered, as we read, at the faith of some no less than at the unbelief of others. — J. J. G. 

Vers. 7—13. Pa-illpl passages : Matt. ix. 35 — 38 ; x. 5 — 42 ; Luke ix. 1—6. — Tht 
mission of the twelve. I. Thbib fibbt missionabt enterprise. Our Lord had 
already, as recorded in ch. iii., made choice of his twelve disciples, to accompany 
himself during their time of training, and subsequently to go forth on their apostolic 
mission and with indubitable credentials of their commission. The time had now 
come for their first brief and tentative effort in that direction. They go " forth by 
two and two " — in pairs (SiJo Sio, a Hebraism for /coTct Sio, or iwa Wo). The wisdom ol' 
this method is obvious for many reasons. It was the cundition of true testimony 
according to the statement of the Old Testament, that " at the mouth of two or three 
witnesses every word should be established " or confirmed. Two are better than one 
for counsel and encouragement. Two would numerically warrant the expectation 
of the Divine presence in prayer, for "where two or three are met" together is 
God's name, his presence is promised. In many ways two would be mutually helpful, 
and abundantly justify the prudence of the arrangement. Endued with miractdous 
power, they had no need of human recommendation ; the powers they possessed were 
amply sufficient to certify the Divine origin of their mission; while the works of 
heavenly beneficence to suffering humanity were well adapted to gain them acceptance. 
With such abundant spiritual equipment, they received the Master's word of command 
(irofrfiYyfAtr) to set out on their first expedition. 

II. Theib fhtsioal equipment. Their physical equipment, however, was of the 
scanttest kind. In fact, they were to make no special provision for themselves what- 
ever; Buch provision might delay them when setting out, and impede them on theii 
journey. Consequently they proceeded at once to their sphere of labour, without 
delay and encumbrance of any kind. Without staff, ekcept the one in common oi 
daily use — they were even expressly forbidden to acquire or provide for themselvei 
(n^ KT'^anaSt) another in addition, or for the particular purpose of their present 
miraion ; without shoes, save the sandals they every day wore (fiiroSeSe/t^Koui) ; without 
bread for immediate use ; without scrip for provisions by the way, or copper in their 
purfM to procure such ; without two tunics, or under-garments, — they set out on theii 
first mission, pensioners on the providence of God and the pious hospitality of his 
people. 

III. The abbanoembnt fob theib lodging. They were not at liberty to lodge 
in any or every house that might open its door to them. They were to act circnm- 
spectly in this matter, and carefully inquire, on entering a city or village, who in it 
waa worthy. By acting without due discrimination in this particular, and lodging iu 
dilrepatable quarters, they might imperil their own reputation or bring discredit on 
their mission. Once they had obtained a suitable stopping-place, they were not to 
change for another, even if the offer of a better place of sojourn or superior accommo- 
dation should tempt them to such a step. Their wants were few, their mode of life 
simple, and with the humblest hospitality it behoved them to be content. In case such 
Oriental and usual hospitality waa denied them or in the event of their being refus«d 



cH, TL 1— 56.J TEE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 278 

Admittance, they were, by a significant symbolic act, to express their renunciation ol 
ill intercourse with persons guilty of such churlish rudeness or barbarous want ol 
hcapitality. They had rejected them, though they went in their Master's name; and, 
rejecting them, they rejected the Master who sent them, and thus cut themselves ofi 
from future opportunities of blessing. 

IV. Thb doctkinb thet preached. Above all was the great doctrine which 
they preached. That doctrine was repentance — the doctrine which our Lord's fore- 
runner had proclaimed before; the doctrine which our Lord himself reiterated; the 
doctrine which, joined to faith, became afterwards one of the elements in that twofold 
apostolic testimony, when, after their Lord's resurrection and ascension, the apostles 
went forth, declaring " repentance toward God, and faith toward the Lord Jesus Christ." 
While thus busied in seeking the salvation of men's souls, they did not neglect the 
sufferings of the body; but cast out devils and healed the sick, using oil, if not 
medicinally, at least symbolically, to establish a point of contact or connection between 
them and their patients. — J. J. G. 

Vers. 14—29. Parallel passages: Matt. xiv. 1, 2; 6—12; Luke ix. 7— 9.— Z%e 
murder of the Baptist. I. Conjectures about Christ. The name of Jesus had now 
attained great celebrity ; it was fast becoming a household word ; the cures he had effected, 
the demons he had ejected from human bodies, the dead he had raised — his wonderful 
works were on every tongue. Some detracted, others wondered, but most applauded. 
The missionary tour of the apostles, brief as it was, had given fresh currency and wider 
diffusion to reports already circulated far and near. His fame had made its way into 
the court of the tetrarch, and thus reached the ears of royalty itself. The personality 
of the great Wonder-worker was keenly canvassed ; conjectures were rife on the subject. 
Some affirmed he was Elias, who had come as the forerunner of Messiah ; others, not 
seeing their way to go so far as to accept him for the Prophet long expected, or even 
the precursor of that great Prophet, simply asserted he was a prophet ; while some 
lancied that, after a long and dreary interval, a new era of prophetic activity was 
commencing, and so that a person like one of the old prophets had appeared. 

II. CoNSOlENOE STRONGER THAN CREED. Such were the conjectures afloat, and such 
the conflicting opinions of the people. Not so Herod ; other thoughts stirred within 
him ; something more than mere curiosity was at work in his case ; he was startled — 
thoroughly perplexed, and quite at a loss (Sirijr6pet, St. Luke) to know what to think 
of the matter. In his extreme perplexity and agitation he expressed his opinion in a 
very surprising manner, and in the following very striking and abrupt words : — " Whom 
I myself beheaded — John : he is risen from the dead ; " adding, " And on this account 
mighty powers operate in him." What a wonderful evidence of the power of conscience 
we have here ! Herod, we have good reason to believe, was a Sadducee, for " the leaven 
of Herod," mentioned by St. Mark (viii. 15), is identified with " the leaven of the 
Sadducees " spoken of in the Gospel of St. Matthew (xvi. 6). The Sadducees denied the 
existence of angel or spirit, and also the resurrection of the dead ; and yet this loose- 
living, unbelieving Sadducee fell back at once on an article of belief which he had all 
his life denied. The power of conscience had overmastered his creed. His guilty 
conscience had conjured up before him the murdered man as restored to life, and 
returning, as it were, with power from the spirit-world. 

lU. A PARALLEL CASE. A somewhat similar instance of the mighty power of that 
monitor within occurs in an instructive narrative in the forty-second chapter of the 
Book of Genesis. When Joseph, before making himself known to his brethren, had 
put them in ward three days, and subsequently released them on condition of retaining 
one as a hostage till the rest returned with their youngest brother, in proof of their 
good faith and of their being true men and no spies, " they said one to another. We 
are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when 
he besought us, and we would not hear ; therefore is this distress come upon us." There 
was nothing apparently in the circumstances of the case, unpleasant as those circum- 
stances were, nor in the condition imposed on them, liard as it seemed, to remind them 
of their cruel treatment of their long-lost brother — nothing to recall his memory, 
absolutely nothing, save the still, small voice within ; in other words, the power of a 
guilty conscience. 



280 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. vi. 1—56 

IV. The cihcumstances that occasioited the Baptist's death. The evangelist 
now turns aside to narrate the circumstances that led up to the death of John tha 
Baptist. Herod Antipas, ethnarch of Galilee and Pereea, called "tetrarch" by 
St. Matthew, as inheriting only a fourth part of the dominions of his father, Herod 
the Great, and styled " king " by St. Mark, had seduced his brother Philip's wife, with 
whom he was now living in an adulterous connection. The Baptist boldly but faith- 
fully lifted up his voice against, this sin, addressiog earnest and repeated remonstrances 
to Herod; for, as we read, he kejit saying (e\eye lieing imperfect), "It is not lawful 
for thee to have her." The vindictive spirit of Hprodias was roused in consequence ; 
she resolved to have her revenge, but was unable to prevail on her husband to gratify 
her fully in this particulir. He arrested the Baptist and imprisoned him, putting 
him in chains. He still, however, retained some respect; for liira, as a good and 
holy man whom he had heard often, and by whom he had been influenced to do 
many things; though ffui/er^pei rather means that Herod kept him in safety, or 
preserved him from Herodias's machinations, than that he esteemed him highly. 
Besides, state policy stood in the, way of further violence. Herod shrank from the 
unpopularity which he was certain to incur by such a course; perhaps even worse 
consequences might ensue. To deprive the people of their favourite might lead 
to insurrection. Josephus, however, attributes the murder of John by Herod to 
Herod's "fear lest the great influence John had over the people might put it into 
his power and inclination to raise a rebellion." This wicked woman bided her time, 
harbouring her secret grudge and ill-concealed resentment (dyeixf, equivalent to 
" she held fast within or cherished inward wrath," or " set herself against," Revised 
Version) ; while <8eXfK implies " she had a settled desire ") ; but the favourable 
opportunity at last arrived. The king was celebrating his birthday festival by an 
entertainment to the magnates of his realm — high ofiScers of the army, military 
tribunes, or chiliarchs, and other functionaries, civil or ecclesiastical, of distinguished 
raik. But besides this great assemblage of Galilean nobles and the splendour of the 
feast itself, a new feature was added to the entertainment. Salome, daughter of Hero- 
dias, in forgetfulness of the due decorum of her rank and the natural modesty of her 
sex, volunteered to play a part little better than that of ballet-girl before the assembled 
grandees of Galilee, and thus to heighten the enjoyment of the king's guests. '1 he 
king looked on in rapture, immensely pleased by the easy condescension, and charmed 
with the agility and graceful movements of the fair danseuse. He was sensible of the 
sacrifice she had made in compliment to his majesty ; for a Persian qneen once lost her 
crown, and was willing to submit to the loss, rather than, at the sacrifice of her queenly 
or womanly modesty, to appear, even by the king's express command, in the presence 
of his banqueters. Being, in consequence, in a grateful, generous mood, he determined 
net to be outdone in magnanimity. There and then, of his own motion, he promised 
Salome whatever she asked, if it should amount to half his kin;;dora; he backed hia 
promise by an oath, yea, by more than one, for we read of oaths (SpKous), as confirmatory 
of that promise. The girl was somewhat nonplussed by the largeness of the king's 
bounteous ofiier. She hesitated : but a prompter was not far to seek. She repaired to 
her mother, no doubt expecting direction in the matter of gold, or jewels, or diamonds, 
or girlish ornaments of some sort. But no ; that wicked woman had set her heart on 
what no gold could purchase, and no gems procure. It was no less than the Baptist's 
head. 

v. Reflections on all this. 1. Surely the maiden, bold as she was, must have 
been shocked at the proposal ; surely she must have recoiled irom such a cruelty ; 
surely she must have required strong and powerful urgency to bring herself to present 
such a bloody petition. And this we think is implied in the word •KpoPifiaaeeTa-a, 
employed by St. Matthew, and signifying " made to go forward," and so instigated. 
She soon, however, recovered her sprightliness. Once her scruples were overcome, 
she returned in haste, and with eagerness pieferred the ghastly request for John the 
Baptist's head to be given her immediately— lest time might cool the royal ardour — and 
in a charger, one of the platters used in the feast, and thus one of those just at hand, 
tc make sure of the execution on the spot. The terms are expresinve of the utmost 
eagerness and haste: "Give me here— immediately in a charger," is the demand after 
«he h«1 " come in straightway with haste." 2. The king at once repented, but to« 



CH. v:. 1-56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 281 

late ; he was excessively sorry (wepfXt/Tros). This word is only used twice again in th« 
New Testament — of the Saviour in his agony, and of the rich ruler in parting, perhaps 
for ever, from the Saviour. But then there was the false shame consequent on repeated 
oaths, and because of the presence of so many persons of quality. How could he break 
the former? How could he insult, by withdrawal of his kingly promise or breach of 
faith, the latter? How could he set aside (Afler^iroi) a promise made before so many, 
and confirmed by so many oaths ? 3. At once a guardsman {airiKov\in-tip, either equal 
to Sopv<p6fot, a satellite or body-guard, or equal to KariaKoiros, a spy, or scout; at 
all events, a guardsman of Herod now at war with Aretas) is despatched. The head 
is brought, dripping with blood. Oh, horrid sight ! It is handed on a platter to the 
maiden ; and she, maiden though she was, received it, and, maiden though she was, 
bore it away to her mother. The word " maiden " (^KopAriov, equivalent to little or 
young maiden) is repeated, as if to stigmatize the untender, unfeeling, and beyond 
expression unmaidenly, conduct of this princess. 4. So ended the last act of this 
bloody tragedy. It now remained for the sorrowing disciples of the Baptist tearfully 
and tenderly to take up the corpse (Trrajfio, equivalent to cadaver) of their beloved 
master, and consign it to its last resting-place in the tomb. 

VI. Additional remarks. 1. A nearly parallel case, or a crime somewhat similar to 
that of Herod, is referred to in strongest terms of condemnation by Cicero, in the twelfth 
chapter of his ' Treatise on Old Ase,' as follows : — " 1 indeed acted unwillinsly in banish- 
ing from the senate L. Flaminius, brother of that eminently brave man, T. Flaminius, 
seven years after he had been consul ; but I thought that his licentiousness should be 
stigmatized. For when he was consul in Gaul, he was prevailed on by a courtesan, at 
an entertainment, to behead one of those who were in confinement on a capital accusa- 
tion ; • . • but lewdness so abandoned and so desperate, which was combining with 
private infamy the disgrace of the empire, could by no means be visited with approba- 
tion by myself and Flaccus." 2. It was in a gloomy dungeon, in the strong old castle 
of Machaerus, that the Baptist was imprisoned and beheaded. That place was In Per»a, 
nine miles east of the Dead Sea, and on the borders between the dominion of Herod 
and of Aretas. It is thus described by Joseph us in relation to its strength : " The nature 
of the place was very capable of affording the surest hopes of safety to those that 
possessed this citadel, as well as delay and fear to those that should at f ack it ; fur what 
was walled in was itself a very rocky hill, elevated to a very great height ; which cir- 
cumstance alone made it very hard to be subdued. It was also so contrived by nature 
that it could not be easily ascended ; for it is, as it were, ditched about with such 
valleys on all sides, and to such a depth that the eye cannot reach their bottoms, and 
such as are not easily passed over, and even such as it is impossible to fill up with 
earth."— J. J. G. 

Vers. 30 — 44. Parallel passages : Matt. xiv. 13 — 21 ; Luke ix. 10 — 17 ; John vi. 
1 — 14. — Miraculous provision. 1. The feedikg of the five thousand. 1. The vivid 
description of St. Mark. In connection with this miracle, St. Mark describes the recog- 
nition of our Lord by the multitude, their lunning together on foot, their outspeeding 
the Saviour, their arrival at the place of disembarkation before him, the compassion that 
moved him, the instruction he gave them. He describes, moreover, the green grass on 
which the multitudes sat down, their divisions into hundreds and fifties, their reclining 
company after company (literally, a convivial party, and iTv/i.v6(na trvinrScria, a Hebraism, 
like SiJo Siio of ver. 1) or as though in military order, the resemblance of the multitudes 
thus seated to the plots of a garden (irfKuriol itpaatai, equivalent to " beds of leeks," from 
■KpAuov, a leek, and the structure another Hebraism) — the whole exhibiting a stirring 
and life-like scene. The importance of this miracle may be inferred from all four 
evangelists recording it. 2. The time of year. From the fresh greenness of the grass 
we infer the season of the year, and can better account for tlie gieat multitrdes that 
crowded the grassy space near Bethsaida. It was spring — March or April — and so 
the season of the Passover, as we are expressly informed by St. John ; the pilgrim 
companies were on the move in that direction, and hence the greatness of the crowdi 
that followed the Saviour. Another miracle of feeding the multitudes is recorded 
by St. Matthew, in the fifteenth chapter of that Gospel towards its close, and alsa 
by St. Mark, ''viii I — 9). That the two miracles are quite distinct, is shown by tbf 



282 THE GOSPEL. ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. vl 1— Six 

following circumstances : — (1) In the miracle of feeding the four thousand just referred 
to, our Lord himself introduces the matter of supply. (2) The provision for th« 
smaller number of four thousand was greater, being seven loaves and a few small fishes • 
while here for the five thousand there are only j?ve loaves and two fishes. (3) Th« 
baskets in this first miracle are called by the four evangelists Koiptyot, small wicker- 
baskets ; on the second occasion they are called both by bt. Maithew and St. Ma; k 
vwuplSes, rope-baskets, so large that in one of them Paid was let down the wall ut 
Damascus; and from airelpa, as if woven work, or rather from 7tvp6s, wheat, as if h 
vessel for wheat. Our Lord also, when making reference to the two miracles, makes the 
same distinction ; thus, " When I brake the five loaves among five thousand, how many 
baskets (ico(f>(vouj) full of fragments took ye up? They say unto him. Twelve. And 
when the seven among the four thousand, how many baskets (<rwvpii<av) full of fragments 
took ye up? And they said. Seven." 

II. Some salient points of the uibacle, and the lessons taught. 1. The way oj 
duty the way of safety. The first lesson here taught us is that the way of duty is the way 
of safety. We see on the surface of the narrative the satisfaction of the multitudes on 
recognizing our Lord, their eager haste in coming up with him, their earnest desire for 
his teaching, their prolonged attention to his utterances. Long without a right guide, 
long wanting a true leader, long panting for the green pastures and still waters, long 
athirst for " the sincere milk of the Word " they have found at last the GKjod Shepherd ; 
they know his voice, and follow him. They had much to learn, and our Lord taught 
truths he taupht them, they had almost forgotten the claims of the body till the 
cravinjTs of nature forced themselves upon them ; at all events, they had laid aside their 
usual forethought for the supply of those wants. And now the day is far spent, the 
shades of evening are closing round them ; they find themselves in a place distant from 
any human habitation, and destitute of the articles of human food. How are they to 
meet the emergency ? Whence are they to obtain the refreshment they so much need ? 
How were they to get " two hundred pennyworth of bread," which, if we reckon the 
denarius at eightpence halfpenny, would cost upwards of £7 ? No doubt they thought 
of different expedients. The disciples proposed one course, our Lord pursued another. 
The Lord is a rich provider; he never falsifies the promise, " Seek ye first the kingdom 
of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you." Here, 
then, we are bidden to " stand still, and see the salvation of God." The result is recorded 
in the words, " They did all eat, and were filled." 2. 2%e compassion of the Saviour, 
His compassionate heart embraces all his people's wants, and those wants at all times. 
In the exercise of that compassion he remembers the body as well as the souL lie 
remembered it in creation ; he remembered it in redemption : "We wait for the adoption, 
to wit, the redemption of the body." He remembers it in his providential care over it, 
and provision for it from day to day. With his own lips he taught this cheering lesson 
when on earth, " Your heavenly Father knoweth ye have need of all these things." 
And he that gave us so much unasked, will not refuse us what we need when he is 
asked. " He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, shall he not 
with him also freely give us all things ? " 3. Nature of this mirade hy which he mpiilied 
their leants. Our Lord on this occasion exhibited his compassion in supplying the 
people's wants by an act of creative power. Some of his miracles are restorative, as when 
he restores sight to the blind, speech to the dumb, motion to the lame, hearing to the 
deaf, and power to the palsied limb. Some are redemptive, as when he rescues the poor 
demoniac from the foul fiends that had usurped such power over him. Some are 
punitive, as when he blasted the barren tree, as a symbolic lesson to all oumberers of the 
ground, and swept away the ill-got gains of the swinish Gadarenes. One is transforma- 
tory, as when he turned the water in the waterpots of Cana into wine. The miracle 
before us is an act of creative power ; for in what other light can we regard the multiplica- 
tion of five loaves and two fishes into a supply of food sufficient for such a multitude, so 
that " they did all eat, and were filled " ? He lays all nature under contribution to supjily 
his people's wants. Even an act of creation will not be withholden, if their neoessitiei 
require it. 4. The Saviour's love of order. " Order," says the poet, "is Heaven's first 
law;" "Let everything be done decently, and in order," is the apostle's command. 
Our Lord confirms both by his example, in the orderly arrangement and disposition into 



3H. VI. 1—66.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAKK. 263 

rank and file, as it were, which he here directs. Whether we are in the Church or in 
the world— that is, whether we are engaged in the arrangements of the uue or in the 
affairs of th« other — we shall do well to observe this law of order. " A place for every- 
thing," says the old maxim, " and everything in its proper place ; a time for everything, 
and everything at its right time." Such orderly regulation of all our matters would s«ve 
time ; it would save trouble ; it would facilitate work ; it would further largely the 
success of our pursuits and plans. Here all saw the miracle, all were fed, all were satis- 
fied ; no one was neglected, no one passed over or passed by. 5. Eis devotion. Never 
did our Lord lose sight of the glory of God. This was the object ever prominently kept 
in view. Before he brake he looked up to heaven and blessed, and brake at once (kots- 
KXaae, aorist) the loaves, and was giving (itiiov, imperfect) bit by bit, as it were, to the 
disciples for distribution by them among the multitude. As Creator, he multiplied the 
loaves ; as creature, he looked up for Heaven's blessing on them. From every gift we 
are to look up to the Giver ; in every gift we are to recognize the Author; for every gift 
we are to record our grateful acknowledgments ; in every bounty we are to own the 
grace and goodness and greatness of the heavenly Benefactor. To see God in all his 
works, to trace him in all his ways, to obey him in all his will, to adore liim in all the 
outgoings of his loving-kindness towards us, and to see him in every blessing he bestows, 
is the lesson taught us by the example of Christ in this passage, and by the exhortation 
of his apostle in that other passage, " Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatever 
ye do, do all to the glory of God." 6. The duty of frugality. Mighty and magnificent 
as the works of nature are, there is no needless expenditure of force. Many of the great 
agencies employed serve a variety of ends. Many results often proceed from one single 
cause. So in the domain of miracle. He never resorts to miracle when ordinary means 
will suflice. Amid all that vast abundance which our Lord created on this occasion, 
he suffers nothing to go to loss. Here we see the same attention to the great things 
and the little things. He allows nothing to go to waste. " Gather up the fragments," 
he said. Surely this teaches us ecsnomy, surely this enjoins thrift, surely this enforces 
the old proverb, " Waste not, want not." Surel}' this is condemnatory of all extrava- 
gance in every department, whether of food, or raiment, or place of abode, or manner of 
life, or course of conduct. 

ILL Daily bread and its pbovision. 1. The wonderful is not necessarily miraculous. 
Some hold that the daily bread which God gives us, which we eat, and by which we 
are sustained, is a miracle as great, or greater, because a standing miracle, than the 
feeding of five thousand with five loaves and two fishes, or the feeding of four thousand 
with seven loaves and a few small fishes. They refer to the fact that the seed covered 
in the earth dies and lives again, growing up under the rains of the spring and the 
suns of the summer, and in due season ripening into the golden grain of the harvest, then 
made into bread, and becoming wholesome food ; and allege that in all this we have a 
miracle great as the multiplying by our Lord of the loaves and the fishes ; that omnipo- 
tence is as much required in the one case as in the other ; but that what is rare we call 
miraculous, while what is common and usual we call a law or process of nature ; though 
both alike are manifestations of the mighty power of God. This reasoning appears 
plausible, and has an element of truth in it, but it mistakes the real nature of miracle. 
It is, in fact, pretty much the view of Augustine, who, besides confounding the wonderful 
with the miraculous, regards miracle as simply an acceleration of a natural process ; 
for he says of the miracle atCana that " he made wine in a wedding feast, who makes it 
every year in the vines ; but the former we do not wonder at, because it occurs every 
year : by its constant recurrence it has lost, or ceased to command, admiration." The 
chief element of miracle is hereby overlooked. We admit that nature is an effect 
whose cause is God, and that omnipotence is at work in the processes of nature as well 
as in the really miraculous result ; yet not in the same way. That which differen- 
tiates the one from the other is, that God in the one case produces the result by 
immediate efficiency, in the other by means of secondary or subordinate causes ; in the 
one by a direct act of volition, in the other by the processes of nature. To attribute a 
miracle to the operation of a higher but unknown law is a gratuitous assumption, and 
is as unnecessary as it is unsatisfactory. To regard it as the result of an accelerated law 
of nature, is overlooking the fact that the really miraculous element in such a case is 
this very quickening int/:' rapid result, or hastening in a forcible and extraordinarj 



B84 THE GOSPEL AOCCEDING TO PT. MARK. [ch. vi. 1—56. 

manner the ordinary process. It has been said, somewhat rhetorically, " We breathe 
miracles, we live by miracles, we are upheld every day miraculously, and that individual 
has a blind mind or a hard heart (or both) who does not see, or seeing does not recognize, 
the hand of our heavenly Father in all those gifts of his providence and bestownients oi 
his bounty, by which we are sustained and surrounded." Now, to convert the rhetorical 
into the real, we must substitute for " niiracles," each time the word occurs in the cited 
paragraph, " marvels " or " wonders," that is, processes that are wonderful — indeed, quite 
marvellous, but in no strict sense miraculous; and then, with this alteration, the 
devoutness of the sentiments expressed commends itself to our admiration. 2. Daily 
bread, though not a miracle, is Ood's gift. It may be objected, that our daily bread is 
not so much God's gift as the fruit of man's labour. Who then, man, we may well 
ask, has given you the hand to labour, the strength to use it, the health to employ it ? 
Who, moreover, has given you the fruitful field to till, the former and the latter rain to 
refresh and ripen the growing grain? Or, going further back, who has imparted to the 
seed, sown or planted, the power of growth or development? Still further, who 
counteracts the hurtful effects of too much drought, or neutralizes the baneful conse- 
quences of excessive moisture, or tempers the scorching heat, or checks the pinching 
cold ? Who protects the root from the worm that would injure it, or saves the ear 
from the blight that would taint it ? Who prevents the mildew that would damage the 
maturing grain, or the disease that would quite destroy it ? Or who rebukes the lurse 
(if barreiuiess that would render all efforts useless? Who watches over the various 
stages of the crop — first the blade, then the ear, afterwards the ripe com in the ear, till, 
having weathered all the storms that endangered it, and escaped all the perils to which 
it was exposed, the golden grain is safely gathered at length into the garner ? Who has 
thus blessed the labour of your hands, establishing your handiworks each one ? Who 
butGod? Who, then,istheGiverofyourdaily bread? WhobutGod? Thus Moses said 
to Israel : " When thou hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt bless the Lord thy God. . . . 
Beware . . . lest when thou hast eaten and art full, and hast built goodly houses, and 
dwelt therein ; and when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold 
is multiplied, and all that thou hast is multiplied ; then thine heart be lifted up, and thou 
forget the Lord thy God, . . . and thou say in thine heart, My power and the might of 
mine hand hath gotten me this wealth. But thou shalt remember the Lord thy God : 
for it is he that giveth thee power to get wealth." Who has not admired and fallen in 
with the sentiments of the beautiful hymn ? — 

" O God of Bethel, by whose hand 
Thy people still are fed ; 
Whu through this weary pilgrimage 
Hast all our fathers led ; 

* Our vows, our prayers, we now present 
Before thy throne of grace ; 
God of our fathers, be the God 
Of their succeeding race." 

IV. Spiritual food : its nature and necessity. 1. 2%e necessity of spiritual food. 
From this miracle of feeding the multitude with bodily food, our Lord as was his 
wont, took occasion, as we learn from the parallel jiassage of St.' John, to call attention 
to spiritual food. From the bread wherewith he had fed their bodies, he passed naturally 
to that which is equally necessary and equally indispensable to support and sustain the 
soul. He showed them that, as bread is the staff of life for the body, there is something 

equally essential to the life of the soul. It matters not by what name we call it 

whether manna, or bread, or flesh — the thing remains the same. 2. The nature of 
this spiritual food. He proposes himself to them for the purpose specified, telling them 
plainly and positively that he himself was that spiritual nutriment. " I," he says 
"am the Bread of life." Nor does he stop with this; ho proceeds to explain in some' 
sort, or at least to extend, the sentiment to which he had given utterance, by the addi- 
tional statement, " My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed." Bv thi» 
as it appears to us, he hinted at his coming in the flesh and shedding his" blood upon 
the cross; fof how else could his blood be separated from his flesh but°by being shedl 



ea. n. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MAEK. -ti3 

He thus intimated, under the thin veil of an almost transparent figure, his incarKatioa 
and atonement — his life as an example, and his death as an expiation, in uther words, th« 
benefits procured by his manifestation in the flesh, and the blessings purchased by his 
sacrificial blood-shedding on the cross. 3. Thi's food partaken of by faith. He enforces 
all this by urging their acceptance of these benefits and blessings. They have been 
secured, but, in order to be fully enjoyed, they must be partaken of; auu they cannot 
be partaken of without faith — they cannot be made our own without faith ; in a word, 
great as they are and precious as they are, they can in no way benefit or profit ua 
w .thout the exercise of faith. Accordingly, he sets forth faith under the suitable symbol 
0/ eating and drinking, and graciously invites to its exercise. He encourages them to 
tne performance of this duty by several considerations of the most cheering kind. He 
holds forth to them the prospect of a living and lively union that would thence ensue, 
and ever after exist, between him and them ; he promises them nourishment, life, and 
comfort as the consequences of that union ; and he comforts them with the assurance 
of fellowship and friendship in time, and unspeakable felicity through all eternity ; lor 
he says, " He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in 
him ; " again he says, " My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed ; " while 
he further adds, to crown all, " Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath 
eternal life." 4. Want of food, natural and spiritual : its effects. There is no difficulty 
in forming a correct idea of the condition of body that would result from want of daily 
bread. It would stunt an individual's growth, make him a starveling in appi;arance, 
and leave him without strength for work of any kind. Similar, but still worse, is the 
condition of soul resulting from the want of spiritual bread. Without Jesus, who is 
the living Bread that came down from heaven, there is neither life nor growth, neither 
grace nor strength, nor spiritual power of any description in the soul. On the other 
hand, by union with Christ we live. So it was with the apostle : " Nevertheless I live ; 
yet not I, but Christ liveth in me : and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by 
the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me." By virtue of 
that imion we are strengthened. So with the same apostle : " I can do all things through 
Christ which strengtheneth me." By means of this union we receive spiritual food 
daily, and thus " grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ." By this heavenly food we are qualified for spiritual work and warfare. Hence 
our Lord's direction, " Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat 
which endureth unto everlasting life." Hence the blessing pronounced on those " who 
hunger and thirst after righteousness ; " hence, too, we can cordially join in the well- 
known words — 

" Ck)od ia the Lord I He gives us bread ; 

He gives his people more ; 
By him their souls with grace are fed, 

A rich, a boundless store." 

Three practical duties we learn from the whole: (1) cordiality in acieptmg the 
provisions of the gospel by living faith on our living and loving Lord ; (2) contentment 
with our lot, and thankfulness for daily bread, as also for the spiritual food of the soul ; 
slnd (3) entire consecration to that God in whom " we live, and move, and have our 
being," "who satisfieth our mouth with good things," and "flUeth our soul as with 
marrow and fatness." — J. J. G. 

Vers. 45—56. Parallel passages : Matt. xiv. 22—36 ; John vi 15—21. — Miraculous 
protection. I. Walking on the water. 1. Almighty power. Every one who has 
,anced over the early pages of English history is familiar with the story of Canute 
the Dane. That king wished to reprove the fulsome fiattery of his courtiers when 
they spoke of his power as unlimited. He ordered his chair to be set by the sea- 
side as the tide was coming in. He peremptorily commanded the waves to withdraw, 
and waited a while as if for their compliance. He seemed to expect prompt obedience, 
and watched to see them retire ; but onward, onward came the surging sea ; its 
waves kept steadily advancing, till the monarch fled before it, and left his chair 
to be washed away in its waters. He then turned to his courtiers, and solemn!) 
reminded them that that Sovereign alone was absolute whom the winds and waves 
obeyed who controlled the formew and set bounds to the latter, saying, " Hiihertj 



23« THE GOSPEL AOCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. vl 1—66. 

shall ye come, but no further.*" The sacred writers claim it as the peculiar preroga- 
tive of God to gather the wind in his fists and bind the waters in a garment. Job, 
in celebrating the attributes of the Almighty, applies to him the sublime and striking 
sentence, " Which alone spreadeth out the heavens, and treadeth upon the waves <rf 
the sea." 2. Comparison of two similar miracles. There are two miracles of our 
Lord which have a close resemblance to each other, and at the same time considerable 
dissimilarity. One of these is that recorded in this passage, and called his " walking 
on the waters ; " the other is distinguished by the name of his " stilling the storm " 
(ch. iv. 35^41). By comparing these together, we find that the circumstances of 
the disciples were much worse, and their distress much greater, at the time referred to 
in this passage than on the former occasion. We may glance (1) at the stilling of the 
storm, which we purposely passed over at its proper place in the fourth chapter. 
Combining the words of the three evangelists who describe that former miracle, we 
cannot fiul to be struck with the exceedingly graphic nature of that description, and 
that in so few words. We are, in fact, made to see it as though the whole were 
transpiring before our eyes, so truly pictorial is the recital. There is first the sudden 
squall (\d\a^, St. Mark and St. Lube), its severity (jieyiKi\, St. Mark), its rapid 
descent upon the lake (Kari^ri, St. Luke), the agitation that ensued (irei<r/tir, St. 
Matthew), the waves as they kept sweeping over the deck of the small craft (JirifiaXKtv, 
imperfect, St. Mark), their beginning to fill with water (o-uccjrAripoSi'To, St. Luke, 
and yeiil{f(rBca, St. Mark, but KoK-lnrTiaeai, St. Matthew), the peril in which the 
passengers found themselves (iKivHvtvov, St. Luke) ; while Jesus remainea all th- 
time iiast asleep in the hinder part of the ship on a pillow (itpoaKeipaKaiov, St. Mark). 
Then follow the alarm of the disciples, the twice-repeated appeal of " Master, master^ 
(iiruTrdTa, tirMTira, St. Luke) evidencing their trepidation and terror, their eager cry for 
instant help (aaaoy, aorist imperative, St. Matthew) in their present perishing condition 
(imoM.iiieea, SS. Mark, Matthew, and Luke), the quiet dignity and self-possession 
of the Saviour, his rebuke to the spirit of the storm (ai^Tta, a-e^f/tanro, only re- 
corded by St. Mark) ; or perhaps we may regard the former word as a command to 
the sea and the latter to the wind, as if he commanded the roar of the water to 
be silent, and the howling of the wind to be still, the spirit thereof being muzzled, 
as the word literally imports ; while the imperative of the perfect implies that the 
work was instantaneous— completed soon as the word was uttered. Then we have the 
storm falling as suddenly as it rose — at once spending its force, wearing itself out and 
ceasing from very weariness (iK6ita(riv, St. Mark), llie calm that ensued was as great 
in proportion as had been the storm, with the milky whiteness of the foam that now 
alone remained from the storm, on the tranquil waters (yaX-hvii), if we derive the word 
from yiKa, milk ; or with the " smile that dimpled " the face of the deep, if we derive 
the word from ytfMt. All these incidents are not so much narrated as exhibited. It 
may be added, as an interesting circumstance in the respective descriptions of the 
evangelists St. Mark and St. Matthew, that while the former, in his usual graphic and 
pictorial style of description, represents the waves as pitching or beating, or actually 
throwing themselves on the vessel so that it was filling (ytiditaBai), the latter describes 
the boat as covered (jcaKiimaSaC) with the waves. Hence it has been inferred, with 
good reason, that St. Matthew's point of view was plainly from one of the other vessels 
that, we are told, accompanied, and from which he saw the waves hiding out of sight, 
the boat in which the Saviour was ; while St. Mark, or rather St. Peter, from whose 
lips he had the description, was evidently in the same boat with our Lord, and from 
inside the vessel observed the waves rushing up against her sides, and filling her. 
Besides, the word rapl/ucao reminds us of the use of ipinoSv, to put to silence, literally 
muzzle, used by St. Peter in 1 Epist. ii. 16. But (2) though the storm may have been 
equally great in the case of the miracle just described as in that of the passage before 
us, yet there were several modifying circumstances in the former that are not found 
In this latter case. On that occasion we read that " there were also with him other little 
ships;" st the time specified in this passage the ship in which the disciples sailed was 
alone. On the former occasion the Saviour was with them and in the boat; on this he 
was both absent and distant. On the former occasion they had the advantages, no 
Inconsiderable ones, of day and light about them ; on this they were surrounded by the 
darkness and dead of night. On the former occasion they were not, it would seem, tax 



OH. VI. i— 56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 287 

from land — they had just launched forth (&rlixBwv), as St. Luke informs us ; on this 
they were in the midst of the sea (fiiaov). On the former occasion the storm had coma 
down on the lake, and, for aught we know, was bearing them rapidly forward towards 
their destination; on this, we are expressly told, it was against them — "the wind was 
contrary (ivarrias) unto them." These points of comparison prove the extreme peril in 
which the disciples were at this time. Great as had been their danger before, it is greater 
now. 3. Cause of these dangerous storms. Such sudden dangerous storms are still of 
frequent occurrence on that small inland lake. The best comment on all this physical 
commotion, and the best explanation of the nature and cause as well as scene of this 
miracle, may be found in Thomson's ' The Land and the Book.' There, after his 
notice of a storm which he had witnessed on the lake, we find the following account :— 
" To understand the causes of these sudden and violent tempests, we must remember 
the lake lies low — six hundred feet lower than the ocean ; that the vast naked plateaus 
of Jaulan rise to a great height, spreading backward to the wilds of the Hauran and 
upward to snowy Hermon ; that the water-courses have cut out profound ravines and 
wild gorges, converging to the head of this lake, and that these act like gigantic 
funnels to draw down the cold winds from the mountains. ' On the occasion referred to 
we suddenly pitched our tents at the shore, and remained for three days and nights 
exposed to this tremendous wind." 4. The difficulty of the disciples. Their difficulty 
was equal to their danger. They were toiling {Pa(rai>i(on4vovs, literally, tortured, baffled, 
tested as metals by the touchstone) in rowing, and we cannot but commend them for 
their conduct. They were using the proper means, and that is ever right to do ; but th* 
means did not avaiL They were employing every energy ; but it was to no purpose. 
They were putting forth all their strength ; but it was utterly fruitless, and without result. 
The wind was still against them. Whether it was blowing a gale, as it does when 
it travels at the rate of sixteen miles an hour, or whether it was blowing a high gale, 
when it goes with the rapidity of thirty-six miles an hour, or whether it was blowing 
a storm, which it does when it sweeps with the speed of sixty miles an hour, or proceed- 
ing with hurricane fury at ninety miles an hour, — whatever may have been the velocity 
of that wild wind, it was rude and boisterous ; and, what made matters worse, it vns 
directly opposite — right ahead. There they were struggling, toiling, tugging ; but all in 
vain. There they were working with all their might ; but still their fraii barque was the 
plaything of wind and water — tossed by the waves and the sport of the storm. They 
themselves were every moment expecting to find a watery grave in that tempestuous 
sea. 5. Another source of distress. There was another source of distress, and one 
which aggravated their difficulty and added to their danger. That was the continued 
absence of the Master. When he had sent them away — in fact, " constrained " (iiviyKoa-e) 
them, as though reluctant to go without him — he remained alone on the land. But 
why leave them at all ? Or why leave them so long ? Or why especially leave them 
at such a critical juncture? Or why, at least, delay his coming in their great 
emergency? They would naturally think of the storm that once before had befallen 
them on that self-same sea. They would think of the glorious Personage that then 
sailed with them in the self-same boat. They would think of the sound slumber he 
enjoyed, as he lay on the cushion in the stem. They would think of his calm 
composure when he awoke. They would think of the short but stern command ho 
uttered, when he rebuked so effectually the tempest, and hushed it into a calm. They 
would think of that gracious presence that curbed the winds and calmed the waves 
and checked even the swell of the waters. They would think, " Were he with us now, 
he would still the storm, and we should soon be safe on shore." They would think of 
the petition they presented to him, the prayer they prayed, the fervency of spirit that 
inspired it, the faith that dictated it, the frailty that cleaved to it when they said, 
" Lord, save us 1 " — there was faith ; " we perish I " — there their faith was weak. Ever 
and anon, as they regarded the war of elements that raged around, they would sigh for 
their absent Lord, and long for land. Mo wonder, for had Christ been in the boat all 
would have been well. 6. The Saviour's presence is safety. Nearly half a century 
before Christ, a great conqueror attempted to cross the stormy Sea of Adria in a small 
boat. The waves rolled mountains high. The courage of the sailors failed them. 
They refused to venture further. It was a sea in which no boat could live. Soon, 
however, they were reanimated and encouraged to renew their toil, when the con(^ueroi 



28tt THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAiiK. [ca. vt 1— 5e. 



discovered himself, and told them who and what he was, in the characteristic words, 
" You carry Csesar and his fortunes." With Christ in the boat, the disciples might have 
flun" their fears to the winds, for One infinitely greater than Cassar would have heen 
there — One who could have stirred their hearts and raised their courage with the 
emboldening words, " You carry Christ and his Church." 

II. The etb of Chbist is on the boat that careibb his disciples. 1. His 
omniscience. He saw it all — their difficulty and danger and distress. His eyes were 
upturned to heaven in prayer, yet he saw all that was transpiring. The night was 
pitchy dark, yet he saw that small speck tossed like a cork upon the waters of that 
stormy sea. He had constrained them to embark, but he kept his eye upon them. He 
saw their fears, but he meant to teach them a new lesson of faith and confidence. He 
saw them from the distant mountain to which he had retired apart to pray. It is posi- 
tively stated that he saw them. He saw them, though he was on the mountain-side 
and they were on the sea ; he saw them from a distance which the ken of no mortal 
eye could reach ; he saw them through the darkness of the night ; he saw them in 
their panic terror ; he saw them and all their embarrassments ; he saw them when they 
did not, and when they could not, see him. " Be of good cheer ! " he said. I did not 
forget you ; I did not forsake you ; I had you on my heart ; I had you in my eye all 
the time. I did not fail to look on you, though you failed to look to me ; I did not 
shut up my compassions, though you restrained prayer. You were neither out of sight 
nor out of mind. I was resolved you should not perish, nor a hair of your head I'alL 
Boisterous as the wind was, I had charged it not to presume to harm you ; rough as 
the sea was, I had commanded it not to dare to destroy your frail craft or damage one 
of the crew. Absence does not limit my power; distance does not separate you from 
my presence ; danger and difficulty and distress only make you dearer, and call forth 
my more tender care. 2. His love is unchanging. Jesus is the same Saviour still, 
"the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever." "Be of good cheer!" he said. These words, 
though addressed to the first disciples, have sent their echo down along the centuries, 
•nd bring comfort to disciples still. In them Christ addresses you, reader, and myself. 
By them he says to every faithful follower, " Mine eye is on thee ; it has beeD 
on thee hitherto ; it will be on thee to the end. You may rest assured I will never 
fail thee — no, never forsake thee." Again, the words of the Saviour, "Be of good cheerl" 
are backed by another fact which presents itself to us in this passage, and that fact la 
the purpose for which our Lord had retired to the lone mountain-side. He was passing 
the night in prayer, not specially for himself but for his disciples — his disciples then and 
now ; yes, for his disciples in that slight ship and on that stormy sea. They toiled and 
rowed ; he prayed. They were suffering ; he was supplicating. They were struggling; 
he was interceding. They were buffeting the waters; he was bearing them, as High 
Priest, on his heart before God in the holy of holies of that mountain solitude. They 
were ready to faint ; he was praying for them that they might not faint, and that their 
faith mio;ht not fail. They were longing for the Master ; he was exercising his love on 
their behalf. 3. A true picture of the Christian's life. It is so still — as it was it is, 
and ever shall be, on the part of our dear Redeemer and his redeemed ones. We have 
before us a true picture of life — of human life, of the Christian's life. We are toiling in 
this world below ; the Saviour is employed on our behalf in the world above. We are 
in circumstances of peril and paiu; the Saviour bids us "be of good cheerl" and lookup 
to him ; " he has overcome the world." We are afloat on the sea of life ; our barque is 
fragile, the wind is high, the storm scaresome, the sea raging, and we are tossed upon 
its waters ; but Jesus is over all, and looks down on all, and will save through all, for 
" he is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him." 4. The suitable 
season for succour. Once more he says, with yet another meaning, "Be of good cheerl" 
I did not come, it is true, when the storm began, nor when the first night-watch set in. 
I knew you would have wished me then, that you would have been glad to see me 
coming then, that you would have hailed my arrival then. But you knew little of the 
difficulties that beset you then, little of your own inability to cope with them then, 
little of the impotence of your own efforts then. You knew not, at least not sufBciently 
then, that the power of man is weakness, and the wisdom of man is folly. You knew- 
comparatively little of your need of a higher hand and a stronaer arm to save you 
then, Aud little also of the great mercy of deliverance. For the like reason I came nor 



OH. VI. 1—56.] THE GOSl'EL ACCOIIUIKG TO ST. MARK. 28y 

in the second watch, nor even in the third. The fourth watch had commenced, and 
still I saw reason to delay my coming. It was half run and more before the proper 
moment arrived. I did not postpone nor defer an instant longer than was meet. Soon 
as the minute-hand pointed to the right moment on the dial-plate of time, I came, and 
came at once, without further or any unnecessary delay. 5. Ood's time is the right 
time. God's time is not only the right time, but the best time. By his coming the 
time he did, the Saviour said in effect to the disciples, and through them to us, 
when we, like them, are tossed by the down-rnshing winds and the upheaving waves 
of a troublesome world. Had I come sooner, it would have been premature on my 
part, and not expedient for you. Had I come sooner, it would have been pleasanter, bui 
not so profitable for you. Had I come sooner, I should have consulted your feelings 
more than your interests. This fourth watch, and this last part of it in particular, is 
the season of your extremity and the time of my oi'purtunity. Thus it is still. When 
you, reader, were saying, " Hath God forgotten to be gracious ? Is his mercy clean 
gone for evermore ? " his grace and mercy were drawing very near. When yoa were 
ready to give up all for lost, and about sinking into despair, then the Saviour said^ 
I have come to give you confidence, to impart to you consolation, and inspire you with 
hope ; in a word, to impress on your heart these words of comfort that now fall upon 
your ears. I come, therelbre, as is my custom, at the moment best for the Creator's 
glory and the creature's good. Further, by the words, " Be of good cheer! " he reminds 
us of the fact that we never enjoy rest so much as after long hours of labour, we never 
enjoy safety so much as after a time of danger, we never enjoy sleep so much as after 
a day of toil, and we never enjoy a calm so much as after a time of storm. Some uf 
us can attest this by personal experience. We have often been to sea, but only oni e 
in a storm. And nevei' did we so thoroughly enjoy the land, or rest so sweetly on 
the shore, as after that terrible storm. 6. Application to ourselves. Thus will it be 
with all the dear children of God. After the tempests of earth, we shall enjoy the 
tranquillity of heaven all the more. After weary wanderings and a sorrowful sojourn, 
in this vale of tears below, we shall relish far more keenly the rest and home above. 
Not only so, there is no common measure by which we can gauge the true relative pro- 
portions of these storms of earth and that sunshine of the skies. The great apostle uf 
the Gentiles felt this when he said, " Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, 
worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." 

III. The announcement op ouk Lord's pebsencb. 1. A mistake. The announce- 
ment of the Saviour's presence is contained in the words, " It is I." When he did 
come the disciples mistook him. First they see through the gloom of night the dark 
object at some distance, then they discern the outline of a human figure standing out 
amid the darkness of the night and apainst the lowering sky. They never for one 
moment supposed it was the Saviour. " Whatcan that phantom form be?" they thought 
within themselves. They had doubtless many conjectures, but sin gave its gloomy 
interpretation to the scene. It is a phantom — a spirit! they said; a spirit of evil, 
a spirit of woe, to take vengeance on the guilty I So it was with Herod ; and so it 
was with Joseph's brethren, as we have seen ; so it was with Belshazzar. So, too, with 
ourselves many a time. Not unfrequently we mistake our own best blessings; we 
think them distant when they are close at hand. Nay, we often mistake them alto- 
gether ; we regard as a curse the very thing that God meant to prove a blessing. The 
dark cloud of his providence " we so much dread," even when it is " big with mercy,'' and 
t-eady to burst with " blessings on our head." We continue our mistake, until God 
becomes "his own Interpreter, and makes his meaning plain." It was thus with the 
disciples here, until Jesus revealed himself in a manner not to be mistaken, and said, 
" It is I." Often and often in time of trouble, of trial, of toil, of difficulty or danger 
or distress, of adversity or affliction, we have said individually, " All these things are 
against me ; " all these things are tokens of Divine displeasure ; all these things are 
messengers of wrath. Jesus draws near and whispers to the soul, Not so ; that trial, 
that cross, that ber-javement, that sickness, that distress of whatever kind, came from 
me ; it was my doing ; it was I sent it ; I was the Author of it ; I sought by k your 
wood; it is I, and you are to recognize me in it; it is I. "Let not your heart be troubled} 
ye believe in Gud, believe also in me." 2. A calm succeeds the storm. When all is 
hturm around, when all is dark within, when of all human sources of consolation we 

ST. MARK. n 



2'JO THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. [on. vi. 1— oft 

are constrained to say with the patriarch of XJz, " Miserable comforters are ye all ; " 
just then, it may be, a happy thought occurs to us, a ray of heavenly light shines down 
upon us, a gleam of comfort comes to cheer us. We fear we are imposing on ourselves. 
Not so. Jesus comes in a way not to be misapprehended, and says to us, "It is I;" 
you need not be afraid. The winds have fallen and the waters subsided. It was I. 
•ays Jesus ; they did it at my bidding. 3. The real source of succour. Belief comes. 
We are rescued from danger ; from sickness we are restored to health ; out of a situation 
of discomfort and unrest we are relieved. At such times we are apt to speak of the 
Immediate instrumentalities in the case, and to attribute the change to second causes. 
This passage corrects that error. In it Jesus says, "It is I ;" in other words, that 
medicine that proved so effectual derived its efficacy from me ; it was I directed to it. 
Those friends that were so kind in the day of your trouble were moved to sympathy 
by me. It was I prompted them ; it was I put "it into their heart ; it was I placed it 
an their power. " While some trust in horses, and some in chariots, we will make 
•mention of the Name of the Lord." Thus, in all that betides the Christian, Jesus takes 
;a part ; in all the variety of change, and scene, and condition, and circumstance — that 
wonderful co-operation of all things for our good — we trace the presence of the Saviour. 
In the painful things and the pleasant, in the heights and depths, in the ups and 
downs, in the joys and sorrows, we are assured of the Saviour's power and presence : 
'he is conducting us through all to the goodly land afar off. 

" When the shore is won at last, 
Who will count the billows past? 

•4. Jeius with us all the way. (1) When the hour of our departure is at hand, when 
•the last conflict approaches, when the darkness of death is beginning to envelop us, 
when we are passing through the dark valley of death-shade, the same Friend is at our 
sidf, the same friendly hand is on our shoulder, and the same fond voice sounds in 
our ears. It is the voice of Jesus, saying, "It is I; " death is my minister, my mes- 
senger ; he can do you no harm ; I have removed his sting. My rod and siaff will 
•comfort you ; through me you will be more than conqueror, and will be able to 
■challenge Death himself, and say, " Death, where is thy sting ? Grave, where is 
ithy victory ? " " This God is our God for ever and ever : he will be our guide even unto 
[rather, over] death." (2) Again, on the resurrectiun morning, when all that are in 
their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God and come forth, the same voice will 
■reverberate through the graves of the poor and tht tombs of the rich with the words, 
"It is I;" " I am the resurrection and the life;" "My dead men shall live; together with 
imy dead body shall they come ; " or, more literally and more correctly, " my dead body 
■shall they come." There is not merely conjunction, not only union — all this is true, 
and all this is much ; but more is meaut, for the words " together with " are in italics, 
and so we are notified that they are not in the original. Thus there is iuentity ; our 
Lord identifies himself with the dead in Christ. He is the Head, they are the members; 
and thus, one in life, one in death, they shall be one in the resurrection, and one 
through all eternity ; therefore it is, "My dead body shall they come." (3) Also in the 
day of judgment, when "we shall all stand before the judgment-seat of Christ," the same 
loving tones will cheer us. The Judge on the throne will stoop down and say to his 
people, " It is I." The same Saviour that shed his blood for you — in whom you believed, 
whom you obeyed, whom you followed, loved, and served — is now your Judge. It is 
I that said to you on earth, " Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, 
and I will give you rest." It is I, your Elder Brother, who say to you now in heaven, 
" Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you before the Ibun- 
dation of the world." 5. Words of couraye as well as comfort. Words of courage are 
also spoken by him. He adds, " lie not afraid." Be not afraid of temptation, for with 
every temptation he will prepare a way of escape. Be not afraid of trials; they enlarge 
your experience: " the trial of your faith worketh patience; aL.d patience, experience ; 
and experience, hope." Be not afraid of tears ; they will soon be wiped away : even now 
the tears you shed cleanse the eyes, so that you see siiiritual things more clearly. Be 
not afraid of toils ; they will soon be past, and then " there remaineth a rest for the 
people of God." Be not afraid of troubles, for " through much tribulation we must enter 
the kingdom of God." Be not afraid of the perplexities of the wilderness; he will "guidt 



OH. vn. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. 



291 



you by his counsel " all the way. Be not afraid of the dark night of storm ; for the dark 
clouds will scatter, and the feet of Omnipotence will come walking on the water. Be 
not afraid of the storms of persecution; "blessed are ye when all shall persecute you for 
the Saviour's sake." Only make sure you are his, and all the blessings of the covenant 
will be your portion. 6. 2%e feeling of danger a precursor of safety. " He would 
have passed by them." Why was this ? Just that they might fully feel their need of 
his help, and earnestly apply for it. Salvation is the response of heaven to man when, 
in his misery, he cries for it. We have read of a young prince who toiled much and 
travelled much, who was often in danger, many times in perplexity, frequently in diffi- 
culties. But he was never left alone ; a faithful friend called Mentor was ever at his 
side — ^his counsellor, caretaker, guide, and guardian. How much greater is our privi- 
lege, to whom Jesus says, " It is I ;" I will be with you all the way ; I will be with 
you at every turn of the way ; I will be vrith you in every time of need ; I will be 
with you in every place of peril ; I will be with you in the darkness of the night and 
amid the terrors of the storm t In calm majesty he will come, walking on the surface 
of the foam-crested wave ; nor will he pass you by, but provoke your confidence, and 
prove your faith, and pour into your ears the inspiriting words, " Be of good chew : 
it ii I ; be not afraid." 

"Thus soon the lowering sky grew dark 
O'er Bashan's rocky brow ; 
The storm rushed down upon the bar^ 
And waves dashed o'er the prow. 

"The pale disciples trembling spake. 
While yawned the watery grave, 
•We perish, Master — Master, wake I 
Carest thou not to save?' 

"Calmly he rosB with' sovereign will. 
And hushed the storm to rest. 
•Te waves,' he whispered, ' Peacel be stilll* 
They calmed like a pardoned breast." 

J. J. G. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER vn. 



Vers. 1, 2. — These verses, according to 
the Greek construction, should run thus: 
And there are gathered together onto him 
the Pharisees, and certain of the scrihes, 
which had come from Jerusalem, and had 
seen that some of his disoiples ate their 
bread with defiled, that is, nnwashen, hands. 
The word (4fiefi\l/avTo') translated in the 
Authorized Version, "they found fault," 
does not appear in the best authorities. It 
seems to have been interpolated to help the 
construction. St. Mark explains the Uiujn- 
ing of the word xoivats (literally, common), 
by the word (flvlwrois) " nnwashen." The 
disciples, doubtless, washed their bands, 
but they abstained from the multiplied 
ceremonial washings of the Pharisees, which 
they had received by tradition and punc- 
tiliously observed. The scribes and 
Pharisees, who had come from Jerusalem, 
were doubtless sent as spies, to watch and to 
report in no friendly spirit the proceedings 
of the great Prophet of Nazareth. 

Ver. 3. — Except they wash their hands oft. 



The Greek word here rendered "oft" {> 
ituy/iji : literally, with the fist, i.e. with the 
closed hand, rubbing one against the other. 
This word has caused a vast amount of 
criticism ; and the difficulty of explaining 
it seems to have led to the adoption of 
a conjectural reading (jtvkv^s or irvKvf) 
rendered " oft ; " crebro in the Vulgate. 
But the Syriao Peshito Version renders 
the Greek word by a word which means 
" diligently," and it is interesting and help- 
ful, as a matter of exegesis, to know that it 
also renders the Greek word (einij.e\as') in 
Luke XV. 8 by the same Syriao synonym, 
" diligently." The " clenched flst " implies 
vigour and resolution, and points to " dili- 
gence," and there are very high authorities 
in favour of this rendering, as, Epiphanius, 
Isaac Oasaubon, and Cornelius k Lapide, 
to say nothing of our best modern exposi- 
tors. It is also adopted in the Revised 
Version. Holding the tradition of the 
elders. The Pharisees pretended that thia 
tradition had been orally delivered by God 
to Moses on Mount Sinai, and then trans- 
mitted orally down to their time. Theae 



Z9S 



THE GOSPIiL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. vii. 1— 37. 



oral precepts were afterwards embodied in 
the Talmud. 

Ver. 4. — And when they come from the 
market (AttA iyopas) ; literally, and from ihe 
market-place ; there is no verb in the prin- 
cipal manuscripts, although the Cambridge 
Codex has gray iKtaaiv, and the old Latin 
gives redeunte$. In the market-place there 
would be every kind of men and things, 
clean and unclean, by contact with which 
they feared that they might be polluted; 
and so they considered that they had need 
to cleanse themselves from this impurity by 
a more careful and complete ablution. An- 
other Greek word is used here, namely, 
ffaTrrlauvrat. In the former verse the word 
is vlifiwvrat, a more partial and superficial 
kind of washing than that implied in 0a.- 
irrffo). It should, however, be added that 
two of the great uncials, Vatican and 
Sinaitio, have ^aurWavTai, " sprinkle them- 
selves," instead of fimrTiaavTiu — an autho- 
rity sufBoient to justify the Revisers of 
1881 in putting it into the margin. The 
washing of onps, and pots, and hrasen ves- 
sels, and of tables. The words (ica! kKivup) 
wrongly rendered, " and of tables " — because 
they could only mean " couches " — have not 
sufficient authority to be retained in the text. 
"Cups" (woTTipiav) mean "drinking ves- 
sels." The "pot" (JeffTJjs) is a Roman 
word, sextarius, a small liquid measure, the 
■ixtb part of a congius, corresponding nearly 
to the English gallon, so that fea-TJ}! would 
be rather more than a pint measure. Brasen 
vesteU. These would probably be copper 
vessels, such as are still used in Syria for 
cooking purposes. These are particularly 
mentioned. Earthenware vessels would be 
broken. Which they have received to hold 
(& irap€\a$ov Kpareiii) ; literally, which they 
received to hold : observe the aorist. 

Ver. 5. — The Law of Moses prohibited 
contact with many things deemed to be 
unclean ; and if any one had touolied them 
he was counted unclean, so that he might 
not approach the temple until he had 
cleansed himself by t)ie washing prescribed 
in the Law; the design being that by 
means of these ceremonial and bodily 
washings the Jews might be awakened to 
the necessity of spiritual cleansing. Hence 
the Jews, and especially the Pharisees, who 
wished to be esteemed more righteous than 
others, plauing their whole religion in these 
external ceremonies, frequently washed 
themselves before their meals, and even at 
their meals. At the marriage feast in Caua 
of Galilee we read that there were placed 
" six waterpots of stone (^Kidivat tSptai) " for 
these purifying purposes; so that if any 
Jew had by accident come into contact with 
any unclean thing, and so had contracted 
any oeremouial impurity, he might remove 



it. This, however, was only a custom, and 
not a thing of legal obligation until it was 
exalted into a law by the Pharisees. Now, 
this punctilious observance of traditioni 
by the Pharisees and other Jews yieldeil 
little or no religious profit; for it occupied 
their time with external purifications, and 
so drew away their attention from the duty 
of far greater moment — the cleansing oi 
the soul from sin. They made clean "the 
outside of the cup and platter," but neg- 
lected the inward cleansing of the heart. 
Therefore our blessed Lord, who came to 
put an end to the old ceremonial law, and to 
these vain and frivolous traditions which 
now *verlaid it, and who wished to direct 
all the care of his disciples to the making 
of the heart clean, cared not to enforce 
these external washings upon his disciples, 
although he did not say this in so many 
words to the Pharisees, lest he should pro- 
voke their envy and their malice. He 
therefore meets their question in another 
way. 

Vers. 6, 7. — Our Lord quotes against them 
a prophecy of Isaiah (xxix. 13), This people 
honoureth me with their lips, but their heart 
is far from me. But in vain do they wor- 
ship me, teaching as tlieir doctrines the pre- 
cepts of men. The prophet here gives the 
cause of the blindness of the Jews, because 
they honoured God with their lips, while 
their heart was far from him; and their 
worship of him (for that is the meaning of 
"their fear") was the commandment ot 
men, which they had been taught; that 
is, they worshipped God, not according 
to that spiritual worship which he had 
commanded, but after the traditions of 
men and of their own sciibes, partly futile, 
partly perverse, and contrary to God's Law. 
Sn he says. Well did Isaiah prophesy of you. 
The word is Ka\Zs, "exoellLiitly — beauti- 
fully — did he prophesy concerning you (tuk 
iwoKp:Taii>), the hypocrites." Not that the 
prop I let had the hypocrites of our Saviour's 
time in bis mind when he uttered these 
words, but that the Spirit of God which was 
within him enabled him to describe accu- 
rately the character of those who seven 
centuries afterwards would be doing the 
same things as their forefathers. And 
observe how they were punislied. For as 
they gave a lip-service only to God, praising 
him with their mouth indeed, but giving 
their heart to vanity and the world ; so God 
on his part would give them the words only 
— the shell, so to speak, the letter which 
killeth; but take away fiom tliem the ker- 
nel — the spirit and the life, so that they 
might not lay hold of it nor taste it. 

Ver. 9. — Here the word Ka\us is re- 
peated. Full well (leaKais) do ye reject the 
oontmandment of God, that ye may keep you> 



.vn.1— 37.] THE GOSPEL ACCOilDING TO ST. MARK. 



293 



traditioii. It is as thongb our Lord said, 
" Your traditions are not instituted by God, 
or by his servants the prophets, but they 
are modem inventions, which you desire to 
defend, not out of love or reverence for 
them, but because yon are the successors 
of those who invented them, and arrogate 
to yourselves the power of adding to them 
end making similar new traditions. 

Ver. 10. — Our Lord now gives an example 
of one of these human traditions. Moses said. 
Honour thy father and thy mother ; — that is, 
obey and love tl lem, and succour them, if they 
need it; for here "honour" means not only 
reverence and love, but support, as is clear 
from ver. 12 — and, He that speaketh evil of 
father or mother, let him die the death ; that 
is, let him " surely die," without any hope 
of pardon. Our Lord means this : " That if 
be who by words only speaks evil of his 
father or his mother is, by law, guilty of 
death, how much more is he guilty of death 
who wrongs them by deed, and deprives 
them of that support which he owes them 
by the law of nature ; end not only so, but 
teaches others so from Moses' seat, as you 
scribes and Pharisees do when you say, * It 
IsCorban.'" 

Vers. 11—13. — But ye say, If a man shall 
wy to his father or his mother, That where- 
vith thou mightest have been profited by 
me is Corban, that is to say, Given to God 
— these words, "that is to say. Given to 
God,"are St. Mark's explanation of "corban " 
— ye no longer suffer him to do aught for 
his father or his mother; making void the 
word of God by your tradition, which ye 
have delivered. Now, this the scribes and 
Pharisees did for their own covetous ends. 
For most of them were priests, who received 
offerings made to God as his ministers, and 
then converted them to their own uses. In 
this they greatly erred ; because the obliga- 
tion of piety by which children are bound 
to support their parents when they need it, 
is a part of the law of nature, to which every 
vow, every oblation, ought to yield. Thus, if 
any one had devoted his goods to God, and 
his father or his mother became needy, those 
goods ought to be given to his parents and 
not to the temple. The word " corban " is 
a Hebrew word, meaning "that which is 
brought near," " a gift or offering to God." 
Hence, figuratively, the place where thee* 
offerings were deposited was called the " cor- 
banas," or, "sacred treasury" (see Matt 
xxvii. 6, KopPavav). Hence to say of any- 
thing, " It is Corban," was to say that it had 
> prior and more sacred destination. And 
when it was something that a parent might 
need, to say, " It is Corban," i.e. it is already 
appropriated to another purpose, was simply 
to refuse his request and to deny him assist- 
kDCe, and lo to break one of the tirst of the 



Divine commandments. Thus the son, by 
crying " Corban " to his needy parents, shut 
their mouths, by opposing to them a scrupl* 
of conscience, and suggesting to them a 
superstitious fear. It was as much as to say, 
"That which you ask of me is a sacred 
thing which I have devoted to God. Be- 
ware, therefore, lest you, by asking this of 
me, commit sacrilege by converting it to 
your own uses." Thus the parents would be 
silenced and alarmed, choosing rather to 
perish of hunger than to rob God. To such 
extremities did these covetous scribes and 
Pharisees drive their victims, compelling a 
son to abstain from any kind ofSces for his 
father or his mother. St. Ambrose says, 
" God does not seek a gift wrung out of the 
necessities of parents." Making void (o/cw- 
povvTes); literally, depriving it of its art- 
thority, annulling. In Gal. iii. 17 the same 
word is rendered " disannul." Sy your tra- 
ditions ; the traditions, that ia, by which 
they taught children to say " Corban " to 
their parents. Observe the words, "your 
tradition " (rp vap56crct inHv) ; your tradi- 
tion, as opposed to those Divine traditions 
which God has sanctified, and his Church 
has handed down from the beginning. And 
many such like things ye do. This is added 
by St. Mark to fill up the outline, and to 
show that this was only a sample of the 
many wiiys in which the commandment of 
God was twisted, distorted, and annulled by 
these rabbinical traditions. 

Vers. 14, 15. — In the Authorized Version 
the beginning of this verse runs thus : " And 
when he had called all the people unto him, 
he said." But according to the best autho- 
rities, the adverb tt^Aii/ should be inserted, 
and the words will run as follows : — And he 
called to him the multitude again. It is pro- 
bable that he had waved them from him 
while lie held this discourse with the scribes 
from Jerusalem. But now be calls the 
people near to him again, that all might 
^ear that which concerned all alike. It is 
probable, indeed, that this discussion with 
the scribes may have taken place in the 
house, into which he again returned after 
having made this authoritative declaration 
to the multitude. The words are given with 
more emphasis here than as recorded by St. 
Matthew. Every one was solemnly invited to 
hearken and understand, while he announced 
a principle of the highest importance. Our 
Lord did not intend to disparage the differ- 
ence between clean and unclean meats as it 
had been laid down in the Levitical Law. His 
object rather was to clear that teaching from 
the obscurities in which it had been involved 
by the scribes and Pharisees, who laid stress 
only on external acts. His object was to 
show that all impurity springs from the 
heart ; and that, unless the heart is cleansed. 



S«4 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. vn. 1—37. 



all external washtngs are in vaiD. It is as 
thongh he said, " The Boribes teach you that 
it is not lawful to eat with unwashen hands, 
because unwashen hands make the food un- 
clean, and unclean food defiles the soul. 
But fai this they err ; because not that which 
enters from without into the mouth, but 
that which proceeds from within through 
the mouth, and so from the heart, if it be 
impure, — this defiles the man ; " as he more 
fully explains at ver. 21. 

Ver. 16. — This verse has some good au- 
thority, but not sufficient to be retained in 
the text. The Bevisers of 1881 have placed 
it in the margin. 

Ver. 17. — Our Lord, having proclaimed 
this great principle to the multitude in the 
presence of their teachers, the eciibes and 
Pharisees, returned into the house (the true 
reading is here eis oIkov, without the article). 
It means, of course, the house where he was 
lodging. And then his disciples asked of him 
the parable. St. Matthew (xv. 15) says that 
the question was put to him by St. Peter, 
speaking in the name of the other disciples 
— another instance of the reserve main- 
tained in this Gospel with reference to 
this apostle. 

Vers. 18, 19. — Our Lord had already, in 
his sermon on the mount, taught his dis- 
ciples fully wherein purity or impurity of 
heart consists, and he might, therefore, with 
good reason, ask them how it was thai they, 
even they who had been so favoured by 
being constantly with him, had forgotten or 
misunderstood him. Our Lord's illustration 
is physically accurate. The portion carried 
oflf is that which by its removal purifies what 
remains. The part which is available for 
nourishment is, in its passage through the 
system, converted into chyle, the matter 
from which the blood is formed. What is 
not available for nourishment passes away 
into the aipeSpcii', or draught. Purging all 
meats. The most approved reading here is 
undoubtedly the masculine (KoflapifaJ^'), and 
not the neuter (/cafla/jifov). This change of 
reading compels a somewhat different con- 
struction. Accepting, therefore, the mas- 
culine as the true reading, the only possible 
renilering is that which makes this last 
clause a comment by the evangelist upon 
our Lord's previous words, in which he in- 
dicates to the reader that our Lord intended 
by this illustration to show that no food, of 
whatever kind, when received with thanks- 
giving, can make a man unclean. The clause 
must, therefore, be connected with t:ie pre- 
ceding words, by the introduction of the 
words, in italics, " This he laid, making all 
meats clean." The passage, thus rendered, 
becomes a very significant exposition of 
what has gone before. It is well worthy of 
notice that this explanation is to be found I 



in St. Ohrysostom (Homily on St. Matthew 
ZV.): 'O Sh MdpKos (fniffly, Sri xaBapi^ay rh 
Ppd/iaTo, toSto e\€yev : " But Mark a£9rms 
that he said these things, making the meati 
clean." It may be added that this explana- 
tion agrees finely with the words in Acts 
X. 15, " What God bath cleansed, that o^ 
not thou common." 

Vers. 20 — 23. — From within, out of the 
heart of men; that is, from the reason and 
the will, of which the heart is the symbol and 
the laboratory. For the heart ministers the 
vital force to the intellect to enable it to 
understand, and to the will to enable it to 
live, although the seat of the intellect is in 
the brain. St. Mark's enumeration of evil 
things is in a somewhat different order from 
that of St. Matthew ; and he adds to St. Mat- 
thew's list (ctc^poiTiiyij), foolishness, showing 
how all evil terminates in the loss of all moral 
and intellectual illumination. AU these evil 
things proceed from within, and defile tlia 
man. Dr. Morison, in his admirable commen- 
tary on St. Mark, well observes here that 
"these things have an inward origin, and 
are vomited forth from the crater of the heart 
or soul;" and further on he says, "In a 
little sphere of things, and as regards aett, 
though not as regards siibstances or eseenoei, 
men may be spoken of as creators. Men, 
that is to say, are the efficient causes of 
their own choices. If they were not, they 
would not be really free. If it was not so, 
there would be no real responsibility." St. 
Matthew (xv. 20) adds here, " But to eat 
with unwashen hands defileth not the man." 
This is the end and scope of the parable, 
which is to show that unwashen hands and 
unclean meats defile not a man, but only an 
impure and depraved will. It seems almost 
needless to observe that our Lord does not 
condemn the washing of the hands before 
meals as a thing in itself in any way wrong. 
All nations approve of ablutions as tending 
to cleanliness and health. 

"Dant famuli manibus lymphas. Cere- 

remqne canlstris 
Exptrliunt, tonsisque ferout mantelia 

villia." 

(Virgil, '.ffineid,' i. 701, 702.) 
"It was thought sordid and mean to sit 
down to meals with unwashen hands. 
Whence not the clergy only, bnt the people, 
washed their hands before prayer." The 
moral of all is this, how carefully is the 
heart to be guarded, instructed, and adorned, 
seeing that it is the instrument and labora- 
tory of all evil and all good, of all vice and 
all virtue! "Keep thy heart with all dili- 
gence," so that nothing may enter therein 
and nothing go out therefrom and you not 
be conscious of it, and your reason may not 
approve ; " for out of it are the issues of lifft" 



OH. VII. 1—37,] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MAEK. 



2»fi 



Ver. 24. — Our Lord now passes out of 
Oalilee into a heathen country, Byio- 
phcenioia, into the boidera of Tyre and 
Bidon, that he might begin to impart his 
miraoles and his doctrine, \^hich the scribes 
and Pharisees had rejected, to the Oentiles. 
There is not sufficient authority for omitting 
"Sidon" from the text. Both these cities 
were renowned for their extensive commerce 
and for their wealth. It is probable that 
the true reading in ver, 81, which will be 
noticed presently, may have led to the 
omission by some authorities of " Sidon " 
here. But there is really no inconsistency 
in retaining the words " and Sidon " here ; 
and accepting the reading " through Sidon " 
there. Tyre, which waa the capital of 
Phoenicia, lay to the south, bordering on 
Judsea ; Sidon to the north : and multitudes 
flocked to Christ from these parts. He 
entered into a house, and would luive no man 
know it : and he could not be hid. He would 
have no man know it, partly for the sake of 
quiet, and partly lest he should rouse the 
Jews more bitterly against him, and give 
them occasion to cavil that he was not the 
Messiah promised to the Jews, because, 
having left them, he had turned to the 
Gentiles. St. Mark (iii. 8) has already in- 
formed us that his fame had spread to those 
about Tyre and Sidon. 

Vers. 25 — 27. — The construction of this 
verse is Hebraistic (see Acts xv. 17). In- 
stead of htoiaiura yhp, the approved reading 
is oW' eiBiis ixoitraaa : Sat straightway a 
woman, whose young daughter ^dvydrptov) — 
literally, little daughter; St. Mark is fond 
of diminutives — had an unclean spirit. All 
ages were liable to this incursion of unclean 
spirits. The woman seems to have come 
from a distance. She was a Oreek — that is, a 
Gentile— a Syro-phoenician by race, as dis- 
tinguished from iiie Libyan Phcenicians, of 
Carthage. She was a descendant from those 
seven nations of Canaan wliich had been 
driven out by God's command. They were 
called in their own language " Canaanites," 
And she besought him QipATo); literally.as^ 
him. St. Matthew (xv. 22) says that " she 
cried (4Kpaiyaaev), Hare mercy on me, O 
Lord, thou Son of David." Aristotle says 
that " parents love their children more than 
their children love them; because love 
descends, and because parents desire that 
their children should survive them, that 
they may live on in their children, as it 
were, after death; that they become, so to 
tpeak, immortal through their children, and 
possess that eternity, which they cannot have 
in themselves, in their children and their 
children's children." St. Matthew (xv. 23) 
tells us that at first " he answered her not 
a word," and he does not record the remark- 
able saying, Let the children first be fiUed, 



which in St. Mark precedes the words, it it 
not meet to take the children's bread and oast 
it to the dogs. Dogs abound in Palestine an<4 
the surrounding districts, but they are not 
cared for. They go about in packs, with no 
particular masters and no particular homes. 
They seem to be chiefly useful as scavengers. 
Kevertheless, the dog of the East is amenable 
to kindness shown him by man, and there, 
as in England, children and young dogs 
soon become friendly. It is of {Kuvdpia) 
" little dogs " that our Lord here epeaks. 
Our Lord here speaks after the manner of 
the Jews, who called the Gentiles dogs, as 
distinguished from themselves, the children 
of the kingdom. Let the children first be filled. 
Suffer me first to heal all the Jews who 
need my help. Our Lord makes at first as 
though he would refuse her request ; and yet 
it is not an absolute denial. There might 
be hope for her when the children were 
filled. Thus Christ oftentimes deals with 
holy souls, namely, by humbling and morti- 
fying them when they desire anything at 
his hands, in order that witl yet greater 
importunity and humiUty they may seek and 
obtain it. St. Ohrysostom says, " Whether 
we obtain that which we seek for, or 
whether we obtain it not, let us ever perse- 
vere in prayer. And let us give thanks, not 
only if we obtain, but even if we fail to 
obtain. For when God denies us anything, 
it is no less a favour than if he had granted 
it ; for we know not as he does what is most 
expedient for us." 

Yer. 28. — In this verse there is a slight 
change of reading, causing a change of 
rendering ; namely, thus : Yea, Lord : even — 
Kol instead of xal yap — ^the dogs — t4 Kvvipia, 
the little dogn — under the table eat of the 
children's crumbs. Observe the antithesis : 
» the children" (the little daughter) sitting 
at the table; the "little dogs" under the 
table. It is as though she said, " Give me, 
most gracious Lord, only a crumb (a small 
mercy compared with thy greater meroie*), 
the healing of my little daughter, which 
may fall as it were obiter from thee upon 
us "Canaanites and Gentiles, and be grate- 
fully picked up as one of thy lesser bene- 
fits." Cornelius h Lapide enlarges beauti- 
fully upon this : " Feed me, then, as a little 
dog. To me, a poor Gentile, let a crumb 
of thy grace and mercy be vouchsafed ; but 
let the full board, the plentiful bread of 
grace and righteousness, be reserved for the 
Jewish children. I cannot leave the table 
of my Lord, whose little dog I am. No ; if 
you spurn me away with your foot, or with 
a blow, I will go away ; but I will come back 
again, like a little dog, through another 
door. I will not be driven away by blows. 
I will not let thee go until thou hast given 
me what I ask of thee.' For this Canaanii* 



896 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. icb. vu. i_87 



constrains Christ, arguing her case from his 
own words, prudently, modestly, forcibly, 
and with a humble faith which perceives 
that he is not unwilling to be overcome by 
petition and by reason. Indeed, she entan- 
gles him in the meshes of his own words. 
So great is the plenteousness of his table, 
thai It shall abundantly sufiBce for her if 
she may but partake of the crumbs which 
fall from the table of his children." 

Ver. 29.— St. Matthew says here (xv. 28), 
■' O woman, great is thy faith : be it done 
unto thee even as thou wilt. And her 
daughter was healed from that hour." If 
we suppose St. Mark's words to come in 
after St. Matthew's words " be it done unto 
thee even as thou wilt," the two narratives 
are perfectly consistent. Our Lord could 
no longer restrain himself, or resist these 
wondwrful appeals of faith. Overcome by 
the skilful reasoning and importunity of 
the Canaanite, he gives her that which she 
asks, and more. He heals her daughter, 
and he sets a crown of gold upon her head. 
It is here obvious to remark that this child 
vexed by the unclean spirit represents the 
soul tempted by Satan and polluted by sin. 
In such a condition we must distrust our 
own strength, and rely only on Christ, ani 
call upon him with humility and repent- 
ance ; acknowledging ourselves to be but 
as dogs in his sight ; that is, miserable 
sinners ; yet not such as that we should de- 
spair of pardon, but rather that we should 
hope tor the mercy of Chi ist the greater we 
feel our misery to be. For it is worthy of 
a great Saviour to cleanse and save great 
sinners. Again, this Gentile daughter rep- 
resents the Church of the Gentiles, which, 
shut out from salvation by the justice of 
God, enters the kingdom of heaven through 
the door of mercy. Here was a great con- 
version indeed ; for now the Jews through 
their unbelief change places with the Gen- 
tiles, and, like them, can only be admitted 
through the same gate of Divine mercy. 

Ver. 30. — There is an inversion in the 
ordor of the clauses in this verse, according 
to iLe best authorities. The words should 
run iiins: And she went away unto her 
house, and found the child (i"o ^atdiov) laid 
upon the bed, and the devil gone out. She 
found lu'.r little daughter set free from the 
possession, but exhausted by the convul- 
sions -.vhioh he caused in departing from 
her ; weaiy with the violence of the strug- 
gle, but restful and composed. So the sin- 
ful soul, set free from sin by the absolution 
of Christ, rests upon the couch of a con- 
science pacified by the blood of Christ, and 
at peace with God. 

Ver. 31. — According to the most approved 
luthorilies this verse should be read thus; 
A.nd again he went out from the bordtrs of 



T^re, and came through Sidon unto the sea 
of Galilee, through the midst of the borders 
of Deoapolis- St. Matthew (xv. 29) simply 
says that he ' ' departed thence, and came 
nigh unto the sea of Galilee." But from 
the more full statement of St. Mark we learn 
that he made a circuit, going first north- 
wards through Phoenicia, with Galilee on 
his right, as far as Sidon ; and thenoe pro- 
bably over the spurs of Libanus to Damas- 
cus, mentioned by Pliny as one of the cities 
of the Decapolis. This would bring him 
probably through Csesarea Philippi to the 
eastern coast of the Sea of Galilee. Here, 
according to St. Matthew, he remained for 
a time in the mountainous district abovc 
the plain ; choosing this position apparent- 
ly for the sake of quiet and retirement,- as 
also that, being conspicuous to all from 
the mountain, he might there await the 
multitude coming to him, whether for in- 
struction or for healing. 

Ver. 82. — They bring unto him one that 
was deaf, and had an impediment in hia 
speech (ttw^ov Kal pc.o-ytX&A/iv). The radical 
sense of /cu^iif (from kSittiJ) is "blunt" or 
" dull ; " and so it is used to represent both 
deafness and dumbness. But in St. Mark 
it means deafness as distinguished from 
dumbness (see ch. ix. 25). "This patient, 
liowever, was not a^?iOf absolutely, but 
/jnyiXaAo!;, i-S., he spoke with difficulty. 
Long-continued deafness is apt to produce 
imperfect utterance. 

Ver. 33.— And he took him aside from the 
multitude privately- This was done, no 
doubt, to fix the attention ot the afflicted 
man upon himself, and upon the fact that 
he was about to act upon his ears and his 
tongue. And te put («/3a/l£) — literally, cagt 
or ihrust — his fingers into his ears. The 
action was very signiticant. It was la 
though he said, " I am about to open a 
passage for hearing through these ears" 

And he spat, and touched his tongue ; ^^''^ 
is, he touched his tongue with saliva from 
his own sacred lips. These syniboliciil 
actions must have had a great meaning 
for the afflicted man. They were a tahleau 
i>ivant, an acted metaphor, teaching him 
what he might expect from the mercy ot 
Christ. The analogy of the miracle record- 
ed in St. John (ix. 6) should be noticed 
here. It is an interesting circumstance 
(noticed in the ' Speaker's Commentary ') 
that, in the Latin Church, the oflBciating 
priest touches the nostrils and ears of those 
who are to be baptized, with saliva from 
his own mouth. We may be assured that, 
in the case before us, these signs used by 
our Lord were intended to awaken the 
afflicted man's faith, and to stir up in him 
the lively expectation of a blessing. 
Vers. 84, 35.— And looking up to heaven. 



OH, vu. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL AOCORDINa TO ST MARK. 



297 



he dghed, and eaitli unto him, Ephphatha, 
that is, Be opened. He looked up to heaven, 
because from thence come all good things — 
words for the dumb, hearing for the deaf, 
healing for all inflrmities; and thus he 
would teach the infirm man by a manifest 
sign to what quarter he was to look for the 
true source of his cure. He sighed (Icrre- 
yole) ; literally, he groaned. Why did our 
Lord sigh at such a moment? We know 
indeed that he was " a man of sorrows, and 
acquainted with grief ; " but now we might 
almost have expected a momentary smile of 
loving joy when he was about to give back 
to this afflicted man the use of these valuable 
instruments of thought and action. But he 
sighed even then ; for he was touched with 
the feeling of human infirmity, and no doubt 
his comprehensive eye would take in the 
TBst amount of misery, both bodily and 
spiritual, which has come upon the world 
through sin; and this, too, immediately 
after having looked up to heaven, and 
thought of the realm of bliss which for a 
time he had left " for us men, and for our 
salvation." Ephphatha, that is. Be opened. 
This word is, of course, addressed to the 
man himself; and the evangelist has re- 
tained the original Syro-Chaldaio word, as 
he has retained " Talitha cumi " elsewhere ; 
so that the actual word which passed through 
the Saviour's lips, and restored speech and 
hearing to the afflicted, might be handed on, 
•a doubtleiB it will be, to the end of tima 



The word applies of course, primarily, 
though not exclusively, to the ear ; for not 
only were his ears opened ; but the bond oi 
his tongue was loosed, and he spake plain. 

Vers. 36, 37. — He charged them (8i6<rTe'\- 
Ke-ro). The word is a strong one : " he 
gave them clear and positive orders." The 
injunotiou seems to have been given, both to 
the deaf and dumb man, and to those who 
brought him. And it was given partly, no 
doubt, for his own sake, and for reasons 
connected with his gradual manifestation of 
himself to the world, and partly for the 
instruction of his disciples, and to shovr 
that he did not desire by his miracles to 
win the vain applause of men. St. Augus- 
tine says that " our Lord desired, by putting 
this restraint upon them, to teach how much 
more fervently they ought to preach him, 
whom he commissions to preach, when they 
who were forbidden could not be silent." 
He bath done all things welL He die. 
nothing that the Pharisees, captious and 
envious as they were, could reasonably find 
fault with. St. Matthew (xv. 30, 31) inti- 
mates that at this time our Lord exhibited 
a vast number of miracles, a bright galaxy 
of wonders, amongst which this shone ont 
conspicuously, as a very prominent and 
instructive one. But, indeed, "he went 
about doing good." His whole life on earth 
was one connected, continued manifestation 
of loving kindness. 



H0MILETIC3. 

Vers. 1—23. — Ceremonialism and spirituality. The teaching of otir Lord Jesus wai 
often in opposition to that of the religious leaders of his age and nation. The Pharisees 
and scribes were most religious, but their religion was of a bad type. They themselves 
practised, and they inculcated upon the people, the observance of religious forms and 
ceremonies ; whilst, generally speaking, they were negligent of the weightier matters of 
the Law. They laid great stress upon the outward, but they were careless of the 
spiritual. Our Lord's teaching, on the contrary, exalted the spiritual, and insisted upon 
the supreme importance of a true, a pure, a reverent heart. The contrast between oere- 
muuiaiism and spirituality is exhibited in this passage in several particulars. 

I. Gbkbmonialism substitutes washing with water fob pdbitt of heabt. 
Ablutions occupied an important place in the system of ritual. In addition to the 
washings and sprinklings required by the Law, many others were invented by the super- 
stitious. It was a religious duty to wash the hands before eating and upon returning 
from market ; to sprinkle and cleanse ceremonially cups and pots, vessels and furniture. 
In contradistinction from all these ritual purifications, our Lord laid stress upon the 
true baptism, the washing and purifying of the thoughts and intents of the heart. 

II. Cbbemonialism substitutes the teaditions of the eldees fob the commands 
or God. The Jews were a nation highly conservative in character and habit. They 
cherished their history, they revered the memory of their heroes, they treasured and 
superstitiously honoured their sacred books, and any doctrines or practices which came 
down from antiquity were, by that fact, commended to tbeir respect. Their fault hera 
was in magnifying the precepts of men rather than the commands of God. Humaa 
interpretations, human additions, human corruptions of the Word, were put in the place 



298 THE GOSPEL ACOOKDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. vn. i— 37. 

of the Word itself. The Lord Jesus came not to destroy, but to fulfil the haw; yet 
with mere tradition he would have no truce. 

IIL Cekemonialism substitutes the worship of the lips fob the toeship of 
THE heart. This was an old error and fault. The prophet Isaiah had seen reason to 
complain of its prevalence among the Hebrews of his time; and, as it is the product ol 
sinfuS human nature, it need not surprise us if we meet with instances of the working 
of the principle of formality in any nation and in any age. Our Lord Jesus had fre- 
quent occasion to censure the vain repetitions, the prayers in the market-places, which 
he knew were in many cases the proof, not of a devout but of a hypocritical nature. 
" God is a Spirit : and they that worship him must worship in spirit and truth." 

IV. Ceremonialism substitutes a subtle evasion foe filial duty. Natural 
piety concurs with the revealed commandment, in requiring of children honour and 
reverence towards their parents. To support them when in old age and poverty ha* 
ever been deemed a plain duty and, indeed, a true privilege. The way in which tht 
unrighteous but religious Jews evaded this obligation is characteristic. Whatever a 
parent needed, the son declared to be dedicated to God, and therefore not applicable to 
the relief of the parent's wants. Such a device was hateful in the eyes of the holy and 
affectionate Saviour, who not only condemned unfilial conduct, but still more the mean 
hypocrisy which could use religion for its cloak. 

V. Ceebmonialism substitutes avoidance of unclean food foe avoidancb of 
iMPUEE AND malicious THOUGHTS. Even Christ's disciples found it difficult to under- 
stand their Master's position with re<iard to clean and unclean food. The distinction 
was in itself recognized by the Law, but additions were made by human ingenuity, and 
the distinction itself was exaggerated, so as to imply more than was divinely intended. 
In the exercise of his authority, he " made all meats clean." He taught that sin works 
not from without inwardly, but from within outwardly ; that the heart of man needs to 
he guarded against sinful thoughts and desires, in order that the life may be just, 
peaceful, and pure. 

Application. It is possible to be, in a sense, religious, and yet, in a deeper sense, 
sinful, and out of harmony with the mind and will of God. It is a temptation from 
which none is wholly free, to substitute the external, the formal, the apparent, for what 
God requires — the faith, love, and loyalty of the heart. Hence the need of a good 
heart, which must be a new heart— the gift and the creation of God by his Spirit. The 
religion of the New Testament both enjoins this and provides for its acquirement. He 
who is "in Christ" is a new creation ; and having the fountain cleansed, sends forth 
pure and purifying streams. 

Vers. 24 — 30. — T?ie alien's faith. In quest of repose and retirement, the Lord Jesus 
often, even during the busiest periods of his ministry, withdrew from crowded cities and 
btisy shores to some accessible seclusion. On this occasion he travelled to the borders 
of Phoenicia, but though so far from his accustomed resorts, he was known and sought 
and followed. From Tyre and Sidon people had already, attracted by his fame, found 
their way to the neighbourhood of Capernaum, to hear his discourses and to behold his 
works. No wonder that now, even in these distant regions, though desiring retirement, 
the Divine Prophet "could not be hid." Hence the application recorded in this touchin'' 
and encouraging narrative. We observe here — "^ 

I. Faith arising in unfavourable circumstanceb. A woman— described as a 
Canaanite, a Gentile— appealed to Jesus for help. Probably a heathen, she yet had 
confidence in the power of the Hebrew Eabbi and Prophet to bring her some relief. It 
is sinp;ular that two conspicuous instances of faith in Christ during his ministry— this, 
and that of the centurion— should be displayed by Gentiles. And this when many of 
our Lord's own countrymen despised and rejected the Son of David! Yet every 
preacher of the gospel has met with cases which show us that faith springs up where 
It IS least expected, and in circumstances the least favourable. An inducement this for 
the Christian sower to " sow beside all waters." 

II- Faith prompting to intercession. Personal faith will lead to pleading prayer. 
Ihis was the faith of a mother, concerned for her afflicted daughter, possessed by an 
unclean spirit. Maternal love incited to the appeal, and sustained under discourage- 
ment and rebuffs. True faith will ever lead to action, and will impel the anxiou« mmi] 



CH,vn. 1— 37.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa 'iO ST. MARK. 2Uy 

bj lay its anxieties before a mighty and compassionate Lord. We cannot be satisfied to 
ODine to Christ for ourselves alone; for those dear to our hearts some true request will 
be preferred, some petition will be urged. The heart's compassionate impulse the Lord 
of the heart will not despise. 

IIL Faith repulsed asd sorely tried. The language addressed by Jesus to this 
woman was certainly unlike what he was wont to address to suppliants. His mission 
was to Israel ; the bread he brought for Israel's sons ; Canaanites and all Gentiles were 
but as dogs, having no claim upon the provision made for the household of the favoured. 
It is mysterious, yet it is unquestionable, that it seems good to God to " try " the faith 
of men. So Jehovah had tried Abraham, and so Jesus now tried this poor, pitiable 
womaa. He will try your faith ; but misunderstand not his treatment of you. 

*'Te fearful saints, fresh courage take; 
The clouds ye so much dread 
Are big with mercy, and shall break 
In blessings on your head." 

IV. Faith TBitrMPHAUT. The woman neither resented the Lord'ii comparison nor 
did she, disheartened by the reception she met with, turn away without a blessing. 
She took the Lord at his word, and followed out his figure. " Be it so ; let the bread, 
the loaf, be for the children; let the dogs keep their proper place; yet, even there, 
surely there is some provision even for them. There are crumbs, and with these the 
dogs may be content ; for these the dogs may be grateful." This is the way tc plead 
with Heaven. God will have earnestness and persistency and perseverance in prayer. 
Christ's grace is ever for those who seek, and who seek not fitfully, but resolutely and 
enduringly. 

V. Faith recognized and rewarded. Christ was pleased because the applicant cast 
herself upon his compassion, because she was willing to receive the boon desired upon his 
own terms. " For this saying go thy way." It was a saying expressing so much 
humility, so much earnestness, so much faith, that the heart from which it came might 
not remain iinsatisfied, unblest. The evangelist tells, in a way very picturesque and 
affecting, how, upon her return to her house, the poor woman found that the power had 
been exercised, that the demon had departed, and that her daughter was healed. 

Application. The narrative (1) affords encouragement to offer intercessory prayer ; 
(2) shows the value of humility in our approach to Jesus ; and (3) assures us that per- 
severing faith shall not be unrewarded. 

Vera. 31 — 37. — Tht deaf hewn; the dumb speaks. In this incident is much of the 
dramatic. It could not well be otherwise. Our Lord's teaching was usually by speech, 
but this was a case in which oral language was needless and useless. Christ accord- 
ingly employed the language of gesture and action. He thus adapted himself and his 
ministry to the necessities of this poor man, ■y^ho was doubly afflicted with privation of 
hearing and of speech. The condition of the sufferer and the conduct of the Healer are 
alike symbolical of spiritual facts and suggestive of spiritual lessons. 

L A picture or the sinker's state. 1. Here is an insight into the nature oj 
hv/man depravity. It is a distortion of, a departure from, the proper, the higher, and 
original nature. Man, in his true bodily constitution, possesses hearing and speech, and 
in his true spiritual constitution he has faculties which bring him into communion with 
the Divine. The privation of such capacity by sin is pictured by the state of this 
sufferer. 2. Here is insensibility to Divine realities. Voices, music, thunder, are aU to 
the deaf as though they were not. So with the sinner; he hears not the tones of the 
Divine voice; the Word of God is nothing to him — has neither authority nor charm. 
The dumb cannot speak or sing; whatever the occasion for utterance, the occasion 
appeals to him in vain. So with the sinner ; he has no witness to offer to the God of 
creation, providence, and grace. 3. Here is deprivation oJ the highest joys. How much 
of happiness is inaccessible to those who are afflicted with deafness! Nature, art, and 
friendly voices have no message for their ears. And, similarly, sin closes the approaches 
of highest spiritual joys to the spiritual nature of the children of sinful men. 4. 
Here is helplessness and hopelessness. It \s not a pleasant or a flattering picture; bu) 
is it not true ? 



THE GOSPEL ACCOBDIN& TO ST. MARK. [ch. vil 1—37. 



IL A VIEW OF THE Saviour and of the process of saltation. Remark: 1. 
The individual character of salvation. As Jesus took this deaf man apart from th« 
crowd, that he might deal with him privately and by himself, so the Lord ever singlea 
out each individual whom he saves. Sometimes he lays such a ono aside bj affliction, 
quietly to converse with him and work upon his nature. 2. Salvation is through 
Christ's personal contact with the soul. When Jesus put his fingers into the man's ears 
and anointed his tongue with spittle, this was a striking and effective lesson to one who 
could not bo reached by the usual channel of articulate speech. It was the touch of 
Christ, and the communication of his virtue, that healed. A lesson to us that restora- 
tion to spiritual capacity and health is the effect of an immediate contact of the soul 
with Christ, the soul's Saviour. 3. A profoundly compassionate Saviour. " He sighed;" 
not simply because of this instance which he encountered of human misery and need, 
but doubtless also because of all the world's sin and misery. His was a heart moved at 
the spectacle of the wretchedness of this fallen race. His work of redemption was 
inspired by pity and by love. 4. An authoritative Saviour. The word of Jesus, " Be 
opened ! " reminds us of the original and authoritative utterance of the Creator, " Let 
there be light!" It is thus that the Lord of light and vision ever speaks: he utters 
his royal command as one who is certain to be obeyed. 

III. A representation of the results op salvation. Simple as is the record 
of the mandate and summons of Immanuel, equally simple is the record of the success 
which attended his word. The response to the command was immediate. Similarly 
with the release which it is the prerogative of our Redeemer to effect for the soul of 
man. The nature which Christ renews becomes sensitive to those heavenly voices to 
which it has so long been deaf, and finds delight in holy and grateful utterances to 
which it has before been utterly strange. 

IV. As illustration of the impression produced by the exercise of Christ's 
POWER. 1. Astonishment; for who but he can work such marvels ? 2. Publication; 
for the healed, and the beholders of the spiritual change, are unable to restrain them- 
selves — are impelled to tell the story of redemption and deliverance. 3. Witness and 
praise ; for such must needs be o^ed to him of whom it is said, " He hath done all 
things weU." 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 23. — Exfernalism versus righleousvess. In vers. 3, 4 of this chapter 
we are furnished with an interesting piece of antiquarianism. The daily life of the 
devout Jew is set before us in its ceremonial aspect ; not as Moses had originally 
ordered it, but as custom and human casuistry had gradually translbrmed it. The 
light thrown upon several questions is very searching and full of revelation, viz. the 
various senses in which baptism seems to have been understood by the contemporaries 
of Christ, and the punctilio, vigour, and detail with which ceremonial purifications 
wero carried out. It is only as we realize the background of daily Jewish life, against 
which the life to which Jesus called his disciples stood out so prominently, that we are 
in a position to appreciate the current force of the objections raised by Pharisee and 
scribe. We have here — 

I. Christianity criticized from the point of view of religious tradition. 
(Vers. 1 — 5.) The exaggerated form the latter assumed brought out the more strikingly 
the peculiarity and essential character of Christ's teaching. 1. Jt was an age in which 
Jeirish ceremonialism had rtached its highest. The doctrine of Pharisaism had pene- 
trated the common life of the people. They might be said to have fallen in love with 
it. The distinctions are artificial and super-refined, e.g. between " common," "profane," 
or " defiled " hands, and hands ceremonially clean. They washed " diligently " (a para- 
phrase of the original substituted by our revisers for " oft " of the Authorized Version, 
and apparently the best rendering of the difficult word in the original), " carefully," or 
" thoroughly ; " and no detail or minute application was forgotten of the " many other 
things " " which they have received to hold " (i.e. to hold fast, retain). Amongst the 
respectable Jews ceremonial strictness and nicety held a place very similar to what 
" good manners," or polite behaviour and refinement, occupy with ourselves, having, of 
cour.5e, an additional supernatural sanctioD fiom association with the Law. Thui 



. VII. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. 301 



to-day the customs and observanceii of nations amongst whom civilization has lonj 
existed might equally serve as a foil for the Christian moralist ; and all casmstrie$ or 
secondary, customary moralities. 2. The objectors were the leaders and representative* 
of the religious life of the time. " Pharisees, and certain of the scribes, which had come 
from Jerusalem." They were the leaders and teachers of metropolitan fanatical ritual- 
ism. It is well when Christianity is judged that such men appear on the bench ; there 
can then be no question as to the representative and authoritative character of the 
criticism. It would be a splendid thing if the representatives of modern political, 
social, and ecclesiastical life could be convened for such a purpose. 3. What, then, is 
the objection thus raised t It concerned an observance of daily life. Christians are now 
judged on the same arena. In small things as in large the difference will reveal itself. 
It depended upon an abstract distinction : the hand might be actually clean when it 
was not ceremonially so. It was, in the eyes of those who made it, the worst accusation 
they had it in their power to make. The moral life of the disciples was irreproachable ; 
they " had wronged no man, corrupted bo man, taken advantage of no man." The 
Christians of to-day ought to emulate this blamelessness ; infiaels can then fire only 
blank cartridge. 

II. The tables turned. (Vers. 6 — 23.) The critics are themselves reviewed. 
Trifling captiousness must be summarily dealt with, especially when it wears the garb 
of authority. The character of the objectors is of the first consequence in judging of 
Christ's tone. Grave issues were at stake. The ground oi the fault-finding was superficial 
and untrustworthy, and a truer criterion must be discovered. "Deceivers may be 
denounced, that the deceived may be delivered " (Godwin). The essential nature of 
rectitude — the grand moral foundations must be laid bare. 1. Christ begins with an 
appeal to Scripture. He is careful to show that the distinction between righteousness 
and ritualism is a scriptural one, and not of his own invention. At the same time, he 
gives the reference a satirical or ironical turn by making; a prophetic identification t 
We don't know how much is lost in ignoring the written Word of God. It is " profit- 
able for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for instruction in righteousness." 2. 
He next pointed out the opposition that existed between their traditions and the Law. 
The instance selected is a crucial one, viz. that of the fifth commandment — " the first 
commandment with promise." Others might have been given, but that would be 
sufBcient. Family obligations are the inner circle in which religion most intensely 
operates ; if a man is wrong there, he is not likely to be very righteous elsewhere. 
To prove their opposition to the Law was to strip them of all pretence to religion. 3. 
Lastly, common sense and conscience were appealed to as regarded rites and ceremonies. 
The " multitude " is here addressed; it is a point which the common man is supposed able 
to decide. There are many weapons that may thus be supplied to the evangelical armoury. 
If philosophy was rescued from barrenness by this method in the hands of a Socrates 
or a Beid, may we not hope for greater things with regard to a common-sense religion ? 
The great foundation of all religious definitions and obligations is the true nature of 
man. The essential being of man is spiritual ; the body is only the garment or case 
in which he dwells. Purity or its opposite must therefore be judged of from that stand- 
point. K the soul, will, spirit, inner thought of a man is pure, he is wholly pure. 
Spiritual and ceremonial cleanness must not be confounded. Religion is not a matter 
of forms, ceremonies, or anything merely outside; but of the heart. Yet the thought 
and will must influence the outward action, habit, and life. The spiritual is the only 
eternal religion (John iv. 23, 24). The private question of the disciples is worthy 
of notice. A " parable " seems to have been their common name for a difficult sayiag 
of Christ's. Their incapacity was not intellectual but spiritual. Professed Christiaus 
themselves often require to be more fully instructed. The progressive life of the true 
Christian will itself solve many problems. "Had our Saviour been speaking oa a 
physiologist, he would have admitted and contended that many things from without, \i 
allowed to enter within, will corrupt the functions of physical life, and carry disorder 
and detriment into the whole fabric of the frame. But he was speaking as a moralist, 
and hence the antithetic statement of the next clause (cf. ver. 15) " (Morison). — M. 

Vers. 24 — 30. — The prayer qf the Syro-phcenician woman. An atmosphere of 
pablicity about Christ: crowds follow him wherever they hear of his presence, ani 



302 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO bT. MARK. [cu. vu. 1—37 

even in strange regions his fame anticipates him. The many who took advantage of 
his power to heal are forgotten in the special case which now prssented itself. This 
may have been the spiritual result of many unsatisfactory cases in which the cure 
only affected the body ; the rumour of them awoke at least one heart to a new sense of 
spiritual power. Speaking about Jesus and his work in this place or that, to one soul or 
another, may he a blessing in unthought-of quarters. Jesus " could not be hid " for 
other reasons ; his disciples were with him, and, more than all, he carried about in 
himself a revelation of love and pity that spoke to every heart. Spiritual influence is 
a mysterious thing, and yet there are some conditions of its exercise which are only too 
plainly declared. Matthew has a fuller account, but our evangelist gives us the chief 
details. The Saviour was touching the great world outside of Judaism, the scene of 
his greater ministry in the future through the Holy Spirit. The incident is remarkable, 
as suggesting this universal relation of him who as yet was but a Jewish Babbi. It 
tells us the nature of the limitation which hemmed in his work, and how that limita- 
tion was to be removed, when he " should open the door of faith to the Gentiles." 

I. At the doob op mkrot. (Vers. 25, 26.) 1. The motive. It was not for 
herself, but her child, whose distress she sought to relieve. The nature of this " unclean 
spirit." Moral parallels. A mother's instinct : how near the human affections and 
family obligations bring us to the gospel 1 The instinct is a natural one, but tending 
to the spiritual. She was in the school of sorrow, noble and unselfish sorrow, which 
searches the heart and awakens the latent forces of the spiritual nature. How many 
have been brought by such sentiments and experiences to the cross I 2. The attrac- 
tion. She had heard of him and his merciful works. We all stand in need of mercy, 
and are insensibly affected as we hear of its exercise upon others. Make known the 
Saviour, and proclaim his saving grace ! The most unlooked-for viill come. " Faith 
Cometh by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God." But now she saw and heard 
himself. Her great yearning, grieving heart read the lineaments of his countenance, 
and the character they expressed. "He will not turn me away." Christ, by his 
spiritual presence in the Word, ever touches human hearts thus, awaking by what he 
is the deepest longings and most instinctive trust. 

II. The dook ajar. (Ver. 27.) 1. It sounds like a rebuff. What claims has she 
upon him ? But : 2. Is really a trial of her faith. It sounds logically conclusive, yet is 
it intended to call forth the inmost spiritual nature. Delays and adverse experiences 
in prayer should not all at once be accepted as iinal. Prayer is not a mere asking ; it 
is a discipline. Remember Abraham's importunity. 3. Encouragement is given even 
under the apjiearance of refusal. Matthew tells us of a silence that preceded this; for 
Christ to s|.'eak was itself an omen not to be despised. " First " is a word that hints at 
postponement, not ultimate rejection. And the picture he sketches is not to be taken 
literally, but is for the spiritual imagination. As the reasoner, in making an induction, 
introduces an element into his reasoning that is not in the facts in themselves, so the 
petitioner at Heaven's throne must learn to interpret his experiences, and to sift the 
rejections that he may discover the elements of hope. Here the petitioner answers the 
objection by completing the picture in which it is couched. True, it would be wrong to 
cast the children's "loaf" to the dogs; but that is not the only conceivable way in 
which the dogs may be fed. Her Oreek experience comes to her assistance. Whilst 
the Jews hated dogs as " unclean," and could not tolerate them in their houses, the 
Greeks had a peculiar affection for them, and tamed and trained them to feed from the 
hand. In many a Greek home the dog had its place beside the table or beneath it. 
And the " onimbs " found their way there in various ways, either by intention or 
accident. The tei m she uses is a diminutive of endearment. The twenty-eighth verse 
is full of diminutives — " little dogs," " little children's," and " little crumbs " — which 
are full of subtle, tender appeal. This is her argument, then. It is a self-humiliating 
one, for she is willing to take the dogs' place. She is not a Jewess — a " child ; " she is 
only a Gentile, and her daughter is " a little dog." And here is the children's loaf— the 
Bread of life— at the very edge of the table. May not some " little crumbs " fall over? 
To such humility, such faith, there can be no refusal ; and there was never intended to 
he one. This is how we must all come to Heaven's door — vile, miserable sinners, with 
no claim save upon the mercy of God ! 

III. The dook ophned. (Vers. 2'J, 30.) 1. It is opened to faith. "For this 



OH. TU. 1—37.] THE OOSFEL ACOOBDING TO ST. MARK. 801 

saying." It was an inspiratioa of faith. She had found the master-key for all time, 
and as she used it the door flew open. If we but " ask in faith, nothing wavering," all 
our petitions will be granted. 2. It is opened hy Divine grace. We are not to suppose 
the request granted because the feeling of Christ was wrought upon. The yielding has 
only a superficial appearance of being duo to constraint. In reality the delay was but 
interpolated that the faith of the woman might be developed in her own soul and 
manifested to the Jewish spectators ; and so the final answer would be justified on 
every baud, and prove a, blessing to others beside the recipient. The cure is already 
effected when she returns home. 3. It stands open for ever to such petitioners. The 
ground of assent to her appeal having been "evidently set forth," she becomes a 
precedent for all believers to plead. She is the pioneer of all who, not being Jews 
according to the flesh, are nevertheless children of faithful Abraham according to the 
spirit. To all who thus believe the invitation is given, " Ask, and ye shall receive ; 
seek, and ye shall flnd ; knock, and it shall be opened unto you." — ^M. 

Vers. 31 — 37. — "Uphphatha." A rest, then a fresh jovurney (" again "). How long the 
interval we cannot determine. To free him from embarrassment, perhaps danger, and 
allow time for spiritual meditation, " Tyre and Sidon." The best manuscripts have 
" through Sidon," which was north of Tyre. " Decapolis : " ten cities, east and south- 
east of Sea of Galilee ; named by the Romans b.o. 65. A favourite scene of our Lord's 
labours (cf. Matt. iv. 25). In Matt. xv. 29 — 31 a multitude of cases is mentioned. 
Here one is singled out as an illustration. 

L Thb case. Familiar and ordinary ; comparatively helpless ; difficult to educate, 
mentally and spiritually. 

II. The cube. 1. The manner of the great Physician, "They beseech him to lay 
his hand upon him " — a grand expression. (1) With respect to the people. He does 
not like the publicity, etc., and so he withdraws the poor man from the excited crowd. 
(2) With respect to the patient. This step was full of consideration and delicacy. He 
sought to gain the confidence of the man. How deliberate and thoughtful was his 
mercy 1 2. The means employed. (1) Of what kinds. Physical — touch, saliva. Devo- 
tional — a heavenward look, a heavenward sigh. Authoritative — a word, " Bphphatha ! " 
Not used as a charm, but plainly intended to be otherwise understood ; a word of the 
vernacular. (2) He spoke to the man through signs, as he could not understand words. 
The means were only morally necessary ; that the man might have some basis for 
confidence, intelligence, and faith. He ever desired to be understood. 

III. That which is symbolized. The shut heart of the world, dead to spiritual 
things. Which is worse ? Only the compassion of Christ can save us. — M. 

Ver. 24 (first part). — I^e seclusion of Jesus. Our Lord, during his ministry, frequently 
■ought retirement, and the text mentions one of these occasions. Seclusion is some- 
times coveted by his disciples from improper motives, but these found no lodgment in 
the heart of the sinless One. We sometimes withdraw from active service for God because 
a feeling of indolence creeps over us, but he constantly found it to be his meat and 
drink to do the will of his Father in heaven. We sometimes shrink back from suspicions 
and reproaches in a spirit of cowardice, whereas in Christ there was no trace of the fear 
of man, that brings a snare. Nor did he ever exhibit the slightest indication of the 
selfishness which leads us to shut ourselves up in the narrow circle of our petty personal 
interests. On the contrary, his whole life, the fact of his living here at all, the death 
which he could easily have averted, conclusively showed that he " came not to be 
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many." We may at 
once and confidently set aside any explanation of Christ's withdrawal from a place 
or people which is diawn from some supposed imperfection in him who was absolutely 
sinless. At the same time, we must remember that we cannot always discover with 
certainty the reasons for our Lord's actions, not only because these are not mentioned 
by the evangelists, who never try to explain or justify what may be open to misre- 
presentation, but also because his nature transcended ours, and his acts had issues not 
only here but in an unseen world. So that whenever we suggest explanations of hia 
conduct, we must say to ourselves, " Lo, these are parts of hia ways : but how little a 
x>rtion U heard of him 1 " 



304 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. MARK. [m. vu. 1— 37. 



I. GCOABIQNAL SECLUSION WAS GOOD FOE THE LOED HIMSELF. He WaS aS truljr th« 

Son of man as the Son of God. His life would not have been complete, it would n^t 
have touched ours at bo many points, if he had always worked and never waited. 
Hence, though he had to do a work so stupendous that it would affect the destinies of 
the world, and of the unseen universe of God, there are no signs in his life of hustle or 
impatience. He waited thirty years before he preached the gospel ; and although he 
allowed himself only three short years for public ministry, he broke off from it again 
and again ; and when at work he was so unhurried that he could stop in his progress 
to Jerusalem to heal a blind beggar, or halt on his way to save a dying child in order 
to heal and teach a poor woinan in the crowd that thronged him. What a Lsson to 
u» in this fast-living age 1 What & rebuke to our feverish anxiety and excitement ! 
Doubtless we should have to sacrifice something to break off from work as our Master 
did ; indeed, this is one modern form of taking up our cross to follow him. It will be 
a fatal mistake to let business hustle prayer out of our life. The busy Christ could 
sometimes be alone, and he could not have been all he is to us if he had not been so. 
In the wilderness of temptation he was alone, and the real struggle of every human 
life is fought out and won in the presence of him who sees in secret. The greatest 
agony of Christ was endured in solitude ; and in our Gethsemane friends fail us, but 
our God is near. It is good to be alone, if only we are alone with God, as Jesus was. 

II. Thb occasional seclusion of our Lord was good fob others. It was well 
for the disciples that they should be sometimes withdrawn, with their Master, from 
circumstances in which they would be harmed by men's applause or overwrought by 
nervous excitement; but besides this, Christ's withdrawal would benefit some who were 
not his disciples. 1. It was a possible means of grace to his foes. When the rage of 
the Pharisees was intensely aroused (and no anger is more unreasoning and devilish 
than that which professedly bases itself on religious conviction), it was well for them 
that the object of their wrath should disappear for a time. Christ's withdrawal saved 
them again and again from the awful crime which they committed at last on Calvary; 
it allowed for the subsidence of hasty excitement, which prejudiced them, and gave 
them time and opportunity for recovering better and wiser thoughts about the Lord. 
The loving Saviour would fain have helped even those who hated him. 2. It was for 
the advantage of the mass of his hearers. They saw his miracles, marvelled at them, 
discussed them, crowded to see more — without the least perception of their spiritual 
significance ; so that if the series of miracles had been unbroken they would have failed of 
their purpose. 3. It was for the good of those who needed him that he should be sought. 
This is clearly exemplified in the experience of this woman of Syro-phoenioia. The 
disciples tried to drive her away. But Jesus meant her to come, had gone thither 
partly that she might come, gave her rebuffs which aroused yet more her apprehension 
of want; and so tested and developed her faith as to make her ready to receive the 
great blessing he longed to give. If Christ does not reveal himself so unmistakably 
to us as we wish. It is because he sees that we may win a higher benediction when we 
obey his command, "Seek, and ye shall find." — A. B. 

Ver. 24 (latter part). — He could not he hid. On several occasions when Jesus sought 
retirement it was denied him, either by the enthusiastic zeal of his followers or by the 
pressing need of those who had heard of his fame. Still he seems to hide himself, and 
yet from no earnest seeker can he be hidden. In respect to many things besides the 
saving knowledge of Christ, it may be said they can only be discovered by diligent 
search. Our present knowledge of the physical world has come to us through those 
who would not be denied in their eager exploration. The forces of nature, too, have 
not obtruded themselves In their various uses, but have been won to our service by 
costly experiments and diligent thought. Speaking broadly, all life is an experiment — 
a discovery. A child learns to judge distances by trying to grasp what is within 
reach ; he discovers the limit of strength by falls and hurts ; he prattles before he talk& 
Very little of what we know has come intuitively. It sought to hide itself, but because 
we could not do without it we strove after it, and from us it " could not be hid." If in 
regard to other good things these words are true, it is not unreasonable that they should 
be true of him who is the highest good our souls can have or eternity can reveal. Our 
text implies, what other verses explicitly assert, that Christ, in the full plenitude ol 



«■. TIL 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 308 



hia salvation, does not come to us when we are spiritually inert, but that when the Holy 
Spirit has shown us that we need him, and when we seek him, he must be found of ua. 
But if we spum him he will hide himself, till he will have to say of us, concerning the 
things that would give us peace, " But now they are hid from thine eyes." The truth 
on which we wish to lay stress is this — that even in the days of his earthly ministry, 
whether Jesus was found as a Saviour or not depended on the condition of those who 
sought him. It was not a question of place, but of purpose. Contrast this story with 
the incident narrated in the first part of the preceding chapter. Tliere we read of his 
visit to Nazareth, his own city, where we should expect he would be most eagerly sought 
After and most rich in blessings ; but he could not reveal himself there as he wished to do, 
" because of their unbelief." Now, on the borders of a heathen district, the inhabitants 
of which had been shut out from the blessings of the covenant, there was a certain 
woman, a Gentile by birth, a heathen by religion, who wanted to tind him, and from 
her " he could not be hid." Chauracter may be, but circumstances cannot be, a barrier 
Iwtween the soul and Christ. 

L Chbist oaknot be hid, beoaube obeat need will seek him out. It was 
so with her who, poor and ill, crept into the crowd and touched the hem of his garment ; 
with the sisters of Bethany, who sent the message, " He whom thou lovest is sick ; " 
with the woman who was a sinner, who ventured into the Pharisee's house to find him ; 
and with this Canaanite, who made her way to the Jewish Teacher, who, so far as she 
knew, had never before blessed one outside the house of Israel. It is God's design in 
oui bodily illnesses, in our bereavements, in our grief about children going wrong, to 
lead us to the feet of him who never has said, " Seek ye my face in vain." 

n. Christ oankot be hid, because tbue love will subelt find him. True 
love in a parent or lover will give persistence and hope in the search for one who is 
lost. So will love to him who is worthy of the highest affection lead us to his presence. 

in. Chbist cannot be hid, because eabnest faith will eveb lead to hul 
The shepherds of Bethlehem who heard the angels' song believed its message, and 
found the holy Child. The wise men from the East, being faithful to the light they 
had, at last bowed at the feet of the Light of the world. Let us not suffer our doubts 
to prevent the outgoings of our soul to the Lord. 

IV. Chbist cannot be hid, because ms own heart will betbat him. Becall the 
pathetic story of Joseph. When he was the lord of Egypt, and his brethren came as 
-suppliants to him, his heart could scarce contain itself, and at last the strength of his 
love forced him to avow himself and to welcome them to his heart. But that is only 
• faint emblem of the nobler love which filled the heart of the Son of God. Heaven 
could not hold it ; the cross could not check it ; the grave could not keep it back from 
his people. All through his life you see the outgoings of that mighty love. If his 
disciples are toiling in rowing, he will walk right over the raging waves to comfort 
them. If after his resurrection he stands as a stranger beside Mary, it can only be for 
« moment, for, like the good shepherd, he will soon call her by name, that she may be 
glad in his love. Still he stands among his disciples, and there his heart bewrays iteelf, 

y. Christ oamhot be hid, because his discifleb will make mu known. In spite 
of the unfaithfulness of many, he has never been without his witnesses. The healed 
demoniac went back to his home to tell what Jesus had done for him ; Andrew no 
«ooner found the Messiah than he went to tell his own brother Simon. So the witness- 
bearing is to continue till the whole earth is filled with his glory. — ^A. B. 

Yer. 32. — Deqfand dumh. Christ's acts of healing were very often performed while 
he was passing from place to place. This occurred on his way from the borders of 
Tyre and Sidon to the eastern side of the Lake of Galilee. His life was like a river, 
which not only, when it reaches the sea, bears mighty fleets on its bosom, but oarriea 
-blessings all along its course through secluded pastures and quiet corn-fields. The case 
of this man was one of physical infirmity and not of demoniac possession. He was 
dei^, and had an infirmity in his speech. In considering the spiritual significance of a 
miracle, we must not overlook or underrate the physical blessing. Such an set at, 
healing as this is the germ whence innumerable good works have come. Institutiou 
for the deaf, hospitals for the sick, homes for the crippled, are the smiling faanrert 
•rising from this seed-sowing ; and the signs by which the deaf and dumb are now 

BT. MABK. X 



806 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. yii. 1— 37. 

taught find their principle in the signs which onr Lord, in loving condescension, used 
in daaling with this afilicted man. The spirit of Christ reigns over and blesses tba 
hodies of men still. If we have the use of all our faculties, and know nothing of the 
irritability of the deaf, the loneliness of the blind, and the agony of the dumb, let us 
not only be thankful, but let us remember our responsibility for their use, lest we fall 
into condemnation because we close our ears against the truth and refuse to move our 
lips in prayer. Let us also learn to cultivate pity for those who are not so richly 
endowed, allowing for the irritability of those who can only partly hear, and the cynicism 
to which the dumb and blind are tempted, and seeking to Ijecome eyes to the blind and 
ears tc the deaf. " Be merciful, as your Pati'ier in heaven is merciful." Be pitiful and 
gentle, as he who sighed over and then blessed the sufferer. The spiritual significance 
of this act of healing is the more important, because deafness to God's voice and dumi)- 
ness in his praise are more general, and less manifest to others than the physical priva- 
tions which are their counterparts. In this light regard the sufiferer and observe — 

I. That he was destitute of two of our noblest faculties. In those days there 
existed none of the mitigations of such distress with which we are familiar, and which 
are the products of patient and skilful training. He could not hear his children's voices, 
nor the cry of warning, nor the whisper of love. All that transpired in the synagogue 
was but dumb-show to him. He could not take refuge from loneliness in reading, as we 
can do. His wants he could not articulately express. When we see a child as yet 
unable to talk we are glad that his wants are limited, simple, well known, and easily 
supplied. But this sufferer had the thoughts and feelings of a man, yet could not utter 
them. In our congregations, and outside them, multitudes fail to hear God's voice. 
The preacher speaks of sin, but there is no consciousness of it stirred in their hearts ; 
he proclaims free pardon, yet there is no sense of grateful acceptance. Voices around are 
eloquent of the Father's love to a Chrisitian, but by these they are unheard. Meanwhile 
their voices are inarticulate on Go'i's side. If' a word of warning ought to be spoken, it 
the cause of Christ is to be defended, if there are vices which a God of sobriety and 
purity would destroy, these are dumb, or are as men who have an impediment in their 
speech. 

II. That these faculties were mutually dependent. He was not absolutely 
dumb, but was inarticulate in utterance; therefore, after i:is cure, it is said "he spake 
plain." It is true he had some physical defect, for we read, " the string of his tongue 
was loosed ; " but it is evident tiiat he could not speak aright, partly because he could 
not hear — perversion of speech being a general accomjianiment of total deafness, for a 
deaf person cannot detect and alter his malpronunciations. There is a connection in 
spiritual life between the similar faculties of the soul. If we try to teach others, we 
must be taught of God. The ears must be opened before the mouth speaks plainly, and 
unless they be, the fluent talker is but a poor stammerer in spiritual utterance. Right 
speaking is conditioned by right hearing. If, therefore, the habit of evil or foolish talk 
has been acquired, it is not enough to vow that it shall be broken off, for it is " out of the 
abundance of the heart that the mouth speaketh." The fountain wants change, not the 
channel. Such a one must give up light reading for a time of earnest reflection, must 
keep clear of vain and idle companionships, and, above all, cultivate fellowship with 
God, the Source of all wise and holy thought. 

III. That he was brought to the true Phtsioiah. Satan is the great destroyei 
and damager, and Christ is the great Repairer and Redeemer. Let us bring onr friends 
to him by counsel, by sympathy, and by prayer. 

IV. That hk left himself m the Lord's hands. Friends asked the Lord to lay 
his hands on the sufferer, probably because they had seen him do this before. But 
Christ was divinely free, was far broader in method than their expectations, and he took 
him by the hand — not to cure him by that touch, hut to lead him apart ; and with this 
Stranger the helpless man was satisfied trustfully to go. Let us leave our Lord to do 
with us and with our dear ones as s«ems good to him. Though he may deal with us 
differently from his dealing with others, his choice is wisest and best. — A. B. 

Vers. 33 — 35. — A typical ewe. In our Lord's different acts of healing there were re- 
markable variations of method. We should expect this of the Son of the Crenlor, whose 
Tuiety in nature ia infinite. No two leaves in the forest are tJike— no two bcea m » 



OH, TO. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. MARK. 807 

flotlc of sheep ; and even the same sea changes in its aspect from hour to hour. Tbii 
variety ia greater as we go higher in the scale of creation, and is most conspicuous 
in man, whether considered individually or collectively. And Christ Jesus was th« 
Image of the invisible God, who is omniscient. He knew the avenue to every heart, 
and how best to win affection or arouse praise. If there was one string in the harp 
which could be made tuneful, he could touch it. Hence the variety in his method of 
dealing with those who came to him. One was called upon for public avowal, and 
another was charged to tell no man ; one was cured by a word, another by a touch ; the 
servant of the centurion was healed at a distance, but of the lunatic boy Jesus said, 
" Bring him hither unto me." Bartimaeus was suddenly restored, but this man was 
gradually given his speech and hearing. This change in mode was not from outward 
hindrance to the Lord's power, nor because that power was intermittent, but because he 
put restraint on himself for the sake of the sufferer or of the observers, Mark appears 
to have taken special interest in cases of gradual restoration. It is not because he 
would minimize the miraculous element, as some suggest, but possibly because, seeing 
in all miracles types-of what was spiritual, he saw his own experience more clearly in 
these. He had been brought up under holy influences. As a lad he had heard the 
Word in the house of his mother Mary, and had been gradually enlightened, like the 
blind man at Bethsaida ; or like this man, without abrupt suddenness, had his ears 
opened aud his tongue loosed to glorify the Grod of IsraeL The method of thia sufferer's 
cure is given in detail, and deserves consideration, 

I. Jesus led him afabt from othebs, dealing with him as with the blind man, 
whom he also took by the hand and led out of the town. This, we think, was not " to 
avoid ostentation," nor to prevent distraction in his own prayer, but for the man's good. 
Christ would be with him alone, and so concentrate attention on himself. He took 
him into solitude that he might receive deeper spiritual impressions, and that the first 
voice he heard might be the voice of his Lord. It is always good for men to be alone 
with God, as was Moses in Midian, David watching his flock at Bethlehem, Elijah in 
the cave at Horeb, and others. Our quietest times are often spiritually our most 
growing times — illness, bereavement, etc. 

II. Jbsdb beought him into vital contact with himself. " He but his fingers," 
etc. We must remember that the man could not speak nor hear, but he could feel and 
see, and therefore what was done met the necessities of his afSiction, With his finger 
Jesus touched his ear, as if to say, "I am going to cure that;" then, with finger 
moistened with saliva, he touched his tongue, to show that it was a going out of him- 
self which would restore him. The man was brought into vital contact with Christ, 
as the child was brought close to the prophet who stretched himself upon him. Our 
Lord seeks that personal contact of our spirit with bis, because the first necessity of 
redemption is to stir faith in himself. The man yielded to all the Saviour did — 
watched his signs and expected his word of power ; and it is for that expectant faith 
he BO often waits. 

III. Jesttb BAI6ED HIS THOUGHTS TO HEAVEN. He looked Up tc| heaven. Watching 
that loving face, the sufferer saw the Lord look up with ineffable earnestness, love, and 
trust ; and the effect of this would be that be would say to himself, " Then I also 
should pray, "0 God of my fathers, hear mel*" We are called upon, in the light of 
Christ's example, to look above the means we use for discipline or instruction, and away 
from ourselves and outward influences to the heavenly Father, who is neither fitful 
nor iudifi'erent to our deepest needs. 

IV. Jesus hade him conscious op peesonal sympathy. " He sighed." It was not 
a groan in prayer, but a sigh of pity, that escaped him when he gazed on this sufferer, 
and realized, as we cannot do, the devastation and death wrought by sin, of which this 
was a sign. Even with us it is the one concrete case of suffering which makes all suffer- 
ing vivid. With that feeling we must undertake Christian work. Sometimes we are 
busy, but our hands are cold and hard ; and when our heads are keen to devise, our 
hearts too often are slow to feel. But when we, followers of Christ, look on those deaf 
and indifferent to God, who never repent or pray, and who are sinking into irreligion 
and pollution, we should yearn over them and pray i'ur them with sighs and tears. 
If our hearts are heavy with pity, God will make our hands heavy with blessings. 
After the sighing and prayer came the word of power, " Epbphatha I " — " Be ofianed 1 ' 



•06 THE GOSPEL ACCOKDINO TO ST. MARK. [ch. -vn. 1— 57. 

and the sealed ear opened to his voice and the stammering tongue proclaimed his praise 
Bee Eeble'g lines — 

" Ab thou hast touched our ears, and taught 
Our tongues to speak thy praises plain, 
Quell thou each thankless, godless thought 
That would make fast our bonds again," eto, 

CoHCiitTiioir. Henceforth this man would be a living witness to Christ's power. 
Though it was expressly forbidden to blaze abroad his cure, all who saw him at home 
or at work would say, " That is the man whom Jesus healed." So let us go forth to 
live for Jesus, resolving that our words shall utter his praise and that our lives shall 
witness to his holiness, till at last another " Ephphatha I " shall be heard, and we pass 
through the golden gates, into the land where no ears are deaf and no tongues are 
mute,— A. B. 

Vers. 1 — 23.— Hie rititaland the reality of purification. I. The most hatobal aOT 
MAT BE PERVERTED INTO A RITUAL BIN. The disciplcs Were Seen eating with unholy 
hands, that is, unwashed ! How this came about we are not told ; probably it was a 
case of necessity : there was no water to be had. Probably it was a choice between 
going without food and being ritually correct, or being ritually incorrect and supplying 
the wants of nature. 

n. The meanino and use op eitual is constantly lost sight of by shalIi 
HOTDB. " The Pharisees and all the Judseans, unless for a pygmy's length they wash 
the hands and arms, do not eat." The Talmud (Lightfoot) directs that the hands 
be washed to the elbow — a rule like that here hinted at ; " pygmy " denoting the arm 
and hand. The custom went beyond what the original ritual required. And so the 
associations of the market-place were thought peculiarly profane. They carried the 
rule out in application to cups, jugs, copper vessels, and couches ; things which cannot 
feel, which are not spiritual, and which therefore are no subjects of " baptism." The 
root of the error was : 1. Blind respect for custom. Custom commands our respect ; but 
a blind respect defeats its end and meaning. 2. The reversal of the spiritual order. That 
order is : first the spiritual, then the material ; the body for the soul. The Pharisaic 
order was : first the material, and the spiritual through the material. 3. The post- 
ponement of the present to the past. What tradition of the fathers can make it a 
duty to neglect the welfare of the sons ? The rules of the past conserved the privileges 
of the present ; if they block the way and tend to hurt human life, they must give way. 
We must study the perspective of duties if we do not desire to become narrow in 
intelligence, and defeat the spirit of law. 

III. Attachment to ritual may actually obsoube the yibw op beligioits 
DUTY. Religion begins in the heart. Unless we love our God and our fellow-man, we 
shall miserably blunder in our construction of duties. Great teachers have always 
placed us at this moral centre ; face to face with God, in immediate relation to his 
imiversal imperative. 1. Isaiah (xxix. 13). He taught that the lips might readily 
be made to do duty for the heart ; and that invented obediences might distract from the 
genuine, natural obedience of the right and loving heart. 2. Moses. To go back 
fiirther in the stream of sacred tradition : no name more honoured than that of the 
great lawgiver of the desert. He distinctly enunciated the duty of filial reverence, 
founded on the instincts of the heart. How were the Pharisees carrying this out ? 
The way in which Christ refers to this is keenly ironical. 3. Christ himself. The 
Pharisees can and do actually evade the great command of filial piety under the show 
of obedience to the ceremonial Law. " By a general consecration to the temple of 
whatever might be useful to parents, it was made sacrilege to give anything to them, 
because whatever was given to them was included in the vow." A miserable trickery, 
cheating God of his due while seeming to obey himl Tradition may be so followed as 
to subvert its very essence ; for there is no tradition respectable which does not enshrine 
Divine commands. 

IV. The true view of pubitt restored. 1. Impurity is not from without hut 
from within. The external defilement may be cleansed away. It is not part of the 
mow. The moral impurity is. It is only what the imagination conceives and the will 



»H.Tii. 1—37.1 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. SOS 

affirms that is real for ns. " In morals and in religion the conscious mind is eyery- 
thing " (Godwin). 2. I%is true view may require an effort to attain. Strange t the dis- 
ciples " could not quite see it 1 " " And he said to them, Are you also so inconsiderate ? ' 
And Christ must explain to them the lesson as to a class of tyros. Want of thought- 
fulness in the mind is like want of stirring and raking to the garden-gronnd. The weeds 
and mosses soon creep. The man's thought is soon overrun by the trash of opinion 
and empty practice, if he will not think for himself. 3. The human source of evil. It 
lies in the thought, the fancy, or imagination. Lust " conceives " a thought of pleasure, 
clashing with the thought of right. The conception germinates, and brings forth a 
deed. But a splash of mud that we receive on our garments in crossing the street 
has no effect on our conscience. And generally, what we do not a^opt as part of 
ourselves, cannot be imputed to us as sin. " What does not affect the moral character, 
cannot affect the relation of man to God " (Godwin). — J. 

Yen. 24 — 30. — 3!%e heathen mother. I. The heathek and the Jew. 1. In 
general, no relation could be more hitter ; no estrangement more wide. No modem 
analogy can well enable us to realize this. They were " wide as the poles asunder." 
2. Jesus the Eecondler. In him there is neither Jew nor heathen. This sublime truth 
was first to be made clear by his own conduct. All truths must be represented in 
practice if the world is to receive them. Christ did not deal in the sentiment of unity. 
He did not propound a theory of humanity, nor of enthusiasm for humanity ; he took 
the hand of the sufferer ; he healed the sickness ; he made reconciliation a fact, " Go 
thou and do likewise 1 " 

II. The ibokt of Christ. We have all heard of the irony of Socrates. It was the 
jesting way the great master had of hinting the truth to the mind, which was con- 
cealed in words. Irony is often the disguise of sensitive and keenly truth-loving 
minds. Here he conceals tenderest compassion for the poor woman under the mask of 
sarcasm. It has the effect of eliciting her deep feeling — profound humility and trust. 
All methods of the teacher are good which love prompts, and which subserve the ends 
of love. " Faith always finds encouragement and obtains reward " with Christ. To 
take the remark of Jesus in ver. 27 as seriously meant, would be contrary to his spirit. 
It is the echo of the harsh feeling of the bigoted Jew, and really illustrates by implicit 
contrut the tenderness and benignity of Chnst, — J. 

VerB. 31 — 37. — The deaf and dumh. I. The great privation of such a 
BUFFERBB. Deafness cuts the person off firom society more than blindness. He is not 
blessed by that music which expresses the soul of things. He cannot hear that sound 
of the human voice, which is the most delicious of all music. One sense needs the 
sisterly help of another. Sight tantalizes without hearing. To be full of thought and 
feeling, yet not to be able to speak, — than this sense of restraint upon the noblest part 
of our nature, nothing may seem more hard. 

II. The cceb is btmbolio of the nature of Christ's mission. 1. The mode 
of the cure. The symbolic action was appropriate. Ordinary language could not be 
understood by the sufferer. Jesus employs gesture instead. There are special insti- 
tutions for teaching the deaf and dumb. Consider how holy a work it is, and how 
consecrated by his example. The up-looking denoted internal prayer. So let prayer 
be the soul of all our action on others and for others (eh. vi. 41 ; John xi. 41 ; xvii. 1). 
2. Tlie cure itself as symbolic, Christ's love entering the heart enlarges the intelligence, 
opens the world of music and harmony. As love opens the gate into a sphere of 
unearthly beauty to the lover, so to the soul captivated by the love of God all things 
have become new. There is a " sacred silence, offspring of the deeper heart ; " and 
dumbness has its sanctity, for here is " the finger of God." But sacred is the eloquence 
of the tongue, set free by the larger life of mind and heart. God made us for utterance, 
u he made the streams to flow.-— J. 

Vers. 1—23. — The tradition of men in competition with the commandments of God. 
Pharisees and scribes of Jerusalem had detected some of the disciples of Jesus eating 
bread " with defiled, that is, with unwashen, hands." " Holding the tradition of the 
elders " with great tenacity themselves, they demand of the new Teacher * reason Sot 



BIO THE GOSPEL ACUOKUl^G TO ST. MARK. [oh. vu. 1—37. 

his diBciples' departure from the old paths. It was a favourable opportunity for exposing 
the error of substitutiug human for DiTine precepts, and for placing the external in its 
right relation to the internal and spiritual. Christ here appears as the authoritative 
Interpreter of the Divine commands ; and, as a true Teacher, discriminating between 
the "commandment of God" and "the tradition of men." Of old time it was well 
■aid, " Man looketb on the outward appearance, but God looketh on the heart." Here 
the men who " sit on Moses' seat," alike in what they " bid " and in what they " do," 
lay great stress on the " washings of cups, and pots, and brasen vessels," and of handis. 
Truly great matters! But the searching eye Divine discerns the hidden " heart " that 
is " far from " God, and whose many evils send forth a thick stream of pollution in 
unholy practices, defiling not merely the hands but the whole life. Jesus rebuts their 
accusation against his disciples, first by a justly merited rebuke, and then by readjust- 
ing the relative authority of the commandment of God and the tradition of men, which, 
in the practice of these accusers, through their selfish, grasping covetousness, had been 
80 greatly distorted. He teaches once and for ever that no commandment of men, no 
tradition of elders, must he allowed to make " void the Word of God." Thus Jesus, 
who is 80 often erroneously spoken of as despising " mere commands/' redeems the very 
" word," and pays his utmost tribute to the letter of the command. In the conflict 
between the Church and the sacred relationships of common life, to the latter must be 
assigned the pre-eminence. The necessities of the temple, of its services or its servants, 
must not be met at the expense of filial faithfulness. The sin of the Pharisees and 
scribes was— 

l a oboss pebtebsion of the bglatitb olamb op the pabent and the 
Dhubch. 

il a wicked interference with the first commandment with promise. 

iii. a orcel undermining of fn.ial affection and fidelity, and as cbcel 
an exfosnbe of the aqed and enfeebled parents to a falsely justified 
NEGLECT. And it was — 

lY. AK UNWABBANTED USUBPATION of ADTHOBITT TO WEAKEN THE OBUOATION 

or A Divine law. 

Christ's words, whilst correcting these errors, (1) traced the tradition to its tme 
source— "your tradition, which ye have delivered; " (2) reduceil it to its proper place 
of inferiority ; and (3) exalted the Divine command, " Honour thy father and thy 
mother," to its unassailable supremacy. So he prepares the way for a correction of 
the " many such like things " which were done by these " hypocrites," who taught " as 
their doctrines the precepts of men." — Q. 

Vers. 14 — 23. — The real and the imaginary defilement The question of "the 
Pharisees, and certain of the scribes which had come from Jerusalem," yet remains to 
be answered, Jesus having turned aside to weaken the force of " the tradition of men." 
The answer is given in the ears of " the multitude." It is simple. " There is nothing 
from without the man that can defile him : " defilement is of that which proceeds 
" from within out of the heart of man." The man's heart is the fountain of evil ; it 
is his heart, not his hands, that needs washing. No wonder that " the Pharisees were 
offended, when they heard this saying." Then, having " entered into the house from 
the multitude," the disciples " asked of him " what is to them as yet " the parable ; " 
for 80 are they " without understanding also." In few words he distinguishes the true 
nature and source of defilement from the untrue, leaving for all time these lessons 
hidden in his words— 

I. All pollution is mobal pollution. From this all mere ceremonial defilement 
must be distinguished. Such uncleanness is not moral impurity, nor is ceremonial 
correctness to be regarded as the testimony of moral purity, 'i'he stainless externalist 
may harbour " within " all " evil things." The perversion of a wise teaching on the 
necessity for personal cleanliness and of instructive ceremonials had led to the foolish 
supposition that a touch of the dead, or the diseased, or the decaying matter, conveyed 
moral impurity. This is once for all contradicted. Whatsoever is " without the man " 
conveys not the defilement. It is a moral condition. The heart can defile all things. 
As that which is from without the man cannot defile, so let it be known " there it 
nothing from without the man that going into him can " cleanse " him." 



OH. TO. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 811 

II. The BOtTRCB of all xhpubitt is not in God's wohks, but n? han's hbabt. 
" All these evil things proceed from within." Thus Jesus, with his just judgment, 
traces evil to its hidden source. The heart, not the flesh, is the seat of defilement. Thii 
is the fountain which can corrupt God's good and pure gifts. How marked a contrast 
does he make between a possible ceremonial uncleanness — a very trifle at moit (as 
to moral uncleanness it is nil) — and the greatness, the multiplicity, and the foulness 
of the "evil things which proceed from within"! Material things cannot in them- 
selves convey moral impurity. Even the excess in the use of the food, which destroys 
life, comes from within. That the good things of God may be turned into occasions 
of evil all know, but it is only the heart that can so turn them. Whatsoever is 
" without the man cannot defile him, because it goeth merely into bis body, not into 
his heart ; " and the heart, not the body, is " the man," the true man, the very man. 

III. Fbou the thsaluom of a false ceremonialisu Christ bedeehs his ois- 
ciFLEa, " H AEiNO ALL MEATS CLEAN." How needful not only to say what is sin, but 
to say also what is not sin 1 From many a yoke which the fathers were not able to 
bear Christ sets his people free! From child's play to serious work he calls them. 
From a mere adjustment of articles of dress and of furniture ; from punctilios of ritual 
observance having in themselves no moral significance, and liable to withdraw men 
from great works and great truths, he turns them aside. He exposes the true evil- 
ness in the long catalogue of "evil things" of which the heart, not the flesh, is 
capable ; and he, without many words of exhortation, directs men to seek the cleansing 
of their unholy hearts, that their lives, their whole man, may be clean also. — G. 

Vers. 24 — 30. — I%e Syro-phoentcian woman. Now, in prudence, not in fear, Jesus 
withdraws from the districts under Herod's jurisdiction, where he had created sufficient 
excitement to expose him to hindrance both by friends and foes. He fain would hide 
himself in secret. " He entered into a house, and would have no man know it ; " but it 
was unavailing — " he could not be hid." One at least sought him out with an eager 
intrusiveness which was only justified by the greatness and pressing nature of her need 
— " a little daughter grievously vexed with a devil " — and the brilliancy of her faith, 
which, while it wrought so great good for her home, secured so high commendation 
from her Lord. On that faith our eye must be fixed. 

L The DEMAND for faith on the part of the stranger was very great. Not one of 
" the children," but one of " the dogs," she had not been trained in the hope of Israel j 
though, living in neighbourly relation with the Jews, she was not wholly uninformed. 
Yet the very name given to the " Lord," of whom " mercy " is sought — " thou Son of 
David " — was an excluding term (or her who could claim no relationship to the sacred 
family. She belonged not to the house ; she was a village dog. Truly it needed great 
faith on her part to burst through the barriers and ask for " the children's bread." But 
she shared the common humanity ; she had heard of the many healings— even " as many 
as touched but the border of his garment," though no appeal were made ; and the keen 
eye of need and maternal anxiety saw the largeness of the compassion of him who had 
not yet denied any. 

II. StraLgely, however, that faith is tested by absolute silence, by apparent indif- 
ference. " He answered her not a word." The disregarded prayer, even though sha 
" besought him " to help her, returned to chill the heart of hope and faith. Her continued 
appeal, " she crieth after us," engages the intercession of the disciples, who, evidently 
for their own relief, add their lieseeching to hers. Still the appeal is unavailing, and 
on high and unassailable grounds, with which no personal consideration mingles. " I 
was not sent " to the heathen. But the struggling faith braves difficulties, and casts 
this mountain into the sea. Prostrate at his feet she falls with the plea, soon to be 
effectual, " Lord, help me." Yet even this appeal fails to conquer. He who always 
acts according to what is right aud just declares, " It is not meet " — it is contrary to 
all propriety and right — " to take the children's bread and cast it to dogs." 

III. The parabolic or figurative argument has its weak place, which qwck-sighted 
faith, untiring and unfainting, detects aud thereby secures its tbiumph. " ' Yea, Lord.' 
Yea, it is true ; they are the children ; yea, I am but a dog ; truly it is not right, to give 
the children's bread to dogs ; yet in every house the dog is not wholly forgotten." The 
argument has its (intended) flaw, for God cares for dogs ; and from every well-suppUed 



lis THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. to. 1—37. 

table lomethiiig goes to them. Give me that — " the crumbs that fall." Give me " the 
children's crumbs ; " what they need not, what they despise, what I may have without 
robbing them, 

IV. It is enough ; the patient, triumphant faith at length finds its bgwabd. It shall 
be written for future generations of needy ones to learn how to succeed in presence of 
difficulties and hindrances and impossibilities. The Lord's honour is upon thee. 
" Great is thy faith." And more, thy suit is gained, thy word is mighty. For " thii 
saying go thy way ; the devil is gone out of thy daughter." It was even so. Let 
every suffering one, even though outcast from the holy, happy community, and every 
one within that community, learn from this little story that if men have faith as a grain 
of mustard seed, it shall be even as they will. And let every timid, unbelieving child 
bend lowly before this " dog," and learn the power of living, hopeful, resolute faith.— G. 

Vers. 31.— 37. — Hie healing of the deaf and dumb man. Another case of healing, the 
record of which is peculiar to St. Mark, throws into prominence both the pitifulness ol 
men and the power of the Lord. It is that of one unable to speak for himself, and unable 
to hear of the many wonderful works which are being done around. " They bring unto 
him one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech ; and they beseech him 
to lay his hand upon him." Ah, they have gained faith in the power of that hand. 
Jesus " took him aside from the multitude privately." Thus the man, at least, would 
know the work was the work of Jesus only. Then, for reasons that are not assigned, 
possibly as signs to him wlio could not hear, he "put his fingers into his ears, . . . 
•pat, . . . touched his tongue," and looked " up to heaven," and " sighed " and spake^ 
and " saith "— saith "to him "the first word he should hear, "Ephphatha!" Then 
" his ears were opened, and the bond of his tongue was loosed, and he spake plain." 
Thus is presented to us a typical example of the redemption of the disorganized life. 

I. One of the disorganizing effects of evil is that it closes the ear. It stops the 
avenues to the soul by which ihe word of truth and love may enter. The wicked man 
Is deaf to the appeals of righteousness. Its gentle, winning tones fall unheeded on the 
inattentive, unmoved heart, which is as insensible to them as is a stone. How great is 
the injury thus inflicted I The man is shut out from the elevating, ennobling, the 
satisfying, sanctifying infinence of truth. The words which minister grace to the 
hearers can convey none of their treasures to his heart ; the way is not open. The 
human or Divine voice, so rich in its ministries to the ignorant, to the inquirer, to the 
hungry, is powerless here. The corrections of wisdom, the lofty motive, the noble aim, 
the calming, comforting voice of truth, guiding and blessing wherever it is heard, baa 
no power here. All is lost. Not more is he to be pitied who, by physical infirmity, 
hears not the voice of friends, the songs of birds, the harmonies of sweet sounds. Sin 
robs the life of its truest, its highest enrichment. Christ's greatest ministries to the 
world were by his lips. Though the words were of earth, they were vessels holding 
heavenly treasure. But the deaf hear them not. So truly is a state of sinfulness 
typified in deafness. 

IL But sin equally impedes the free and profitable service of the life of its victim. 
It closes his mouth. The mouth, which may be a fountain of wisdom, if unsealed. The 
life, which might be a spring of blessing to many, is as a dry and parched land, or as a 
well having no water. That beneficent ordination by which one life — even every life 
is designed to be a source of blessing to every other, is, by evil, firustrated ; and it 
becomes, instead, a cause of injury. 

III. It is here Christ appears to bless the race by opening the eyes of the blind, by 
onstopping the ears of the deaf, by loosing the tongue of the dumb. His holy work 
stands over against the evil of sin. He unstops the deaf ear. Awaking the attention 
of the sleeper, he gives to the receiving soul the words of eternal life. His heavenly 
teaching renews, exalts, ennobles. The ignorant one becomes wise in his school, ffls 
truth raises the beggar from the dunghill. Righteousness puts the soul en rapport with 
all that is good, and beautiful, and wise, and holy. It makes a man to be at one with 
all the kingdom of God, with all truth and all life. 

IV. But the redeemed life becomes a source of blessing to others — a iountain of living 
waters. The unsealed lips speak forth the heavenly wisdom. The psalm of praise the 
•ong of thanksgiving, the word of truth, of peace, and of blessing, and the activities of 



«^ ▼11.1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACOORDINO TO ST. MARK. 31» 



the good Ufe, are all semceable. The life now becomes an active power for good. 
Each, when he has " turned again," is able to strengthen his brethren. The first effect 
of the eviction of evil from the life is that the eyes are opened, that all that surrounds 
may enter to enrich the life. The second effect is, the lips are opened, the life becomes 
S centre of useful influence. It is a new acquisition to the world, a new joy. So from 
vithout flows into the redeemed life all that is calculated to minister to it, to nourish 
to purify, to exalt, to gladden and perfect it ; while back again from the nourished' 
purified, and gladdened life, new sentiments, new emotions, new aims, and new efforts 
proceed. The effect of which reciprocal infiuenoe is that each becomes a point of light, 
a form of loveliness ; each a stream of holy, useful influence, refreshing this weary 
desert and making it glad. Truly, of him who " maketh even the deaf to hear, and the 
dumb to speak," it may be said, " He hath done all things well." It is no less well 
■aid, " And they glorified the God of Israel." — O. 

Vers. 1 — 23. Parallel passage: Matt. xv. 1—20. — Exposure of Pharisaism : iU 
errcr» and evils. I. Doctbine of defilement. 1. Contents of this chapter. This 
chapter contains three principal sections. The first section treats of defilement ; the 
second gives an account of a demon being expelled from the daughter of a Syro- 
phoenioiau woman ; and the third narrates the cure of a deqf mute. The first section, 
again, contains the following :— The charge of defilement which the Pharisees pre- 
ferred against the disciples ; the evangelist's digression for the purpose of explaining 
to his Gentile readers the Jewish notions and usages in this matter ; Christ's apply- 
ing to the Jews of his day a description of their fathers by Isaiah ; the reason of this 
application in the displacement by them of God's Law to make room for the tradi- 
tionary teachings of man ; a much graver delinquency in nullifying the Law of God 
not merely with respect to ceremonial washings, but in regard to moral duties ; a specific 
example of this in a glaring and most culpable neglect of filial obligation; our 
Lord's exposition, publicly in the presence of the assembled people and privately i< the 
disciples, of the true nature of real, that is, moral defilement ; and a reference to the 
distinction of clean and unclean in the matter of meats, which formed a main par- 
tition between Jews and Gentiles. The way was thus prepared for, and an easy 
transition made to, the subject uf the second section, which narrates our Lord's only 
recorded visit to the Gentile world, and tlie miracle there wrought in the case of the 
Gentile maiden who was dispossessed under singularly interesting circumstances. The 
third section records a miracle which is only mentioned by St. Mark, and so peculiar to 
his Gospel. Our Lord, having just returned from the cities of Phcenicia, was making 
his way through the midst of the region of the Ten Cities, when he cured the deaf 
mute or dumb man of Decapolis in a very remarkable manner, and by a method of 
external application not employed hitherto in the miracles wrought by our Lord. 

2. Linguistic peculiarities in the first section. (1) The first peculiarity of the kind 
indicated is the use of the Greek word itvyix^, which is a hapax legomenon, and qualifies 
the verb " wash." In our English version it is translated (a) oft, and in the margin (6) 
diligently, which is adopted in the Revised Version. The former is supported by the 
Vulgate, which has erebro, and depends on the analogy of similar but not really 
related words, such as miKvf or m/KvSn ; while the marginal rendering has the support of 
the Peshito Syriac h'tiloith. Some of the older interpreters understand it as (c) a 
measure of length, and so Euthymius has /t^Xf" ""^ iryKwvos, " as far as the elbow ; " and 
Theophylact similarly, adding that it is the space from the elbow to the knuckles ; the 
water poured out into the hollow of the hand would thus, by the elevation of the same, 
flow down to the elbow. The more natural explanation seems to be that which takes 
it (d) in the primary signification of the word, which is clenched hand or fist; not in the 
sense of the closed hand being raised so as to allow the water to flow down to the 
elbow; nor yet in the sense of rubbing the closed hand or fist with the hollow of 
the other hand, which, as Fritzsche suggests, would require the words to be rf iroXoM^ 
rl^aivTat T^r ruyiiiiv ; but in the sense of washing the hand with the fist, that is, by 
rubbing one hand with the other closed or clenched or with the fist, in the sense of 
vigorously. This explanation, which corresponds with that of Beza, amounts to the 
idea of diligence conveyed by the Syriac. This verb W^ttw, it may be observed in pawing, 
generally refers to " washing the hands or feet," as ■wxivv signifies to " wash clothes." and 



814 XHJ; (jOSPEL ACUOiCUiiJU I'U a I. MArCK. [cii. vu. 1—37. 

Kata to "wash," usually the body, antl therefore in the middle voice "to bathe." (2) Again, 
in 7er. 4, a different kind of washing must be meant by Pmrrlirturrea. Olshausen and 
others refer the washing which it implies, not to the Pharisees themselves, but to the 
articles of food bought in, and brought from, market; and explain the middle voice con* 
ut'tently with its usual meaning, ihat is to say, in the signitication of washing for them- 
ielves. Tliis rendering scarcely deserves the serious consideration given to it, and is to 
be rejected unhesitatingly. It must, as we think, refer to the men themselves. The 
washing of ver. 3 is partial, only including the hands ; it was the ordinary custom 
with the Jews of that day before partaking; of food ; but in case they had been to the 
market or bazaar, and had come into contact with the crowd that resorted thither, it 
was scarcely possible to escape defilement of some kind in mixing with that motley 
multitude, and therefore a more general washing, extuuding to the whole body, became 
a ceremonial necessity. The other reading (^a>'Tr(r(i»Toi),deQoting " to sprinkle" or "cleanso 
by sprinkling," is properly regarded as a gloss ; the word fimrrlawiniu, in the absence oi 
regimen, is quite unrestricted as to mode, signifying " wash themselves," as it is rendered 
in the Revised Version. There is (3) a slight diversity about the connection of the 
words cath iyofas, which are joined by Krebs and Ruinoel to iaiiovai, in the sense of eating 
of things bought in the market, like the construction which occurs in ver. 28 of this 
same chapter, where the dogs are said to eat of the crumbs (JtaBUi kith rav ^ixW); while 
ayopi. is admitted to have in the classics the signification of provisions bought in the 
market, as in the phrase iyopiir irapeTxor, This, however, appears a straining both of 
the sense and construction, the plain rendering being "alter market," or, as the 
English haa it, " when they came from the market;" thus ivb ttlimu means "after 
supper." 

3. Additional baptisms. These washings, which the Pharisees and indeed all the 
Jews practised, were not confined to their hands or whole persons ; but, besides such 
personal ablutions, there were baptisms of cups and pots, of brazen vessels, and of 
couches. Of these domestic utensils the first are named from the use to which they 
are applied, namely, for drinking, as is expressed by its root ; the second, corresponding 
to the Roman sextarius, from which, and not from (ta, to polish, is the word derived, 
are named from their size, and contain a pint, or sixth part of a congius (somewhere 
about a gallon); the third are called from the material copper of which they are made ; 
the fourth get their name like the first, from their use, to wit, of reclining on, either for 
the purpose of sleep or at meals. 

4. The origin, of these washings. Several chapters of Leviticus (xii. — xv.) contain a 
tolerably full account of the ablutions enjoined in the Law, and employed for Levitical 
purifications. These purifications were resorted to for the purpose of ceremonial 
cleansing. They had generally respect to certain states or conditions of the body, 
symbolical of the defiling nature of sin. In some of these cases we read that the 
person to be cleansed " shall wash his clothes, bathe his flesh in running water, and 
shall be clean." But Pharisaism extended these washings far beyond the limits of the 
Law — applied them to cases neither contemplated by, nor comprehended in, the Law, 
and multiplied them to an absurd amount. Persons, before engaging in the com- 
monest acts of domestic or social life, were compelled to a strict observance of such 
washings ; nay, the very articles of household furniture, including those here enume- 
rated, had to be subjected to them. God had, for good and wise purposes, instituted 
certain temporary means of ceremonial cleansing; but man perverts and pollutes, or, 
when he does not pollute, he perverts the wisest means to the worst ends. The per- 
versions in the case befure us, besides being excessively burdensome and extremely 
inconvenient from their multijilicity, were perfectly contemptible from their very 
puerility and triviality, and positively sinful from the seemingly magical efficacy with 
which they invested mere mechanical operations. 

5. Ceremonialiim. Ceremonies of human invention, especially when multiplied and 
perverted from their legitimate or appointed use, like the ablutions referred to, instead 
of being helps, become hindrances to devotion. They promote irreligion at the same 
time that they foster pride. Their tendency is to put outward purifying in the place of 
inward purity, to substitute external cleansing for internal cleanness, to prefer clean 
hands to a clean heart, and to rest in " the righteousness which is of the Law " instead 
sf " the righteousness which is of Ood by faith." True religion, under whatevsi 



ca. vn. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCOilUlNG TU HI. MAKK. 31« 

dispensation, begins with the heart. Thus the psalmist prays so beautifully, " Create 
in me a clean heart, God; and renew a right spirit within me." The promise here is 
limited to such, as when it is said, " Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are 
of a clean heart ; " the prospect hereafter is for them, and for them alone ; for it ia 
only " the pure in heart " that shall " see God." No amount of outward observances 
or ceremonial ablutions could constitute real religion or supply its place, nor entitle the 
person that performed them to the privileges of a true child of God. The apostle 
insists on this when he says, " He is not a Jew, which is one outwardly ; neither is 
that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh : but he is a Jew, which is one 
inwardly ; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter ; 
whose praise is not of men, but of God." 

6. Tradition. Tradition in general is that which is handed down from father to son, 
or from one generation to another. The word is sometimes used in a good sense, and sig- 
nifies instructions, whether relating to doctrine or duty, faith or practice, and whether 
the delivery be oral or written ; but, and this is the main thing, consisting of truths 
immediately delivered by inspired men. Such is its signification in 1 Cor. xi. 2, 
where the apostle commands or exhorts the Corinthians to " hold fast the traditions, 
even as I delivered them to you ; " also in 2 Thess. ii. 15, " Therefore, brethren, stand 
fast, and hold the traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word, or our 
epistle;" and again in the same Epistle (iii. 6), "Withdraw yourselves from every 
brother that walketh disorderly, and not after the tradition which he received of 
us." But it has another sense also in Scripture, and is employed to denote what is 
merely human and untrustworthy, as when St. Paul speaks of himself as he was in 
his original sinful, unconverted state, and says, " I profited in tlie Jews' religion above 
many my equals in mine own nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions 

,, of my fathers ; " and again, when he warns the Colossiaus, saying, " Beware lest any 
man gpoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the trwlition of men, after the 
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ." It is in this latter sense that it is used 
in ver. 6 of the present chapter, when " the Pharisees and scribes asked him, Why 
walk not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders? " The Jewish theory 
of tradition was that, along with the written Law, Moses received at Sinai a secoiifl or 
oral law, and that this latter law was handed down through succeeding generations. 
This law, consisting of traditional interpretations and gradual additions, was at length 
embodied in the text of the Talmud, called "Mishna," or "second law." This oral law 
held a higher rank, and was more highly esteemed than the written Law. It not only 
supplemented the written Law by large additions, but was employed as the key to its 
interpretation. Thus in the end it was used in instances innumerable to supplant, or 
supersede, or set aside, the written Law at pleasure. We do not despise tradition in the 
proper and legitimate sense which, as we have seen, the word sometimes has, nor in 
its present ordinary sense of something handed down — ordinance or ceremony — pro- 
vided it be agreeable to the Divine Word ; but we must not set up tradition side by 
side with the written Word of God, nor bring God's Word into conformity with tradi- 
dition ; on the contrary, whenever God's Word and human tradition clash, the Litter 
must be corrected by the former. One example of this kind we have in relation to the 
Apostle John, about whom the saying went abroad that he should not die. Jesus had 
said, " If 1 will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee ? " This was in the first 
instance misinterpreted, then the misinierpretation spread from mouth to mouth as a 
regular tradition, till the apostle himself felt called upon to correct it by the specific 
statement, " Yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die; but. If I will that he 
tarry till I come, whnt is that to thee? follow thou me." 

7. Isatxh'-i prediction as applicable to the Pharisees as to their fathers. The state- 
ment of Isaiah, though not in the strict and specific sense a prediction concerning our 
Lord's contemporaries, was a description so all-embracing and so pregnant with 
meaning, that it exhibited with striking exactness the chief features of tlioir religious 
life, or rather of their irreligious, soulless formality. Isaiah foretold it (irpse^TcuweF, 
aorist) in the past, but it stands written from then till now, and so our Lord, in this 
case, uses the perfect (7f'7()airToi.) What was said then, so long before, was equally 
true in the Saviour's day ; it was as true of the children, or remote descendants, as ol 
thair ancestori, as though the traits of character referred to had become stereotyped. 



116 THE GOSl'EL ACCORDING TO ST. MAKK. (_CH. vn. 1—37 

(1) H« charged them with hjrpocritical lip-service, saying, as though with withering 
Bcom, "Ye hypocrites, ye honour me with lip-service, but without sincere heart- 
worship! " (2) with vanity or empty form in worshipping according to the command- 
ments which human tradition taught ; and (3) our Lord, in stating the ground of the 
application which he makes of the prophet's words, brings home the charge, asserting 
that by those human precepts they displaced the commandments of God ; and then (4) 
he backs his assertion by an example of most glaring and flagrant criminality as ue 
natural result of such Pharisaic teaching. 

8. Practical remarks ore the preceding. We cannot fail to notice (1) the depth of 
meaning in the Divine Word; of this characteristic of Scripture we have here a notable 
illustration. What Isaiah spoke in his moral portraiture of his contemporaries, applied 
to their children's children many centuries after, as accurately and as exactly as if he 
had had the latter solely in view, or rather as if the distant ancestors and the remote 
posterity both sat together before this great spiritual limner. Such apt and felicitous 
delineation was not the result of human intuition or prophetical sagacity, bat of Divine 
inspiration ; it was the Spirit that gave the prophet such foresight, and thus testified 
the truth beforehand. The word "hypocrite" (2) originally meant one who answered in 
a dramatic dialogue, and thus an actor ; and further, one who wore a mask as actors 
did. It denotes one who assumes a character which does not really belong to him, or 
acts a part that is unreal, or feigns virtues not possessed. The persons to whom the 
word is here applied approached God with their lips, while their heart was far distant 
irom (wofpit kitix^i, " holds far aloof from ") him. They were acting the part of true 
worshippers, but were not so in reality ; they were wearing a mask of profession, 
which they put on to conceal their real character. They pretended to he honouring 
God, but the honour which they gave him did not proceed from the heart ; it was only 
in outward seeming, or for external show. This worship (3) was confined to the utter- 
ances of their lips as the main instrument employed in such worship ; but the under- 
standing and its faculties, the heart and its affections, were not engaged, and took no 
part in it. It was hollow-hearted and false-hearted ; it was vain O'cEtjif, in vain, a 
word which may come from luim, to seek but without finding). It was meant as 
worship, no doubt, but it was fruitless, being worship that God could not accept. The 
vanity (4) of this worship, however, did not arise so much from the manner of it — 
heartless as that was, and spiritless as it was — but from the matter of it. All worship 
presumes certain doctrines and duties, and proceeds in accordance with these. Every 
time we open our lips in praise or prayer, or other act of worship, doctrines or duties of 
some sort are involved, implied, or referred to. But the doctrines which these Pharisaic 
formalists taught were the commandments of men ; they had no higher source and no 
better origin. If we would worship God aright, we must worship according to the 
way and means which God himself has prescribed ; if we teach acceptably, we must 
teach the doctrines which God directs. Not so the Pharisees : their doctrines were 
human commandments; their teaching, therefore, was olten lalse, always fallible, often 
puerile, and not unfrequently pernicious. But worse still, their teachings were not 
merely negative, in so far as they did not teach what God commanded, but only what 
men invented ; they were positively subversive of the commandment of God in any 
given case, and hence the word here is singular (iyTo\iiv) ; as our Lord himself affirms, 
when in ver. 8 he states the ground on which he applies to the Pharisees of his time 
the words spoken by Isaiah in relation to their ancestors. Ye give up or ht go the 
commandment of God, but hold fast the tradition of men in the matter of ceremonial 
washings, and of many other things of like kind. Not only so ; ye set aside the com- 
mandment of God (not ly, as in the Authorized Version, but)/or Me safe o/ your tradition 
(Si4 T-))v iro()el5o<ru' i/iliv, St. Matthew), or, as St. Mark more fully expresses it, "in order 
that ye may keep your own tradition." Thus there is a climax ; for, first, they let go 
or diimiat the commandment of Uod, while they hold with obstinate tenacity human 
tradition ; then, secondly, they set aside or displace, putting something else in its room 
or reject with something akin to contempt, the commandment of God ; from omission 
they proceeded to commission as usual, and all this in order to guard, observe, or 
maintain their own tradition. Isaiah had finely (koAus) described them beforehand, 
and now they finely ((toXSr, the same word, but used ironically in this neconl instance, 
»nd not with the meaning of "entirely") act up to tliat description. 



OH. vn. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAUlv. 317 

9. Morai obligation set aside thromfh Pharisaism. Our Lord proceeds to expose the 
practical and pernicious effect of Pharisaic traditionalism in the domain of ethics. H« 
had shown the hoUowness of its teaching in cases of ceremonial cleansings ; but h« 
now advances from the ceremonial to the moral. For this purpose he selects the fifth 
commandment, and proves that the antagonism between the written Law, or Lawof Go^ 
and the oral, or human law, in respect to this commandment, is complete. He quotes 
the prescriptive part of the commandment, and omits the promissory as not required 
by the object he has in view; instead of the promissory clause attached to obedience, 
he substitutes the punitive sentence pronounced on the person guilty of a breach of the 
commandment in question. " Moses said " — and here it will be observed that the com- 
mandment of God, who spake by Moses, is identified with the commandment of his 
inspired servant, so that what was really said by God is here attributed by our Lord to 
his servant Moses — " Honour thy father and thy mother." These words were graven 
by the finger of the Almighty on the stone tablet at Sinai, and the precept thus 
solemnly delivered at first was enforced by the awfully severe sanction which follows : — 
" Whoso curseth " — that is, speaketh ill of or revileth — " father or mother, let him die the 
death." (1) In the "precept" the possessive pronoun and article are used with both 
words, " father " and " mother," as if to individualize, and point out specifically to every 
reader or hearer of the Law, the duty as individual and personal ; but, in the penalty 
clause, the pronoun and article, though expressed both in the original Hebrew and 
Septuagint Version, are omitted in the record of both evangelists, as if to generalize or 
treat as a class, and present the duty in the abstract, thus denoting unfaithfulness to 
such a relationship^sucA a sacred object of affection as a father and a mother. The 
omission of the article by itself draws attention to the quality, character, or nature, 
rather than the substance, of the thing thus spoken of. (2) The original Hebrew 
expression is a peculiar idiom of that language, implying intensity by means of an 
infinitive mood joined to the finite verb of the same signification, and denoting, " Let 
him be surely put to death " — literally, " dying, let him bo put to death." The Septuagint 
Version has two ways of expressing this Hebrew idiom, either by the verb and cognate 
noun in the dative, or by the verb and its participle ; the former is the mode not 
exactly adopted, but only approximated in this instance, with merely an insignificant 
variation, by the evangelist, namely, " Let him end with death." But (3) the words 
" he shall be free " of the common version are supplied in order to make out the sense. 
If the reading of the received text, which begins the next verse with wal, be retained, 
the Terse before us may be regarded (a) as an instance of the figure aposiopeais, by 
which our Lord, as if with inexpressible indignation at the thought of conduct so 
unnatural and reprehensible, breaks off without completing the sentence ; while the 
supplied words of the English version express the acquittal conceded in the case by 
Pharisaic casuistry. Another way (6) of evading the difiBculty was suggested by 
Fritzsche, who supplies here the closing words of ver. 10 with a negative — that is, ^j) 
SariTif TfKfvTirv — so that this verse would read as follows : — " But ye say. If a man shall 
say to his father or mother. It is Corban, that is to say, a gift, by whatseover thou 
mightest be profited by me, let him not die the death." The Revised Versiqn, (c) how- 
ever, cuts the knot by adopting the reading which excludes koI from the beginning of 
ver. 12 ; thus, " But ye say. If a man shall say to his father or his mother, That where- 
with thou mightest have been profited by me is Corban, that is to say. Given to Qod ; 
ye no longer suffer him to do aught for his father or his mother." 

10. Further development of our Lard's retort. The word " corban " meant anything 
brought near to the altar or to the God of the altar for presentation, and applied, like 
the cognate verb hikrih, to bring near, to any offerings, whether bloody or unbloody, 
animal or vegetable. The evangelist, as is his custom, explains it by a Greek 
word denoting a gift in general, but more particularly, according both to Homeric and 
Hellenistic usage, a gift to God, or a votive offoriug. It is thus a correct equivalent of 
the word which the evangelist explains by it. When, then, a Jewish child wished to 
discard, and entirely free himself from, filial obligation, he had only to pronounce this 
mystic word of potent meaning, and the traditional law of Pnarisaism gave him a full 
release. Whenever a man said of any part ol his property or of his whole possessions, 
" It is Corban," that is, " given to God," he was bound by his vow, and the property waa 
ieToted to the service or .support of the altar or teuiple or national religion ; it wa* 



818 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, MARK. [oh. vh. 1—37. 

made over for religious purposes, though the time of fulfilling such vow was left to 
hi8 own option, and so its fulfilment became discretionary, or was evaded. To revila 
or curse father or mother was surely bad enough and wicked enough ; but to refuse to 
supply the wants of a parent when reduced to poverty, or to support a parent in old 
age and when needing such support, or to withhold from an indigent parent the neces- 
saries of life, on the plea that the means or resources out of which such could be 
lupplied were devoted to religious uses, was a refinement of unnatural and inhuman 
wickedness almost incapable of being expressed in words. And thus, as the next verse 
informs us, they sufiered him no longer to do anything for his parents, even if he would; 
or, if he would not, they suffered him to have his way, conniving at his sin and over- 
looking his shame, nay, putting words into his mouth to enable him to perpetrate in 
the name of religion such abominable villainy. If, from a spirit of greedy avarice, or 
miserable meanness, or detestable stinginess ; or in a fit of spiteful passion ; or under the 
influence of superstition, a wicked Jew pleased to say to either parent suffering from 
disease, or labouring under age and poverty, " That whereby I might have helped, or 
relieved, or in any way benefited you, is devoted to the service of God and religion, 
and cannot now be withdrawn," the oral law of the Pharisee granted full liberty to do 
so, taught him its formula for that very purpose, and salved his conscience that he 
might withal feel at ease. Now, to those censorious Pharisees who watched our Lord 
and his disciples with such lynx-eyed vigilance and malign intent, and who had seen, 
not all the disciples, but some of them, partaking, not of a regular repast, but eating a 
morsel of bread with hands common, that is, in the ordinary or general state — clean, it 
may be, but not ritually cleansed — our Lord may be supposed to say. Ye blame my 
hungry disciples for snatching the fragment of a hurried meal without ceremonial 
ablution, and censure them for neglecting a silly ceremony enjoined no doubt, by your 
traditional law, which is only of human origin, and, in such a case as that just referred to, 
of most nefarious tendency ; but ye teach your disciples to violate, not a trivial ceremonial 
observance for which only human authority can be pleaded, and from which no benefit 
can be derived, but a moral duty, based on closest human relationship, written by God's 
own finger, recorded in his written law, and enforced by the most solemn sanction 1 Is 
not this to establish man's law and set aside God's Law ; to adhere punctiliously to the 
miserable tradition of miserable or wicked men, but to invalidate and even abrogate 
the Law of an infinitely pure and holy God — a Law, too, like its Author, holy and just 
and good 1 To wash the hands before a regular meal, or any meal, may be proper enough 
as a custom, or for cleanliness, or as a matter of delicacy, yet can never be exalted into a 
religious act or rite ; but to trifle with or trample underfoot the law of natural affec- 
tion, of filial piety, of common humanity — a law specially honoured with a most 
gracious promise, and sternly hedged in with the severest sanction — must bring down 
the vengeance of Heaven on the guilty head of its transgressor. Thus our Lord left 
them to look at this picture and on that. 

II. DiSTiKCTiON BETWEEN CLEAN AND UNCLEAN. 1, Statement of a principle. After 
our Lord had put to silence and covered with confusion these intermeddling, fault- 
finding, censorious, and cavilling Pharisees, he proceeds to state a great and funda- 
mental principle, -which covered the whole ground and went to the very root of the 
matter. Before doing so, he requests the particular attention of the multitude. Whether 
they had withdrawn to a respectful distance during our Lord's interview with the Phari- 
sees and triumphant answer to their objection, or whether, irom indifference to their obtru- 
aive questionings the malevolent intention of which was obvious, they had sunk into a 
state of listless inattention, does not appear. They required, from whatever cause, to 
have their attention stimulated. For this purpose he calls on all and each, not only to 
listen attentively, but to reflect, with intelligence wide awake and active, on the great 
principle he is about to enunciate. Having thus gained their intelligent attention and 
roused their powers of reflection, he states the important distinction that "there is 
nothing from without a man, that entering into him can defile him : but the things 
which come out of him, those are they that defile the man." After making this 
statement, he again appeals to them to give it their careful consideration, 

e. Important distinction. Our Lord, in the principle stated, distinguisheu between 
the physical and spiritual natures of man, as also between ceremonial and moral defile- 
ments ; between positive regulations and moral requirements ; and thus between pre- 



CH. vn. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 81» 

cepts given for a particular purpose and obligations for a limited time, and those laws 
that were unvarying in their nature and perpetual in their obligation. The principle in 
question onr Lord propounds in the form of an antithetic paradox. The first part of it 
seemed to collide with the distinction between meats clean and unclean, which God 
himself had appointed and minutely specified ; and, if taken in a ceremonial sense, so 
it did; but understood morally, as our Lord had intended, it pointed not obscurely to 
the purpose for which such distinctions had been instituted. That purpose was temporary 
in its duration, and for the segregation of the chosen people from the mass of toaDkind, 
as well as for the symbolic intimation of the difference that should exist between the 
holiness to which the people of God were called, and the heathenism that prevailed 
nround. Our Lord meant to correct an injurious error under which the people of the 
Jews in general then laboured. He had rebuked their superstitious punctiliousness 
about certain ceremonial washings, and their sinful n^gardlessness of moral obligations, 
'i'his naturally leads him to expose the grave mistake they made when they foolishly 
supposed that meats of themselves exercised any moral efficacy or possessed any moral 
putency. That they defiled ceremonially, and exposed to disabilities of a ceremonial 
kind and entailing purification, was not doubted ; but that they had any power oi 
themselves either to cleanse or purify is here most positively denied. The cause of 
defilement was man's fallen nature ; the source of it was within ; the seat of it was the 
heart ; the stagnant pool from which such polluted waters issued was deep down in the 
very depths of his being. 'I'hence proceided defilements of speech through the mouth, 
defilements of work in the conduct, defilements of thoughts in the character and con- 
versation. The disciples had shared the errors and prejudices of their race to a very 
lar;:e extent, and not understanrling the strange paradoxical statement, sought an 
explanation in private. After a gentle reprimand for their dulneas of apprehension, 
tiiey were favoured by their Master with a full explanation. 

3. Moral impurity. The belly is the stomach and viscera, or organs of digestion 
generally ; the heart is used for both the intellect and affections — the whole soul. 
These are totally distinct ; what enters the former does not and cannot reach the latter. 
There is no connection between these parts of man's nature, and no compatibility 
between the objects that affect them. Meats only enter the stomach and intestines, 
and minister to man's life and strength ; even the exclusion of their refuse tends to 
purification rather than detilement. But the things that do defile proceed out of the 
heart ; and they are sins against God's Law, or dispositions that incline to those sins, 
and incentives that prompt to them. Those sins are against the commandments in the 
su-called second table of the Law. According to a rough classification that has been 
made, some are sins against the sixth commandment, as murders, wickedness, and an 
evil eye ; some against the seventh, as fornication, adultery, and lasciviousness ; some 
against the eighth, as theft and deceit ; some against the ninth, as blasphemies, or 
evil-speaking, and false witness (in St. Matthew's enumeration) ; and some against the 
tenth, as covetousness, or, literally, "reachings after more." But of the evil dispositions 
that lead to overt acts of sins, the chief place is occupied by evil thoughts, whether 
the reference is to evil thoughts in general, or to such vicious reasonings (SioXoynr/wil) 
as those in which the Pharisees were accustomed to indulge. While such inward 
thoughts or reasonings are the seminal principles from whicn sinful actions proceed — 
the bitter roots from which they shoot up and grow — a leading motive to sin is specified : 
it is pride (wirepTjfoyfo, a desire to appear above others), the wish for conspicuous 
elevation. In pride itself the predominant element is selfishness — that selfishness that 
))rompts men to seek the pre-eminence in all things, and to prefer self to all other 
persons or interests, in contrariety to the scriptural precept which directs us " in honour 
to prefer one another." Pride implies that overbearing demeanour and haughtiness ol 
carriage that make men look down on others, supposing themselves so much superior. 
Pride centres all in self, disregarding others' interests whenever they seem to stand in 
the way ; at the same time proud persons, male or female, " sacrifice to their own net, 
and burn incense to their own drag." Pride is thus a most powerful motive to sin, 
to selfish inilulgence, to self-aggrandizement, to supercilious speech in regard to others, 
and to self-interest, whatever form it may assume, and however much detriment may 
be done to the rights of others. Further, one cliaracteridic of all sin, and a name 
frequently used in Scripture as synonymous with " sin," is " folly " (4rt(>«r»»Tj). Thit 



320 THE 30SPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. vn. 1—37. 

senselessness denies God the glory that pertains to him, for " the fool has said in hii 
heart, There is no God." While it thus robs God, it refuses to man his due. In the 
end it ruins the individual himself. " This their way is their folly." Oh, the folly of 
sin I The enumeration of the things which defile a man, as given here by St. Mark, 
is fuller than that given by St. Matthew. The latter mentions only seven ; while 
St. Mark specifies thirteen. The cause of this additional number by the latter may be 
found in the vices that commonly prevailed among the Romans, for whom in the first 
instance St. Mark wrote, as compared with those to which the Jews, whom St. Matthew 
more especially kept in view in his Gospel, were addicted. A comparison also of the 
catalogue of crimes, which St. Paul, in writing to the Romans, gives at the close of his 
first chapter, will probably confirm the same conclusion, that the cause of the difference 
in the enumeration is connected with the different classes of sins to which persons 
belonging to these dlfTerent nationalities were respectively addicted. Judaism at its 
worst, if this theory be correct, had greatly the advantage of paganism ; so the lowest 
type of Christianity is superior to heathenism. — J. J. G. 

Vers. 24—30. Parallel passage: Matt. xv. 21 — ^28. — Daughter of a Syro-phtjemetan 
woman healed. I. Oub Lobd's withdrawal into the beqiok of Tybb and Sidon. 
Our Lord's retirement at this time into the region indicated was probably occasioned 
by a desire to avoid the further attention and inquiries of Herod, and perhaps his 
presence also there in his tetrarchy, which comprised Galilee and Per%a ; while it may 
have been a symbolic intimation of the mercy in store for, and ere long to be extended 
to. Gentile lands ; or it may have been simply for the purpose of seclusion and rest 
after a time of toil, and to escape from the cavils of scribes and Pharisees. The 
territory here described as " the borders of Tyre and Sidon " was not a district inter- 
jacent between Tyre and Sidon, as Erasmus understood it ; nor yet the territory proper of 
Tyre and Sidon, as Eritzsche explained it ; or the neighbourhood of the former city, as 
Alford took its meaning to be ; but originally a tract of border-land or neutral ground 
which separated Palestine from Phoenicia, subsequently ceded by Solomon to the King 
of Tyre and incorporated with Phoenicia, yet still retaining its ancient name of border- 
land. 

n. The applicant, and heb wbetohednbbs. This applicant is called by St. Matthew 
a Canaanitish woman, and by St. Mark a Syro-phcenician. Phcenicia, in which the old 
and famous commercial cities of Tyre (from Tzor, " a rock," now Sur) and Sidon (from 
Tsidon, " fishery," now Saida, twenty miles further north) were situated, was part of 
ancient Canaan, and so inhabited by a remnant of that doomed race. But, as the 
Phoenicians were the great seafarers and colonizers of ancient times, they had sent out 
and founded many settlements. One of these was in Africa, and the colonists were 
distinguished by the appropriate name of Liby-phcenicians, from the parent stock which 
went by the name of Syro-phoenicians. Horace has the expression, " Uterque Poenus 
serviat uni," and Juvenal twice employs the word " Syro-phoenix." It is probable that, 
whils the coast-line retained the name Phoenicia, the more inland parts, where Syrian 
and Phoenician intermingled, got the name of Syro-phcenicia. But, wnile this woman was 
a Syro-phoenician by race, she was a Greek, that is, a Gentile; for the name Greek was 
used generally for all Gentiles, as distinguished from Jews, just as Frank is employed 
in the East for all Europeans ; thus, we read in Bom. i. 16, " To the Jew first, and also 
to the Greek." Thus Greek was the same as Gentile, and the inhabitants of the world 
were distributed into Greeks and Jews. The applicant, then, in the narrative under 
consideration, belonged to a difierent nationality from the Jews, for she was a Syro- 
phcenician, and to a different religion, for she was a heathen. This poor woman, bom 
and bred amid the darkness of heathenism, with little to sustain and comfort her in 
this world, and without hope for a better, had her full share of the miseries of mortal 
life. She appears from the narrative to have been a widow, as there is no mention or 
notice of her husband. If so— and we have no reason to doubt it — she had to bear th* 
faaiddiips and fight the battle of life alone, without the head of her little household, 
without the bread-winner of her family, and without a partner to share and to divide 
the current of her grief. She had a daughter, probably an only daughter, mayhap an 
only child ; but that one daughter, that only child, instead of being a source of comfort 
«r support to the widowed mother, was the cause of the great grief that pressed npoa 



ea. TO. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MABK. 321 

■nd onuhed her heart. That beloyed child— that dear daughter, round whom alone, in 
the absence of other objects, the mother's affections were now all entwined — was an 
inyalid, and an invalid whom no medical skill and no human power could relieve. It 
was not merely disease under which she laboured ; if that had been all, however bad 
the case or severe the distemper, it might, even after medical appliances had proved 
unavailing, have exhausted itself, ag is sometimes known to happen, or even the vi$ 
medicatrix natures might have effected a cure. But no, it was something worse, much 
worse, than any ordinary disease, however virulent ; it was demoniac power— diabolical 
possession. The girl had " an unclean spirit," and was " grievously vexed with a devil,'' 
so that the case was taken out of the common category of diseases, and entirely hopeless. 
The poignancy of the mother's grief, the bitterness of her sorrow for a daughter so dear 
to her, and yet so hopelessly, helplessly afflicted, we can well imagine. Indeed, ws seem 
to hear the echo of her wail in the pathetic cry for mercy : " Have mercy upon me, 
Lord, thou Son of David ! " 

III. Heb afflioation. What led her to think of Jesus at all ? In the first instance^ 
no doubt, it was her misery on account of her daughter's distressed condition. She 
had, we are persuaded, tried many means before this ; she had left nothing undone, we 
are very sure; but all was in vain! Her wretchedness had found no relief; her misery 
remains without alleviation. She is now ready to do or to dare anything that may 
hold forth the slightest hope of relief. But while it was the feeling of misery in the 
first instance, and that strong maternal affection which the sufferings of her daughter 
roused into such active exercise, there was, besides, a rumour that had somehow 
reached her ears of the great Jewish Teacher, who was Prophet and Physician both in 
one. His fame had reached that distant heathen land. He wished, indeed, that no 
man should know of his journey thither or of his being there ; he meant to travel 
incognito. But that he soon found to be impossible, for, as the evangelist expresses it, 
" he could not he hid ; " there was that about him, conceal it as he might, which revealed 
his majesty and bespoke the greatness and dignity of his person. This Canaanitish 
woman has heard, moreover, that this powerful Healer has quitted the holy city, and 
left the Galilean hills, the flowery slopes, the glancing waters of the lovely lake ; and 
that he is at present travelling in that remote north-west. Now she feels that her 
opportunity is come, that the time for trying another remedy has arrived, and that a 
Physician, greater than any she had ever applied to or heard of before, is now 
accessible. A load is lifted off her heart ; her hopes are raised, and with buoyant spirit 
she sets out to where she heard he was. But she has not been long on the road till 
hope and fear begin to alternate. Had she not been buoyed up with similar hopes 
before, and yet those hopes had ended in disappointment ? May it not be so again ? 
May it not be so now? Still she feels that the object of all this solicitude can scarcely 
be worse, and may perhaps be better. At all events, she is determined to make the trial, 
if it should be the hist. She has heard of multitudes of cures he has performed, of 
wonderful cures— cures of demoniacs as well as those afSicted with diseases ; and so 
she plucks up heart anew, and again resumes her journey. Here were two strong 
motives impelling her to take the course she was doing — her sense of misery, and the 
reports about Jesus. And yet there was, we think, a third impelling power ; for what 
suggested the resolution she came to in view of the wretchedness of her own and her 
daughter's condition, and on the ground of the reports that had reached her ? What 
or who empowered her to make up her mind at once and form the resolution ? What 
it was we are not told in so many words ; it is not expressly stated, perhaps not even 
clearly implied ; and yet such an impulse must have been given to her will. We speak 
of God putting this or that thought into the heart ; and so we believe that it wag God 
that opened her eyes to see her real condition, that opened her ears to hear the report — 
the good news about One who was mighty to heal and cure ; that quickened the seed 
of thought thus sown in her soul, making it fhictify, blossom, and bear fruit ; in other 
words, that produced the resolution and prompted to action in carrying it out. It is 
exactly thus with the sinner; his eyes are opened to see his sin and consequent 
misery ; his ears are opened to hear, and his heart to believe, the report of a Saviour ; 
and he is persuaded and enabled to form the right resolution of applying at once to 
Jesus for pardon and peace — made willing, in fact, in the day of God's power. 

IV. Hkb bbspeotful addbebb. The respectful mode of her address, and the earnest 

ST. MABK. * 



•22 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, MAEK. [ch. vu. 1—37. 

petition wliich she prefers, are calculated to surprise and eren astonish us. We muat 
presuppose some knowledge of the Saviour, from whatever source it came. She had 
obtained in some way, and to some extent, knowledge of Jesus — ^how or whence we 
have not sufficient information to enable us to say. The terms of her address, when 
we consider her heathen antecedents and surroundings, are truly wonderful. " Lord, 
thou Son of David " — these are marvellous words to come from heathen lips ; " have 
mercy on mel," are words easily read between the lines of her misery, una easily 
accounted for by the sympathetic chord which her daughter's affliction had touched in 
her heart. The former words are not so readily accounted for. " Lord," she said, 
and thus she acknowledged his power and his providence. She confesses her faith in 
his power as almighty, and in his providence as nniversal ; she owns a providence 
which extends to, and is employed about, all the affairs of the world and men, and a 
power that regulates and controls all events. Nor are we sure that this term, as it was 
uttered by the lips of this woman, did not embrace more than matters of mundane 
interest. But whether or not it comprehended authority over things in heaven as well 
as things on earth — celestial as well as terrestrial concerns— one thing is certain, that 
the expression immediately following clearly embraced Messianic hopes and prospects. 
" Son of David " is a name or title of Messiah in Old Testament Scripture. He was to 
be the Son of David according to the flesh, as well as " the Son of God with power ; " 
David's Son as well as David's Lord, according to the Saviour's own words. She thus 
acknowledged him as Lord, and so possessed of unlimited power over all beings, 
human, angelic, and demoniac; over all agencies of every order ; and over all ailments, 
whether diseases proper or diaboUc possession. She acknowledged him also as the Christ 
of God, whose very mission was to impart prophetic instruction, to make priestly 
satisfaction, and to exercise kingly authority in, over, and on behalf of his people. 
There was thus a whole creed, at least in germ, contained in the words of this woman's 
address to the Saviour. How had she attained such knowledge? Had the Spirit of 
GK)d enlightened her ? Had the Saviour been made known to her, as afterwards to 
Saul, by direct and special revelation ? We believe that there was the agency of the 
Spirit in making application, but that there had been human instrumentality in 
conveying instruction. We read in the third chapter of this Gospel, at the eighth 
Terse, that^ in addition to the great multitude that followed Jesus from Galilee, Judaea, 
Jerusalem, Idumtea, and beyond Jordan, also "they about Tyre and Sidon, » great 
multitude, when they had heard what great things he did, came unto him." Was 
it not most likely that from some of these, on their return home, this woman had 
beard something about the Savioiff — who he was, what he was, as well as about the 
great things he was doing ? The Spirit's agency was needed to make application to 
her heart of the fragmentary truths she may have gleaned in the way indicated. 
Here, again, the sinner's case is similar. He hears about Christ, he reads about him, he 
is taught many facts in relation to his life, death, resurrection, ascension, saving power, 
and second coming to judgment ; but yet "no man can call Jesus Lord, but by the Holy 
Ghost." We need the instruction, it is true, but we require also the illumination of the 
Spirit. That we may derive real benefit from Scripture truth, and spiritual [ffofit 
from the facts of Christ's history, the Spirit must " guide us into all truth," even the 
" truth as it is in Jesus." 

y, Heb eabnest pleadiko. In her earnestness she makes her daughtei'a case her 
own ; she regards the affliction of so near a relative as personal ; in her daughter's afSic- 
tion she was afflicted. " Have mercy on me 1 " she said — on me, who feel myself so 
identified with my daughter, who suffer in her suffering, who am distressed in her 
distress, whose life is bound up in her life. Again, " Have mercy on me 1 "—a wretched 
woman, a sorely tried and almost broken-hearted mother. Then she repeats the 
jpetition with a slight variation, saying, " Lord, help me 1 " How touching this repeated 
request 1 how pathetic 1 How eloquent as well as earnest I It is, indeed, this eamevt- 
ness that forms the chief element of its eloquence. 

VI. The tbial of ueb faith. She had been sorely afflicted, and now her faith is 
sorely tried. In the Gospel of St. Matthew the recital is fuller, and these trials stand 
out more conspicuously. The first trial of her faith is our Lord's tUence. "He 
answered her not a word." What can this strange silence mean ? Is it indifference or 
negluct? Is it want of sympathy with her own distress and her daughter's affliction} 



<H. VII. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. 828 

Or b it dislike and contempt for a descendant of a sinful and accursed race ? And 
yet she must have heard of his compassionate kindness and tender pity, as also of th* 
'ready relief he was in the habit of granting to every son and daughter of a£9ictiou. 
She must have heard, from all who told her of him, that no applicant had ever met 
with repulse or refusal at his hand. Is she to be an exception ? Will he not con- 
descend to take the slightest notice of her ? Another sore discouragement arose from 
the inconsiderate and unsympathetic conduct of the disciples, who came forward and 
Actually besought him to dismiss her. " Send her away," they said, " for she crieth after 
us " — send her away at once (li7r6\viroi>, aorist imperative), and get rid of her annoyance ; 
it is troublesome and even indecorous to have her following us, and painful to have to 
listen to her crying after us in this fashion. Either dismiss her summarily or grant 
her request, that, one way or other, we may get rid of her. Even if we understand the 
■disciples in this latter sense, as asking their Master to give her what she wanted and 
let her go, it was a cold selfishness that prompted it, and an ungracious spirit that thus 
wished to be done with her importunity as speedily as possible. Their interference, 
iowever, had only the effect of drawing forth in reply a reason for refuml. When our 
Lord did break silence, it was only to indicate the circumscribed sphere of his present 
mission, and thus to imply her exclusion : " I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the 
house of Israel." It appears to some that even in this refusal there was a faint gleam 
of hope, and that this despised woman of Canaan might have replied, — Though not of 
the house of Israel, yet I am a lost sh^ep, and greatly need the Good Shepherd's care; 
«nd though he has not come specially on an errand of mercy to my race or me, yet I 
«m come in quest of him and to seek his favour. But another obstacle, seemingly more 
formidable, bars the way. There had been silence and seeming indifference ; there had 
been a refusal, and that backed by a reason — a strong reason, and one that did not 
admit of any questioning; and now there is reproach — apparent reproach. Thii 
■orrowful woman, in this her direst extremity and the darkest hour of her misery, 
summoned up all her strength of resolution to make one final effort ; and coming closer 
to the Saviour, and with still greater reverence as well as earnestness, she " worshipped 
him, saying. Lord, help me." And yet, the reply to all this profound respect and 
unflagging importunity appeared at least to be of the most discouraging character, and 
'in fact the unkindest cut of all : " It is not meet to take the children's bread, and cast 
it to dogs." 

VII. Hbb pebsevebanoe and HinnLiTT. Her perseverance was truly wonderful, 
ud her humility was equal to her perseverance. She turns the seeming slight into an 
-argument. Our Lord, in the similitude he employs, does not refer to the wild, ferocioui, 
gregarious dogs of the East, that are owned by no master, but prowl about for food, 
«nd that supply, in some sort, the place of street-scavengers. He refers to young or 
little dogs (KuyeSpio), and to children, or little children (iraiSluv), and the friendly relations 
•that are well known to exist between them, denying the propriety of defrauding the 
children of food in order to feed even their canine pets — to take their bread and cast it to 
'dogs (where observe the paronomasia in Kafiiiy and 0a\eiy). " Yes, Lord : for indeed the 
little dogs under the table eat of the children's crumbs." The proverbial expression 
Jmplied (1) the impatience of dogs desirous of food; and (2) the impropriety of taking 
-the bread intended for children and giving it to dogs before the children had got their 
portion ; consequently (3) the injury of conferring benefits on one to the detriment of 
others, and prematurely before the claims of those others had been properly met and 
fully satisfied. Such might be the feeling of the Jews, if the Gentile stranger should 
-step into some privilege before they had received their proper place and promised share. 
The opinion of Theophylact, and of many besides, that the Gentiles are meant by the 
dogs, because they are looked upon as unclean by the Jews, or the narrower notion of 
Chrysostom, that this woman herself is stigmatized by the name of dog from her 
persistence and blandness of entreaty, are unnecessary, if not unwarranted. The 
appropriateness of the proverb, and of the mode of treatment it implied; is admitted by 
this woman who gives it a most felicitous turn and favourable interpretation on her 
own behalf. She frankly and fully admits the reasonableness of supplying food to the 
children first, but insists at the same time on the humane principle and considerate 
practice of allowing the little dogs to eat the crumbs that fell accidentally, or were let 
Itii on purpose, beneath the table. She accepted the situation thus indicated ; she wa» 



«24 THE GUSi-EL ACCOEDING TO ST. MABK. [ch. vu. 1—37. 

content to take the place of dogs under the table ; she was satisfied with the cmmb» 
that remained after the children had got their full share. It was as if she said, — I own 
my inferiority ; I am not a descendant of Abraham, nor a daughter of Israel ; I do not 
claim equal privileges or equal dignity with one of that highly favoured race. I only 
ask the position which a bind master allows his dog that is under the table, and the 
friendly treatment which such a master is in the habit of granting to his canin* 
favourite ; and that is to be fed from the children's crumbs, as the source (&7rb) of their 
nourishment. A crumb is all I crave. One crumb from my Master's table will 
comfort me and cure my child. 

YIII. The bewabd of her fersevebanoe ab an ezamfle and encourasement. 
We have seen how, in the face of what seemed contemptuous silence, of positive refusal 
—a refusal made more positive by the strong reason alleged in its support— of apparent 
reproach and depreciation, this woman kept to her purpose, converting a slight into » 
sound argument. By firmness of purpose, by strength of will, by great humility, by 
astonishing earnestness, above all by vigorous faith, she held on, and, like Jacob with 
the angel, she did not let the Saviour go until she obtained the blessing which she 
sought. What a pattern of faith and patience combined this woman exhibits I Sh» 
had made probably a long journey, undergone much fatigue, spared no pains, shrunk 
fipom no toil, till she reached Jesus ; and, after going so far and doing so much to reach 
him, she seems doomed to disappointment ; and is treated with silence, with sternness,^ 
and with something like scorn ; and yet by a quick instinct she makes that scorn 
helpful to her suit. And now at last she has her reward. Not only does she gain th» 
object about which she was so earnestly solicitous, but she receives the cordial com- 
mendation of our Lord. " For this saying go thy way ; the devil is gone out of thy 
daughter;" or, as St. Matthew has it, "O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee 
even as thou wilt. And her daughter was made whole from that very hour." 

IX. Practical lessons. 1. We learn from this most interesting and encouraging 
narrative the power of faith and its prevalence. If " all things are possible with God "— 
and we are sure they are — " all things are possible to him that believeth." It was faith 
brought her to Christ ; it was faith kept her close to Christ, in spite of so many and so 
great discouragements ; it was faith obtained the blessing from Christ ; it was faith 
called forth the commendation of Christ, for in that faith he recognized the gracioua 
principle he had himself implanted in her soul. Accordingly, it was her faith he so 
commended. He did not say, " Great is thy humility," and yet slie displayed the grace of 
humility in an eminent degree ; nor " Great is thy fervency," and yet she was uncom- 
monly fervent in her petitions ; nor " Great is the love thou bearest thy child," and yet 
she was a model at once of womanly tenderness and motherly affection ; nor " Great is^ 
thy patience," and yet her patience had few parallels ; nor " Great is thy perseverance," 
and yet her perseverance commands our admiration, even across the centuries. No ; but 
" Great is thy faith." It was the mother grace and parent of all the rest. Lord, grant 
each of us Uke precious faith I 2. Our duty to our children, and to the young in 
general, is strikingly taught us here. Taking this woman for a pattern, we should 
^ead with God frequently, fervently, and faithfully on behalf of our children, until 
Girist be formed in their heart. And oh, if any of them should be a victim of the evil- 
one, and possessed by some evil passion, some sinful propensity, some destructive lust — 
In case any should be thus "grievously vexed with a devil" — ^how anxious,how laborious^ 
how perseveringly prayerful we should be on their behalf! and how we should imitate 
this woman's importunity, and, like her, make their case our own until we ubtain 
for them the blessing I 3. A further lesson is to go to Christ in every season of distress, 
nor despair, however long he is pleased to keep us waiting. Here are two lessons- 
put together, for they properly go together. Whatever be our distress — whether personal 
affliction or domestic trial, whether the undutifulness of children or the godlessness of 
their lives, whether it be hostility of foes or the coldness of friends, whether it be 
worldly loss or'sore bereavement — we should go and tell Jesus, acknowledging his all- 
sufficiency, spreading the whole case before him, confessing our great unworthiness, 
•nd pleading earnestly with him for mercy and help. And here another and a kindred 
lesson suggests itself, and that is firmness and freedom from despondency in trial. It 
pleased the Saviour to try the woman ot Canaan severely and long ; but it was for her 
good, for the glory of his grace in her, and for a pattern to ourselvei. He proved hei 



iH. vu. 1— 37.] TUE GOSPEL ACCORDING \0 ST. MARK. 821 

^aith, but his object was to improve and strengthen it ; he meant to exhibit its sterling 
qualities as a pattern to his disciples. Many a one, tried as this woman was, would 
have sunk down into sullen silence, or hurried off in a fit of passion, and given up hei 
suit. It might have been so with some of ourselves ; but he will humble us before he 
«xalt8 us ; he wiJl have us trust in him, though he slay us. Some token will be vouch- 
safed for our encouragement, even in the sorest testing-time. It was probably so with 
this woman. Sho may have discerned a tenderness in the tone of the Saviour's voice, 
or a gentleness in his look, that encouraged her to persevere. But, even in the absence 
of such, we mufst impress on ourselves the conviction that there "may be love in 
'Christ's heart while there are frowns on his face,'' as it is quaintly expressed by an 
old divine. Fmther, we may be kept long waiting, but we shall not wait in vain, any 
more than thn poor woman. Our prayers may not be favoured with an immediate 
answer; but, though not answered at once, they will be accepted at once, and 
answered at 'he time most expedient for us, as well as most cof^iucive to the Divine 
«lorf. 

" For though he prove our patience, 
And to the utmost prove, 
Tet all his dispensationa 
Are faithfulnesB and love." 

J. J. G. 

Vers. 31 — 37. — A miracle of restoration. I. The deaf mutb healed. 1. J 
■difference of reading. According to the common text we learn that our Lord, 
" departing from the coasts [borders] of Tyre and Sidon, came unto the Sea of Galilee, 
through the midst of the coasts [borders] of Decapolis ; " but according to the best 
critical authorities " through Sidon " must be substituted for " and Sidon ; " and then 
the sentence reads as it stands in the Revised Version : " Again he went out from 
the borders of Tyre, and came through Sidon unto the Sea of Galilee, through the 
midst of the borders of Decapolis." 'This reading is unquestionably the more difficult, 
but exceedingly interesting, as it shows the extent of our Lord's tour through those 
XJentile lands. Proceeding twenty miles northward from Tyre, he came to Sidon, the 
i;reat seat of Phoenician worship and of the idols Baal and Astarte ; and then passing 
along the foot of Lebanon, and crossing the Leontes or Litany, the largest river of 
Syria, he came to the sources of the Jordan, whence he descended along the eastern 
bank into the region of Decapolis. The probable object of this detour was to gain 
privacy, instruct more thoroughly his disciples, escape his enemies, and visit the 
many towns and villages dotting ^this route. 2. An interesting though practically 
unimportant question. Was the subject of this miracle deaf, with an impediment in 
his speech, or both deaf and dumb ; in other words, a deaf mute ? If he was deal aad 
bad (1) only an impediment in his speech, he had not been born deaf, for in that case he 
would have been destitute of speech altogether. He may have become deaf in early 
-childhood, before the organs of speech attained their full development ; or he may have 
been deaf for such a length of time that, through long disuse, his tongue had lost its 
ipower ; or disease may have supervened, and inflammation or ulceration tied the lingual 
■nerve. Whatever the cause of this impediment was — whether it was occasioned by 
rigidity of the membrane arising from long desuetude, or whether it was produced 
by the diseased state of the muscles, or whether it was the result of early deafness — the 
impediment was so great that it differed little from the entire absence of the power of 
articulation. This poor man was thus little, if at all, better than a deaf mute. But 
'(2) several reasons induce the belief that this man was actually dumb as well as deaf. 
Among these we may mention the statement at ver. 37, where the Jews, who witnessed 
this miracle, said, " He maketh both the deaf to hear, and the dumb (^li\d\ovs) to speak ; " 
and the woi^ /loytJijUiMs is used in the LXX. Version of Isa. xxxv. 6 in the signification of 
dumb ; also, in a reference by St. Matthew to this same journey of our Lord, and to 
the miracles performed at that time, the evangelist mentions the dumb speaking, 
^Ktt^obs JuAovrrat). It may be observed that, while Ku^hs, meaning " dull " or " blunt," 
may be applied to either hearing or speech, the meaning of the word In St. Mark ii 
«,lways " deaf," though the usual meaning of it is " dumb," being synonymous with 
#*»..'„. in the classics. Z, Native of this privation. This affliction was twofold. Two 



iae THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAILK. [ch. vn. I— 3T. 

orgiiDB were Tirtually wanting, two senses were sealed, two channels of communi- 
cation with the external world were closed. The case of this person, if not actually 
identical with that of a man deaf and dumb, is illustrative of it. And oh, how great thi* 
double privation 1 How difficult for those, whom God has blessed with the free use of 
all their bodily organs, to appreciate the privation of one who is deaf and dumb I These 
twin calamities are, it is true, physiologically reducible to one. They stand related as 
cause and effect. Deafness at birth, or loss of hearing soon after, usually involves 
dumbness. Deafness is the radical defect, dumbness is its natural result. This man ia 
said to be KOKfAs, which expresses the primitive want ; while iioyi\i\os (the root is /uy, 
equivalent to /tey, as in iiex-Bos, labour, equivalent to something great laid (9e) on one), 
expresses the natural and necessary consequence — the great obstacle to speech, ThiS' 
latter word, therefore, is wrongly rendered " stammering," and rather denotes one unable 
to utter articulate words. Hearing, like sight, and as much as sight, is an inborn faculty ; 
but speahing is a learnt art. Man of himself can utter sounds, and that is all, but not 
speak words. The latter he learns by hearing ; but how can he learn without hearings 
and how can he hear if be is bom deaf? Further, in deafness the organ is wanting or 
defective ; in dumbness the organ is present, but it might as well be absent, as it i» 
disabled and incapable of use. When the ear is stopped, 'silence seals the tongue. 
But, though the cause may thus be one, the calamity affects two senses, and debars- 
the use of both. 4, Extent of this privation. On due consideration, it yiHl be found 
that these "children of silence," as they have been called, are doomed to as severe 
deprivations as any to be found in the whole catalogue of human woes. By nature 
they are excluded from all those pleasures which the ear drinks in and the tongue gives 
out. Nor do we refer merely or mainly to the melody of sweet sounds — to the thrilling 
tones of harmony, to the witching spell of minstrelsy, to the rapturous delights of 
music, as it is beard from the birds that make the woodland vocal with their notes, or 
from the itinerant musicians that stay for a few moments' space the step of the man of 
business, or cheer the spirit of the downcast ; or as it swells in the concert, or sweeps so 
erandly in the oratorio, or is wafted aloft from a thousand voices on the open air of 
heaven. The deaf are excluded from other joys more homely, but not less hearty. 
They are shut out from the pleasant voice of childish prattle, from domestic or friendly 
converse, from intellectual interchange of thought, from literary amusement, scientific 
research, or political intelligence. From all these sources of information, instruction,, 
and enjoyment they are by nature shut out. And here we come to the worst phase of 
their condition — the blank it leaves the mind. When sound is shut out, a chief 
entrance of knowledge is barred. The exclusion of sound is the exclusion of all 
that knowledge and of all that multitude of ideas that sounds convey or suggest to 
the mind. 5. Contrast between the respective privations of the deaf and blind. We 
deeply commiserate the condition of the blind, from whom the fair face of nature i» 
shrouded in darkness, whose eyes are never gladdened by the light of the sun by day 
or of the moon and stars by night, from whom the beauty of the human countenance 
and the loveliness of the landscape scenery are alike hidden, while " the shadow of 
death " rests " upon their eyelids." And yet the deaf mute is in a worse condition 
than even they. You can talk with that blind man, and tell him many things. He- 
has an ear to hear, and learns much from your lips. Tou can read to him, and he 
listens to the lessons of heavenly wisdom, or human philosophy, or every-day expe- 
rience, which you thus communicate. He is entertained at the same time that be- 
lays up a store of useful knowledge. Not so the deaf mute ; he is unimproved by all 
you say or read. Your speech does not instruct him, for he cannot hear. Books are 
useless to him, for he cannot read because he is ignorant of sounds made visible. He 
learns not, for thus the key of knowledge is taken away. Deaf mutes are, therefore, 
shrouded in deeper than midnight gloom; they grope in a "darkness that maybe felt." 
Thus one of the great inlets of knowledge is taken away ; one of the main sources of 
enjoyment is hermetically sealed ; one of the chief links that bind men in social 
intercourse is snapped ; one of the silken bands that unite men in intercommunion is 
severed. Thus the deaf mute stands apart, and in lonely isolation from his fellow-men ■ 
thus one of the sweetest streams of human happiness is frozen up. We have thus 
lui'ked at the condition of the deaf mute of our own day, as closely resembling, if not 
qmul the same with, that of the man that was hrou<iht to our Lord, a» it is here 



le 



«w.vu.l— 37.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MARK. STi 

written, "They bring unto him one that was deaf, and had an impediment ia hia 
speech." 

IL The signs which the Satioxtb usrd. 1. Wltat these ligns were. After taking 
him aside, he " put his fipgers into his ears, and he spit, and touched his tongue." 
These signs which he employed did in no way contribute to the cure he effected, and 
ret they were signiticant of what he was about to do. They were far from meaning- 
less mancBUTres or purposeless displays of power. They were no empty make-believes. 
Our Lord meant to arrest the man's attention and excite his expectations. He did so 
with the impotent man when he said, " Wilt thou be made whole ?" He did go with 
the blind men when he asked them, " What will ye that I should do unto you?" and 
when he added, " Believe ye that I am able to do this ? " He does the same in the 
case before us. But as this man knew nothing of the language of sounds, our Lord 
addressed him in the language of signs. He touched the parts affected to apprise him 
of his intention to reach the seats of the infirmities and remove the maladies. He put 
his fingers into the ears to signify that he would take away the obstructions that were 
therein, and open up the way for sound to enter — that he would penetrate eveiy 
opposing barrier, and bestow a new acoustic power. He touched the tongue with 
moisture from his own mouth to lubricate the stiffened member, to loosen whatever 
impediment confined it, and restore its agility of motion. Thus by signs he gave the 
man some indication of what he meant to do. But by these signs he taught him 
another lesson. The second lesson was one of faith in our Lord himself as the Author 
of his recovery, as the Source from which healing power flowed, and as able to do all 
and accomplish all fully and perfectly which he had signified. A third thing, perhaps, 
he meant to convey was that he sanctions the use of those means which he himself 
appoints. Here the means are all his own. His own fingers he inserted into the deaf 
man's ears ; with his own saliva he moistened his tongue. The power of healing is all 
his own. He can work without means, or against means, or by means; he here directs 
to the use of means, but only such means as he himself devises. These he sanctions, 
these he consecrates, sanctifies, and crowns with success. Further, oui Lord adapts his 
signs to the source of the ailment, and accomplishes a perfect cure. It might seem 
sufficient to insert his finger into the deaf ear without touching the tongue with saliva; 
and likewise, in the account of the cure, it might be thought enough to say " his ears 
were opened," without adding that " the string of his tongue was loosed, and he spake 
plain." The touching an^ consequent opening of the ear would undoubtedly have 
reached the origin of the ailment, and cured the defect at its source ; but there would 
not have been a complete cure. The sufferer would only have been put into the 
condition of one learning to speak ; but the cure, in the very mode of it, was meant to 
save him this trouble, and to secure to him the ability to speak at once, Henue it is 
not only said of him iJ^ei, " he spake," that is, had now the power of speaking, but 
the term ipSas is subjoined, from which we learn that, without any loss of time, and 
without any process of educating the ear, he spake correctly and normally, as if he had 
been accustomed to do so from his youth, and not as one exercising a power just 
bestowed. The distinction between the sense of hearing and the organ of hearing in 
this passage is noticeable: the former is ajcoii, and the latter ^to. 2. Symbolie 
actions. Another and a different symbolic action follows the signs we have been 
considering. The Saviour turned his eyes to heaven. By this time the Saviour had 
familiarized the sufferer to the use of signs, and accustomed him to the language which 
they couveyeid. He guards him against any misinterpretation of the fore-mentioned 
signs. He'tums his mind from those signs, as though by themselves they were in any 
way conducive to his cure. He raises his thoughts to heaven, to remind him that all 
relief was to he looked for from thence; that the blessing which made the means 
effectual came from above ; that " every good gift and every perfect boon is from above 
coming down from the Father of lights;" that the power to cure in this case was 
Divine ; and that, as the Lord from heaven, he himself had broucht that power down to 
earth. While, on the one hand, he showed that the power emanated from himself, 
he, on the other hand, acknowledged the Father who had ent him to put forth such 
power. While he was manifesting by certain signs or one kind of symbolic action 
that power proceeded from his own person, he was proving by another kind that is 
that person divinity was shrined ; that " it pleased the Father that in him "—the Soft^ 



S28 THE GOSPEL ACCOKDINQ TO ST. MA.EK. [oh. vn. 1^1-37. 

" should all fulness dwell ; " that " all power in heaven and on earth " was entrusted to hia 
hands. He was indicating, moreover, the unity of purpose and of plan that subsisted 
between the Father and the Son ; that he was doing the will of the Father, and accom- 
plishing the work with which he had been commissioned. " The Father," be said, 
" worketh hitherto, and I work ; " " It is my meat and my drink to do the will of him 
♦hat sent me." He sought thereby the Father's glory, as he himself said, " Now is the 
Son of man gl3rified,and God is glorified in him; and again he says, " I have glorified 
thee on earth : I have finished the work that thou gavest me to do." Thus here and now, 
as always, he sets forth his mediatorial dependence on the Father, and the eye he had 
to his praise : " My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me ; " " He that speaketh of 
himself seeketh his own glory ; but he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same 
is true, and no unrighteousness is in him." 3. Duty of imitating the Master. As it 
was with the Master, so in measure is it with the disciple still. Ever and anon we 
must turn our eyes to heaven. While our hands are duly employed in the daily 
occupations of our calling upon earth, our hearts must mount upward on the wings of 
faith, in praise for mercies received and in prayer for the blessing to be bestowed : " I 
will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence cometh my help. My help cometh 
from the Lord, which made heaven and earth." Otherwise our most strenuous efforts 
will be frustrated, our most fondly cherished hopes blasted, and our highest aspirations 
doomed to disappointment ; for " except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain 
that build it: except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but iu vain." 
While we thus lean on an Almighty arm, and depend for everything on God, we must 
have a single eye to bis praise, ever keeping his glory as our chief end in view, and 
ever leekiug from liimself grace and strength and steady purpose to do his wilL 

" To do thy wUl I take delight, 

thon my God that art ; 
Tea, that most holy Law of thine 

1 have within my heart." 

4. The significance of the Saviour's sigh. "He sighed;" and no wonder, when he 
thought of the ruin that sin had wrought, and of the wreck which man had in consequence 
become. The Saviour sighed when he looked abroad on suffering humanity, when he 
reflected on the miseries of a fallen race, and when especially he contemplated the living 
example of that misery that then stood before him. He sighed in sympathy with our 
sufferings, " for we have not an High Priest that cannot be touched with the feeling ol 
our infirmities." Blessed be God for such " a merciful and &ithful High Priest in things 
pertaining to God." He sighed in sorrow for our sins. In them he saw the cause of all ; 
in them he saw the bad and bitter fountain-head ; in them he saw the fruitful source 
of bo much woe ; in them he saw that fearful thing that darkened heaven above us 
opened hell beneath us, and cursed the earth on which we tread ; in them he saw that 
fell infection that has disordered, in a certain sense and to a certain extent, all the 
members of the body and all the faculties of the soul, so that " the whole head is sick 
and the whole heart faint ; " in them he saw the prolific germ of all those " ills that flesh 
is heir to," and of all those pangs that make the heart of humanity ache : for " by one 
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin," and not only death, but with it all 
our woe ; in them he saw, too, the grievous losid he was himself one day to bear 
when he " bare our sins in his own body on the tree," so that it has been truly as tersely 
Mid — 

" With pitying eyes, the Prince of peace 

Beheld oiu: helpltss grief; 
He saw, and oh I amazing love I 

He came to our relief." 

He sighed when he thought of the works of the devil and his malice against man and 
how human weakness had given him power to deform the body by disease and deface 
the image of the Creator in the soul of his creature. Perhaps, too, he sighed when as 
has been shrewdly suggested by an old divine, he saw the new temptation to sin that 
the man's renewed powers would expose him to— the evil things the ear would hear the 
idle things the tongue would speftk, the wicked things in which both organs might be 



DH. TU. 1-37.] THE GOtiPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MAKE. SiiU 



made instrumental. " Therefore," said the psalmist, " I will take heed to my ways, 
that I sin not with my tongue : I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked 
are before me." The explanation of the Saviour's sigh by a German writer on the 
miracles, though ingenious, is not sufficiently comprehensive, when he traces its cause 
to " the closed ear of the world " of which the deaf man was the symbol, " which does 
not perceive his Word, and therefore does not receive it;" and thinks his view 
commended, if not confirmed, by St. Marie's numerous exhortations to spiritual hearing 
by maxim, parable, and symbol. The maxim is, " If any man have ears to hear, let 
him hear ; " and connected with it is the parable of the earth's producing fruit after 
the reception of the seed, or salvation attained by right hearing of the word, whil* the 
preient symbol corroborates the same truth. 

"The deaf may hear the Saviour'a voice. 
The futtered tongue its chain may break { 

But the deaf heart, the dumb by choice. 
The laggard soul, that will not wake* 

The guilt that scorns to be forgiven — 

These baffle e'en the spells of Heaven: 

In thought of these, his brows benign 

Not e'en in healing cloudless shine. 

The correct explanation, while not exclusive of this view, is inclusive of much more. 
6. TTte single word spoken hy the Saviour. " Ephphatha," that is, " Be opened," was the 
single utterance after the heavenward look and inward sigh. The root of this word is 
the Hebrew pathach, to open ; from a similar Syriao root comes ethpatach, the impera- 
tive of the passive conjugation Ethpael ; then, by assimilation of theta and aspiration, 
we get ephphatha. And no sooner had he spoken that word than its omnific power 
appeared. The dull ear was endowed with a power it had never known before, or to 
which it had been long a stranger. The hindrance that prevented the free passage of 
the air, or deadened its undulations, was removed ; the defect in its organism was 
remedied. The pleasure of drinking in sweet sounds and of listening to the music of 
human speech came with all the freshness of a new faculty. The man felt as though 
he had found himself in a new world, or had entered on a new and improved existence, 
or had risen many steps higher in the scale of being. And so, in truth, he had. But 
this was not all ; the tongue was freed completely and at once from whatever it was 
that liad fettered it, the impediment was quite gone, and the articulation was, notwith- 
standing the long disease, immediately perfect. He could now tell to all around the 
happy change he had undergone — the perfect nature of the cure, the pleasure that 
filled his soul, the gratitude that glowed in his heart and which then flowed from his 
lips. 6. The ewe a cause of adoring wonder. Here we must admire, and, while we 
admire, adore, the power of Christ, for it is the power of God. Nothing short of 
Almighty power could have accomplished this wonder-work of mercy, for " Who hath 
made man^ mouth f or who maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind ? 
have not I the Lord?" And none, surely, save the Lord could thus unmake what 
sin and Satan had marred, removing all deficiencies, and renewing the afflicted with 
more than original powers. Here, too, we trace distinct proofs of his Messiahship. 
Blind as the multitude so frequently were, they could not shut their eyes on this fact ; 
they were so astonished that they could not help admitting it. They said, "He 
maketh both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak ; " they evidently had an eye 
to the words of the prophet, and the works he predicted the Messiah would dc, when 
he said, " Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be 
unstopped. Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb 
sing." 

UL Pbaotioai. iNSTEncTioii. 1. Inferences. This miracle, like others of our 
Lord's miracles, warrants three inferences : (1) his superhuman power, and by conse- 
quence his Divine commission ; (2) a glorious coming day foreshadowed, when all 
physieal disabiUties shall be finally and for ever removed ; and (3), what is of personal 
and practical importance, the inference of the Saviour's ability to do for the soul what 
he 10 often and so effectuaJly did for the body. The impediments of tbo body are but 



830 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. ^ch. vm. 1—38 

dim sbadowa of the worse impediments of the soul. By nature the ear is deaf to tha 
Divine commands, the tongue dumb when it should celebrate his praise ; while tha 
heart is hard, the affections frozen, the mind shrouded in darkness — the man in a stata 
of isolation, without fellowship with God or communion with the saints. Christ says, 
" Ephphatha," and oh, what a change ensues 1 The ear is opened to hear God's Word, 
the heart, like Lydia's, to receive his grace, the tongue untied to praise bis name and 
call upon him in prayer. 2. Eis due meed of praise. In view of fdl this we must join 
with the multitude and say, " He hath done all thincts well." It was well for the man 
that was healed, because in bis case it was next to life from the dead ; it was well for 
his relations, for their trouble was all but over ; it was well for bis Mends, because 
their enjoyment of him and pleasure with him were unspeakably increased ; it was well 
for mankind, that the Son of man had authority to exercise such power upon earth ; 
it was well for each of us, because herein we have an earnest of what he will do for the 
■oul, a pledge of the renovation of soul and body, an assurance of the future and final 
perfection of both. He did all things well, for he " did no iniquity, neither was guile 
found in his mouth ; " he did all things well, for he went about continually, doing good. 
More particularlv, he did all things well, for whatever be did he did largely and 
liberally, modestly and humbly, generously, graciously, gratuitously, and yet gloriously. 
Like the first creation, when God saw everything that he had made, " behold, it was very 
good ; " 10, when the works of Christ are contemplated, the concurrent testimony of 
heaven and earth will be, that " he bath done all things well." Saints on earth will say 
it, for they are the trophies of his mercy, the triumphs of his grace, the memorials of hU 
goodness, and the monuments of his power ; saints in heaven will say it, adding. He 
opened our ears by his power, our hearts by bis spirit, our tongues by his grace ; 
he washed us from our sins in his blood, naking us kings and priests unto Gh>d. 
Multitudes when he was on earth said it ; multitudes yet unborn will say it. We 
ourselves are entitled to say it, for his healing power has reached us ; he hag 
removed our maladies, renewed our souls, made us to delight in liis Word and rejoic* 
Ia his loTflb 

" He speaks, and, listening to his voioe^ 
New life the dead receive ; 
The mournful, broken hearts rejoice, 
The humble poor believe. 

" Hear hira, ye deaf; his praise, ye dimib. 
Your loosened tongues employ ; 
Te blind, behold your Saviour come. 
And leap, ye lame, for joy." 



J. J. G. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER vm. *''® context. In the original Greek eon- 

struotion the word ix'^"^' i° th^ singular, 

Ten. 1,8. — The opening words of the first is disintegrated in the next clause by a 

Terse seem to imply that our Lord remained passage into the plural (koI fiii ix^'^"'* ^t 

for some time on this, the north-east, side of ipiyoucri). This is properly marked in the 

the Sea of Galilee. The multitade being Bevised Version by the words, a great 

very great. The word here rendered " very multitude, and theyliad nothing to eat. Our 

great " is iraintiWov, a word not to be found Lord has compassion on them. He desires 

anywhere else in the New Testament. But not only to heal the sick, but to feed the 

according to the best authorities, the true hungry. We may here notice tiie burning 

reading is TnUic vtfXAov ; so that the words zeal of the multitude. They were so intent 

would run, ahen then ucu again a great npon hearing Christ, that they forgot to 

multitude. It has been supposed with some provide themselves with the necessaries of 

reason that, a* an old ecclesiastical Lection life. They continued with him for three 

began with this chapter, this may have led days and had nothing to eat. Whatever 

to the substitution of ira;iiiri(\Aav for irdKiv small supplies they might have brought with 

vtfAAuv, in order to make the Lection more them at first were now exhausted ; ami still 

•omplete in itself avoiding this reference to they remained, " esteeming his word« to be 



OH. vm. 1—38.] THE (iOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAKK. 



331 



more than their neoesBary food." Onr Lord 
on his part was bo full of zeal for their good, 
that daring all that time, with little inter- 
Td, he had been preaching to them, denying 
himself rest, refreshment, and sleep. So true 
. were those words of his, " My meat is to do 
the will of him that sent me, and to finish 
his work." 

Ver. 3.— For divers of them came from far. 
These words, as they stand in the Authorized 
Version, might be supposed to be an obser- 
vation thrown in by the evangelist himself. 
But the oorreot rendering of fixcuri is not 
" came," but have come, or rather, are eome ; 
and instead of rivh yip at the beginning of 
the olanse, the more correct reading is koI 
riv^s. This change makes the clause almost 
of necessity to be a part of our Lord's own 
words going before. It was not until the 
third day that our Lord interposed with a 
miracle, when the people were absolutely 
without food, and would therefore feel more 
sensibly the blessing as well as the greatness 
of the miracle. Their extremity was his 
opportunity. 

ver. 4. — ^Whence shall one be able to fill 
these men with bread here in a desert place t 
St. Matthew (xv. 33) gives the question thus: 
"Whence should we have so many loaves in 
a desert place, as to fill so great a multi- 
tude?" The disciples, measuring the diffi- 
culty by human reason, thought that it was 
impossible to find so many loaves inthedesert. 
But Christ in this necessity, when human 
resources fail, supplies Divine; and mean- 
while the disciples' estimate of the im- 
posBibility Ulnsbrates the grandeur of the 
miracle. 

Yer. 5. — The seven loaves and the few 
small fishes appear to have been the modest 
provision for our Lord and his disciples. 
As he often retired into the desert, they were 
no doubt accustomed to carry small supplies 
about with them, tliough poor and scanty. 
In the former miracle of the multiplying of 
the loaves (ch. vi. 35), we And that their 
took consisted of five loaves and two fishes. 
..t was, of course, just as easy for our Lord to 
multiply the smaller quantity as the larger. 
But he chose bo to order it that the original 
quantity of food, as well as the number re- 
quiring to be fed, should in each case be 
different, in order that it might be evident 
that they were different occasions, although 
the miracles were of the same kind. 

Yer. 6. — And he commandeth the multitnde 
to sit down (^oivairfaeTp) — literally, to recline — 
on the ground (M "njs yvs) ; not the green 
grass, as before. It was a different season 
of the year. ■' He gave thanlzs." In this 
expression is included the recognition of the 
Divine power to enable him to work the 
miracle. Christ indeed, as God, was able 
f>f his own will and by his own power to 



multiply the loaves. But as man he gave 
thanks. And yet, as Dr. Westcott excel- 
lently remarks, " The thanksgiving was not 
for any uncertain or unexpected gift. It 
was rather a proclamation of his fellowship 
with God. So that the true nature of 
prayer in the case of our blessed Lord was 
the conscious realization of the Divine will, 
and not a petition for that which was contin- 
gent." And having given thanks, he brak*^ 
and gavo to hia disciples (Jlxhiae, koI iSiSovY 
Observe the aorist and the imperfect. Th« 
giving was a continual act, till all were 
filled. 

Yer. 8. — And they did eat, and were filled 
C4x'>P'''<l-<''Bv<'''"')- Wycliffe renders it, " were 
fulfild ; " according to the original meaning 
of "to fulfil," namely, "to fill full." And 
they took up, of broken pieces that remained 
over, seven baskets — as many as tliere were 
loaves. In the record of the other similar 
miracle, the number of baskets corresponded 
to the number of the disciples. Here, as in 
the former miracle, far more food remained 
after all were fed than the original supply 
on which our Lord exercised his miraculous 
power ; for each basket would contain much 
more than one loaf. The Greek word her* 
rendered " basket " (amipis) is a different 
word from thiit used for "basket" in tiie 
record of the other miracle (oh. vi. 43). 
There it is K6<pa/os. The k6^ivos was a band- 
basket of stout wicker-work. The ampls 
was a much larger basket, made of a mors 
flexible material, perhaps " rushes," like our 
" frail." It was by means of such a basket, 
called in Acts ix. 25 (rmpls, but aapydyTi 
in 2 Cor. xi 33, that St. Paul was let down 
through a window at Damascus. This 
supplies another evidence, if it were needed, 
that these two recorded miracles took place 
on different occasions. Cornelius ik Lapide 
mentions an opinion that the amipls was 
double tlie size of the K6(pivos, a large basket 
carried by two. 

Yer. 10. — He entered Into a ship (e/s t4 
TiXo'iov) — literally, into the hoat ; probably the 
same b^at which he had ordered to be in 
attendance upon him (ch. iii. 9) — and came 
into the parts of Dalmanntha. St. Matthew 
(XV. 39) has " the coasts of Magdala; " morei 
properly, "the borders of Magaden." This 
place was in all probability about the middle 
of the western shore of the Sea of Galilee 
where now stand the ruins of the village of 
El-Mejdel. 

Yer. 11. — And the Pharisees came forth— 
St. Matthew (xvi. 1) says that the Saddu- 
cees came with them — and began to question 
with him, seeking of him a sign from heaven, 
tempting him. They had already asked for 
a sign from heaven (Matt, xii 38) ; but noW 
this miracle gives them oooasion to ask 
again. For when they saw how greatly it 



132 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. vm. 1—38. 



wai extulled by the mnltitndes who had 
benefited by it, it was easy for them to nrge 
that it was an earthly sign, and might have 
been wrought by him who la called "the 
god of this world; " and so they insinnated 
that he had wrought this miracle as well as 
his other miracles by the power of Satan. 
Therefore they seek a sign mm hearen, that 
he who dwells in heaven might thus bear 
witness that he came from Ood, and that 
his doctrine was Divine; the Pharisees 
probably meant that if he did this they 
would believe in him as the Messiah, and 
lead the people to the same faith. The 
Badducees, who were practically atheists, 
thought that no sign could be given from 
heaven by God, seeing that in their opinion 
it was doubtful whether there was any God 
to give it. 

Ver. 12.— He sighed deeply in his spirit 
{ivcurrevdias). Another graphic touch of 
this evangelist; such as he had learnt in 
all probability from St. Peter. The word 
occurs nowhere but here. It isthe outcome 
of grief and indignation, in which, however, 
grief predominates. There shall no sign be 
given unto this generation (ei Soe^a-crai 
arnieiov). This is a Hebrew idiom, based 
upon a form of taking an oath which pre- 
vailed amongst the Jews. The full form 
would be, " God do so and so to me, if so and 
■o." Hence the hypothetical part of the 
clause came to be used alone, expressing a 
ve^ strong form of denial or refusal 

ver. 13. — And he left them, and again 
embarking — i/iPhs for i/aPas els rh ir\oioy— 
departed to the other side. Again and again 
our Lord crossed this sea, that he might 
instruct the Galileans dwelling on either 
tide ; in fulfilment of Isa. ix. 1, " The land of 
Zebulun and the land of Naphteli, ... by the 
way of the sea, beyond Jordan, in Galilee of 
the nations. The people that walked in dark- 
ness have seen a g^t light." 

Ver. 14. — And they had forgotten {tireXii- 
tovTo) — literally, they forgot — ^to take bread 
i&pTovs); loava. The conversation which 
foUowi took place on the boat while they 
were orossing. The passage would take 
perhaps six hours. And it was during that 
ttane that they would want food; for when 
they reached the port, they would find it in 
abundance. 

Ver. 18. — Beware of the leaven of the 
Pharisees and liie leaven of Herod. St. 
Matthrw (xv. 6) says, " Beware of the leaven 
of the Pharisees and Badducees ; " thus St. 
Hark identifies the leaven of the Sadducees 
with that of Herod. " Leaven " here means 
"doctrine." They were not to beware of 
this, so far as the Pharisees rightly taught 
and explained the Law of Hoses ; but only 
■0 far as they corrupted that Law by their 
»wn vain traditions, oontrnry to the Law of 



God, St. Luke (zil. 11) calls this leavvn 
" hypocrisy ; " because the Pharisees only 
regarded outward ceremonies, and neglected 
the inward sanctificatiou of the Spirit. St. 
Jerome says, " This is ):he leaven of which 
the Apostle speaks where he says, ' A little 
leaven leaveneth the whole lump.' Meuoion 
and Valentinus and all heretics have had 
this kind of laaven, which is on eveiy 
account to be avoided. Leaven has this 
property, that, however small it may be in 
quantity, it spreads its influence rapidly 
through the mass. And so if only a little 
spark of heretical doctrine be admitted into 
the soul, speedily a great flame arises, and 
envelopes the whole man." 

Ver. 16. — According to the most approved 
readings, this verse should be read thus : 
And they reasoned one with another, saying, 
We have no bread. There is something very 
artless and simple in this narrative. Our 
Lord speaks of " leaven ; " and the mention 
of this word reminds the disciples that they 
had forgotten to bring bread with them in 
the boat; and fearing lest Christ should 
direct them, according to his wont, to land 
on some desert shore, they were in seme 
anxiety how they might obtain what they 
would need ; and so they disputed among 
themselves; one, it may be, throwing the 
blame upon another. 

Yer. 17. — And when Jesus knew it (koI 
yvohs 6 'Iriaohs) — ^literally and far more 
correctly, and Jenu perceiving U — ^he saith 
unto them, Why reason ye, because ye have 
no bread % Jesus perceived the direction in 
which their thoughts were moving, by the 
power of his divinity. It is as though he 
said, " Why reason ye because ye have no 
breaid, as though I was referring to natural 
things, and speaking concerning bread for 
the lx>dy, and wishing you to be anxious 
about that ; as though I could not provide 
that for you, if necessary, just as easily here 
on the sea as I did just now in the desert ? " 
Dr. John Lightfoot (' Hebrew Kxercitations 
on St. Matthew,' vol. ii. p. 204) says, " The 
rule of the Jews was very strict as to the 
kind of leaven that was to be used ; and the 
disciples supposed that our LDrd was 
alluding to this when he cautioned them to 
beware of the leaven of the Pharisees." 
Perhaps they also thought that our Lord 
was conveying a silent reproof to them for 
not having brought a sufBcient supply of 
bread _ with them. The whole incident, 
while it shows their transparent simplicity 
of character, exhibits also their dulness of 
apprehension. 

Vers. 19, 20.— Here St. Mark is as care- 
ful as St. Matthew to mention the details of 
the two miracles, even to the reference to 
the two kinds of baskets in which the 
fragment^ were sr*tliered up. They had • 



H. vm. X— 38.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MAltK. 



831 



distinct recollection of the facte, but they 
had failed to catch their spiritual import. 

Ver. 21. — How is it that ye do not under* 
stand t A. better reading here is otfTrw in- 
stead of xSj oi). Therefore the words shoirld 
run, Do ye not yet underitand 1 It is as 
though our Lord said, " Yon ought to have 
perceived, both from my words and from my 
actions, that I was not speal<ing concerning 
earthly leaven or earthly bread, but con- 
eeming spiritual doctrine." St. Matthew 
here (xvi. 12) is careful to tell us that this 
reproof of Christ quickened their intellects, 
and forced them to understand. 

Ver. 22. — This miracle is recorded by St. 
Mark alone. And he oometh to Bethsaida. 
A better reading is ipxovrai for epx^'"'"; 
they eome unto Bethiaida. Which Beth- 
saida ? It seems most probable that it was 
Bethsaida Julias. This Bethsaida was in 
the tetrarchy of Philip, who improved and 
adorned it, and named it Julias, in honour 
of the emperor's daughter Julia. A refer- 
ence to ver. 27 seems to make it quite clear 
that it must have been this Betlisaida, and 
not the Galilean Bethsaida on the other 
side of the lake. It is not surprising that 
there should have been, adjoining this 
great lake, more than one place called Beth- 
saida, t'.e. the "place of fish." And they 
bring a blind man nnto him, and besought 
(iropoKo\oC<r(i/) — literally, beseech — him to 
touch him. St. Mark is fond of the graphic 
present. There is here, as at ch. vii. 32, 
something almost like dictating the mode of 
cure. They seem to have imagined that 
the healing virtue could not go forth from 
Christ except by actual contact. 

Ver. 23. — And he took (imXapS/xevos) — 
literally, took hold o/— the blind man by the 
hand, and led him — this is the rendering of 
H'liyaryev ; but a great weight of manuticript 
•nthority points to i^iiveyiav as the better 
reading, brought him — out of the village 
(?fo> rris Kii/iris). This Bethsaida was a 
Tillage; bnt Philip had raised it to the rank 
of a city (ir6\is), though it still seems to have 
retained its old appellation. Our Lord "led" 
or " brought " the blind man out of Beth- 
saida, for the same reason that he led the 
deaf and dumb man (ch. vii. 33) away firom 
the multitude: (1) for the sake of prayer, 
that he might collect his mind, and unite 
himself more closely to God, and pray more 
intently and earnestly ; (2) that he might 
shun vain-glory and human praise, and teach 
OS to shun it also. And when he had spit on 
his eyes— this act had a mystical meaning; 
it was the instrument by which his Deity 
operated — and laid his hands upon him, he 
asked him, Seest thou aught 1 Here were 
three acts— (1) the spitting, (2) the laying 
of the hands on him, (3) the questioning 
tt Um. We gather from ver. 25 that our 



Lord's hands were applied to the blind 
man's eyes. From the analogy of the 
miracle in the last chapter (vii. 33), we may 
perhaps infer that our Lord touched the 
man's eyes with saliva on his flnger, and 
that the hands were withdrawn before lie 
aski'd him if he saw aught. 

Ver. 21.— And he looked np, and said, I 
Bee men as trees, walking. He looked np-~ 
a natural action. He instinctively looked 
in the direction of the source of light. Th« 
words in the Greek of the next clause m 
as follows: — $\4jru tovs iai9p<lnrovs, in &a 
Sii/Spa Spci ■jrepiiraTovvTas: I see men; for t 
beJu)ld them as trees, walking; that is, "I 
see something confusedly and obscurely, not 
clearly; for I see what I think must b« 
men, and yet so dimly that they look to m« 
like trees, only that I know that men moT* 
from their pla tes, whereas trees do not." The 
word " walking" refers to the men, and not 
to the trees, as is evident from the Greek. 
This man, as yet partially blind, saw men 
as in shadow, magnified by the mist, looking 
much larger than they really were. 

Ver. 25.— Then again he laid his hands 
npon his eyes, and made him look np — this 
is the Authorized Version rendering of itroi- 
riffei/ avTov iva$\4\fiaii but the better 
authenticated reading is simply xat Sic- 
$Ke^e, and he looked steadfastly — and was 
restored, and saw all things clearly. Ifow, 
here it pleased our Lord, not suddenly, but 
by degrees, to give perfect sight to this 
blind man. And this he did (1) that he 
might give examples of different kinds of 
miracles, showing that " there are differL-noes 
of operations," and that he, as sovereign 
Lord, was not absolutely tied to any oue 
particular method of working ; and (2) that 
he might administer his power in increas- 
ing measures, as the faith of the recipient 
waxed stronger ; that so he might gradually 
kindle greater hope and desire in him. It 
may be that the spiritual oondition of this 
blind man was one which specially needed 
this gradual method of treatment. Our 
Lord was a wise and skilful Physician. At 
first he healed him in part, as one who 
imperfectly believed ; that he who as yet 
saw little with a little sight, might believe 
more perfectly, and so be healed at last more 
perfectly ; and thus by this miracle Christ 
teaches us that for the most part the 
nnbeliever and the sinner is by degrees 
illuminated by God, so as to advance step 
by step in the knowledge and worship of 
Gi<Dd. "By this miracle," says Bede^ 
" Christ teaches us how great la the spiritual 
blindness of man, which only by degrees, 
and by successive stages, can come to the 
liglit of Divine knowledge." The experi- 
ences of this blind man In gradually T» 
covering his eyesight show as in a panbia 



8S4 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. iVABK. [ch. viti. 1—38. 



the Btagea of the spiritual change from 
absolnte darkness to glimmering light, and 
thence to bright and clear Tieion. Cornelius 
k Lapide says, " We see an example of this 
in children and Bcholars, who must be taught 
and instructed by degrees. Otherwise, if 
the master, impatient of delay and labour, 
seeks to deliver all things to them at once, 
be will overwlielm their mind and their 
memory, so that they will take in nothing; 
as wine, when it is poured into a narrow- 
necked vessel, if you attempt to pour in the 
whole at once, scarcely any will enter, but 
almost all is wasted." A Lapide adds the 
well-known Italian proverb, " Piano, piano, 
yi va lontano." 

Ver. 26. — This verse, acoording to the best 
reading, runs thus : And he sent him away to 
his home, saying, Do not even enter into the 
village. It thus appears that Bethsaida was 
not the home of this blind man. He might 
naturally have wished to exhibit himself in 
Bethsaida, where many must have known 
him, and to have sung the praises of his 
great Benefactor. But this was far from 
what Christ wished. He wished to be in 
leolusion. He had no desire to excite more 
than oonld be helped the idle curiosity of the 
multitude. His miracles were for the sake of 
his doctrine, and not his doctrine for the sake 
of his miracles. The whole character of his 
administration was retiring and gentle. 
" My doctrine shall distil as the dew." " He 
■had not strive, nor cry ; neither shall any 
hear his voiee in the streets." 

Vers. 27, 28.— And Jesus went forth, and 
his disciples, into the villages of Csesarea 
Fhilippi. This verse seems to corroborate 
the view that the Bethsaida just referred to 
WM Bethsaida Julias. Ctesarea Fhilippi lies 
at the roots of Libanus. Cornelius k Lapide 
says that it was originally called Dan, the 
place where two little streams united, namely, 
Jeor and Dan. These two streamlets so united 
make the Jordan, whence the name Jeoi- 
Dan, or Jordan. But since Fan, the god of 
shepherds, was better known to the Gentiles 
than Dan, a Hebrew tribe, it was hence 
called by them "Faneas." It is called 
Banias at the present day." It lay at the 
extreme north, as Beeisheba lay at the 
extreme south. Hence the phrase, "from 
Dan even to Beersheba." On this account 
many neighbouring Gentiles, especially the 
Phoenicians, flocked to this city, as is 
frequently the case with border towns. And 
BO Christ visited this neighbourliood, not 
only because it presented favourable oppor- 
tunities to him for teaching Jews and 
Gentiles alike, but also that he might speak 
more fni'ly than he could have done in 
JudaBii I oil! ruing a Messiah, whom the Jews 
ex|iu<;teil It tlieir king. In Judeea itself, 
■od e8pt>3iall> in the neighbourhood of 



Jerusalem, it would have been perilous to 
speak on such a subject; for the scribet 
would at once have accused him to tbt 
Boman power that he was seeking the king^ 
dom. The student who wishes for further 
informLlon respecting the site of Cffisarea 
Fhilippi may consult with advantage Stanley's 
•Sinai and Palestine' (oh. xi., "The Lake 
of Merom and the sources of the Jordan "). A 
more familiar derivation of the Jordan than 
that given by A Lapide is that of the 
" descender," from Jarad, " to descend." Our 
Lord went from Bethsaida Julias directly 
northwards towards Faneas, named by 
Philip the Tettarch Cnsarea Fhilippi, to 
distinguish it from the other Csesarea in 
Samaria on the Mediterranean coast. It 
will be observed that he went into the vil- 
lages of Cessarea Fhilippi, avoiding the city 
itself. In the way thither he asked his dis- 
ciples, . . . Who do men say that I am 1 This 
incident is mentioned also by St. Matthew 
and St. Luke. St. Luke _(ix. 18) says that 
he was alone praying, his disciples being 
doubtless not far oS. According to this 
evangelist, otu Lord says, "Who do the 
multitudes say that I am ? " thus distinguish- 
ing them more particularly from his own 
disciples. The common people among the 
Jews knew that not long after the Babylonish 
Captivity the gift of prophecy had Ceased 
amongst their nation. So they thought that 
Christ was not a new Prophet, but one of the 
old. They could not but see in him the 
renewal of the powers of the old prophets, 
their miracles and their teaching; but there 
were very few of them who believed that he 
was the Messiah, llie great body of them 
were oflended at his poverty andhumility; for 
they thought that Messiah would appear 
amongst them with royckl state as a temporal 
king. So that when some said, moved it 
might be by the sight of his miracles, " This 
is that Prophet that should come into the 
world," they did but give utterance to a 
momentMry and furtive feeling, and not a 
firm or abiding conviction. The mass of man- 
kind are fickle, easily led to change their 
opinions. Perhaps some of the Jewish multi- 
tude thought that the soul of one of the 
ancient prophets had entered into Christ, 
according to the Pythagorean notion of the 
transmigration of souls ; or perhaps they 
thought that one of the old prophets had risen 
again in the person of Jesus. For though 
the Sadducees denied a resurrection, the 
great body of the Jews believed in it. Some 
thought that Christ was John the Baptist, 
because he resembled the Baptist in age 
(there was only six months difference in age 
between them), as he also resembled him in 
holiness and in fervour of preaching. It was 
but a short time before, that John the 
Baptiut had been pnt to death by Herod. 



OH, Tm. 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 



I3S 



HIb chaiaoter and actions were fresh in their 
memories: and Herod himself had given 
currency to the idea that the Baptist Iiad 
risen again in the person of onr Loid. Then 
there was Elijah. Some thought that our 
Lord was Elijah, because it was known that 
Elijah had not died, and because there was 
an expectation, founded on Malachi's pro- 
phecy (It. S), that he would return. They 
thought, therefore, that Elijah bad returned, 
«nd that our Lord was Elijah. 

Ver. 29. — By this second putting of the 
question, our Lord warned his disciples that 
they who had been better instructed ought 
to think greater things of him than these. It 
was necessary that he should show them that 
these current opinions and floating notions 
were far below his real claims. Therefore he 
flays with emphasis, But who say ye that I 
ami — ye, my disciples, who, being always 
with me, have seen mo do far greater things 
than they; ye, who have listened to my 
teaching, confirmed as it has been by those 
miracles ; ye, who yourselves also have been 
enabled to work many miracles in my name ; 
—who say ye that I am ? Feter answereth 
and saith onto him, Thou art the Christ. St. 
Feter here spoke as the mouthpiece of the 
rest. The suddenness and terseness of the 
answer is eminently characteristic of St. 
Peter. In St. Matthew's narrative it is given 
a little more la full, " Thou art the Christ, 
the Son of the living God." But the 
•trength of the answer really lies in St. Mark's 
words, " Thou art the Christ," that is, the 

SroDiised Messiah. What, however, St. Mark 
oes omit here — a oircumstanoe not to be 
passed without notice — is the great blessing 
pronounced by our Lord upon St. Peter (Matt. 
zvL 17 — 19) as the reward of his confession. 
The explanation of this omission is to be 
found in the fact that this Oospel is really for 
the most part St. Peter's Gospel, recorded by 
6t. Mark. It has already been observed, 
that, as &r as it is possible to do so, consider^ 
big Peter's prominent position amongst the 
other apostles, be retires into the background. 
It was necessary that it should be recorded 
that he made the good confession of our 
Lord as the Messiah; but beyond this the 
evangelist suppresses all mention of the 
distinction subsequently conferred upon him, 
although the rebuke which he afterwards 
recei ved is recorded in full. It is, moreover, 
• siguiflcant circumstance (noticed in the 
' Speaker's Commentary ') that this Gospel 
was written at Borne, and in the first instance 
for Boman readers. 

Ver. SO. — And he charged them (ertrl- 
Hii<re») — a strong word. Implying almost re- 
buke, he UrieUy charged them — ^that they 
«hould tell no man of him. Why was this? 
There were many reasons for this reticence. 
The etate of paries in Palestine was most 



inexpedient for snoh a disoloanre at that 
time. Those who were favourable to hii 
cause would have wanted at onoe to take him 
by force and make him a king. In fact, soma 
of them made no secret of uieir bitentionf 
(John vi 15). Those, on the other hand, 
who were opposed to him were only watching 
their opportunity to destroy him. Moreoveiv 
his own disciples had yet many things to 
learn ; and besides idl this, &ith in his God- 
head would be easier when his death should 
have been followed by his glorious resnrrety 
tion and ascension. 

Ver. 31.— And he began to teaoh them, 
that the Son of man must suffer many thisgi, 
etc. In St. Matthew's narrative he says 
(xvi. 21), " From that time began Jesus to 
show unto his disciples," etc. — from the time, 
that is, of this great confession; from the 
time when he had openly acknowledged to 
his disciples the tmth of his essential 
Divinity ; &om that time he began to in- 
struct them as to his passion and his death. 
There are two great principles of fidth, 
namely, (1) the Divinity and the humanity 
of Christ, and (2) his cross and passion, 
whereby lie has redeemed the world. And 
it was necessary that the disciples shonld be 
thus instructed in his amazing dignity aa 
the Son of God, lest, when they saw him put 
to death, they might doubt as to his God- 
head. And E^er three days rise again. St 
Matthew and St. Luke say, "on the third 
day " — the day of his death counting for ane^ 
and the day of his resurrection for another, 
with one clear day intervening. 

Ver. 32. — And he spake the saying 
openly (vap^iiai<i); literally, voithotit reiene. 
This sudden announcement excited St. 
Peter. It was a new and startling com- 
munication. Feter took him, and began 
to rebuke him. The word irpo<r}ia$6it(yos 
indicates that he "took hold of him," to 
lead him apart, as though to have the 
opportunity of warning him with the 
greater familiarity and secrecy. So say St. 
Chrysostom and others. Peter would not 
have his own confession of Olirist thus 
evacuated, as it were ; uor does he think it 
possible that the Son of God could be slain. 
So he takes him apart, lest he should 
seem to reprove him in the presence of the 
other disciples; and then he says (Matt, 
xvi. 2^), " Mercy on thee. Lord ClKeis troi, 
Kipti): this shall never be unto thee." 

Ver. 33. — But he turning about, and saeing 
his^^isoiples, rebuked Feter. The words in- 
dicate a sudden movement (4 Si iTurrpa^Els), 
accompanied by a keen searching look at 
his disciples. Then he singles out Peter, 
and addresses to him, in tHeb presence, the 
severe rebuke. Get thee behmd me, Satan: 
for thou savourest not (av (fipoyeiy) — literally, 
thou mindett not — the things of Ood, bnt th« 



8M 



THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MARK. [oH.vin.1— S& 



things of men. The fonn of words is the same 
as that used by our Lord to Satan himself, 
when he was tempted by him m the wilder- 
ness. It reminded him of that great con- 
flict. The visions of worldly glory again 
floated before him. The crown without the 
cross was again held out to him. This 
explains his language. Peter was indeed 
rebuked ; but the rebuke was aimed through 
him at the arch adversarT who was address- 
ing him through Peter. Here is the 
striking significance of his " turning about." 
Peter was fur the moment doing the 
tempter's work, and in "turning about" 
our Lord waa again putting Satan behind 
him. 

Ver. 84. — ^He oalled unto him the multi- 
tude with his disciples. This shows that 
there was an interval between what had 
jnst taken place and what is now recorded. 
Our Lord now, without any further special 
reference to St, Peter, delivers a lesson of 
vnivereal application; although, no doubt, 
be had Peter in his mind. If any man 
would («{ rii e4\ei) come after me, let him 
deny Umself, and take up his cross, and 
follow me. This self-denial ought to 
extend to everything, even to life itself, 
which we ought to be willing to resign, if 
need be, for the sake of Christ. Tahe up 
hit erou. It is as though he said, " Let him 
take up his cross, as I have borne my cros% 
that I might be the standard-bearer and 
Leader of all cross-bearers — I, who carried 
the cross on which I was to be crucified to 
the mount of Calvary." St. Luke (ix. 23) 
adds the words ((tafl' ri/iepav), " daily : " " let 
him take up his cross daily; " thus showing 
that "every day," and often "at every 
hour," something occurs which it becomes 
us to bear patiently and bravely, and so on 
continually through our whole life. He 
takes np his cross who ia orucifled to the 
world. But he to whom the world is 
cnioifled follows his crucified Lord. This 
oroas assnmes vaiious forms; such as perse- 
cution and martyrdom, afdiction and sor- 
row of whatever kind, appointed by God; 
temptations of Satan, permitted by God for 
our trial, to increase our humility and 
virtue, and to make brighter our crown. 

Ter. 35. — Because the cross is sharp and 
afflicting, our Lord animates his followers 
to bear it by the thought of ita great and 
•verlasting rewards. The meaning of the 
Terse is this: He who by trying to shun 
the cross and to escape self-denial would 
MT« Ua life here, will lose it hereafter. 



Bnt he who loses his life here for the sake 
of Christ, either by dying in his cause or by 
denying and mortifying his lusts out of 
love for him, he in the life to come shall 
find his life in the bosom of Christ and in 
eternal joy. 

Ver. 36. — ^What doth it profit a man, to 
gain the whole world, and lose his own 
sonl? {Cvi^iae^fai) ; literally, /or/ei< his life 
iifivxli). The word ^x^ •'* *'^^ Greek, 
originally meaning simply " breath,"_ as the 
sign of life, is of very comprehensive import 
embracing not merely " the breath of life, 
but also the "soul," or immortal part of 
man, as distingoished from his mortal body, 
also the mind or understanding, as the organ 
of thought. "Life" seems here to be the 
best English synonym, as being, like the 
Greek ifiux^, the more comprehensive term. 
Ver. 87. — ^In exchange {avriWaryiia) for 
his life. The Greek term here means an 
" equivalent," " a compensation." The " life," 
in its largest sense and meaning, defies all 
comparison, surpasses all value. It has 
been bought and redeemed with the precious 
blood of Christ ; therefore the whole world 
would be a poor price for the soul of one 
man. 

Ver. 38. — Onr Lord here looks onward to 
the day of judgment. Vhosoever shall be 
ashamed of me. "Whosoever:" the word 
includes all, whatever their position or cir- 
cumstances may be. *' Shall be ashamed of 
me ; " that is, shall deny my faith, or blush 
to confess me here. Of him shall Qie Son of 
man be ashamed; that is, Gbris^ will 
despise him, when he shall appear with 
power and great glory, in that sublime 
majesty which he gained by his death upon 
the cross. In this adulterous and sinfol 
generation. It adds to the disgrace of being 
ashamed of Christ that the shame is mani- 
fested in the presence of the base and the 
worthless ; and therefore onr Lord exhibits 
the contrast between the mean and con- 
temptible people in the presence of whom 
men are ashamed of him here, and the 
magnificent assemblage in whose presence 
he will be ashamed of them hereafter. The 
cross of Christ appeared to the great body of 
mankind to be shameful and contemptible. 
To the Jews it was a Btnmbling-blodc, and 
to the Greeks foolishness. Hence vast 
numbers, whether through shame or fear, 
did not dare to confess it, and still less to 
preach it. And therefore it is that St. 
Paul says (Bom. L 16), " I am not ashamed 
of the gospel of Qbriit.'* 



H0MILETIC3. 

Ten. 1 — 10. — The Oiver of hread. That the miracle of feecUng the tnnltltud* 
ihould be repeated, and that two evangelists should record both events, ii a testimony 



OH. Tm. 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAKK. 331 



to the generous and considerate kindness of the Saviour, and to the instructive naixxit 
of the sign. We discern in this narrative an illustration of — 

I. Chbist's ATTBAcnvB MiNiBTBY. A great multitudb followed him to listen to his 
teaching, and were so absorbed in his words as to neglect attention to their bodily 
wants. Far from home, and without a supply of food, they hungered. Eating of the 
spiritual bread, they were satisfied in iheir souls. But they had bodily wants 
also. 

IL Chbist's considerate compassion. A man himself, Jesus was touched with a 
feeling of human infirmities. He had known hunger. The people had come from far; 
they ha^ remained in the neighbourhood where he was for three days; their little stock 
of provisions was exhausted, and, should he send them away fasting, many might faint 
upon the road. All this Jesus thought of, and his sympathy was aroused. °He had 
compassion, not only upon their souls, but upon their bodies. 

in. Chbist's use op oedinaet human kbsoubces and means. Jesus might douotless 
have created bread of stones, as the tempter had once challenged him to do. But he chose 
to use what provisions were at hand, and to make the few loaves and fishes which the 
disciples held as a reserve of food, the basis, so to speak, of his miraculous action. The 
Lord does not despise, or dispense with, human means or human agencies. As on this 
occasion he directed his disciples to distribute the bread they had, so ever does he use 
his people and their powers and possessions as means of good to their fellow-men. 

IV. Christ's dbvodtness in THANKSorviNa. Being himself the Son of the Father, 
he yet, in the name of the dependent children, acknowledged the bounty and benefi- 
cence of the Giver of all. 

V. Chbist's mibaculous poweb. We are not told how it came to pass, but it is 
recorded that the four thousand found the slender provision sufficient for all their 
wants. When the Saviour provides, there is always enough and more than enough 
for all. 

VI. Chbist's feuqalitt and economy. The Lord was liberal, but not lavish. 
There was no waste in his arrangements. The broken pieces that remained were 
gathered, and doubtless saved and used. Because he miraculously supplied what was 
needed, it did not follow that he would suffer anything to be wasted and lost. 

Ver. 4. — Whence shall man's soul be fed ? Grod's creatures are altogether and for eve: 
dependent upon him. It is not now and then only that our Creator and Lord interposes 
upon our behalf, to supply our wants and to relieve our distresses. There are times 
when we specially recognize, and occasions when we specially feel, his care. But his 
bounty and watchfulness are, in fact, unceasing. " In him we live, and move, and have 
our being ; " "He openeth his hand, and satisfieth the desires of every living thing." 
Bread for the body, and bread for the soul, alike are from Mm. Our daily bread is 
his daily gift, and our daily remembrancer of him the Giver. In most cases the pro- 
vision is so regular, by reason of fruitful seasons, by which he fills us with joy and 
gladness, that men take the gifts of his providence as a matter of course, and are (in 
instances) only now and then reminded of their dependence when he withholds nis 
bounties. Our souls equally wait upon him, and to them he also giveth " their portion 
in due season." The sinless beings above doubtless receive from him abundant spiritual 
good, in an unceasing stream. If our human spirits are not constantly and of course 
enriched by his Spirit, it is not that his lOving-kindness is little or intermittent; it is 
because our sin prevents us from receiving what is, to believing, lowly, and obedient 
natures, ever accessible. There is, accordingly, something altogether special in the 
supply provided for the deep and everlasting needs of human spirits. The unfallen 
angels, by reason of their purity, have constant fellowship with God, and doubtless are 
daUy fed from his presence, and drink of the stream of his life. But wo — poor, sinful 
children of men — need to be dealt with in a way Divine wisdom alone can devise, to 
suit the emergency of our position. The plenty of the Divine granary must iie brought 
to our perishing souls by a heavenly interposition and grace. It is in Christ Jesus, the 
Son of the Eternal Father, that the bread of God becomes the bread of man. Needy, 
and therefore longing for spiritual food ; sinful, and therefore unable to obtain and par- 
take of such food, except in the way Infinite wisdom and grace may open up to ns, — we 
are in a pitiable case until the beneficent Father sends unto us a heavenly and all- 
8T. maek. » 



S38 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. viil 1— 3a 

ia£Scient supply. No fellow-creature can give what our circumstances demand and 
OUT nature craves ; no fellow-creature can satisfy the necessities of one suppliant, far lesi 
those of the unnumbered race of humanity. " From whence can a man satisfy these 
men with bread here in the wilderness ? " 

I. This language suggests the cry of the spibituallt hungbt fob bread. Man 
cannot " live by bread alone." Unless he change his nature, or blunt its urgencies, and 
stifle its voice, it calls aloud for God. 

" Far and wide, though all unknowing. 
Pants for thee each mortal breast ; 
Human tears tor thee are flowing. 
Human hearts in thee would rest." 

)ftentimes do men try to misinterpret this utterance, to persuade themselves that it is 
not God they want ; that they are as the brutes, to which due fodder and litter and 
shelter suffice for satisfaction and enjoyment. When one looks upon the vain endea- 
voiirs of misguided, self-deluded men, one cannot help crying aloud, in the memorable 
language of the Hebrew prophet, " Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread, and your labour for that which satisfieth not ? " There is a deep-seated 
longing, a recurring appetite, which prompts all men in whom is any spiritual vitality 
at all to look for more than earth, than man, can give. We ask for truth, for without 
truth — and especially truth concerning God — is no satisfaction possible to the created 
soul. " Oh that I knew where I might find him I " — ^him, my Maker, Lord, and Judge ; 
that I might know why he has made me, why he has stationed me here on earth, what 
is the purpose of his wisdom concerning me ! Mock me not with dust and stones, but 
give me bread indeed, even the true knowledge of God I And as conscience assures 
each child of man that, if this God whom he fain would know take any interest in him, 
be cannot but remark his disobedience and his errors, the heart within calls aloud for 
^e favour and acceptance of the great King. " How shall a man be just with God ? " 
« Wherewithal shall I come into his presence ? " Will he " lift the light of his coun- 
tenance " upon me, and be gracious to me ? Must my sins be a barrier between me and 
my God ; or can he, will he, overturn and cast them away, and admit me to his grace 
and fellowship and peace ? Turning his regard inward upon himself, and perceiving 
his own helplessness in the struggle which is not to be avoided, the poor and feeble 
child of man asks for strength. How shall I gain strength for duty in times of weak- 
ness and temptation ? How realize the intention of the Creator concerning me, that I 
shall enter into the conflict, sustain its toils, brave its dangers, and come forth victo- 
rious ? And when the day of suffering and the night of sorrow come, can the human 
soul find comfort in the lessons of human philosophy, in the balm of human sympathy? 
Alas 1 these cannot suffice. Kor can aught truly soothe and effectually succour the 
weak and weary, the sad and lonely, the bereaved and dying, save the hand which 
fiishioned the soul and made it susceptible to anguish — the heart that, by a Divine sym- 
pathy and consolation, heals the wounds that it permits. And when " heart and flesh 
fail," who but the Creator and Saviour can prove " the Strength of the heart, and its 
Portion for evermore " ? No human plummet can fathom the river all must cross, no 
human hand uphold the feeble, trembling feet amidst the dark, cold waters. Be sure 
of this : as long as man retains a nature higher than that of brutes that perish, so long 
as his heart is subject to grief, his life is surrounded by trouble, his nature prone to sin ; 
so long he will ever and anon cry out for supernatural succour and comfort, and call 
upon his God. Spiritual hunger is no fancy of the sentimental, no artificial deman.d 
of the leisurely and cultivated. It is a fact — a fact which (however it may be regarded) 
is not to bo denied, and without considering which, our view of our human nature and 
our knowledge of ourselves must needs be incomplete and delusive. Bread for his soul 
man will ask for, and, unless he have it, he will hunger, pine, and perish I 

II. This language suggests the silence of the wilderness to this appeal. Out 
beyond the Lake of Tiberias, away from towns and villages, in the solitudes of the green 
hillsides, how was the want of the multitude to be supplied ? Blades of grass wei ►, 
not ears of corn, stv-nes were not bread. " Here in the wilderness " was no answer tf 
the demand of the hungering — none 1 The wilderness could only leave those to perisb 
who trusted to its tender mercies. An emblem of the world's powerlessness to meei 



in. Tin. 1—38.1 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 339 

the case of our spiritually dependent and liungering race! The world b the scene of 
our trial and proving, the occasion of our manifold temptations. Of what use is it to 
look to it for sympathy, succour, strength, and salvation ? It cannot satisfy you, search 
a.nd prove it how you may. Is that rich and luscious fruit that hangs from yonder 
bough? Alas! it is the apple of the Dead Sea, dust and ashes between the teeth. Is 
that a lake of sweet, pellucid waters which gleams in the glowing sun in yonder hollow? 
Alas ! it is the mirage of the desert, which mocks the thirsty travellers, offering them 
sand for water. So with the pretences of the world to satisfy the hungering soiil. Thes« 
pretences are vanity and delusion. Equally vain to help, though more honest, is the 
world, when its response is otherwise. It sometimes acknowledges its utter powerless- 
ness : none to help, none to pity, none to deliver and to save ! Whilst some who reject 
and despise the message of religion abandon themselves to selfish and worldly aims, 
and seek to still the voice of conscience and to repress the aspirations of the soul in 
the pursuits of pleasure, pelf, or power, there are, others in whose breasts is no peace and 
no hope. They cry aloud in the wilderness ; but no answer comes to them, save the 
mocking echoes from the hard, dead rock. No truth, no law, no grace, no hope, no 
heaven, no God ! Such is their interpretation of the echoes of the desert. And we 
cannot wonder that, incredulous of every higher, better message, they abandon them- 
selves to doubt, despondency, despair. From this cheerless and desolate prospect, let 
us turn to facts fitted to gladden every depressed and anxious heart. 

IIL The language suggests to us the Divine pbovision of the Bbbab of life 
When the disciples of Jesus asked him this question, " Whence shall one be able to 
satisfy these men with bread here in the wilderness ? " they must have been thinking 
of their own inability. For they could not have forgotten how, not far from this very 
spot and not long since, their Master had fed five thousand men with five loaves and 
two fishes. If they had been there without him, they might have been as helpless ai 
they were when the father of the lunatic boy brought his son into their presence, and 
«ntreated their compassion and aid. But the Lord Jesus was himself the answer to 
this inquiry. He had but to bless the bread, and distribute it by the hands of the 
disciples, and, for even so vast a multitude, there was " bread enough and to spare." 
Thousands were fed when Jesus was the Master of the feast. No miracles were more 
evidently and decisively than these of feeding the thousands, parables concerning 
Christ himself. St. John has recorded the discourse which our Saviour uttered in 
Capernaum, in which Jesus asserted his own mission and ofiice and power. " My 
Father," said he, " giveth you the true Bread from heaven. For the Bread of Grod is he 
which Cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the world. ... I am the Bread 
of life : he that cometh to me shall never hunger ; and he that believeth on me shall 
never thirst." In this language our Divine Lord evidently referred to that marvellous 
incident in the history of Israel when the wants of the people were supplied by daily 
provision of manna in the wilderness. More especially he brought before the minds uf 
his hearers the great fact that the supply of human wants is due to the grace and inter- 
position of God himself. Bread does not come to us from the wilderness, but it comes 
to us in the wilderness ; and it is the Father above who sends it — none but he I 
Obviously, the figurative knguage in which Christ describes himself appeals to our best, 
purest, most sacred feelings. God is the Father, who will not leave his children without 
bread. He cares for his spiritual family, considers their wants, hears their cry, and in 
his wisdom and love secures for them all that he sees to be for their good. Our Lord 
Jesus Christ is himself the Divine provision for the needs of men. " He that eateth the 
flesh, and drinketh the blood of Christ, has life eternal." For it must be borne in mind 
that the heavenly Father who has given us his Son, has in him virtually given ug all 
the resources of his boundless compassion and grace. " He who spared not his own Sou, 
but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things ? " 
Do our hearts cry aloud for spiritual truth ? God gives us this in Christ, who is him- 
self the Truth — the revelation of the Father's mind and will. The heart that finds 
" Immanuel — God with us," finds God himself— for Christ is " the brightness of the 
Father's glory "—reads the writing of God's own hand, hears the utterances of Truth 
Divine. " He that hath seen me," says Christ, " hath seen the Father." Is our heart 
restless until assured of the forgiveness and the favour of our God ? Hungry for th« 
irile of Heaven, does it turn heavenward a wistful gazeV God in Christ gives us thi» 



MO THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. viu. 1—38 



first great necessity of the sinful souL Jesus came to call sinners to repentance, but 
he came at the same time to assure the penitent of pardon — the purchase of his precious 
blood. What bread is to the hungry, that is pardon to the contrite, humbled, suppliant 
transgressor. And this is the gift of Christ, who came with " power on earth to forgive 
sins." Do we feel an inner craving for a strength which wo do not find within ourselves— 
for a power which shall uphold us in the labour and the conflict of this earthly life? 
Not only to know the will of God but to do it — this is the want of man's souL 
Power to do this is bread to his hungering nature. Do you not, indeed, when you 
best know yourselves, feel that truly to live you must have strength to live to God ? 
And who but God himself can impart this strength ? It is given in Jesus. Eat of 
this bread, and labour shall be sweet and work welcome. His meat and drink was to 
do the will of him who sent him, and to finish his work. And in his people is " the 
mind of Christ." Does not the sorrowful and tempted soul — the soul oppressed by the 
infirmities of the flesh and the ills of life — hunger for a consolation not to be found 
from the wilderness ? Who of us has not felt this, in seasons of grief and anxiety ? 
Surely, God knows the heart which he has fashioned ; he reads its laments, he 
witnesses its struggles, he comprehends its fears. It was to allay our anxiety, to 
assuage our griefs, that Jesus dwelt on earth, wept our tears, tasted the bitterness of our 
death; that he might be a " High Priest touched with the feeling of our infirmities." 
As long as " man is born to sorrow," so long shall the " Man of sorrows, acquainted 
with grief," be the dearest Friend the heart can know. Jesus is a " brother born for 
adversity." 

« But what to those who find ? Ah I this 

Nor tongue nor pen can show ; 
The love of Jesus, what it is 

None but his loved ones know." 

IV. This language suggests the satisfaction found bt those who pabtake of 
THIS SPIKITUAL FOOD. We read in the Gospel that, when the great Lord of nature 
and of men miraculously supplied the wants of the hungering crowds, " they did all eat, 
and were filled." In this they prefigured all who, in every land and age, should feed 
by faith upon the Son of God. Of him it may truly be said, " He filleth the hungry 
soul with goodness." Three remarks may be made upon the power of the Lord Jesus to 
appease the spiritual hunger and to supply the spiritual wants of men. He is sufficient 
for each, sufficient for all, sufficient for evermore. Each soul, however drawn or driven 
to Christ — driven by the desperation of want, or drawn by the excellence and abun- 
dance of the Divine supply — tinds in him all that he himself has promised. To believe, 
to trust, to love, to follow Christ, — this is to appropriate him, to prove and leaa. his 
Divine sufficiency. " He that cometh to me," says Jesus, " shall never hunger ; and he 
that believeth on me shall never thirst." The same faith which first reveals Christ to 
the soul, and stays its hunger, is the means of attaching the soul to Christ and the 
means by which the soul finds in him all the fulness of God. For he of God is made 
unto his people " wisdom and righteousness, sanctifioation and redemption." The 
bounty of the Lord Jesus is unrestricted. As the vast multitude of his auditors were 
fed by his beneficence — as men, women, and children all ate and had enough, so that 
basketsful of fragments were taken up — so throughout this wide world its teeming 
and varied populations are all destined to find in him the Saviour of mankind. " I," 
said he, " if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me." Untold 
myriads have feasted at the table of Christ, and none have risen hungry and dis- 
satisfied. Still have the ministers of his grace the privilege of announcing to the 
starving children of men, " ' Yet there is room.' Come ye in, that the guests may b« 
many and the tables filled. ' Eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself 
in fatness.' " Still further to enhance the conception of the preciousness of the great 
salvation, let it be remembered that it is an unfailing, an everlasting, an impcrishabla 
satisfaction which is to be found in Jesus Christ. He that eats of earthly bread and 
drinks of earthly streams hungers and thirsts again ; but he who, by Divine mercy, feeds 
on heavenly food and drinks of the living water hungers and thirsts no more. For him 
ia provided a perpetual feast, an immortal satisfaction and content. Generation aucceedi 
jBiieration, and age follows age. The experience of humanity is prolonged from century 



BH. TOi. 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. MARK. S41 

to century. Opportunity is given to every system, to every creed, to every philosophy, 
to deal with the deep and spiritual necessities of mankind. As one attempt of human 
wisdom succeeds another, and as each fails in its turn, we hear in our soul within os the 
cry arise, suggested by human effort and by human powerlessness, " From whence can 
a man satisfy these men with bread here in the wilderness ? " There is no answer. 
None has been given ; none can be given. Happy are we who hear a voice. Divine 
klike in sweetness and authority, rising above the plaint of the hungry, or breaking the 
■ilence of the bafBed and the helpless, and uttering forth the welcome declaration of 
pity and of love, " I am the Bread of life " ! And happier still if, convinced of the 
sincerity and the power of this Divine and compassionate Benefactor, prompted by our 
human need, and guided by the Spirit of God, «« respond, in faith and gratitude and 
hope, " Lord, evermore give us this Bread " 1 

Vers. 11 — 13. — Signs. This was not an isolated case of the demands on the part of 
the Jewish leaders that Jesus should work some miracle which they might receive as a 
sign from heaven. And it was not only during our Saviour's ministry that they pre- 
ferred such a request. For Paul had occasion long afterwards to complain of the Jews 
that they "required a sign," and were dissatisfied with the doctrines and with the 
evidences of Christianity. 

I. Thb bequest op the Pharisees. These men made a point of seeing Jesus, and 
seem, on this as on other occasions, to have come as a deputation from his adversaries. 
1. What was it they asked? Not an ordinary miracle, for such Jesus had already 
repeatedly and publicly performed. It was a sign, not from himself, but from heaven. 
Any wonder he might work they would attribute to magic or to Beelzebub. But, such 
was their profession, if he would furnish them with some splendid celestial portent — if 
he would give bread from heaven or stay the sun in its course — then they would 
be convinced of his Messiahship. 2. Whi/ did they ask such a sign? They were 
tempting, testing him — putting him to the proof. Had he complied with their wi:jh, 
they would have seen in him the Messiah they wanted — one prepared probably to 
wield supernatural power for personal aggrandizement and for political dominioa. 
Should he refuse, they would be confirmed in their rejection of his claims. 

IL The rbfdsal of Cheist. Observe : 1. THie/eeUng with which he refused. " He 
sighed deeply in his spirit." Had they come asking for healing, relief, assistance, 
he would have joyfully complied ; but it grieved him to the heart that they should come 
thus. And he read in their conduct the sign of a widespread carnality, unspirituality, 
and unbelief. 2. He disapproved of the spirit in which the request had been made. 
He was not only pained by it, he censured and condemned it. They who came, came 
to carp and criticize, and confirm themselves in their unbelief. 3. He had already 
given evidence enough to justify the faith of such as were candid and open to con- 
viction. He had wrought miracles so many and of such a kind as might assure the 
thoughtful and spiritually susceptible that he was from God. 4. He knew that wJutt 
they asked for, if grantfd, would not convince them. The deficiency was not in him ; it 
was in themselves. The principle was applicable, " If they hear not Moses and the 
prophets," etc. 5. There was one great sign yet to he given, in God's time — a sign that 
should surpass all granted in the olden days ; a sign that should leave all unbeliever! 
without excuse — his resurrection from the dead. 

Vers. 14 — 21. — Misunderstanding. The evangelists have left untold much which 
we would fain know, and they have recorded some things which our unwisdom would 
have dispensed with. The incident here recorded seems trivial, and the conversation 
•rising upon it commonplace. Yet it was not without a purpose that two evangelist* 
were directed to preserve this passage in our Lord's ordinary life. 

L The waendio which the disciples misundeestood. Christ's ministry of 
teaching seems to have been one long protest against the current doctrines and 
practices of the religious leaders of the time. The Pharisees were very generally for- 
malists, and the Herodians secularists, and against both tendencies our Divine Lord's 
opposition was unceasing and uncompromising. Using figurative language, Jesui 
cautioned his disciples against the leaven, i.e. the influence, of such errors as were cVia- 
wcteristic of these religious schools. Although they were so much in his ■ociety aod 



842 THE GOSPEL ACCUKDING TO ST. MARK, [c"- vi i- i- 38 

BO attached to his ministry, they were not deemed by the Master beyond the need oi 
this wise and faithful admonition. 

II. The oonstbcction which they pot upon his words. The word "leaven" 
remiiided them of bread, and the thought of bread reminded them of their negligence in 
not having made proper provision for their journey. But their misunderstanding was 
scarcely due to their oversight; it was rather the consequence of their -own slownsss o/ 
mind to take in their Master's manner of speech. We do not trace impatience, but we 
do trace a certain dissatisfaction and reproach fulness, in the Lord's language : " Do ye 
not yet perceive, neither understand ? " How often has Christ occasion thus to exposta- 
late with bis too unspiritual and inappreciative disciples! We often take Christ's 
words too literally, without that discernment and sympathy which a wise and gracious 
Master expects from his scholars. 

III. The oonsidebations by which Christ reproved their misunderstandino. 
1. They should have known him better than so to misapprehend him. Where were 
their eyes, their ears, their heart? Had they been susceptible and active, surely a 
truer, a loftier judgment would have been formed of the Christ, the Son of God. In 
this case they would not have supposed that he was troubling himself or them with 
such a trifle as now excited their concern. 2. They should have better remembered 
the past, especially the occasions upon which the Lord had supplied the wants of multi- 
tudes in the exercise of his omnipotence. Such a recollection would have saved 
them from the misapprehension into which they had lalltn. 

AppiiicATioN. Christ's words are to be uudexstood in the light of his nature and his 
works. To understand what Christ says we must think of him aright, and we must 
study his teaching in the light of the wonderful deeds which he has performed for the 
relief and the salvation of mankind. It is want of sympathy and of remembrance 
which often leads to misunderstanding. He that will do the Divine will shall know of 
the doctrine. 

A'ers. 22 — 26. — Sight far the Wind. Every form of human privation, sufferir^, and 
Infirmity which came under the notice of Christ elicited his compassion and his healing 
mercy, and every such disorder was treated by him as a symptom of the moral malady 
which afflicts mankind. The diversity of his miracles of heaiiug may serve to represent 
his power and willingness to restore our sinful humanity, aiSicted with many and 
various ills, to spiritual soundness and health, in this miiacle we observe — 

I. A SYMBOL OF THE BFIBITUAL BLINDNESS OF HnuANiTY. The blind man of Beth- 
saida may not have been born blind; but his sightless state was well known, and 
excited the commiseration of his neighbours and acquaintances, who led him to the 
great Healer and Enlightener of men, that he might touch and cure him. He is an 
emblem of this humanity, darkened in understanding, incapable of discerning truth, 
blind to moral beauty, to heavenly glory. 

II. A SYMBOL OF SALVATION BY DiviNE CONTACT. Jesus treated this man in a way 
appropriate to his condition and infirmity. He appealed to the sense of touch, for 
there was no sense of sight to which to appeal. He led the blind mun by the hand, 
took him apart, spat on his eyes, laid his hands upon him. All this was to make the 
patient feel that the Divine Physician was there, was interested in him, was working 
for his cure. It was to reveal his own presence and to call forth the sufl'erer's faith. 
And there is no salvation for any by merely hearing or reading about Jesus Christ. 
The spiritually blind cannot experience his illuminaiing power except by coming to 
him in faith. If he enter the heart, reveal his truth and love and power, come intc 
immediate contact with the sprmgs of the spiritual nature and life, then the mind, 
before insensible to the light of Heaven, begins to appreciate the great realities of being 
— the nature, the character, the will, of a holy God and Father. 

HI. A SYMBOL OP THE PBOaBESSIVE CHARACTER OF SPIRITUAL ENLIGHTENMENT. Th« 

most noticeable feature of this miracle is the way in which the cure was wrought— 
gradually and progressively. Why Jesus did not effect the result at once does not 
appear. It may have been to teach us how difficult and slow is the process of human 
illumination, even by the gospel and the Spirit of God. Aa at tirst the man saw 
human figtires, which appeared like trees, but moved, so that even his half-recovered 
nsion judged them men ; so those to whom the liglit of the gospel first comes oftni 



OH. TOI. 1— 3&] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, MARK. M) 



discern but dimly those spiritual facta and relations which time and experience and 
Divine teaching will render more vivid and distinct. It is not to be expected that 
young Christians or recent converts shall understand all such truth as is comparatively 
clear t: the mature and instructed. God's ways herein are like his ways in other 
departments of his government ; order and progression are characteristics of his reign. 

rV, A SYMBOL OF THE POWEB OF CBBIST TO EFFECT COMPLETE TLLUMIlfATION. After 

the further application of the wonder-working hands of Jesus, it is recorded that tha 
blind man " was restored, and saw all things clearly." So in God's light we shall see 
light. He hath "shined into our hearts." We shall "see God." The vision shall 
brighter here; and it shall be more than bright — it shall be glorious — hereafter. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 
Vers. 1— 15.— (Cf. on ch. vi. 32— 41.)— M. 

Vers. 11 — 13. — Seeking for a sign. Christ knew at once what this meant. Ha 
" knew what was in man," and refused to commit himself to the pretended inquirers. 
We have a more difBoult course to pursue. 

L The character of the demand depends upon circumstances. It may be made 
in an honest, inquiring spirit, or in order to injure religion. In the former case too 
mnch consideration can hardly be given to it, as it is the indispensable preliminary to 
rational conviction, and the gospel offers evidence for its claims. ' The spirit in '«rbich 
the inquiry is made may be determined by: 1. The character of those who inquire. Bad 
men may be genuine inquirers, but it is well to know their antecedents. Christ could 
rsad the underlying design of the Jews. It may reasonably be expected that inquirers 
should give some proof of their sincerity, especially if already furnished with many 
evidences. 2. The kind of sign asked for. Here it was " a sign from heaven," i.e. 
differing from the miracles and previous manifestations of Christ. This implied that 
they were insu£Scient, and indirectly pronounced judgment upon the previous words 
and works of Christ. A question may sometimes reveal a more thorough scepticism 
than a dogmatic denial. Whilst apparent liberty is given as to what particular sign 
mght be produced, there is really a tone of dictation and unseemly assumption. 

II. Such a demakd exposes the befbesentattves of Chbistianitt to btbong 
tghftation. They are invited to criticize God's methods of revelation, and to despise 
the " means of grace." A position full of unbelief and presumption may insensibly be 
asijumed, such as that of Moses at the rock : " Must we fetch you water out of this 
rock ? " (Numb. xx. 10). They may be induced to attempt to " force the hand " of 
God. The crime of such a proceeding could only be equalled by its folly. As if those 
who are insensible to the cross of Christ could be converted by a thunderbolt or a 
merely supernatural spectacle ! It is for Christ's servants in times of popular excite- 
ment to preach the old truths, and to appeal to every man's conscience in the sight of 
God. The improbability of sensationalism producing belief is a growing one. " If they 
hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, if one rise from the 
dead " (Luke xvi. 31). So we may now add, " If they believe not One who has risen 
from the dead, neither will they believe, though he were to be manifested to them in 
heaven itself." 

III. Even were it desibed it would be refused. " This generation " represents 
til who ask in a similar spirit. 1. Because the evidence for Christianity is spiritual, 
not eamal ; moral, and not material. 2. Because the patent, outstanding facts of the 
gospel a/re sufficient : (1) For the conversion of sinners ; and (2) for the confirmation 
and edifying of saints. 3. Berause if is part of the punishment appointed to such 
inquirers that they shall ask and not receive, and seek and not find. 4. Because it may 
become a means of turning attention hack to the evidence that has heen despised w 
ignored. It is high time our philosophical inquirers began to inquire why theii 
researches have produced no fruits in evidence or conviction as yet. Why is it that 
whilst the evidence for the gospel is at least equal to that for any other matters of 
history, it is yet disbelieved when they are accepted ? Is not the reason a moral rathei 
thin an intellectual one ? — M. 



•44 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. viii. 1— 3a 

Vers. 14 — ^21. — The leaven of the Pharisees and of Serod. The parabolic habit of 
mind of Christ was essential to the setting forth of Divine truth to the comprehension 
of men ; but as yet the persons who might have been expected to understand his 
teaching most thoroughly, were continually mistaking it. Whilst their Master dis- 
coursed of heavenly things, the thoughts of the disciples were upon the earth. There 
Is nothing so reveals the moral and spiritual distance of persons from one another as 
the difference in their habits of mind. 

I. How TOO GREAT A EEGAED FOB OUTWABD THINGS BETBAT8 ITSELF. 1. In OVer- 

anxiety. The disciples had by inadvertency omitted to take in a supply of bread ere 
leaving the shore, and their minds were full of trouble. They began to forecast the 
inconvenience to which it might expose them. Over-carefulness is a common feature of 
worldly character. It arises from too great self-dependence and too little faith in God. 
A certain, moderate attention to earthly wants is a duty, and will be bestowed by 
every well-regulated mind ; but there are limits to be observed. " Be not anxious for 
your life," etc. (Matt. vi. 25). It is a great aim of the spiritual life to be free from this 
bondage to minute worries and cares. 2. In/ailwre to attend to or understand Divine 
things. The disciples were so taken up with this little matter that they utterly failed 
to perceive Christ's meaning, when he warned them against the Pharisees and Herodians. 
That they should be so was also a proof that they had forgotten the teaching of the 
two miracles of the loaves and fishes. For this Christ reproved them. His cross- 
questioning elicited the fact that the details of these miracles were still reQollected ; 
but the spiritual lessons had been completely lost. So to speak, these spiritual tours de 
force had been thrown away upon them. How hard a race has the Divine life with 
earthly concern and anxiety in the soull There is a littleness in such habits of 
thought that effectually prevents the great ideas of the Divine kingdom from entering 
the mind. Herein is to be found the explanation of the failure of many services and 
sermons, which in themselves may have been faithful and devout enough : the hearers 
are occupied with worldly cares. "The cares of the world, and the deceitfulness of 
riches, and the lusts of other things entering in, choke the Word, and it becometh 
unfruitful" (ch.iv. 19). 

II. The dangeb to which it exposes. 1. Christ, referring to the doctrine of the 
Pharisees and Herodians, warned against thai conception of the Messiah, as one who 
was to he an ea/rthly king, establishing a temporal dominion, which the leaders of 
Judaism held. The state of mind of the disciples was eminently favourable to such a 
view. In them it was only a tendency, in the Pharisees a fixed point of view; and thus 
the latter wholly missed the spiritual element in the Saviour's teaching. They were 
filled with visions of national restoration and individual aggrandizement ; and failing 
to receive encouragement from Christ in these, " they were offended in him," and began 
to seek his destruction. The same danger still haunts the Church of Christ, the 
absolutely spiritual nature of the Divine kingdom having been one of the most slowly 
developed of Christian doctrines. 2. The power and the insidiousness of this point of 
view are suggested by the figure of " leaven." Leaven works slowly, but a very little 
affects a large amount. "A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump." To minds already 
prepared by habit and tendency in that direction, it would be a comparatively easy 
thing to adopt the worldly interpretation of prophecy given forth by the Pharisees. 
Indeed, if they were only let alone, the " leaven " was already within them, and would 
assuredly develop into the same fundamental heresy. To think thus of Christ and his 
kingdom is " to come short of it," to our own hurt and ruin ; " for the kingdom of 
God it not eating and drinking, but righteousness and peace and ioy in the Holv 
Gho8t"(Rom. xiv. 17).— M. ' 

Ver. 21. — " Do ye not understand f " The last of a series of surprised, sorrowful, and 
indignant questions on the part of Christ. 

L Spieitual understanding was a eesdlt to be looked for from Chbistian 
BXPBEIENOB. 1. From the teaching of Scripture. It unfolds the will of God and 
reveals his mind and character. It is the record of the spiritual history of man in the 
past. The lives of the Old Testament saints and the history of God's chosen people 
were intended to acquaint us with the principles of the Divine kingdom, and the 
purpose of God's dealings with men. " Now these things happened unto them by way 



VH. vm. 1—38,] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MABR Mi 



»f example ; and they were written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the 
•ges are come " (1 Cor. x. 11). " These are written, that ya may beheve that Jesus is 
the Christ, the Son of God " (John xx. 31). 2. From ^personal experience. In the 
case of the disciples, the teaching, example, and miracles of Christ were intended to 
repeal the merciful and loving purpose of God to redeem the world. This was to be 
(1) the basis of a personal faith ; (2) a principle for interpreting the circumstances of 
life ; (3) an influence for delivering and elevating the human spirit. The consistent 
lesson of Christ's works— especially of his crowning miracle of the loaves — was that 
men were to seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all needful 
things of the earthly life would be added. Instead of being lost in anxious delibera- 
tions and " reasonings " about ways and means, the true (Ssciple was to look stead- 
festly to the great end. 

II. The lack of it m his disciples disappointed Christ. He was astonished and 
pained at their hardness of heart. The works specially intended to produce faith and 
understanding had hitherto failed of their legitimate result. We seem to detect in his 
tone : 1. Wounded feeling. He had yearned for spiritual companionship and co-opera- 
tion. It was ever his desire to draw his disciples into a closer fellowship ; but they 
were discovered to be unfit and unworthy of the privilege. It is as if, too, he was 
indignant that the honour and love of his Father should be suspected. 2, Apprehen- 
sion. They were in a dangerous spiritual condition, ready to be the prey of every 
passing temptation. It was as if the foreboding, "When the Son of man cometh, shall 
he find faith on the earth ?" (Luke xviii. 8), had already flitted across his spirit. 

III. It IS Air ACQUiBBMENT TO BE DiLiQENTLT CULTIVATED. 1. Sow f By remem- 
brance. The dealings of God with others are plainly set forth in Scripture ; but every 
Christian has a special history of his own in which God has revealed himselh None of 
the incidents of that personal history should be forgotten. Let him remember all the 
way by which the Father has led him, the gracious interpositions and revelations that 
have marked it, etc. By meditation. These circumstances are to be pondered and 
studied, that their inward meaning may be discovered. Above all, we ought to con- 
lider "what manner of love the Father hath bestowed on us" ( I John iii. 1). 2. Why? 
Because (1) it is essential to the usefulness and happiness of the Christian ; (2) it 
may be increased. In some it can hardly be said to exist at all. Yet if there be faith 
•8 a grain of mustard seed it will grow, where diligence and prayerfulness are exercised. 
Of even those very men Christ at last declared, " No longer do I call you servants ; 
for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth : but I have called you friends ; for 
all things that I heard from my Father I have made known unto you " (John xv. 15). 
"He that doeth the will shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God." — M. 

Vers. 22 — 26. — Restoring the blind to sight. Illustration of Christ's— 
L Wisdom. He rebuked a vulgar curiosity, and perhaps bafiled a Pharisaic intrigue. 
His privacy, so needful for bodily rest and spiritual preparation for the great conflict he 
felt to be impending, was thus preserved ; and the course of teaching and working upon 
which he had entered was not seriously disturbed. The subject of the miracle was 
himself preserved from undue excitement with its attendant dangers. And shall we 
not suppose that a deeper and more spiritual understanding may have arisen between 
the Saviour and the recipient of his mercy during those solemn and deeply moving expe- 
riences which preceded his recovery ? His deep, unbroken attention was secured as he 
felt the Saviour's touch and listened to his voice. By leading him away he tested and 
exercised his faith. By emphasizing the stages of recovery he made it clear to the man 
himself that it was no accidental occurrence, but a deliberate cure. And in the means 
used — so evidently inadequate to produce such a result — he showed how supernatural 
the power that was being exercised. The questions asked encouraged the man to put 
forth his own power as he received it, and thus to co-operate in the curative process. 
The final injunction to silence and home-going present the incident as a deep personal 
experience in the mind of the man, and as an evangelic message to those who were 
most likely to receive it in simplicity and gratitude. 

II. MEBOr. Although the shadow of death was falling upon the soul of Jesus, he uxu 
fiiU of the instinct and will to save. There is scarcely any appreciable pause in hii 
work: and retirement is nut inactivity, but quieter, deeper, and more continuous 



849 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. Lch. vin. 1— 38t 

because more naturally prompted, action. Each case of distress as it arises receives hi* 
deliberate and careful attention. His ^agnosis of the blind man's state must have 
been perfect. It was impaired original power that had to be restored, and the treat- 
ment corresponded to this fact. The interest of the Saviour in the case is as great as 
that of the saved. The sinister ends of those who brought the blind man, or watched 
to see what would be done, did not prevent him showing the mercy required. When 
the bodily cure had been completed, the spiritual welfare of the recovered one was care- 
fully provided for. The aim is complete salvation in every sense of the word. What 
Christ does he will do perfectly. 

III. JuDQMENT. Unworthy men were debarred from seeing the wonders of his 
saving power. They might have perverted the privilege to an evil end, and so injured 
themselves «nd the cause of Christ ; so they were shut out. It is a fearful sentence 
against a place or a person when the spectacle of the Lord's saving grace is denied, and 
the things that make for peace are hidden from view. — M. 

Vers. 22 — 26. — TJie Saviow's method in dealing with, iridividtml louls. L He 
ISOLATES FBOM DiSTUEBiNo INTLUBNCES. The gossips and Scheming politicians of the 
town of Bethsaida. Notoriety. The sense of importance. By his dealings with the 
sinner in conviction and repentance, he spiritually removes him to his own retirement. 
He is first brought to be with Christ, that by-and-by he may be in him. 

II. He encoubaoes a»d confirms faith. By leading the blind man away, although 
as yet a stranger to him. By personal contact and operation, and by kindly words, the 
inner free-will and power of the patient were evoked. The means and the gradual 
working out of the cure were a demonstration of the Power by whom the miracle was 
wrought. The gradual realization of spiritual power in those being saved is a crucial 
evidence of Divine grace, and encourages belief in the ultimate accomplishment of • 
complete salvation. 

III. He exacts implicit obedtekcb. This was the highest exercise of a spiritual 
kind he had demanded. It was hut a phase of the faith already called forth — " the 
obedience of faith." Having won the trust and confidence of his people, he proves and 
perfects that by directing the fulfilment of duties the reason for which may not be 
apparent. It is sufScient that he has commanded. The first use of the restored vision 
ia to avoid those upon whom he had formerly depended — a hard task! The life Christ's 
people are bidden to lead may not commend itself to their judgment or desire, but it is 
best for their spiritual interests ; and if Christ is to be a complete Saviour, he must be 
au absolute and unquestioned Lord. — M. 

Vers. 22 — 26. — Curing spiritual blindness. I. Beliverahoe from blind guides. 

II. Transfer of confidence to the true Guide. 

III. Revelation of the invisible power of God. 

IV. ExBRCisraa the soul's newly acquired powers of smeitual vision. 

V. Giving spiritual dibection for the futukb. — M. 

Vers. 27 — 30. — Peter's good confession. The scene of this is worth notice. It lay 
to the northward of Bethsaida, amongst the villa£;es in the neiglibourhood of Cassarea 
Philippi. This town, on the site of the ancient Paneas (now Banias), was built by the 
tetrarch Philip in honour of Tiberius Csesar, and is to be distinguished from the Cssarea 
of the southern Mediterranean seaboard of Palestine. The country was magnificent 
(Tristram, 'Land of Isriiel,' p. 586) ; wild, woodeH, and mountainous, and dominated by 
the royal castle of Subeibeh. Here, too, was the chief fountain-head of the Jordan 
(ibid., p. 585). It was a region where the utmost seclusion could be enjoyed, pend- 
ing the great things which were to take place in the near future. Immediately 
behind the disciples were the sreat works which had occasioned such universal wonder 
and speculation concerning their Master ; and they were in a position of comparative 
leisure and quietude duly to recall and meditate upon them. No better opportunity 
had hitherto presented itself for the crowning question of Jesus, " Whom say ye that 
lam,*" 

L The identification was distinguished prom several already cuekent. So 
marvellous was the career of Jesus, that all ideas of explaining on ordinary groundl 



UH. vui. 1— 38.J THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAKK, 841 

had to be abandoned. In the popular mind the only personages corresponding to 
Jesus, save John the Baptist, were those of ancient Jewish history, the heroic ages oi 
the theocracy. All were agreed that in him there was a revival or reappearance of the 
religious spirit of the best days of Israel. 1. The Imowledge of these opiniont rendered 
the judgment of the disciples highly conscious and deliberate, and therefore of great 
critical importance. Each of them, as it came to their ears, would doubtlessly be 
considered and weighed. The popular guesses would be compared with the full and 
complete experience of Jesus and Ms work, which they alone possessed, and one by 
one rejected. But they would serve to awaken their critical attention and their 
spiritual discernment — constitute, in fact, a sort of ascending scale according to which to 
adjust their own thoughts. 2. The certainty to which they had arrived, notwithstanding 
the variety of opinions of which they were aware, proves how overwhelming the evidence 
must have been upon which they based their conclusion. There is no hesitation in 
Peter's answer. And as spokesman of the twelve he utters their unanimous conviction. 
How much previous examination and interchange of views does that imply ? 

II. How WAS THIS CONOLDSION ARRIVED AT? 1. Not from unsdentiflc guessing. 
From their peculiar circumstances this was impossible. 2. Not from information 
furnished hy Jesus himself. There is no trace of hinting or suggesting on the part of 
the Master. His withdrawal from that course of policy which might have enabled him 
to take advantage of popular influence was against the idea of his being the Messiah of 
the people's dreams. It was in spite of his mysterious behaviour, therefore, and incom- 
plete ateence of any information furnished by himself, that they formed their opinion. 
3. It was by a twofold process, viz.: (1) Induction from their experience of his 
character and works. For this they were peculiarly fitted ; and the searching training 
of the Master led them gradually but surely to make it. And they were well versed 
in Scripture. (2) Inspiration of Ood. Elsewhere (Matt. xvi. 17) we read the decla- 
ration, "Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in 
heaven. ' These two sources of information were not mutually exclusive, but mutually 
supijlementary and confirmatory, as in every Christian mind to-day. Indeed, in a 
larger view of evidence the spiritual intuition — the most truly moral evidence of the 
conscience — ^is but an element of the general moral evidence upon which the induc- 
tion is based. It is the conscience which is the ultimate jud^e of all spiritual questions 
the ordinary understanding cannot completely or satisfactorily settle. 

IIL The siqnifioanob of its attainment. 1. It was but a recognition of certain 
correspondences between Jesus and the Messiah spoken of in Scripture. There was 
certainty and intelligent perception, so far as their knowledge went. But the full con- 
ception of his personality and work was reserved for the future. They knew that it 
was he of whom the prophets spoke, but about himself in his deeper nature and the 
spirituality, etc., of his work — in short, of what he was — they were not fully aware. 2. 
What they did arrive at altered their entire relation to him. A new, vague authority 
attached henceforth to him, and the future was full of a keen expectancy and interest. 
It gave a new meaning to every word and action proceeding from him, and prepared 
them for the special training and teaching which they had to receive as his apostles ; 
just as the principle attained by induction of many facts, when its light is turned 
back upon them interprets them, and we see them as we could not before. — M. 

Vers. 29, 32, 33. — Peter's self-contradiction. L Wherein it consisted. 1. In 
identifying Jesus with the Messiah and yet deprecating his sufferings. That Messiah 
should suffer was abundantly declared by the prophets. His death was the greatest 
testimony he could give to the righteousness of God. A comfortable, earthly, pros- 
perous king could nevei- occupy the spiritual position of the Christ; moral influence, 
the essential feature of the latter's reign, would be entirely wanting. To the thorough 
student of prophecy and contemporary life, Messiahship " connoted " suffering, not as 
an accidental but necessary qualification. 2. In identifying Jesus with the Messiah 
znd yet assuming such an attitude and tone towards him. The utmost reverence and 
lubinission were not only due to his Lord, but would have been voluntarily rendered 
had he understood what was meant by his own declaration. In such a case he would 
lever have pre? umed to dictate or chide. 

IL To WHAT IT WAS DOB. 1. Insufficient realizatitm of what he knew. He had 



348 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MABK. [ch. vui. 1— 3a 

divined the true dignity of his Master, hut what it involved was not yet felt. The 
doctrine is often correct when the sense of ohligation it ought to pijoduce is not 
awakened. A great spiritual truth may he perceived and adopted long ere its relations 
to practical life are recognized ; just as a principle in mechanics or a law of nature. 
Deeper spiritual experience and more sympathetic agreement with Christ in his desire 
to abolish sin were needed ere this con id take place. 2. Impulse and thoughtlessness. 
This was his temperament. He was a man of impulse and aifeotion, rather than of 
clim, spiritual intuition, or careful, painstaking reflection. It was due to his forward 
and impulsive temperament that he generally spoke for the others, and was so confi- 
dent respecting himself in the future. Christianity owes much to such spirits, but they 
have to he kept in check by more sober thinkers, and disciplined by the lessons of 
providence. 3. Worldly conceptions of the kingdom of Ood. Had he entertained 
purer and more spiritual hopes respecting his Master's work, the mischief of his impul- 
siveness might have been minimized, although it would still have been a source of 
danger. But with such habitual materialism of aim and desire (common to him with 
the others) he was constantly committing mistakes, and ready to compromise the 
cause of Christ. " This world has many Peters, who wish to be wiser than Christ, and 
to prescribe to him what it is needful to do " (Hofmeister). We ought not to he too 
severe with Peter whilst we ourselves lean so much for the guidance of the Church to 
merely human wisdom, and set our own affections for particular persons, or for our- 
selves, above the well-being of the race ; and estimate that well-being not from a 
spiritual but from a material standpoint. — M. 

Vers. 31 — 33. — The Christ foretelling his own career. I. How unique and marvel- 
1.0D8 THE PREDICTION ! It is a clear, consistent, even symmetrical scheme ; as exqui- 
sitely balanced and progressively developed as any tragedy of iEschylus or Euripides. 
A person who could ideally mark out -such a future for himself could not have been 
mere ma-; The gospel challenges investigation because of the originality and Divine 
moraJ elevation of its conception. And by such statements as this it proves huw 
closely the Old and New Testaments are interwoven, and sympathetically and ideally 
correspondent. 

II. It demonsteatbd that his suffekinq and death must have been in the 
HiOHEST SENSE VOLUNTAEY. He was Still at a point where the future was in great 
degree within his own power. That he clearly knew what lay before him in the event 
of his continuing steadfast proved that his will was absolutely, divinely free. There 
were several alternatives within easy reach : these, comprehensively, he put from him 
in spurning Peter's interference. It is no fate that is blindly shaping out the destiny 
of a powerless victim ; the necessity is a moral and spiritual one, consequent upon 
motives and aim deliberately preferred. 

III. Only the highest moral end could justify such conduct. To suppose that 
«arthly aims or selfish objects could have deteimined such a career is a palpable 
absurdity. Christ is, therefore, through all Ume, the type of noble self-sacrifice. But 
it is only spiritual motives and principles that can so inspire. And conscience justifies 
the sacrifice upon such grounds alone. Whilst we may be incapable of it ourselves, we 
feel, nevertheless, that it is not madness, but the fulfilment of the great end of our 
being, and its highest blessedness. If it be but fairly and fully regarded, it furnishes 
its own justification, and constitutes a judgment bar before which all so-called religious 
acts and schemes must stand or fall. 

IV. By making this announcement Chkist : 1. Tested the loyalty of his disciples. 
2. Vindicated and revealed his ovm pure, unalterable spiritual resolution. 3, Fur- 
nished them with a support for faith and enthusiastic sympathy. — M. 

Vers, 32, 33. — Covert temptation. This scene has, of course, certain features con- 
nected with it which cannot be imitated by ordinary persons, or by mere men. Christ 
exercised a Divine insight and authority. But there are certain principles illustrated. 
We see — 

L How it presents itself. 1. Under the guise of friendship. The love may b« 
real in the individuals who are the instruments of temptation, hut their knowledge is 
not sufficient, or their moral character rot so high as it should be. Many of the iqo»i 



am. vm. 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. 349 

terrible moral trials of life owe their power to this circumstance. 2. With great 
assumption of reasonablenesi. In Peter there was a domineering, " superior " tone. Ha 
spoke as one who knew the world, and the impracticableness of his Master's ideas. But 
even where this is absent there may be a latent contempt for religious aims, and an 
unconscious appeal to the utilitarian standards of conduct. With many persons tha 
test of reasonableness in moral action is the immediate advantage of those immediately 
concerned, or the most directly pleasant course of procedure, or the attainment of 
some recognized worldly object. 

II. How IT IS TO BE DETECTED. 1. By the aid of the Divine Spirit. There are 
necessarily many occasions for moral decision in which it would be impossible to assign 
reasons for the steps taken, because tliese are not clearly discerned ; yet there may be 
moral certainty. It is the Spirit of God that is to guide us in such cases. 2. By com- 
pa/ring spiritual things with spiritual, e.g. : (1) In moral questions we should distrust 
proposals which too readily fall in with our own desire for ease, or a pleasant life, or 
worldly advantage. It is not usual for great duties so to approve themselves. (2) 
Suggestions are to be rejected which stand in the way of personal consecration, or 
interfere with moral duties and Divine impulses. 

III. How IT IS TO BE OVERCOME. 1. By distinguishing between the agent or insfru- 
' ment and the inspirer. It was a paiuful thing for Christ to do, but he did not shrink 

from denouncing the spirit to which the suggestion was due, and the evil one who had 
used Peter as his tool. This detection, whether it be declared or not, is a great part of 
the victory. 2. With promptitude and decision. Christ turned his back upon tha 
tempter. There must be no dallying or temporizing. Upon every moment that 
follows discovery of evil an eternity hangs. 3. By casting one's self upon the Spirit of 
Qod. In pra\ er : " Deliver us from the evil one." In abiding union and voluntary 
submission : " Not my will, but thine, be done." " Minding " the things of God, and 
having the whole attention and affection absorbed by them. — M. 

Ver. 34 — oh, ix. 1. — Tht Master's summons to his disciples. Like a commander 
addressing his soldiers. Pull of clear vision and resolve. 

I. The aim. (Ver. 38, ch. ix. 1.) It is the overcoming of spiritual error and Satanic 
influence, and the establishment of the kingdom of God. 

II. The CONDITIONS or its attainment. (Ver. 34.) These are open to all. The 
multitude is addressed equally with the disciples. There appears to iiave been a dispo- 
sition in many to join themselves to his fortunes. He therefore lays down the terms of 
his service, so that none may enter it without knowledge of its nature. 1. Self-denial. 
2. Cross-bearing. Not quite identical with the preceding, although involving it. "A 
Christian," says Luther, "is a Crucian" (Morison). " ffis cross," each having some 
personal and peculiar grief, sorrow, death, through which he has to pass. This cross 
he is to take up voluntarily, and to carry, long ere it shall have to bear him. 3. Obe- 
dience and imitation. There can be no self-assertion or private end to be sought by 
individual believers. " The footsteps of Jesus." It is a cross even as the Master has to 
be crucified. The same spirit and plan of moral life must be shown. He is our law 
and our example. 

II. Incentives. (Ver. 35 — oh. ix. 1.) 1. Christ s example and inspiration. He says 
»ot "Go," but "Come." He goes before, and shows the way. 2. The endeavour to save 
vAe lower " self" will expose to certain destruction the higher " self; " and the sacrifice 
of the lower " self" and its earthly conditions of satisfaction mil be the salvation of 
the higher " self." " Life," or " soul," is used here ambiguously. A moral truism ; a 
paradox to the worldly mind. " It is in self-denial that we first gain our true selvea, 
recovering our personality again" (Lange). 3. The value of this higher life cannot be 
computed. All objective property is useless without that which is the subjective con- 
dition of' its possession. Eighteousness is that which makes individuality and the 
spiritual nature precious, and imparts the highest value to existence. Every man has 
to weigh the " world " against his " soul," 4. Becognitum of Christ on earth is tht 
condition of his recognition of us hereafter. It is not merely that we are " not to be 
ashamed ; " we are to " glory " in him. The recognitions, the « well done " of Heaven, 
the highest reward. Even here the great triumphs of truth confer honour upon those 
*ho have striven for them. 5. The triumphs of the kingdom of Ood are not long 



«50 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. via. 1— 3» 

deferrti. Some of Christ's hearers lived to see the overthrow of Jerusalem and th« 
universal diffusion of the gospel. The spiritual vision is purified to discern the pro- 
gress of truth in the world. Those victories which Christian morals and spirituality 
have already woa within the experience of living Christians are an ample and abun- 
dant reward. — M. 

Ver. 38. — Ashamed of Jesua and his words. This warning is evidently called forth 
by the unholy presumption of Peter, and the wavering of the disciples divined by the 
penetrating spirit of Christ. He rebukes the spirit of false shame as a heinous offence 
against himself and his cause. 

I. Jesus and his words an cooasion of false shame. The penalty attaching to 
Unreal or unjustifiable feelings is that, sooner or later, they commit their subject to some 
egregious folly or inexcusable sin. This is a result of natural law. 1. WTiy should 
men be ashamed of Jesus t That they can ever be justified in such shame is, of course, 
impossible. But there are reasons that, human natvu-e being what it is, explain the 
phenomenon. (1) Their opposition to the spirit and conduct of the world. Fashion, 
custom, perverted and corrupted religion, the general principles upon which worldly 
men conduct their affairs, are alike condemned by the gospel. The wisdom, authority, 
and influence of the world are therefore arrayed against its teachings. The methods of 
the Divine life are in contradiction to those of the ordinary life of men. It involves 
humiliation and self-sacrifice. Christ, as the embodiment and central principle of this, 
is therefore "rejected and despised." (2) The objects and aims of Christ's teaching 
seemed so remote, and so unsupported by the external evidences to which men are 
wont to appeal. What sign was there of a coming " kingdom," other than those with 
which they were already familiar ? Never had wickedness appeared so secure and 
influential, or religion at such a discount. The same causes are at work in all ages ; 
and to-day there are many evidences of the same spirit. 2. Eow does this shame 
manifest itself t In shrinking from open discipleship. Bringing an eclectic spirit to 
the teachings of the gospol. Making compromises with fashion, selfish principles, or 
demoralizing amusements and pursuits, etc. 3. What renders siich conduct pecvliarh) 
heinout t The weakness of the cause of Christ, and the power and reputation of its 
.inemies. Sin had never so lifted itself up against God. It was " a wicked and adul- 
terous generation," and was to crown its apostasy by crucifying the Son of man. At 
such a critical time every individual had an influence that might affect the issue cf the 
conflict, and gratitude and honour urged him to exercise it. Unbelief was at the root 
of the shame which many felt. 

II. Jesus and his words judoino false shame. 1. By the fulfilments of prediction. 
The destruction of Jerusalem, the sign of the inauguration of the kingdom of God, 
was at band. Some of those a(1dres.sed were to live to see it. And as in major historic 
events, so in minor ones. Every success attending Christian effort, every verification 
of Christian doctrine in experience, is a judgment of the unbelief which is ashamed of 
the gospel. 2. By exclusion from the'blessedness and glory of Ohrisfs advent. Just 
when such men have begun to see how unfounded their suspicions and doubts, and 
how real are the promises of Christ, they are unable to partake of them. They have 
no fellowships with the redeemed and glorified, are out of place and covered with con- 
fusion because of their guilt and folly. A personal element adds poignancy to their 
shame ; they are openly repudiated by him whom all adore and glorify. A simple bu» 
terrible and inevitable retaliation, due not to vengeance, but to spiritual laws. Thr 
exposure will be overwhelming and absolute. — M. 

Ver. 8. — Chrisfs hemficence and economy. [. Christ's benefioenoe, 1. It embracea 
all human wants. He came to save from sin, but he also delivered men from its 
manifold effects. The dead were raised, the sick were cured, the hungry were fed. 
Herein signs were shown of the coming of that heavenly state in which the redeemed 
hunger no more, and wherein there shall be no more pain. The Church should seel 
to deal with human necessities as broadly as her Iiord did — overlooking neithei 
the temporal nor the spiritual. 2. It wa» not exercised as we should have expected. 
Jonu the Baptist, "the iiiend of the Bridegroom," was not delivered from death, 
yet this crowd of men and women, who were so undeserving, wore relieved from 



m. TOL 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST MARK. £51 

the pangs of hunger. He is kind to the unthankful and to the unworthy. 3. /( 
wots free from ostentation and from pride. A plainer, cheaper meal could scarcely 
have been given than this, of barley loaves and fish. The absence of luxury on 
this and on other occasions during our Lord's ministry is a rebuke to our self- 
indulgence. " Peed me with food convenient for me." As ostentation was avoided, 
CO also was pride. Our Lord did not look down with contempt upon the pitifully small 
provision offered by the disciples — " seven loaves " and "a few small fishes." He did 
not put these aside and create afresh, as he might have done ; but although he needed 
not to take the loaves, he did take them. Use to the utmost what God has already 
given you. Do the best you can with what you have. As you use any gift, it will 
increase as the loaves did which the disciples carried to the multitude. 4. It was 
accompanied by devout acknowledgment of Ood. Jesus " gave thanks " over this 
labourer's dinner. God's presence will make the eating of common loaves a sacrament 
to us. Let us thankfully receive his gifts, and in his name distribute them, that our 
beneficence may be a humble copy of our Lord's. 

II. Christ's economy. On this occasion, as on that near Bethsaida, the evangelists 
tell us that the apostles gathered up the remnants of the least; and, judging from 
John vi. 12, we may be sure that on both occasions they were obeying their Lord's 
command. In God's gifts to man there is no waste, except where our ignorance and 
carelessness misuse them. The leaves of a tree are not mere ornaments, as was once 
imagined, but are means of nourishment ; and when they fall and are driven by the 
wind into secret resting-places, they still enrich the soil. Not a drop of rain is wasted, 
fall where it may. Every year we are learning more and more that what was 
squandered as refuse from factories and sewers was meant by God for use. Science is 
following in the footsteps of these disciples of Christ. 1. Economy is needed in regard 
to the use of our daily food. This wealthy nation is peculiarly wasteful. Servants 
use extravagantly anything of which there seems plenty. Artisans are prodigal in 
expenditure when wages are good. The middle classes and the upper classes are 
increasingly luxurious. All this was rebuked when Jesus taught his disciples that, 
although he could multiply food so easily, they were humbly and patiently to take up 
the fragments. 2. Economy is called for in, the use of all Ood's gifts. Fhysieal 
strength we should husband, and not squander. In seeking wealth or honour, many 
ft man lives to repent his disobedience to this law. The whole life is God's. We have 
no right to force into a few years what he meant to occupy its whole length, but are 
called upon to work thoughtfully and lawfully. There is a great waste of mental 
strength also going on amongst us. Some books and papers occupy the mind only to 
debase it. In education we ought to seek for ourselves and others well-trained and 
well-developed powers, so that nothing may be wanting to our complete manhood when 
we lay ourselves as living sacrifices on God's altar. Spiritual sensibility, also, is wasted 
when it evaporates in temporary excitement. The engines which make most noise are 
those which are doing nothing. When steam is up it must be used. So when feeling 
is aroused it must be turned into activity. 3. Economy is the more requisite when gifts 
are diminishing. At the end of an abundant feast little was left, yet even about it 
the Lord Jesus was concerned. Gather up what is left of former religious teachina^ 
which is too often lost ; of good resolutions, which have been broken again and again , 
of old beliefs, which have been shattered, and must be rearranged; of good reputation, 
although so little is left ; of opportunities for Christian service, which may appear 
slight and casual, but fairly used will multiply and grow. — ^A. R. 

Vers. 22—25. — Tht blind man of Bethsaida. The variety of method adopted by 
our Lord in bis acts of healing finds a striking illustration in the contrast presented 
between the cure of this blind man and that of Bartimseus. The sight of the latter 
was instantaneously and perfectly restored, but it was otherwise with the former. If, 
as we believe, Christ's miracles were symbols of spiritual experiences, we must expect 
variety in these also ; and we see them in the contrast existing between the sudden 
transformation of a profligate, and the religious life of one who from a child has known 
the Scriptures, and loved the things that are excellent. For <he further eluddation 
of such truth, consider — 

I, Thb botmbct of this miraculous cube. 1. He wa» a hlini' man. Although 'ighl 



862 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. vni. 1— 3a 

blazed around him, to him it was as darkness, and objects which appeared to others 
real and near were unperceived by him. Hence we often, and properly, speak ol 
" moral blindness " or " spiritual blindness," by which we mean, that he who suffers 
that privation is incapable of discerning the moral or spiritual truths which an obvious 
to others. And the faculty which he lacks is something distinct from, although not 
independent of, mental perception. In other words, a man must have brains to undei 
stand spiritual truth; but he needs something more — a faculty of soul, to which 
St. Paul alludes when he says, " Spiritual things are spiritually discerned ; " " The god 
of this world hsth blinded the eyes of them that believe not." 2. He was brought by 
Ms friends to the Lord. Unlike him, they could see. They knew better than he did 
what he lost by his blindness. They could find their way to the place where Jesus 
was, and see his face. Another blind man could not have led him thither. It becomes 
parents, teachers, and friends, who are rejoicing in God's light, to bring others by 
pleading and by prayer to Jesus' feet. 3. Se was willing to confide in the unseen 
Saviour. When Jesus took him by the hand, he did not withdraw it. In this 
wonderful Stranger, of whom he had heard so much, he had implicit confidence. His 
touch meant a blessing. How often, by our wilfulness and unbelief, we lose what by 
trustful waiting we might receive ! 

IL The method op this mibaoulous cure. 1. Jesus led him apart. He wished 
to have him alone. Separation, secrecy, solitude, often precede the reception of blessing 
from Christ. He takes us away from the multitude by illness, in worship, etc. 
2. Jesus gave him glimmerings of light (see ver. 24). He saw slightly and indis- 
tinctly. His companions, who had been left at a little distance, appeared to him to be 
moving, but seemed vague, large, formless, like trees waving in the wind. Perhaps this 
cure was gradually wrought because the man's faith was weak, and the slight change 
already experienced would strengthen his expectation, and make him ready for a fuller 
blessing. It is at least a beautiful type of the jjradual illumination of the soul with 
light. Lydia was an example of this. 3. Jesus by repeated touch gave him perfect 
sight (ver. 25). He leaves nothing incomplete. He is " the Author and the Finisher 
of feith." The imperfect vision of earth will be followed by the perfect tision ol 
heaven. — A. B. 

Vers. 34 — 38. — The worldling and the Christian : a contrast. Our Lord had just 
foretold his own sufferings, and now he goes on to speak of his requirement — that his 
disciples should be willing to follow him in the way of the cross. Soon they would be 
involved in persecution and trials, which they would be unprepared to meet unlesi 
they had wholly surrendered themselves to him. He never hid from his disciples what 
it would cost them to follow him. Again and again, when there were signs of defection 
on the part of the people, he gave the twelve an opportunity of leaving him if they 
wished to do so (John vi. 67). Only whole-hearted service is acceptable to our Lord. 
It seems strange that his definite announcements of his sufferings, death, and resurrec- 
tion should have been so imperfectly understood by his disciples. This can only be 
accounted for by the fact that they often took figurative language literally (Matt. xvi. 1 ; 
John iv. 33 ; xi. 12), and literal language figuratively (Matt. xv. 15 — 17 ; John vi. 70). 
In this passage some of the distinguishing points between a worldling and a Christian 
are suggested, and by them we may test ourselves. 

L The one follows the world, the other follows Christ. Our Lord speaks 
here of following him, i.e. doing what he did, going where he went, etc. In any 
doubtful sphere let us fairly and frankly ask ourselves — Would the Lord be here ? He 
did not confine himself to the synagogue or to the temple, but dwelt in the home at 
Nazareth, worked at the carpenter's bench, sat at the wedding feast, went out on the 
lake with the fishermen, etc. In our innocent enjoyments and ordinary work we may 
Ktill be following him. Suggest occasions on which there i& a distinct choice between 
'he worldly and the Christ-like. 

IL The one rNDULOES himself, the other denies himself. A complete surrendoi 
of will is called for if we would truly serve Christ. Whenever his will points in one 
way and our inclination points in another, we must deny ourselves. This is an indis- 
pensable condition of following. The true denier of self is the true confessor of Christ. 
Wishes, tastes, and appetites must be restrained and (where obedience to the Lord 
requirai it) denied by a Christian. 



ea, vui. 1—38,] THE GOBPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 363 

III. The one cares fob what ib outward, the other for what is inward. Many 
desire to " gain the world," and in the attempt use selfish and sinful means, such as 
the Lord spurned when they were offered to him (Matt. iv. 9). But what seems to us to 
be "gain" we must learn to "count loss for Christ" (Phil. iii. 7, 8). His disciples 
cannot be content with the outward show of happiness. Character to them is far mora 
important than circumstances. If the world be gained, nothing is gained ; if the soul 
be lost, everything is lost. 

IV. The one seeks base, the other bisks the loss op it. We want a test of the 
different courses which are sometimes presented for our choice. Speaking broadly, two 
are possible to us, and our use of the one as of the other proclaims what manner of men 
we we. The worldling asks, " Which is the pleasantest and easiest thing to do?" the 
Christian asks, "Which is the right thing?" and will choose that, whatever its issues. 

V. The one finds death a loss, the otheb a gain. Our life reaches far beyond 
things seen. Death is the grave of earthly pleasures, but it is the gateway of heavenly 
joys. 

YL The one will be ashamed, and the other exalted, in the day of jitdo- 
ment. Christ speaks here of his coming again, " in the glory of his Father," as his 
Representative in judgment and as the Founder of a new heaven and earth, in which 
ilghteousness will dwell. Around him will be "the holy angels" — those servants of 
God who rejoice over the penitent (Luke xv. 10), who minister to the saints (Heb. 
i. i4), and who will finally execute the judgments of the Lord (Matt. xiii. 41). Then 
he who knows us altogether will separate us, according to his unerring judgment of out 
sharvsters. All will awake, " some to everlasting life, and some to shame and ever- 
lasting contempt." (See also ver. 38.) — A. R. 

Vers. 1 — 21, — A sign from lieaven. " There was again a great multitude, and they 
had nothing to eat." Again Jesus had " compassion." Again are the disciples per- 
plexed. " Whence shall one be able to fill these men with bread here in a desert 
place ? " Speedily, of " seven loaves " and " a few small fishes " " about four thousand 
men, beside women and children, did eat and were filled," and " broken pieces remained 
over " to the extent of " seven baskets." Jesus left the miracle to give its own teachings 
— the great work to sink down into their hearts, while that he sought relief and rest, 
entering into the boat and coming " into the borders of Magadan." Perversely, the 
Pharisees, now joined by the Sadducees, came tempting him, putting him to the proof, 
" seeking of him a sign from heaven." They knew not that he had already put them 
to the proof by the signs already wroua;ht, which, had they had eyes to see, would have 
led them to believe. He had, withuut words, proved that the veil was on their hearts. 
Had they been children of truth, how soon would they have acknowledged the truth \ 
But now, with words, he would carry home to their hearts a conviction of their blind- 
ness in presence of spiritual things. " A sign from heaven," would ye ? Quick are ye 
to discern the signs in the reddened sky of the morning or evening. See ye no red 
" signs of the times " ? Do the passing clouds of heaven foretoken storm or calm ? and 
do not the passing incidents of earth in the political or the social sphere, or the sphere 
of the individual life ? Look around. Was it ever so seen in Israel as it is now seen ? 
Your fathers did eat manna in the desert — is it not .so now? Are not the words of 
the prophets finding their exact fulfilment in these hours ? Are not " signs " abundant 
in the healed ones and in the wonderful words? Would ye have "blood, and fire, 
and pillars of smoke"? Would ye have the sun "turned into darkness . . , the 
moon into blood"? Verily the sun shall be darkened; verily the sign of blood shal' 
be in the heavens and upon you. Alas! having eyes they saw not, and having ears 
they heard not. Then " deeply " from the heart of compassion and sorrow a sigh arose 
mingling with his words of astonishment and inquiry, " Why doth this generation seek 
a sign?" followed by the stern condemnation, " There shall no sign" such as they 
desire "be given ; " though God's own sign — " the sign " — will not be wanting, nor be 
unseen by the watchers. Why will men " seek a sign " ? Why " cannot " men " discern 

the signs " even those which are always the peculiar and appropriate " signs of the 

times"? The questions admit of one reply, for that age and this, and for every age. 
''^he answer is found — 

L In the prevalent spirit of unbelief. The strange closing of the eyes and shutting 

ST. MARK. ^ ^ 



354 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. viii. 1— 3a 

of the ears anj hardening of the heart. And if the light abound the closed eye cannot 
lee, and if the air be filled with angel-songs, or the voice of the Teacher lade the air 
with heavenly truth, the closed car admits it not. And though the hand of the Lord 
be present, the hardened heart receives not its impress. It is unmoved, untouched. 

II. But why do not men believe? Is it that they cannot or that they will not 
believe ? Alas ! both. Some cannot because they have not been solely or sufiSciently 
attentive to the Word, from the hearing of which cometh faith, or for a time they 
labour under the soul-hindering perplexity which some unresolved sceptical difSculty 
has involved them in. But these, being seekers of the faith, "shall find." They 
must be patient ; for with our partial views of things we cannot suddenly quadrate all 
our truth with every suggested opinion, or point out the fallacy of that opinion. But 
some will not believe. In a foolish, even stupid — yea, wicked — resistance of evidence, 
they shut out the force of conviction ; while others are hindered, being " slow of heart 
to believe," and therefore " foolish men." 

III. Moral conditions affect the power of faith. Jesus showed this when he 
said, " How can ye believe which receive glory one of another, and the glory that 
Cometh from the only God ye seek not?" And the self-seeking and world-loving, 
the evil and the sensual, the disobedient, and all who have " refused to have God in 
their knowledge," must gain both an indisposition and an inaptitude of mind to receive 
God's testimony in that spirit of faith which implies faithfulness to the truth when 
known. These are the " wicked and adulterous " to whom " no " special " sign shall be 
given ; " for, refusing the many signs that are arocnd, they will not be " persuaded, if 
one rise from the dead." But to all one "sign" shall "be given' — "a sign which 
is spoken against," but which remains ever the one " sign " in heaven and in earth and 
in all " times," " the sign of Jonah the prophet." — G. 

Vers. 14 — 21. — Leaven. After the great miracle of the feeding of the four thousand, 
-Jesus " entered into a boat with his disciples, and came " — for rest, probably — " into the 
parts of Dalmanutha. And they forgot to take bread." Had not emphasis been laid 
on their forgetfulness, we might have supposed they had been led to think " one loaf" 
•enough ; for if the Master could feed four thousand with seven loaves, surely he could 
feed twelve men with one ! These men were yet but children in understanding, and 
Jesus, their watchful Guardian, therefore warns them against the spirit of the men who 
had recently made the strange demand from him for signs — " the leaven of the Pharisees 
«nd the leaven of Herod," " the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees." Strangely 
«nough, they think the reference is to " leaven of bread," which must find an explana- 
tion in the engrossment of their minds by the astounding miracle they had witnessed. 
And yet they see not the thing signified. Jesus, by a brief teaching on the tvo 
bread-miracles, draws them away from the " leaven of bread " to " the teaching of 
the Pharisees and Sadducees." Is this a lesson for all time ? Was the leaven of 
Herod wholly put out of the house with his name ? Do Sadduoeeism and Pharisaism 
still linger amongst men ; and are the disciples of Jesus still exposed to their corrupting 
influence ? It is but too true that these questions must be answered by one afBrmative. 
Herod is described as " a frivolous, voluptuous, unprincipled man." His name sym- 
bolizes a morally vile life. Readers of the Gospels know well what the word " Pharisee " 
stands for — " the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy." The Sadducees, though 
less prominent, are not wholly unknown. Their rejection of great truths on no higher 
authority than their own opinion points at once to the dangerous tampering with 
revealed truths. These two rivals as schools were one in the evilness of their teaching 
so aptly alliterated as " unbelieving hypocrisy and hypocritical unbelief." They stood 
in united opposition to the Lord's Christ. Thus is the Church for all ages warned 
against evils that threaten the entire strength and the very existence of the Ufe of the 
Spirit. Those evils are — 

I. Hbathenisb sblf-indulgbnob. Faith grows not in a heart given over to self- 
indulgence. "The Author and Perfecter of our faith" has made demand, in un- 
mistakable terme, of all who would be his disciples : " Let him deny himself, and take 
up his cross, and follow me." Evil self-indulgence saps the strength of all faith. Tha 
highest evidence of the truth and authority of Christ's teaching is given to the obedient. 
•' Lf any man willeth to do his will, he shall know of the teachins, whethei it bo of 



«H.vin.l— 88.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK, 8U 

Ood, or whether I speak from myself." Evilness of life puts men out of harmony 
with the truth ; and as all disobedience is a denial of authority, it disposes men to 
desire that its authority may be questioned: while the continuous acknowledgment 
of the authority of the truth makes disobedience the more guilty. These " hold down 
the truth in unrighteousness." This spirit will support the second evil, namely — 

II. Sadduoean scEFTioiBm. If scepticism were a true spirit of inquiry, or even 
that sensibility of faith that longs to know, and is eager to defend itself from deceit, it 
were a healthy guard against childish credulity. But if it become a proud self-suffi- 
ciency, a resolute resistance and despisal of truths that are apprehended only by faith 
— truths which by their very nature do not admit of scientific demonstration, or of truths 
that do not harmonize with preconceived notions — it then stands in the way of all 
holy and healthy influence from the highest truths that could reach the heart. It is 
the opposite of the hearing ear, of the childlike teachableness. There is a faith which 
is wrought in the heart by the truth's own testimony — the belief that " cometh of 
hearing," the hearing that is hearkening. But yet another danger lies in the path of 
the followers of Christ. It is — 

III. Hyfocbiticaij FBETENTionsNESB. Here the truth is acknowledged, but neither 
the heart nor the life is true to it. It is unfaithfulness, deceit, hypocrisy. It is the 
vice against which the severest words that escaped the lips of Christ were directed. A 
^' double-minded man is unstable," but a double-faced man is utterly unworthy. He 
is open to all seductions ; he may become the tool of all evil, and all the time hiding 
the filthiness of his evil heart in a show of righteousness whose deceitfulness reduces 
it to the lowest grade of evih Of this leaven all disciples from the earliest hour have 
been in danger. Even a little may be " hid " in the heart " till all is leavened." To 
how many of the disciples may it be said to-day, " Do ye not understand?"! — G. 

Vers. 22 — 26. — The gradual liealing of the Hind man. In each of the many cases of 
healing there were, doubtless, peculiarities of incident of great interest to the healed, 
if not to us. But of only a few have we the details. Perhaps where we have them 
ithey have their more important relation to us than to the subjects of the healing 
themselves. In this case, as in others, the compassion of friends is called into play. 
" They bring to him a blind man, and beseech him to touch him." Not without 
service to us all is this little feature preserved. How may we who have proved his power 
to heal learn here the duty, the propriety, the encouragement to bring to Jesus, by 
.kindly, leading hands, those who see not their way to him. Gently Jesus took the 
hand of the blind man in his, and led him away from the crowd, " out of the village " — 
itself a judgment to this Bethsaida. But oh, how beauteous a picture — Jesus leading 
ithe blind ! This is itself a homily. Singular to us appear the actions of Christ, both 
here and elsewhere. But why did he "spit on his eyes"? That he should work 
gradually and through the medium of outward signs was very becoming, if only to 
identify himself with the miracle. But who shall tell the thoughts they stirred in the 
hearts of the healed, for every one of whom Jesus cared ! There was no need of spittle 
even to loosen the gummed eyelids, though such loosening may have been necessary, 
and needed no wasting of power by the doing it miraculously. Nor was there any 
absolute need of the touch of the hand ; no, nor even at any time of the word. His will 
was enough. But he who chose to use liis word or his touch or his breath here identi- 
fies himself with the miracle by the spittle. The progressive character of the work 
stands in contrast to the somewhat hasty " touch him." As there is no mention of 
faith (so generally commended where found) on the part of the blind man, it may have 
been but small, if there were any. Perhaps this may afford some reason why the 
healing was not instantaneous. It may have responded to the growing faith of the 
recipient — ^a seeing far more important even than beholding men and trees. Would no 
virtue come from the touch of that leading hand ? Were no words spoken to awaken 
faith ? Was there a Lydian spirit in the man " whose " eyes " the Lord " so gently 
" opened " ? We may not know. But to us the miracle is a type of many healings in 
our suffering, blind world, where faith and hope have need to be roused into activity by , 
gome measure of healing — some sign. And it may be that here the full trust of that 
half-hoping heart was gained by the very lingering of the light on the threshold at 
those half-opened eyes. 



356 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. vhl I— » 



" For thou wouldst have ub linger still 
Upon the verge of good or ill. 
That on thy guiding hand unseen 
Our undivided hearts may lean." 



Oeitainly we may learn, in the midst of the variety of the Lord's ways of working : 
1. That it may please him to use many means to accomplish that which by a word, s 
touch, a look — or without — he could instantly effect. 2. That it may equally please him 
to detain hope till it is made strong by tried faith — the faith that is as severely tried 
by time as by fire. 3. That it may as truly please him to draw out the heart's love by 
its sense of dependence upon him. So is it by all those slow but beautiful processes of 
nature, which are the Lord's hands for ministering to us bread and wine. 4. And most 
assuredly may we learn not to despise the Lord's work while it is in process. For what 
seems to us to be but imperfectness of work or tardiness of method, may be his kind 
and gentle and instructive way of leading us to Bee things in their perfectness — even 
" all things clearly." — G. 

Vers. 27 — 30. — Hie confession of Peter. The brief record of St. Mark leads us to 
turn to the fuller statements of St. Matthew. Jesus tests the faith of his disciples 
" as they were able " to bear it. First, " in the way he . . . asked. Who do men say 
that I am ? " What is the general opinion ? ITien, more closely, " But who say ye that 
I am? " It was a day of testing. There had been a general blindness. Immediately 
before he had occasion to say, " ye of little faith, why reason ye among yourselves, 
because ye have no bread ? Do ye not yet perceive ? " But there was amongst them 
one discerning spirit ; and he who " knew all men " saw the elevation of character, the 
quick perception, the sympathetic, sensitive soul. " Who say ye ? " " Simon "t— of 
whom it had been early said, " Thou shalt be called Cephas (which is by interpretation, 
Peter)," which is by interpretation, " Rock," or " Stone " — " Simon Peter answered and 
said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." It is enough. Here is one 
who, seeing, can see the true character of the Sent of God ; not a mere teacher, or 
rabbi, but the Hope of Israel — the long looked-for Christ, " the Son of the Blessed." 
The wise Master-builder stood ready to lay the firm foundation-stones of his enduring 
Church — " a spiritual house," built up of " living stones ; " and in this first confessor, 
the first to acknowledge his exalted person and high office, in this man who is a rock, 
Jesus discerns the suitable stone to lay first on the prepared earth. " Thou," of whom 
it was once said, " Thou shalt be," now " art, Peter : and upon this rock I will build 
my Church." Not upon Peter's mere confession ; not upon Peter apart from his 
confession ; nor, indeed, upon Peter alone. For the Church of Jesus is not a column, 
k pillar, of stones. But of those " twelve foundations," of what afterwards was seen 
by one of them to be a city, and on which are the "twelve names of the twelve 
apostles of the Lamb," this was the first to be laid. Or of that " household of God," 
which is " built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself 
being the chief Comer-stone," this stone gained the honourable position of being laid 
immediately next to the corner. The house is spiritual, the stones are spiritual, the 
total idea is spiritual — every stone is a "living stone." Here is no dead body of 
rubbish ; but spiritually discerning men, who, like Peter, can discern and confess the 
Lord's Christ. There need be no hesitation in acknowledging the high position 
assigned to Peter — the prince, the very primate of the apostles — ^by his Lord and ours. 
An immeasurable gulf lies between this and the assumption of the exclusive authority 
of Peter by Rome. Yea, though the improbability of Peter's ever having visited Rome 
were exchanged for a certainty that he both visited the city and founded its Church, 
yet would that claim be baseless. Nor does the putting into his hands " the keys of 
the kingdom of heaven," with which, by God's good grace, he opened the gates of the 
kingdom to Jews and Gentiles, which work, dono on earth, was truly confirmed in 
heaven, give Rome the slightest warrant for her assumption. 

I. The first great lesson for every Peter obviously is — to seek a fenetratiti 

DISOEBNMENT OF JeSUB AB THE ChKIST, THE SON OF THE LIVINQ GoD. The beholding 

Jesus, the Son of Mary, as the common eye may, is a primary step. A life so pure, so 
beneficent, so exalted, justly claims the attention of all. It stands pre-eminently above 
all. It is out of the common category. But this is not the perfect view. There ii 



OH. vin. 1—38.] THK GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 857 

mora hidden in tlie word " Christ ; " and this demands a fuller insight. Some, lik* 
Nioodemus, acknowledge him to be " a Teacher come from God." But in their yiew 
he is only one of many ; with whom Homer, and Shakespeare, and Dante, and a 
thousand others rank as sent of God, and filled with the spirit of wisdom and under- 
standing and all knowledge, like a Bezaleel of old, to work in all manner of work for 
the building up of an outer temple of God. But he stands alone in Peter's judgment, 
and in that of all who are " blessed " like Peter, in that the truth is revealed to them 
nut by " flesh and blood," but by the " Father which is in heaven." But even this 
falls short of the final term : " Thou art . . , the iSon of the living God." " God of 
God, . . , very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one substance with the 
Father ; " he " being the Effulgence of his glory, and the very Image of his substance." 
Yet let every discerning one acknowledge, " no one knoweth the Son save the Father." 
II. A second lesson is for every one who seeth the Son as he is revealed of the 

Father, to confess him in PBESBNCB of the world's BREOK, SELF-SEEKOfa, OOH- 

F0SION, AND SIN. This each, who having seen Jesus has seen the Father in him, is 
called to do. And thus shall the kingdom of heaven be opened more and more. 
Thus shall the great Church be extended, whose inviolable security is pledged to 
every one who, in the spirit of Peter, can hear and receive the assuring words, " The 
gates of Hades shall not prevail against it." — G. 

Ver. 31 — oh. ix. 1. — Disevpleship. Having elicited Peter's noble confession, Jesus 
puts the disciples to further proof by declaring that " the Son of man " — his own lowly 
title, contrasting so strangely with Peter's word — must " suffer," " and be rejected," 
"and be killed," "and after three days rise again." And this was said in no enig- 
matical or hidden way, but " openly." Whereupon the weaker side of Peter's 
character obtruded itself: he "took him and began to rebuke him." The Messianic 
hopes which had been expressed by the confession, and confirmed by the Lord's 
testimony to that confession, were contradicted, if not dashed to the ground, by the 
suggestion of a suffering and conquered Christ. " This shall never be unto thee." Now 
does Peter need correction. The strong word of which shows how good and bad may 
mingle in our present imperfectness. The great proto-confessor denies his Lord by 
denying the true spirit to Christ, and by opposing his earthly to the heavenly method 
of conquest — " the things of men " to " the things of God." In the yet imperfect heart, 
though, indeed, taught of God, this would be a prevailing of the " gates of Hades." 
Therefore we must say, " Be it far from thee, Lord." m presence of the disciples, 
for their instruction, as for Peter's correction, the Lord utters his displeasure in the 
strongest terms — terms quite sufficient to prevent any boasting on account of the 
previous honourable distinction, " Get thee behind me, Satan." So near the words 
spoken " to the evil one," " Get thee hence, Satan." One only word is needed to add 
to this by way of explication, " Thou art a stumbling-block to me ; " and another word 
by way of application, " For thou mindest not the things of God, but the things of men." 
Is it so, then, that " the things of men" stand in direct contradiction to "the things 
of God " ? That which is purely " of men " do ; and all that is not " of God " is of the 
adversary, " Satan," and must be silenced That silencing is effected by words which 
have ever since appeared as in letters of fire over the gate of entrance to discipleship. 
And " the multitude " is " called " together to hear them. " If any man would come 
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me." How simple, 
yet how comprehensive 1 how easy, and yet how difficult, is this tri-unity of duty 1 In 
its simplest presentation it \»i \. A thorough, complete, continuous, self-denial. 2. A. 
patient endwrance. 3. A diligent obedience, " With men this is impossible, but not 
with God ; for all things are possible with God." 

I. It was not only during the early struggles of the Church of Christ, or merely in its 
conflict with the anti-Christian world, that the disciple must needs "deny himself." 
It is tnu groundwork of all discipleship, and finds its necessity in the natural revulsion 
from the duties, the restraints, and the discipline of the gospel. That it should be 
more needful to urge the necessity for a total self-abnegation in the midst of an 
unfriendly, antagonistic worldly power, is obvious. But a spirit of self-indulgence is 
wholly removed from the idea of the disciple of Jesus. The habitual refusal to hearken 
to the appeals of the sinful self when those appeal? contradict the voice of con^cienoei 



858 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, [oh. vni. 1— 3d 

the inward echo of Christ's outward voice, is a rule allowing of no relaxation, even 
under the most favourable religious influences. The true idea of the disciple suggests 
the absolute, unconditional self-surrender — the whole life laid at the feet of the 
Master. 

II. The subsequent words point to a buying of the life at the expense of the life. 
A paradox designed to awaken thought, and that finds its solution in the dual character 
of life. The outward and visible, the inward and spiritual ; the life temporal, and the 
life eternal. In Jesus' view a man might suffer, be rejected of men, be killed, and 
yet truly "save his life" and "find it;" while, on the other hand, a man might save 
his life from the toils, the sacrifices, the self-inflictions and self-denials which discipleship 
would require, from the cruelties of men, from the death wtiioh human hands could 
inflict, and yet " lose his life " — lose life in the truest, highest, best, and therefore only 
real sense. Jesus saw that, so far from losing all, a man might gain all — all the world 
could give him — the " whole world " itself ; yet all this might be at the forfeiture of 
the life. And if he forfeit his life, " what shall a man give in exchange for " it again ? 
Once forfeited, it is forleited for ever. There is no possibility of returning to regain 
it. Well were it, therefore, for his disciples to carry a cross daily, a symbol of dying 
to self, to sin, and the world, and in the patient endurance of that self-inflicted death 
to find the true life — the life in Christ, the life in the region of righteousness, and the 
pledge of a being "raised up" to life everlasting. Before the words were formulated, 
the disciples of Jesus attained the high estate, " I have been crucified with Christ ; yet 
I live ; and yet no longer I, but Christ liveih in me : and," with a reaching far and 
forward, " that life which I now live in the flesh, I live in faith." 

III. It was in this spirit of unflagging obedience — even to a bard, self-restraining, 
self-denying, and self-crucifying rule — that the disciple was, with his far-reaching and 
fore-reaching vision, to " live in faith," anticipating the time when " the Son of man 
shall come in the glory of his Father with his angel-i, and render unto every man. 
according to his deeds." After these hard sayings with which Jesus had shaken the 
hearts of the disciples, and proclaimed to the " great multitude" the severity of his 
rule, he comfortingly assures them of the nearness of his kingdom, by dwolariag " soma 
of them" should "in no wise taste of death" till they had seen it "coxe with 
power." — G. 

Vers. 1—10. — Compassion for the many, I. Christ's compassion fob the uany 
CONTRASTED WITH THE NARROW HEARTS OF THE DISCIPLES. 1. Narrow hearts often 
are caused by narrow means. Alas! grinding poverty makes even naturally kind 
hearts indifferent to others' sufferings. Where there is " little to earn and many to keep," 
this will be so. There are circumstances in which the whole kindly current of the 
man's being is frozen, and he becomes utterly egotistic. 2. The Divine heart is of 
boundless compassion. All those ancient pictures of God as unwearied and unworn 
after all his creative activity, may be used of his redemptive activity. There is no 
exhausting the Divine intelligence, no draining the resources of the Divine heart. 

II. Christ's action on this occasion a parable op the call of the Gentiles. 
The present feeding of the multitude differs from the former ; the numbers given are 
different. Again, the present work was done after a long journey in heathen lands. 
" The one miracle was chiefly, if not entirely, for Jews ; the other chiefly, if not entirely, 
for Gentiles. The feeding of the five thousand was an exceptional miracle, which Jesus 
had refused to repeat on behalf of Jews. It was therefore quite natural that the 
apostles should not at cnce receive the intimation of Jesus respecting wliat he was 
willing to do for the multitude. They spoke only of their own inability to supply the 
wants of the people ; but they did not forget what he had done a few weeks before. 
There were only a few miraculous cures for the Gentiles, while those for the Jews were 
innumerable ; and it might therefore be doubted if Jesus would now do for Gentiles 
what he had only once done for Jews " (J. H. Godwin). The Divine compassion and 
love exceed our noblest and largest thoughts, and are extended alike to all peoples. — J. 

Vers. 11^21. — Craving for signs. I. Whence the oravino sprinos. " The Jews 
seek after a sign." It is the spirit we nowadays term "sensationalism." It is a 
natnral desire for a certain pleasure of the mind. Fixed ideas, a sameness of mental 



BH. VIII. 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 359 

representations, wearies and saddens the mind. Hence the craving for amusement, 
which gives change to the perpetual march past of the same old thoughts. The feeling 
is natural enough. The Jews, who had no science in our sense, and did not live in an 
interesting age like ours, wanted si^ns and wonders to amuse. We can understand the 
feeling, and allow it to be natural, but at the same time not religious. 

II. Christ befuses to tostbr sensationalism. 1. The form of denial and j^/mal 
U very strong and emphatic indeed. (Ver. 12.) Signs will be given to those who are 
ready to profit by them, not to gratify idle curiosity. How severely does Christ 
discountenance " sensationalism " in connection with his religion 1 He will have as 
little noise, as little rumour, finger-pointing, gaping of vacant crowd, as possible. " The 
kingdom of God cometh not with observation." 2. Besides, an express tvaming is 
yivtn : against " the leaven of the Pharisees and of Herod." This means much the 
same as the Pharisees and Sadducees, apparently. The political Herodians were many 
of them Sadducees. Again, the Pharisees and Sadducees had a certain common basis 
of teaching. Both were at once in opposition to Jesus and the aims of his kingdom. 
The Pharisees, strongly conservative of Judaism, would disparage Jesus and his works. 
The other party would object to any " kingdom of heaven," acknowledging only the 
Roman empire. The " leaven " means both the teaching and the spirit of it (of. Matt, 
xvi. 12 ; Luke xii. 1). 

III. The unspibitual mind constantlv MistrsDEBSTooD HIM. The disciples 
stuck at the word " leaven " — leaven -loaves. " We forgot to bring provisions with us ! " 
The error was double. They caught at the sound instead of the sense. And they 
showed forgetfulness of the miracle they had so recently witnessed. " How is it that 
you do not consider ?" Christ is just as much misunderstood to-day as he was then. 
We forget the spirit of Christianity ; we blunder over its meaning. He says to us 
to-day, " How is it that you do not consider ? " " Moral evidence is most profitable 
and proper for religious truth. Lower proof is desired when higher is disregarded and 
despised. Forgetfulness of the past occasions needless anxiety for the future " (J. H. 
Godwin). — J. 

Vers. 22 — 26. — Thehlindman. I. "The knowledge op Chbist awakens taith 
IN those who are brought to him bt the faith of others." 

II. "Benefits are received according to the mbabubb of faith in him" 
(J. H. Godwin).— J. 

Vers. 27 — 30. — Jesus the Messiah. I. Some mistaken identifioations of Jestts. 
John Baptist ; Elijah ; a prophet ; Jeremiah, according to Matthew. There was some 
truth here. They recognized the prophetic inspiration and power of Jesus. Truth in 
feeling, error in thought ; Jesus was the greatest of the prophets, not reproducing his 
predecessors, but going beyond them. God hath spoken by his Son (Heb. i.). 

II. A TRUE identification. Peter's, " Thou art the Messiah," i.e. the Anointed of 
God (cf. Matt. xvi. 13 — 20). The Messiah includes Prophet, Pi-iest, and King within 
his person and functions. 

III. The acceptance of the identification by Jesus. 1. It is implicitly 
accepted here, as explicitly in Matt. xvi. Jesus claims to be Prince and Saviour of his 
people and mankind. 2. Yet it must not be made known. Probably the statement, 
" The Prophet Jesus is the Messiah," noised abroad, would have produced a false 
impression. When by his death all hopes of an earthly kingdom had been destroyed, 
it would not be so. " Only with a knowledge of his character would the statement at 
any time be beneficial ; and from this it would receive the best and surest confirmation " 
(.J. H. Godwin).— J. 

Vers. 31 — 38. — Unwelcome prophecies. I. Plain teuths seldom welcome. He now 
spoke of suflering, rejection, even murder, at the hands of a conspiracy. The veil 
was drawn aside ; at last it was seen what the Messiahship of Jesus meant. The lamt 
thing had before been expressed parabolioally (John ii. 19 ; iii. 1-i ; vi. 51). 

n. The flattery of fbiendship. The honest-hearted Peter is endeared to us. 
Ho IS so human ; his feelings always on the right side, his intelligence often confubed. 
How true his heart here ! how wrong his thought ! Suffering and death seem an evil 



360 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. vin. 1— Sd 

to him, as to most of us. Not so to Christ. The mere suggestion that the real is to 
be preferred to the ideal, mere life to duty, self-interest to the kingdom of God, ha 
ipurns from him as the suggestion of a dark spirit. 

IIL Self-renunciation. " Let him renounce himself 1 " says Christ to the recruit 
for his army, the would-be citizen of his kingdom. Deep words : the meaning behind 
them it requires a life to learn. 1. The resolve of egotism must end in failure. To 
determine to save one's life is to cast it away ; to cast away one's life for the sake of the 
ideal is to save it, Christianity is the kingdom of the ideal. 2. In the spiritual 
sphere there is no real loss. Life is one, and is not " in the abundance of the things 
possessed." It cannot be "priced," nor bartered away. It is the man's very se^, 
a. To disavow our ideal is to incur eternal shame. There are the ideals of comfort, 
ol luxury ; the ideals of society ; the ideals of God, of the spirit. We must take our 
choice. We may make a choice of the lower which shall exclude the higher, or of the 
higher which shall include all of worth in the lower. There is no other rule than 
" Seek first the kingdom of God 1 " If we are ashamed to be true to our ideal, the time 
will come when we shall be put to shame in the presence of it. To disavow greatness 
when it comes to us under the guise of obscurity, this is to ensure our being disavowed 
of greatness when it appears in its true and heavenly glory. — J. 

Vers. 1 — 21. Parallel passage: Matt. xv. 30 — xvi. 12. — 1. 7%e feeding of the /our 
thousand. 2. The sign sought by the Pharisees. 8. The leaven of the Phariseei. I. 
Omission. Having pretty fully considered the feeding of the five thousand recorded in 
the sixth chapter, and its relation to the feeding of the four thousand narrated in the 
above section of this eighth chapter, we waive further notice of this subject, as the two 
miracles are in fact twin miracles, having much in common, and many circumstances so 
similar that, as we saw, some erroneously identified them. We may add, however, that 
on the former occasion the northern villasiers would have made Jesus a king ; the dwellers 
on the eastern shores make no demonstration. Further, the five thousand were fed 
after the return of the twelve; the four thousand after our Lord's return from the 
borders of Tyre and Sidon. In the former case, the disciples went away by sea and 
Christ retired to the mountain, but met them again at the fourth watch, as he walked 
upon the waters. On the present occasion the multitude had been with Jesus three 
days, and afterwards he departed with the disciples in the ship. 

II. The Pharisees. At this juncture they had made common cause with their 
bitter opponents, the Sadducees ; both together made a combined and desperate attack 
on our Lord. He seems to have avoided Bethsaida and Capernaum, which were further 
north, and to have landed near Magdala, now El-Mejdel, in the neighbourhood and about 
three miles to the north of which was Dalmanutha, on purpose, it would seem, to 
escape from those inveterate enemies who appear to have made Capernaum or Bethsaida 
their head-quarters. Consequently they were under the necessity of coming in quest 
of him ; for they " came forth, and began to question with him." Their ostensible 
object on this occasion was to seek of him a sign from heaven, but their real desigr 
was. In all likelihood, to entrap him. They were insincere as well as sceptical ; and, had 
the sought-for sign been granted, it would not have overcome their deeply rooted pre- 
judices and hypocritical pretunces. The conduct of these wretched men was suicidal. 
Their curiosity craved a sign ; their unbelief unfitted them for its performance, as also 
for itu proper perception had it been performed. Besides, had there not been many 
signs? Had not a multitude of the angelic host celebrated Christ's birth on the plains 
of Bethlehem ? Had there not been the reception by Simeon, and the response of Anna 
at his presentation in the temple? Had not the star appeared in the East? Had not 
the Magi followed its guidance to worship the infant Saviour and to present their gifts ? 
Had not an audible voice from heaven acknowledged him at his liainism, it did as on 
two subsequent occasions ? Had not the Spirit, in visible, dove-like form, descended 
upon him ? Thus in the temple two pious Jews expressed their grateful acknowledg- 
ments and recorded their joy, confessing their Lord. Soon after. Gentile Magi, men of 
scientific knowledge and literary pursuits, came from a far-off Eastern land to pay their 
homage. Here we have at once Hebrew piety and Gentile philosophy uniting to do 
honour to the infant Saviour, and bow in humility at his feet. Here, too, we have mala 
md female — that godly old man Simeon and that holy, aged woman Anna repre- 



SH. viii. 1—38.1 IHE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. MARK. 



senting their respective sexes in owning hi3 Messiahship. So afterwards, on his 
triumphal entry into Jerusalem, when the crowd that went before and the crowd that 
followed after had cried, " Hosanna to the Son of David : Blessed is he that cometh in 
the Name of the Lord ; Hosanna in the highest ! " the children in the temple responded. 
Baying in the selfsame strain, " Hosanna to the Son of David 1 " Old and young, male and 
female. Gentile and Jew, thus unite their tribute to that Saviour whose mercy they 
need, whose grace they share, by whose work they are benefited, and in whose salvation 
they participate. But not so these captious, sceptical, false-hearted, and malignant 
Pharisees. Un three other occasions we read of a sign being demanded — after the 
cleansing of the temple, the journey through the corn-flelds, the feeding of the fire 
thousand ; so also on the occasion mentioned here. What was the nature of the sign for 
which they clamoured ? The signs they sought were marvels of a garish kind — appear- 
ances in the sky, such as manna coming down from heaven, as they themselves iuti* 
mated in John vL ; or the standing still of the sun and moon, or the sudden descent of 
thunder and hail, or some change of the atmosphere, as Theophylact suggests ; or the 
calling down of fire and rain, or the receding of the sun's shadow on the dial, or some 
great, overmastering, and stupendous miracle. " They thought," says Theophylact, 
" he could not perform a sign from heaven, as one who in league with Beelzebub could 
only perform signs on earth." But had they not seen even greater signs than these ? 
And, had they been favoured with the signs of their own choosing, would they have 
been satisfied ? There is no reason to believe they would. Our Lord, however, never 
gratified an idle curiosity, nor wrought a miracle to create wonder, but usually to supply 
some want or relieve some necessity. 

III. The disciples' want of spiaiTrrAL discernment. Our Lord, as we have seen, 
had to contend with the hostility of the Pharisees, their stubborn disbelief and ensnaring 
captiousness. In view of these, and of the subtilty of the temptation which claimed a 
miracle to prove his Messiahship, as also perhaps of the crisis that was hurrying on, there 
welled up from the depths of his heart that sigh of mingled patience and pity. But he 
had more to contend with than Pharisaic opposition and disbelief; he had the perverse- 
ness of his own disciples. If he had the stolid stubbornness of the Pharisees to encounter 
on the one hand, he had the stupidity of his own disciples to oppose on the other. On 
the one side there was sullen scepticism, on the other sad slowness of heart ; on the one 
malignant frowardness, on the other wayward misconception. How often is the disciple 
of Christ similarly situated I He meets with open enmity on the part of godless, 
Christless men, while unaccountably he finds obstacles thrown in his way by the pro- 
fessed friends of truth. If foes are bitter in their opposition, friends sometimes fail to 
render the expected and much-needed support — often, however, more from want of 
thought than want of will. But when distressed and depressed, what by fightings 
without and fears within, we have the example of our Lord to encourage us and keep us 
from desponding. If such things were done in a green tree, what may we not expect 
to be done in a dry ? 

IV. Meaning of the warning against the leaven. Our Lord broke off his inter- 
view with these hypocritical Pharisees abruptly, and re-embarked rather hurriedly. He 
abandoned them in their unbelief, renouncing and rejecting them as impracticable 
malignants. The disciples, whose duty it was to provide for their own and Master's 
wants, had somehow overlooked or neglected the duty that thus devolved on them. 
Either, owing to their hasty re-embarkation, they had forgotten (kveKiSoino being used 
in a pluperfect sense) to provide bread before starting — a strange oversight after having 
collected seven large baskets (o-iruptSos) full of fragments; or, after landing, and when 
they had come to the other side, they forgot Q7te\i6ovro having the ordinary past sig- 
nification of the aorist) to take bread for their land-journey further, though they had 
had only one loaf with them in the ship. Our Lord, as usual, improving the occasion, 
and intending to guard his disciples from the subtle, insinuating errors and example of 
the Pharisees, warned them against their plausible but pernicious teaching, and iu doing 
BO he employed terms, as was his custom, suggested by recent occurrences "Take 
heed, beware," he said, " of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of Herod ; " 
or, as Meyer understands the word {^Kenere), "Take heed, turn your eyes away Irtm 
the leaven of the Pharisees, and Irom the leaven of Herod ; " or, as St. Matthew has i 
from " the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees," so that Herod, firom hig Sau- 



362 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, [ch. viu. 1-34 

duceeistn, may here, by way of eminence, represent that sect. Leaven, with the single 
exception of the parable of the leaven, is always used for evil of some sort, especially 
evil secretly working and silently diffusing itself; and hence, in preparation for the 
Passover, leaven was to be purged out of all the households of the Hebrews. Accordingly 
the leaven of the Pharisees, if used here in a specific and not in a generic sense, may be 
taken to denote hypocrisy, while the leaven of the Sadducees may signify misbelirf, and 
that of Herod worldliness ; and as the Sadducean creed allows full scope to worldly 
pleasures and pursuits, and because of their many points of contact, the two latter may 
coincide or change places ; while the whole three are animated by one and the same 
spirit of opposition to God and true religion. Our Lord here warned his disciples 
against all doctrine, practice, or teaching of like character under the name of leaven. 
His disciples, in their low, grovelling notions, and through their slowness of spiritual 
apprehension, understood him to speak of bread in the literal sense, and of bread baked 
with leaven got from the Pharisees on landing. They supposed that the Saviour was 
warning them against anything of that kind that might corrupt them. How different 
the Master and the disciples 1 The latter allowed their thoughts to be too much 
engrossed with the bread that perisheth ; the former had his mind occupied with the 
bread that endureth unto eternal life, and warned them against any teaching or any 
practice that might interfere with their possessing it. No wonder our Lord was some- 
what sharp in his rebuke of their spiritual dulness, for, having eyes for the physical part 
of the miracles, they failed to see their spiritual import. They had eyesight only for 
the outward shell, but did not perceive the kernel. Hence it is that he inquires, 
" Having ears, hear ye not ? " and again, " How is it that ye do not understand ? " 

V. EXEGETICAL NOTE ON CERTAIN W^OBDS AND PHKASBS IN THE PEECBDINQ SECTIONS. 

1. The clause, "They have now been with me three days," is literally. There are now 
three days to them remaining with me. To the original expression thus exactly 
rendered has been cited the following parallel from the ' Philoctetes ' of Sophocles : — 
'Hi/ 5" ^itap ^Sr) Seirepov v\4ovtI /loi: "It was now the second day to me sailing." 2. Instead 
of eV ipti/ila of St. Matthew, we have here in St. Mark ^ir* ifrnitias, which is slightly 
different in sense, meaning, " In circumstances consequent on or connected with being in 
a desert." 3. In ver. 32 the received text reads imCirrei, which yields a very suitable 
sense, namely, seeks a sign in addition to those already given. The critical editors, 
Lachmann, Tischendorf, and Tregelles, however, read the simpler verb Cijret 4. In 
this same verse there is a Hebraistic form of strong abjuration. The clause in our 
English Version is, " There shall no sign be given ; " so also the Syriac has simply " not ; ' 
but the strict rendering is, " If a sign shall be given," which, resolved according to the idiom 
of the original, is, " May I not live if a sign shall be given," or " God do so to me and more 
if a sign shall be given." 6. So also in the same verse, " he brake," that is, at once, 
because the verb is the aorist tense; and "kept giving," as the verb is imperfect. 
6. The two participles meaning respectively "having given thanks" and "blessed" 
amount to nearly the same thing, and set us an example suitable, seemly, and seasonable 
of thanking God and asking his blessing when we partake of our daily food ; in other 
words, of conforming to the time-honoured practice of saying "grace," as it is called, 
before meals, by which we thankfully acknowledge the Giver, and ask his blessing on 
and with the gift. — J. J, G, 

Vers. 22 — 26. — The hading of a Hind man at Befhsaida. L Several mieaoles 
or A smiLAE KIND. The miracle here recorded was performed at Beihsaida Julias, 
or the northern Bethsaida, on the route from the north-east shore of the lake to 
CsBsarea Philippi. It is related by St. Mark alone. The peculiarity of this miracle 
of restoring sight to the blind is the circumstance of its being wrought at twice; that 
is to say, the cure was progressive or gradual. In the ninth chapter of St. John's 
Gospel we have the account of a like miracle of opening the eyes of a blind man ; but 
one peculiarity of the miracle there recorded consists in the fact that the man on whom 
the miracle was performed had been born blind. There is again the opening of the eyes 
of two blind men near Jericho, recorded in St. Matthew (xx.), one of whom only is 
mentioned by St. Mark (x.) and by St. Luke (xviii.), and called by the patronymic 
Bartimieus, or the son of Timseus. There is also the record of another similar miracla 
in the ninth chapter of St. Matthew, when oir Lord, after putting their faith to th« 



CH. vm. 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. 363 



test, cured two blind men in the house whither they had followed him. Besides thee* 
specially recorded cases, we have several references of a general kind to our Lord's 
healing of the blind. The great number of instances of this kind is accounted for by 
the fact that blindness is a disease much more common in the Bast than in the lands of 
the West, while several causes have been assigned for that prevalence, such as the 
small particles of dust and sand impinging on the eye, and persons sleeping in the 
open air at night. 

II. The condition of this man. This man was blind, but, as we shall see, he had 
not been born blind— he was not blind from birth. He had become blind from accident 
or disease. At all events, he was destitute of that most valuable sense, the sense of 
sight. He had been long a stranger to the beauties of nature. " The light is sweet, and 
a pleasant thin" it is for the eyes to see the sun ; " but that sun, that light, those beauties, 
those bright colours, those lovely Ibrms that appear in the heaven above, in the earth 
beneath, in the waters round the earth — all, all had long been to him a blank. He was 
in that state which Milton, in the days of his blindness, so poetically and pathetically 
deplores — 

" Thus with the year 
Seasons return ; but not to me returns 
Day, or the sweet approach of ev'n or morn, 
Or sight of vernal bloom, or summer's rose. 
Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine ; 
But cloud instead and ever-during dark 
Surrounds me, from the cheerful ways of men 
Cut offl and, for the book of knowledge fair, 
Presented with a universal blank 
Of nature's works, to me expunged and rased. 
And wisdom at one entrance quite shut out." 

We know not whether this blind man had wife or child. It is probable he had ; and, 
if so, when he rose in the morning his wife ministered unto him, his children clung to 
his knees and kissed him while he blessed them. They led him forth to the street or 
elsewhere out of doors. He could feel them, but could not behold them. Their smiles, 
their tears, their bright eyes, and sweet faces were to him unknown and by him unseen. 
All the region round Bethsaida was charming — the glancing waters of the lake, the 
lovely flowers of the Galilean hills, were a sight worth seeing ; but what were all these 
to this blind man ? The district might as well have been dark and dismal, bleak and 
black ; at any rate, a blank, a night without moon or star, midnight with its darkness 
visible, even " darkness that might be felt." 

III. Peculiabitv in the mode op cure. Here the peculiarity is twofold: 1. 
Jesus took him by the hand and led him out of the town. 2. The cure was 
effected progressively, or at tw^ice. What reason can we assign for the former pecu- 
liarity? Why did he conduct him outside the town? Several reasons have been 
assigned. Some say that our Lord thereby meant to intimate the unworthiness, through 
unbelief, of the inhabitants of this town, or rather village ((ct^/tij), and his consequent 
dissatisfaction with them ; this, of course, is a mere conjecture. Others suppose, with 
more apparent reason, that, as the process of cure in this case was more than usually 
protracted, our Lord led the man out of the town in order to be free from interruption 
or any obstruction on the part of the crowd, just as in the preceding chapter he is said 
to have taken the deaf mute aside from the multitude. Bengel, with his usual inge- 
nuity, conjectures the cause to be the Saviour's intention that, when the blind recovered 
eight, his eyes might rest on the more cheerful aspect of the sky and of the works of 
God in nature — that is, in the country — than of the works of mm in the town. The 
thought is a beautiful one, but only the product of a tertile imagination. Of two 
remaining reasons, which have been suggested with considerable plausibility, one is the 
ayoidmce of witnesses on account of the somewhat disagreeable application of spittlC; 
or saliva, to the person of the invalid, exactly as in the case of the deaf mute already 
referred to ; and the other is that our Lord, by varying the mode of cure, " sometimes 
doing more, sometimes less, and sometimes nothing," signified his freedom from any fixed 
form of gesture or manipulation. Some, again, reject with regard to the saliva all these, 
holding that our Lord meant to graft the supernatural on the natural, the saliva being a« 



364 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. vm. 1—38 

ordinary medinal application in such cases. We are rather inclined to adopt the view ol 
variation, for the purpose of proving independence of any specific or stereotyped mode in 
•uch miraculous performance. With respect to the progressiveness of the cure a similar 
diversity of opinion prevails. Theophylaot attributes it to the imperfect faith of the 
blind man himself, and of those who brought him to the Saviour; others imagine that 
on a sudden recovery of sight the man would have been unable to distinguish objects 
from each other. But to this latter, which proceeds on the assumption of his being bom 
blind, it is sufficient to reply (1) that this man had not been born blind, as is implied 
in the word iiroKaTeardBri — he was restored to or reinstated in his once normal condi- 
tion ; and (2) he was able to discriminate trees from meo, so that he must have seen 
both before this blindness supervened. Before Berkeley's time visual distance was traced 
to an original law of our constitution, and considered an original perception ; but the 
bishop proved, as is very generally admitted, that our information on this subject of 
the distance of objects is acquired by experience and association; while, if we judge 
of the distance of objects solely from the visible impressions on the retina, we fall 
into great mistakes. The case, too, of Gheselden, who had been bom blind, appeared 
to confirm the theory of Berkeley, for when couched he at first had no correct notions of 
distances, but supposed all objects to touch and to be in close contact with the eye. It 
was gradually he corrected his visible by his tangible impressions, and gained a correct 
understanding of the situation of the objects that surrounded him, as well as of their 
shape and size. Had the blind man in this passage been thus bom blind, we could 
readily concede the necessity of a gradual operation — first to get his eyes opened, and 
secondly to gain correct notions "f the objects about him. No gradual miracle of this 
sort was required in the case of this man, because he had originally possessed the sense 
of sight and lost it. The true cause appears to be either an evidence on the part of the 
Saviour that he is not tied down to any particular mode of operation, but mani&sts his 
mercy in divers manners, according to his sovereign good pleasure ; or, if this theory 
be not accepted, the cause may be assigned to the symbolic nature of the miracle, 
as exhibiting the gradual recovery of spiritual eyesight, the removal of spiritual blind- 
ness being, tor the most part and with some rare exceptions, gradual and progressive. 

IV. ExPLANAriON OF TEEMS WITH riFFEBBNCES OT EEADINO. 1. OuT Lord led the 

blind man out, having taken him by the hand, which is a very expressive action, for it 
is a guide which the blind, whether physically or spiritually, so much need ; and this is 
just the kind of guide here mentioned — a Divine and therefore infallible Guide. This 
guidance is expressed in the received text by i^-hyaytv, though some critical editors 
prefer ^J^i'£7(ccv, equivalent to "conveyed out;" while in both the phrase "out of" is 
strongly expressed by the preposition in comiiosition with the verb and the separate «{». 
2. The reading of the common text is properly rendered, " I see men as trees, walking ; " 
that is to say, he saw men, but so indistinctly and at first apparently motionless, that 
they seemed more like trees ; but then he saw them walking, and so discriminated them 
from trees. The expression is rather abrupt, but most accurate in describing the three 
stages indicated. The reading of the critical editions is different, and is rightly repre- 
sented by the following rendering : — " I behold men, because as trees I see [them] walk- 
ing." Even according to this reading the expression is abrupt, as significant of sudden 
and joyful surprise ; as if he said, "1 see men not much differing in shape and form from 
trees ; but I know they are men, and not trees, for I see them in motion." 3. Succeed- 
ing this is the expression, he " made him looli up," not " see again " — a signification 
of the word quite admissible, yet not in accord with the sense here ; but for this whole 
phrase Tischendorf Tregelles and Alford read Sie$h.eifiey, " he saw clearly," that very 
instant (aorist) ; then, after restoration, he saw all things or all persons plainly — rather, 
continued looking on (Iv^fiXeirey, imperfect, instead of iv4$\t\)ie^ aorist) all things with 
clear vision. 4. The word TitKavyas, from T?\f, at a distance, and abyfi, equivalent to 
" bright light," " radiance," and in the plural " beams of the sun," signifies generally 
"far-shining" or " far-seen;" but here, from shining in the distance, " far-sightedly," 
" clearly," " plainly." 5. An important distinction is made between ifi/ia and o<^ea\uLj 
In this passage, the latter being the organ of sight, and as such used by prose-writers, 
the former or more poetic word being here the sense or inner power of seeing ; and lo 
the latter is the instrument employed by the former. 

V. The spitting and the application of the hands denote, according to Theophylaet, 



CH.vm. 1— 38.] TEE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 86C 

word and work ; they rather denote — the former the virtue proceeding from th« 
Saviour, which restored the extinct sense of sight, the latter the rectification of the 
organ. Just as in the case of the person born blind, who was couched for biindaess, 
the recovery here also was gradual ; so with the spiritually blind we proceed gradually 
from one degree of light to another, from grace to grace, and from strength to strength. 
When the spiritually blind recover sight, they discern many things before shrouded in 
darkness, but not all things, nor even those many things with perfect clearness, or in 
their correct relations or relative proportions. We need the hand of Jesus to touch oui 
eyes many a time before our spiritual eyesight is perfected ; that sight, by the gentla 
touch of our loving, living Saviour, goes on improving till our dying day. We are in 
the hand of our Saviour just as this blind man ; and as he led him forth, fully restored 
his sight, and sent him away from his old associations, so we must give ourselves up to 
his guidance, depend on him entirely for full restoration of sight and other spiritual 
powers, turn our back on old sinful courses or companions, and gc ^ith our Lord 
whithersoever he leads us. The following context exemplifies the gradv.al recovery of 
spiritual sight in those who identified Jesus with John, or Elias, or a prophet, and in 
the disciples who acknowledged him to be the Christ. The former had a glimmering of 
the truth ; the latter saw its full-orbed clearness. The former only saw " men like 
trees, walking ; " the latter saw it in this particular with perfect plainness. — J, J. G. 

Vers. 27 — 34. Parallel passages : Matt xvi. 13 — 24 ; Luke ii. 18 — 23. — Chrisfi 
prediction of M» death and rebuke of Peter. This section will be considered in con- 
nection with a like prediction in the following (ninth) chapter of this Gospel. — J. J. O. 

Vers. 35—38. Parallel passages: Matt. xvi. 25—27; Luke ix. 24 — 26. — Secular 
profit and spiritual loss. 1. A ouBioirs oalohlation. These verses present themselves 
in the light' of an arithmetical calculation regarding profit and loss — a calculation as 
important as it is curious. In this calculation the soul is on one side, and the world 
on the other ; secular matters on the one hand, spiritual concerns on the other. A 
calculation of this sort involves a difficulty, for there is no common standard to which 
we can bring things so difi'erent in their nature. There is no common measure by 
which we can simplify their comparison, and so better gauge their real relative propor- 
tions. They have no common factor ; they stand prime to each other. But perhaps it 
were better to regard these verses as an allusion, not so much to a bare arithmetical 
calculation, as to a practical mercantile reckoning. It is customary with merchants 
and others, at some particular period of the year, to look into their books and see how 
they stand with the world, and how the world stands with them — ^to balance their 
accounts, ascertaining their profits and determining their losses. Now, the course thus 
pursued in secular may with still greater advantage be adopted in spiritual concerns, 
while the adoption of some such course seems suggested by the inquiry, " What aball 
it profit a man?" 

II. Sdpposbd peofit. The supposed profit is here set forth to the greatest advantage. 
The supposed giuu is the very maximum — the greatest possible. It is, in fact, much 
greats: than any man has ever reached. That any one individual should gain the 
whole world is quite improbable — nay, it is almost, if not altogether, impossible. No 
man has ever gained so much, no man is ever likely to do so ; no man nowadays ever 
dreams of such a thing. We read, indeed, of one in ancient times that made au 
approximation to it. We are informed that Alexander the Great subjected the 
surrounding hostile tribes to the arms of Macedon ; conquered the provinces of Asia 
Minor, deciding the empire of all Asia in three great battles at Granicus, Issue, and 
Arbela; received the submission of Italian, Scythian, Kelt, and Iberian ambassadors; 
penetrated to the furthest limit northward, and overthrew the Scythians on the banks 
of the Jaxartis ; pushed his victories far eastward, even to the Eyphasis or Sutlej ; 
founded cities and planted colonies in the Punjab. And when at that point his 
progress was checked by the murmurino; of his troops, and he was obliged to retreat to 
the Hydaspes or Jlielum, he built a fleet, sailed down the Indus to its mouth, and 
there, standing in view of the Indian Ocean, and feeling he had arrived at the limit ot 
his career, tears filled his eyes, and he wept because his victories were at an end, and 
there was no more for him to subdue — " no other world," say the old bistorians, " for 



466 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO BT. MARK. [cH,vm. 1-33 

him to conquer." But, if we examine tlie matter with any degree of accuracy, we shall 
find that this bold adventurer overran only a few countries of the then known world, 
and but a very inconsderable portion of those immense continents and many islands 
which modern geographical discovery has added to the present huge dimensions of the 
globe. We have all heard of another in modern times who grasped at the sceptre of 
universal empire, who rose rapidly from a lieutenant of artillery to captain, and from 
captain to colonel, and from colonel to general of division. Soon he became first 
consul for ten years, then for life, and afterwards ascended the imperial throne. The 
empire of France he increased by one-third; but what was that to the high-vaulting 
ambition of Napoleon ? He must needs reign suprems and without a rival in Europe, 
and in prosecution of that gigantic scheme of conquest he actually added to his empire 
Italy, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Hanover, the Hanse towns. He seized on Spain 
and Portugal, and set his kinsmen on foreign thrones. He sought Russia, but above 
all he sighed for England. He pounced on Egypt ; thence, as the most potent point of 
attack, he fixed his eye on India. India once gained, the world, he thought, would be 
laid subject at his feet, and he its one and sole possessor. This, doubtle^>s, would have 
been the result of its successful invasion. But the tide of fortune ceased to fiow. To 
his failure in Spain succeeded his retreat from Moscow, next his defeat at Leipzig, then 
his banishment to Elba, and, last of all, his final and fearful overthrow on the plains of 
Waterloo. No one individual has ever yet attained to the possession of the world ; no 
one has advanced beyond a distant approximation to it. But let us for a moment 
fancy the supposition to have become an accomplished fact. Let us suppose the wide 
empire of earth in the hands of one man; let us take for granted that the possession of 
the world — the whole world — is realized by a single individual ; let us imagine all the 
benefits of that vast dominion — its conveniences and comforts, its riches and honours, 
its pleasures, praises, and profits, all at the command of one man. 

IIL The ddbation of such pbofit bbiep. What then would be the continuance 
of such ? Why, he would find it impossible to retain it for any considerable length of 
time. We cannot calculate with certainty on the continuance of any worldly posses- 
sion during the whole of life ; we cannot reckon on its lasting for even a few years of that 
life in advance ; and, even if we could, we are not sure of life itself for a single moment. 
" Life is even a vapour, that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away;" 
" There is but a step between us and death ; " " This night the soul may be required." 
Thera is no permanence of possession upon earth ; there is no fixity of tenure here 
below. The heirloom handed down from father to son, and again from son to fiftther, 
shall pass into strangers' hands. The hereditary estate, secure it as you may by deeds 
and settlements, will soon, notwithstanding all your caution, change proprietorship. 
The baronial residence will in time become a ruin grey, round which the ivy twines. 
Truly as well as eloquently has the poet said — 

" The cloud-capp'd towers, the gorgeous palaces, 
Tlie solemn temples, the great globe itself, 
Yej, all whioh it inherit, shall dissolve." 

Our most cherished possessions must soon revert to others. It matters not how firmly 
we hold them ; force, or fraud, or casualty, or imprudence, or disease, or death — one or 
other of these will wrench them from our reluctant grasp ; and the question may be 
asked of us, as of the fool in the Gospel, " Then whose shall these things be? " If, then, 
ve possessed the whole world, every instant we lived in it we shoulu run the risk of 
losing it or leaving it, of being taken from it or having it snatched from us, of beinw 
compelled to give up the possession either by the open violence of enemies or the 
treacherous avarice of friends, by folly on our part or dishonesty on that of others, by 
some sudden reverse of fortime or by some sad dispensation of providence. 

IV. The enjoyment of it impossible. Further, if we had the whole world in actual 
possession, and were able to retain it in inalienable and never-failing proprietorship 
still we could not enjoy it all. With all the progress of modern times, with all the 
advances of science, with all the forward strides of this nineteenth century, with all that 
geological research and chemical analysis and botanical skill have discovered, there ars 
still many plants and many substances of whioh we know not the nature, or »t least 
have not yet learned the use. So long as the properties of any object remain unKnown, 



CH. viu. i— a«.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAKK. 361 

it ia manifest that that object itself cannot be enjoyed. Anc even if we knew all tha 
qualities of every fowl uf heaven, of every fish of the sea, of every plant that grows oa 
the surface and of every mineral that is buried in the bowels of the earth, yet what uss 
could any one individual make of them all ? What a small portion of them would 
meet all the real necessities of life! How few of them would suffice for man's limited 
powers of enjoyment ! How few of them would supply a substantial answer to that 
wide question, "What shall I eat, or what shall I drink, or wherewithal shall I be 
clothed? " If the cattle on a thousand hills were ours, if all the mineral wealth of the 
world were our own, if earth and all its store of gold and silver and precious stones were 
at,pur feet, if earth with all its fruits and flowers, its animal and vegetable productions, 
were at our disposal, what could one individual, possessing limited powers and capaci- 
ties, do with them all ? How could he enjoy them ? Where would he store them that 
they might be safe? What, in a word, would they really profit him? Ah! how 
forcibly is the whole expressed in the simple lines ! — 

" Man needs but little here below, 
Nor needs that little long." 

V. Thk nNSATisFACTORT NATURE OF IT. The world, if we possessed it all, and could 
retain it always, and enjoy it fully, would not satisfy us. We all know the possibility 
of being as much or more disappointed in a thing, as inconvenienced by bein^ dis- 
appointed of it. Hope has its pleasures, and they are frequently as great, sometimes 
far greater than those of enjoyment. The poet, when he wrote of " the pleasures of hope," 
knew well that hope was one main source of human enjoyment. But in the supposed 
possession of the whole world that source of enjoyment would be cut off, as in that case 
man would have nothing to hope for. The distance, that lent its enchantment to the 
view, would be annihilated ; desire would still be unsatisfied, and yet hope would be at 
an end. Besides, where is the rich man who is perfectly satisfied with his wealth, and 
who feels that it is a sufiioient source of happiness ? Where is the man of pleasure who 
can truly say that his pleasures have been without alloy? Where the ambitious 
aspirant who is not in feverish dread of the fickleness of popular favour ? Where the 
heart that has not yearned for more than earth can furnish ? Who has not felt that 
" aching void " which " the world can never fill " ? It is not in the increase of riches, 
nor in the accession of honours, nor in any augmentation of creature enjoyments, that 
true satisfaction is to be found: the wealth of this world cannot purchase it; the 
pleasures of sense and sin cannot procure it; honours bestowed by fellow-creatures 
cannot confer it. Nor yet do we mean to decry the importance of temporal things 
We know that they can minister much to man ; they can add to our convenience and 
comfort ; they can furnish their quota to our enjoyment ; they can supply enlarged 
means of usefulness ; they can contribute to the decency and dignity of life ; they can 
shield us from the distresses, and difiiculties, and discomforts of poverty. But we deny 
altogether that they can prevent or remove the vanity and vexation of spirit that are 
inseparably associated with all worldly things. In the midst of all that this world can 
furnish men have been heard to cry out, if not in words, at least in the sentiments of 
the patriarch, " I would not live alway." When this is the way with the prosperous 
worldling, often too has the child of God, amid the perplexities of life, cause to repeat 
the n^ng — 

"I would not live alway ; I ask not to stay 
Where storm after storm rises dark o'er the way. 
The few fleeting mornings that dawn on us here 
Axe enough for life's sorrows, enough for its cheer. 

• Who — who would live alway, away from his God ; 
Away from yon heaven, that blissful abode. 
Where rivers of pleasure flow o'er the bright plains. 
And tha noontide of glory eternally reigns?" 

VL Smeotjal loss. 1. Practical bearing of all this. What, it may be asked, k 
the practical lesson from all this ? It is to lead us to God as the end, and to Christ as 
the way to the Father ; to show us the value of salvation, the importance of eterna] 



868 '1 HE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. vm. 1—38. 

things ; to make us alive to the things of God ; and, above all, to impress on us the worth 
of the Boul and spiritual life. We have seen that if a man could possess the whole 
world he might still be unhappy — ay, perfectly miserable; fears harassing him, 
conscience tormenting him, afflictions overwhelming him, death overtaking him, and 
his worldly all departing from him amid " the swellings of Jordan." But in general men 
stop far short of what has been thus supposed. They are willing to lose the soul for 
infinitely less than the world : at all events, a small thing takes the place of all the 
world to the sinner, and is made the means of his losing the soul. Thus, to the 
drunkard, the indulgence of his passion for strong drink is the horizon that bounds the 
world of his happiness and of his hopes ; while to gain his object he submits to the logs 
of his soul. So with the licentious ; rhe gratilication of their low lust is all the world to 
them, and to it they sacrifice the soul. " Avoid," says the apostle, " youthful lusts, 
that war against the soul." So with the ambitious; the attainment of the olijeot on 
which their heart is set is their world of gratificatioa, and, for the sake of it, they will 
not only run the risk of losing the soul, but rush upon sure destruction. We might 
enumerate many and various classes of sinners — the horse-racer, the gamester, the 
blasphemer, the liar, the murderer — all ruining their owil soul for the sake of question- 
able pleasures ; at all events, pleasures that last but for a season, and that perish in the 
using. With sinners of every grade the indulgence of sin is their world of gratification, 
their all of wretched happiness, for which they are every day throwing away their 
chances of salvation and deliberately damning their own soul. Oh, what fearful folly ! 
What unspeakable madness 1 Oh, may we not with propriety appeal to that sinful 
man, to whatever category or class his sin belongs, and with all the earnestness of our 
nature plead with him to spare his own soul ? Should we not urge him, with all the 
powers of persuasion we can possibly command, to part with his vice at once and for 
ever, rather than plunge his soul into a hell of eternal misery ? 2. Exeyetical note. (1) 
The word fle^j is not " will " of future time, but " wi 11 " connected with choice or purpose. 
It is correctly rendered " would " in the Revised Version. The word ia also dis- 
tinguished from Poi\ofuu, which expresses a wish — mere willingness or inclination. 
Homer employs the latter for the former in the case of the gods, for with them wish ia 
ivill. Thus the meaning is, " Whosoever may will [or choose] to save his life ; " while in 
the next clause it is taken for granted that no one, of his own free will and choice, would 
desire to lose it, and therefore the expression is different, beins; literally, Whosoever 
shall (as a matter of fact) destroy (AiroAcVei) his life. (2) The word x^uxh is the bond 
of union between the body and the spirit in the triple trichotomy of " body, soul, 
and spirit " (1 Thess. v. 23). Viewed in connection with the body, it is the natural or 
animal life, but in its relation to the spirit it is the spiritual or higher life. Thus in 
one sense it is less than what we understand by soul, and in another sense it is more, 
comprehending not only the immortal life of the soul, but the never-ending life of soul 
and body when reunited. (3) ZinuaBy denotes forfeiture, and so it is correctly rendered 
in the Revised Version " forfeit ; " while iiTiiWaryiui (from the roots irrl, instead of, and 
^AAoT, another) denotes one thing given in exchange for another, and so an equivalent or 
ransom, the idea being that if a man have lost, by way of mulct or forfeiture, his life 
or soul, what ransom will he be able to give in order to buy it back or redeem it I The 
expression in St. Luke is, " What is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and 
destroy himself " or " suffer forfeit ? " 3. .4 celebrated choice. The fabled choice of Her- 
cules has at least a useful moral. T«yo ladies of gigantic stature — one graceful and 
modest, with raiment white as snow, the other florid and aifected ; the former called 
Virtue, the latter Pleasure, though self-named Happiness, approached the youthful hero. 
The latter promised him the possession of all pleasures, and that his path in life would 
be strewed with flowers, if he chose to follow her, reminding him at the same time that 
the path of virtue was tedious and thorny ; the former promised to make his name 
glorious to posterity, and introduce him at death into the society of the gods, remind- 
ing him that the pleasures of the senses are the enjoyments of the brute, and that 
true pleasure springs from virtuous conduct. The hero, as the fable goes, did not 
long hesitate, but, giving his hand to Virtue, bade her be his guide, saying, " Lead on, 
and I will follow you." 

VIL Thk value of the soul, ob everlabtinq life. 1. Valtie of the sovl variously 
atimated. We may estimate the value of the soul in several ways ; we may enumerata 



CH. Tin. 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MARK. 96$ 

four of these as the most obvious. We may estimate it by the infinite price paid for 
it, by the immensity of its capacities, by its intrinsic worth, and by the immortality 
of its being. 2. The price paid. The price paid for the soul was a precious ransom price, 
" for the redemption of the soul is precious." That price was not " corruptible things, 
as silver and gold," but " the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and 
without spot." In him we have " redemption through his blctod, the forgiveness of sins, 
according to the riches of his grace." On account of the soul Christ died ; on account of 
the soul the Holy Spirit, the Sanctifier, is at work ; on account of the soul the Word of 
God is given, the gospel is preached, and " the arm of the Lord revealed." Thus, from the 
, pains God takes to save the soul, from the power the Spirit exerts to sanctify the soul, 
from the efforts Satan makes to destroy the soul, as well as from the blood which Christ 
shed to redeem the soul, we may infer the value of the human soul, and consequently 
infer the exceeding greatness of its loss. 3. Its intrinsic worth. Again, we think of its 
intrinsic worth. It is a scintillation of Deity ; it is the breath of the Almighty ; it is the 
candle of the Lord in man. " God breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man 
became a living soul." It was at its creation the image of its Maker as well as the 
masterpiece of his workmanship; it was stamped with the likeness of the EtemaL 
And though the superscription is sadly defaced by sin, it is an infinite spirit still, and 
the direct offspring of the Father of spirits, i. Its immense capacities. When we 
reflect on its great capacities, we bethink ourselves of its capability of suffering, which is 
immense. No pain of body is to be compared with the unspeakable anguish of the souL 
There is, on the other hand, no pleasure of bodily organization to be compared with th« 
intensely thrilling joyousness of the soul, when it delights itself in God, or meditates 
on his Word and works, or soars aloft in high and holy contemplation. Even a worldly 
poet, speaking of the happiness of thought, says, "1 have oft been happy thinking." 
Besides, there is its wonderful power of development. The little that the lower 
animals possess is soon perfected ; instinct flows in at once. The mind of man con- 
tains in itself the elements of almost unlimited improvement. As long as life lasts, 
accessions may be made to our knowledge, additions made to our attainments, 
new discoveries made in science, fresh advances in art. Better still, it is the very 
prerogative of the soul, as it is the very purpose for which its powers were bestowed, 
to glorify God on earth and be glorified with him in heaven, to enjoy him both here and 
hereafter, to see him and serve him, to hold converse with angels and glorified spirits, 
to have fellowship with Father, Son, and Spirit, to drink deep of the fountain of grace 
and love that wells up beside the throne of the Eternal. 5. The immortality of its 
being. Add to all this the immortality of its being. It is an immortal spirit ; it is s 
flame that can never be extinguished ; it is a light that can never be put out ; it is unseen, 
but eternal The babe that is only a span long has a soul that will outlive this world. 
In the bosom of that babe, as it sleeps in the cradle, or hangs on the breast, is a soul 
that will last longer than sun and moon endure. When the elements shall melt with 
fervent heat, when the earth shall be burnt up, and the heavens rolled together like a 
crumpled scroll, that soul shall survive, and remain unhurt amid " the wreck of matter 
and the crush of worlds." Not so the body. 6. The shroud of Saiadin. Who has not 
heard, or rather read, of that famous Asiatic warrior, Saiadin ? After subjugating Egypt, 
establishing himself as Sultan of Egypt and Syria, taking towns without number, and 
retaking Jerusalem itself from the hands of the Crusaders, this Moslem hero of the 
Third Crusade, and beau-ideal of mediaeval chivalry, had at length to yield to a still 
mightier conqueror. A few moments before he breathed his last, he ordered a herald to 
suspend on the point of a lance the shroud in which he was to be buried, and to cry as 
he raised it, " Look, here is all that Saiadin the Great, the conqueror, the emperor, bean 
away with him of all his glory." Thus all the honours and riches of this world, all bodily 
pleasures and gratifications, all earthly greatness, are reduced by death to the shroud 
and the winding-sheet ; but the soul, immortal in its nature, and secure in its existence, 
" smiles at the drawn dagger " or other implement of death. From all these considerations 
may be inferred the immeasurable loss of the soul ; for — 

<* What is the thing of greatest price^ 
The whole creation round ? 
That which was lost in Paradise, 
That whirh in Christ is found. 
•■LMJlSK. 



no THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. vm. 1- 



" The 8onl of man, Jehovah's breath. 
It keeps two worlds in strife ; 
Hell works beneath its work of death. 
Heaven stoops to give it life." 

7. The Ml font of fhi question. What, then, we may repeat, shall it profit • man, if 
ha shall gain the whole world — and yet all the gain any man can expect is infinitely 
lees than that — and lose his own soul or higher heavenly life? What shall it profit 
him, if be shall make a little sordid gain, but lose his soul ? What shall it profit him, 
if he shall indulge some degrading passion, and thereby lose his soul ? What shall it 
Mofit him, if he gratify some vile lust, and by it lose his soul ? What shall it profit 
kim, if he swallow a few more intoxicating draughts, and in the end lose his soul ? 
What shall it profit him, if he gratify a few more lusts of the flesh, and lose his own 
•oul ? What shall it profit him, if he enjoy a little longer the society of evil com- 
ranions, or even the smile and favour of the great ones of the earth, and lose his soul ? 
Wliat will it profit him, if he have a few more pleasures of any kind — ^pleasures that 
last so short a space, and satisfy so very little wlule they do last — and in lieu of them 
lose his own soul ? Who is not, on due reflection, prepared to answer any such 
questions with the strongest negative ? The angels in heaven, and the spirits of the 
just made perfect that are already there, if asked the same question, would declare, in 
tones of loudest earnestness and solemn emphasis, " Nothing, nothing 1 " Lost souls 
in ludl^ if malice prevented not, would assert the same. God the Father, who sent his 
Son to save the soul ; God the Son, who suffered on the cross to redeem it ; God the 
Spirit, who came to sanctify it; the Almighty undivided Three in One, would answer 
their own question in this passage by a negative that neither man nor angel, fallen nor 
nnfallen, would gainsay, and that would wake an echo both in heaven above and in 
•arth or hell beneath. 

Vin. Extent op the loss. L This is an entire loss. The loss in question is an 
entire and unqualified loss. When Francis I. lost the important battle of Pavia, he 
described it by saying, " We have lost all but honour." And thus, though the disastei 
was overwhelming and the loss exceeding great, yet there was one qualifying circum- 
stance — the preservation of honour intact and unsullied. Not so with the loss of the 
■oul : there is nothing to qualify it, nothing to mitigate it. It is tlie loss of lones, the 
death of deaths — a catastrophe unequalled in extent, and unparalleled in its amount 
through all the universe of God. 2. A loss without compensation. The loss of the 
soul is a loss for which there is no compensation. The great fire of London consumed 
•ix hundred streets, thirteen thousand dwellings, and ninety churches, and destroyed 
property to the amount of seven and a half millions of pounds sterling. Yet that 
calamity was in some sort changed into a blessing ; for the rebuilding of the city, in a 
superior style of architecture, and with more regard to sanitary arrangements, banished 
for ever the fearful plague which had previously made such havoc in that populous 
place. There is, besides, a well-known compensatory principle in the providence of 
God, so that, when a man loses his sight, the sense of hearing becomes more acute, 
and the perception of sounds more exact and accurate. The deaf mut«, again, is said 
to have the sense of sight quickened ; while the man both blind and dumb gains a 
more exquisite sense of touch. But the loss of the soul is a calamity for which there 
is nothing to compensate, and which nothing can countervail so as to make amends 
for it. 3. The loss is irreparable. Other losses may be repaired. The friend you love 
as your own soul may take an umbrage ; he may misunderstand you, or you may be 
misrepresented to him ; — 

" Angry words will soon step in. 
To spread the breach that woids begin." 

But let a proper explanation be given, and his friendship may be regdned ; or, if he 
continue obstinate, other and even better friends may supply his place. Tou may lose 
your health ; you may be like the poor woman who had sufTered so much from, and 
expended so much on, physicians without any improvement ; but, under the blessing of 
Providence on the skill of yet another physician and the use of proper medicines, or 
by the intervention of the great Physician apart from any means, or when all means 
hava failed, you may regain that inestimable blessing. You may lose your property, 



OH, vra. 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCOIIDING TO ST. MARK. 371 

like Job when his cattle were lost, and when his children had perished, and want had 
come in like an armed man ; yet, by years of patient industry and steady perseverance, 
under the Divine blessing, you may, like that same patriarch, gain double of all you 
lost. But oh 1 there is no reparation for the loss of the soul ; that loss can never be 
retrieved, and can never be recalled. When Sir Isaac Newton had lost some most 
important and complicated calculations, the result of years of patient thought and 
investigation, by the burning of his papers, the loss to him was immense ; and yet, 
with patience equal to his genius, he could say to the favourite animal that caused it, 
" Diamond, Diamond, thou little knowest the labour thou hast cost me I " But what is 
the loss even of years of patient philosophic investigation and profound mathematical 
research compared with the loss of a human soul, capable of conducting, in some 
degree, similar investigations, and of repeating and repairing, in case of loss, those 
investigations? 4. " Cast away." This is the expression in the parallel passage of St. 
Luke. Though it may serve in exposition, it is not quite exact. The word (riiuaBels 
lias rather the signification of having incurred a forfeiture; but, in sooth, a fearful 
lorfeiture — a forfeiture that involves the fate of being cast away into that " blackness of 
aarkness," unrelieved by any starlight of hope or sunshine of promise, and where no 
liiinbow of mercy ever spans the sky. The heathen, without any proper notion ol a 
future state, shrank from the death of the body, because they were then deprived for 
fvnr of the light of day. "There is a magnificent fulness of life," says Bulwer, " in 
those children of the beautiful Hellas. They ever bid a last lingering and half- 
I eluctant farewell to the sun. The orb which animated their temperate sky, which 
ripened their fertile fields, in which they saw the type of eternal youth, of surpassing 
beauty and incarnate poetry — human in its associations, yet divine in ite ns-ture — is 
equally beloved and equally to be mourned by the maiden tenderness of the batine or 
the sullen majesty of the hero. The sun was to them a familiar frieiid. Tr-fc ttaror of 
the nether world lay in the thought that its fields are sunless." Oh, what shall we, to 
whom futurity has been revealed, then say of the second death, when the lost soul is 
cast away, through a fatal forfeiture of the light of heaven, into that sunless region 
where the "blackness of darkness" ever reigns, where it is consigned to the com- 
panionship of devils and the damned, where it sinks deeper and deeper into 
the bottomless abyss of misery, "where their worm dieth not, and the fin is not 
quenched''^-^. J. CL 



END OP VOL. L 



