“TTT 





\ 
sal A) $ 
CNORG: SASS \\ WSS - : | 

| rr Ox 
RAT NC Vs INC ee 
WK CG 
1-XIll 
J - 
WS\S 
© 


The Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 


WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 








NORMA) s 
MET ER ODIST. 2 
MANSFiki i AT A 


HE UGHTS COMMUNITY 


“1 CHURCH 
DAMS 

















_ THE LIFE AND LIGHT OF MEN. 

















Rev. Frederick B. Meyer, B. A. 
COD 


“« Few books of recent years are better adapted to instruct and 
help Christians than those of this author. He is aman ‘mighty 
in the Scriptures.’’”’—D. L. Moopy. 


Old Testament Heroes. 2mo, cloth, each..... $1.00 


Joshua and the Land of Promise. 
Moses, the Servant of God. 

Joseph: Beloved— Hated—Exalted. 
Israel: A Prince with God. 

Abraham; or, The Obedience of Faith. 
Elijah and the Secret of His Power. 


‘* Such studies as these may serve as models to those who are 
grappling with the problem of a Sunday-night preaching ser- 
vice. These sermons are of exceptional excellence.”—7%e 
Golden Rule. 


The Christian Life Series. 18mo, cloth, each 50¢.; 
Wihite:clotly caches... ins, curiae eke cata oie .60 
Key Words Of the Inner Life. 

The Future Tenses of the Blessed Life. 
The Present Tenses of the Blessed Life. 


The Shepherd Psalm. 
Christian Living. 


“ The Christian Life series of books by F. B. Meyer are well 
adapted to inspire the purpose of holy living.’—7x%e Central 
Presbyterian. 


The Expository Series. 12mo, cloth, each..... 1.00 


The Way into the Holiest. An Exposition of the Epistle to 
the Hebrews. 
The Life and Light of Men. Expositions in John’s Gospel. 
Tried by Fire. Expositions of First Epistle of Peter. 
““ These expositions have the character of all Mr. Meyer’s 
writings. They combine devout insight into the rich resources 


of the Word of God, with skill in adapting it to the scriptural 
needs of his readers.’’— The S. S. Times. 


Envelope Series of Booklets. Packets Nos. 1 and 2, 
each containing 12 Tracts, assorted........... Net s2O 


Choice Extracts from the Writings of Rev. F. B. Meyer. 
Compiled by Rey. B. Fay Mills. 24mo, paper, each 5c.; 
Per dozen ss aoc nie aaterg rei AOR ee nee 35 
Larger edition, r6mo, paper........ Nahe teen Scien fits 


Iq 


ee ele AND LIGHT 
OF MEN. 


EXPOSITIONS OF JOHN 1—XIL. 


BY 


BB. MEYER, ;By A; 


Author of ‘‘ Abraham: or, the Obedience of Kaith;” 
“‘ Blijah: and the Secret of His Power,” 
“‘Tsvael: a Prince with God,;”’ 

“‘ Tried by Fire,’ ete. 


FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 
New York CHICAGO TORONTO 
Publishers of Evangelical Literature 


Author’s Edition 


Theology Library 


SCHOOL OF HIEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 


PREFACE. 
Soc 


A{HIS is the Gospel of the Divine Life of Jesus. The 
eagle has always been its recognised emblem, as 
denoting its sublime and heavenly character. : 


And, clearly, in its diction, its insight into the 





deepest truths, its repeated testimony to the Glory 
and Deity of our Lord, it holds a unique place among the 


records of His life. 


It soars. It holds fellowship with the Throne. Its eyrie is 
in the Heart of God. And yet, in one ef its aspects, this Gospel 
is as much the record of the Man Christ Jesus, as of the 
Only-begotten Son; and for this it is of inestimable worth 


to all who desire to follow in His steps. 


There is no part of Scripture more conducive to the 
culture of the inner life; and it is under this aspect that it 


is considered in the following pages. 


This attempt to present some of the unsearchable wealth 
of this Gospel may be compared to a shell-full of water dipped 
up by a child from a vast fresh-water lake ; but such as it 
is, it is commended to the people of God with the desire 
that it may be used by the Divine Spirit to bring them into 
a deeper knowledge of Life, Light, and Love, as they are 


in Jesus Christ our Lord. 
F. B. MEYER. 





aor eka Ne be. 


SE SS = 
PAGE POE PAGE 
THE WorD .. a of -- 5 | Tue Worps or Jesus 40 +» 142 
I. XXL 
THE WorD IN CREATION ., +» 12 | Rivers or LivinG WaTER ~. Spee) 
: a z LTT, - XYIL 
BONS poe Ne Lg Tue PENITENT’s GosPEL .. .. 154 
IV. 
Tue WorRD MADE FLESH .. mat he: Sapaecs 
- Tue Licut oF Lire .. aie +. 160 
THE WorD DECLARING THE UNSEEN : oN 
Gop Be x ae .. 33 | Curist’s AxpsorpTION In His 
a { FATHER .. Ae ve o. 167 
THREE MEMORABLE Days pee AG AX, 
VU. MADE FREE BY THE SON OF Gop 1173 
Tue Son or Man 50 XXXVI. 
VII. Tue GLory OF CHRIST .. Btw.) 
Tue First MirAcLE ae Hoe Gy XXVI. 
TX, THE Works oF Gop.. ‘ae «- 185 
DY de 
Tue TEMPLE OF THE Bo 65 XYVUL 
x | Tue BLessep Lire or TRUST .. 192 
A PsatMor Lire .. 3 ee) 72 
XALX, 
XT. 
| DHE IbeAL SHEPHERD 0 -. 199 
Tue SHADOW OF THE Cross on 99 
ATL. XXX, 
Sewer” 86 THE WoRK OF AN UNGIFTED 
WORKER .. “5 a -. 206 
ATI. 
Lire as A FounTAIN .. 93 ALAT 
oan Love’s DELAYS a BS weeny 
Darine To AcT In, FalTH ++ 100 AXXIL 
B ANOINTED FOR His BuRIAL yo 
AV. 9 
Tue DivinE MasTER WORKMAN 107 AXXIT, 
XVI. FALLING INTO THE GROUND TO 
THE WiLL oF Gop .. ae Supe y Dis “ oi =a : 226 
f YVIL XXXIV, 
Tur Faruer’s NAME eS _, rat | THE TROUBLED SAVIOUR .. ++ 233 
XVII. AAAKY, 
Tue Faruer’s Girt TO THE SON 128 THE WORLD AND ITS PRINCE . 240 
ATX, XXXVI, 
Tue BREAD WHICH GIVES AND SUS- Tue True Licur or Gop’s 
TAINS LIFE at Be 22 °135 CHILDREN st aa an BLY 








THE LIFE AND LIGHT OF MEN. 


EXPOSITIONS OF JOHN I-XTI. 


oe DA 
Es 
Ghe Word. 


‘‘In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the 
Word was God.’’—JOHN i. 1. 





nets 
m,)¥u. OW amazing is the opening of this Gospel! The 
writer does not stay to introduce himself, to men- 
BV iB tion his name, or give proofs of his trustworthiness. 
y- With singular abruptness, with no attempt to sub- 
cu stantiate his own claims or the claims. of this 
marvellous treatise, he casts it into the teeming 

world of human thought and life, as Jochebed launched the 


cradle on the bosom of the Nile. 


Did he feel that the matter of the book would sufficiently 
vindicate its truthfulness ; and that it would authenticate itself 
as bread, and light, and water, and spring flowers do? Did he 
feel that the Spirit who inspired it might be left to care for it? 
To ask such questions is to suggest the answer. But is there 
not a marvellous audacity in the casting forth of this Gospel, 
unannounced, unauthenticated by the recommendations of great 
names? Yet the result has vindicated the Evangelist. For, as 


_ the experience of the Church grows—nay, as our own experi- 


ence grows—new depths of beauty and truthfulness reveal 


_ themselves in its pages, and compel belief in all whose hearts 


are pure enough to recognise the Divine. 


6 | The Word. 


Our writer does not name the gross errors of his time, which 
were beginning to obscure the dawn of our holy faith, as clouds 
steal up upon a too radiant sunrise. Why should he preserve 
these flies in amber? It is enough for him to announce, 
positively and dogmatically, the Truth; sure that the conscience 
of man would not fail to recognise her face and the accents 
of her voice, and eventually turn from all others to cleave 
to her alone. 

Nor can we wonder that the fisherman of Galilee was able 
thus to write for all the world to hear. Truths of universal 
importance are perceived less by the intellect than by the 
heart. Things which are hidden from the wise and prudent are 
revealed to babes. An intense religious conviction will stimu- 
late the action of all the faculties ; as a jar of oxygen quickens 
into brilliant coruscations the burning phosphorus. But how 
much must we not attribute to the teaching of that blessed 
Spirit, who found congenial work in glorifying the Lord through 
the pen of his dearest friend and aptest pupil! Very majestic 
are the opening words, and this designation of our Lord :— 


THE WoRD. We need not ask whence this term came. It 
may have been a pebble from the brook of Old Testament 
Scripture; or a phrase borrowed, as Neander suggests, from the 
current talk of Ephesus, where this Gospel was written about the 
year A.D. 97. But, whencesoever it came, it is here re-minted 
by the Spirit of God, and is most significant. 

As words utler thought, so does Christ utter God.—A man, 
newly arrived from the busy outer world, sits among his family, 
absorbed and rapt in thought. Wife and child are hushed 
into a great stillness as they look upon his face, which tells 
a tale of inner conflict ; as the foam-flecked surface of a mountain 
stream reveals the agony of its boulder-broken career. They 
cannot. even guess what oppresses him until he opens his lips 
and speaks. The friends who gathered to the consecration of 
the angel-heralded boy had no idea by what name the aged 
priest would call him, till the trembling hand indented the 
wax of the writing-tablet with the Divinely-appointed name of 
Christ’s forerunner. 


Christ uttered God. % 


‘So man had not known God, unless Christ had uttered Him. 
An Egyptian temple bore this inscription on its portico: “Iam 
He that is, and was, and shall be ; and no mortal has ever lifted 
my veil.” A profound Eastern thinker, in the very dawn of the 
world’s life, cried : “Oh that I knew where I might find Him!... 
Behold, I go forward, but He is not there ; and backward, but 
I cannot perceive Him.” An altar in Athens, the brain of the 
world, was erected to “the unknown God.” ‘But Christ uttered 
God. “No man hath seen God at any time ; the only-begotten 
Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared 
Him.” 

There are three ways in which Christ has uttered God, as 
these introductory verses prove : in Creation ; in his Teaching ; 
and in his Incarnation. 


God zs Life-—Not simply living, in contrast to dead idols ; 
but life-giving. The fountain of life ever rises from the depths 
of the abysmal Godhead. Yet that life had been an unknown — 
‘quantity, had not the Word uttered it in creation, which his 
hands have wrought; so that the universe is a poem (in the 
strict meaning of that word) wrought out of the majestic 
substance of God’s underived and eternal Being. 


God zs Light.—But the light had been undiscovered, because 
insufferable, unless the Word had shed it forth on created 
vision, revealing yet tempering its beauty, passing it through 
the luminous and yet shrouding veil of his words. 


God zs Love.—Love is the essence of his being, and all love 
everywhere is the far-travelled beam and ray of his heart 
(Eph. iii. 15, R.V. mar.). But that love had never been realized, 
unless the Word had embodied it in a human life, with caresses 
for little children, tears for broken hearts, tender pity for the 
lost, agony unto death for mankind. 

Lift up your eyes and hearts, and behold with devout rapture 
your glorious Lord, uttering the depths, the hidden depths of 
God (1 Cor. ii. 10, 16).. He has not only done so, but He will 
continue to do so through all ages, as we are able to bear it 
(John xvii. 26). We have only yet, at his feet, commenced 
to learn the alphabet, the first broken syllables of the Divine 


8 Ghe Word. 


Science ; but it is probable that the ages of eternity are to 
witness an eternal progression in this sublime theology. Our 
knowledge ever-increasing our capacity to know ; our capacity 
ever leading to fresh hunger; our hunger ever appropriating 
the blessedness of the fourth Beatitude. Remember the 
majestic Apocalyptic vision, in which the seer beheld Christ 
riding forth on his snow-white steed, his eyes as flame, his head 
girt with many crowns, his vesture dipped in blood ; but this is 
the name by which He was known—a name symbolic of his 
eternal ministry—/Azs name ts called the Word of God (Rev. 
xix. 13). 


Before illustrating in detail our Lord’s three-fold utterance 
of the Father, there are one or two thoughts suggested by 
the sublime opening sentences of this Gospel which we do well 
to notice. 


I. THE ETERNITY OF THE BEING OF THE LORD JESUS.— 
“In the beginning was the Word.” Is there not here an 
evident reference to the opening words of the Book of Genesis, 
“In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.” 
But what a. contrast! At that moment, described as the 
beginning, and which may be pushed back far enough to 
include all the demands of modern geologists, you do not find 
the heavens and the earth, which as yet are not; but you do 
find the Word already in existence. . The words in the one case 
expressly exclude the eternity of matter ; but in the other they 
expressly include the eternity of the Word. Moses strikes the 
chord to descend the stream of Time ; John strikes it to look 
out on the expanse of Eternity lying beyond created things, 
but in which the Word was already existing. 

It is not so difficult to wend one’s way slowly back into 
the past, or to imagine the successive ages during which the 
world was being prepared for man’s habitation. But when we 
reach the place where the links of the time-chain stop, and we 
stand at the first moment of the creation of time and matter, 
and look out into the void on the other side—it is then that 
thought staggers and gives way. 

There is no light to guide us—sun, moon, and stars are 


\ 


“From Cherlasting to Eberlasting.” 9 


not created. No spirit to lead us; cherubim have not begun to 
love, or seraphim to burn. No stepping-stone for our feet ; 
for space is unoccupied save by the all-pervasive presence 
of God. No sufficient unit of measurement ; since, when 
arithmetic has reached its uttermost, the mighty aggregate 
is but a mote floating in the sunshine of the Being of God. 
What shall we do then, as we learn the pre-existence of the 
Word, but worship Him? 

That mind must indeed be slow to perceive which does not 
recognise that what is eternal must be Divine. If it be true 
that before the mountains were brought forth, or the earth was 
formed, the Word was, then, from everlasting to everlasting 
He must be God. Wherefore “unto the King eternal, immortal, 
invisible, the only wise God, be honour and glory for ever 
and ever.” 


II. THE PERSONALITY OF THE LORD JESUS.—“ He was 
with God.” We may not at first perceive the significance of 
this clause, any more than the casual tourist sees the import- 
ance of an embrasure in the fortifications where sheep browse, 
and soldiers stand at ease. But if ever there should come 
again days of conflict, like those which swept across the early 
Church, in which men should assert that the Word was but a 
momentary and impersonal manifestation of God, we should 
instantly revert to this significant clause, and cry, It cannot 
be— The Word was WITH God. The same was in the beginning 
_ WITH God. 

The preposition selected by the Evangelist is very significant. 
It means communion with and movement towards.. It denotes 
the intimate fellowship subsisting between two, and well befits 
the intercourse of the distinct Persons of the one and ever- 
blessed God. “The face of the everlasting Word was ever 
directed towards the face of the everlasting Father.” He was 
in the bosom of the Father. “He makes the Divine glory 
shine outwardly because He is filled inwardly. He contemplates 
before He reflects. He receives before He gives.” 

We are not then surprised to hear the Divine colloquy: “Let 
us make man”; or to learn that Jesus knew the Father (x. 15). 


10 The Word. 


How could He do other, when, “trailing clouds of glory 
behind Him,” He proceeded and came forth from God ? 

Let us never forget that our Saviour, who lived, and died, 
and rose, and is our familiar Friend, is a distinct personality, 
who was before all worlds, and will be unchanged for evermore. 
This is what we want. It is not enough to give us an 
abstraction, an ideal, a word. Our hearts crave One, and, 
blessed be God, they may have One whe may be a living, 
bright reality. 

More present to faith’s vision keen 
Than any earthly object seen ; 
More dear, more intimately nigh, 
Than e’en the dearest earthly tie. 


III]. THE DEITY OF OUR LORD JEsUS.—“ The Word was 
God.” He is not said to be ¢ke God; for that assertion would 
ascribe to the Son the totality of the Divine Being, and 
contradict the doctrine of the Holy Trinity. And He is not 
said to be Dzvine, which would lessen the emphasis. But He 
is said, distinctly and emphatically, to be God. “God manifest 
in the flesh.” 

He was born of a woman; yet He made woman. He ate 
and hungered, drank and thirsted ; yet He made corn to grow 
on the mountains, and poured the rivers from his crystal 
chalices. He needed sleep ; yet He slumbers not, and needs 
not to repair his wasted energy. He wept; yet He created 
the lachrymal duct. He died; yet He is the ever-living 
Jehovah, and made the tree of his cross. He inherited all 
things by death ; yet they were his before by inherent right. 

And what ts the Word to us ?—In his first Epistle, the holy 
Apostle tells us his intention in declaring that which he had 
seen and heard and handled of the Word : it was that others 
might share with him his fellowship with the Father and 
the Son. And fellowship means partnership, a common 
participation in a common stock; and, in this case, a blessed 
share in the very life and light and love of God. 

But how may such things become ours? There is a sense in 
which the orator, the thinker, the friend, is able to infuse 
himself into us by his fervid and quickening words, And is 


“God manifest in the flesh.’ II 


there not also a deep sense in which Jesus is the Word of God, 
because through Him God is ever pouring Himself into our 
hearts and lives? Asaman puts himself into his words, and 
by them communicates himself to others, so has God embodied 
Himself in Jesus, and those who receive the Son receive the 
Father, who has sent Him (Matt. x. 40). 

As the Father has put Himself into the Word, so has the 
Word put Himself into his words. “The words that I speak 
unto you, they are spirit, and they are life.” Live then in 
meditation on the words of Jesus; so that his being may 
become infused into yours, and through the Word the eternal 


Father may come and make his abode within you (John xiv. 23). 


So shall you be inspired by the very life and indwelling of 
God, and be lifted increasingly out of the time-sphere into the 
eternal ; into fellowship with all noble souls, with all saints and 
angels, with all who, through all worlds, live on Him, who is 
the Eternal and Divine Word, ever-blessed, ever to be adored. 


IT. 
Che Word in Creation. 


‘’The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by 
Him; and without Him was not any thing made that was made.” 
JOHN i.-2, 3. 


T is a distinct loss to many of us, whose lives are 
spent in the heart of great towns, that we miss those 
enlarged conceptions of Nature which are suggested 
by the far horizon of the sea ; the outlines of distant 
hills ; the snowy summits of the Alps; or the out- 
spread panorama of woods, rivers, and pasture lands. 

And the privation affects us principally in this, that contracted 

views of Nature sometimes carry with them more limited views 

of God’s being and glory than if we dwelt in habitual con- 
templation of the vastness and splendour of his Creation. 

One of the first thoughts which occur to the devout mind, on 
emerging from the straitened conditions of city life into the 
larger world of Nature, is to reproach itself that it has 
entertained such dwarfed ideas of God. And whilst it does not 
abate one note of the tender strain, Our Father, it adds to it 
the deep bass of the Psalmist’s awe, “ Great is the Lord, and 
greatly to be praised, and his greatness is unsearchable.” 

Such thoughts open straight on the passage before us. We 
look, and rightly, on the Lord Jesus, as Brother, Saviour, 
Friend ; but do we always conceive of Him as invested with 
the awful glory of Godhead? We cannot be too intimate and 
tender in our relations to Him ; but we do well sometimes to 
go outside to see what He has done, that we may know how 
great He is, who is so near and dear. 





“THE SAME WAS IN THE BEGINNING WITH Gop.”—At 
first this seems merely to sum up and repeat the previous 


bas Het ws make dilan.” £3 


verse. But it does more. It tells us that He who was before 
the beginning was also at the beginning ; and that that face-to- 
face fellowship, which had subsisted before all worlds, was in 
active exercise at the august moment. when the ever-blessed 
Trinity proceeded to create. ‘Let ws make man.” 

“ALL THINGS WERE MADE BY HIM.”—The Greek is very 
significant : AW things became, t.e., came into being, through 
flim. This decame is in striking contrast to the was of the 
previous verse, and indicates the passage from nothingness to 
being. Decame, z.e., all things emerged out of nothing at the 
creative fiat. There is a beautiful parallel in another passage 
of this Gospel, in which our Lord affirms, “Before Abraham 
became, 1 am” (viii. 58). 

The preposition “through” is always used of the office of our 
blessed Lord in the work of creation (1 Cor. viii. 6 ; Col. i. 16; 
Heb. i. 2), and is full of meaning, It leaves God the Father as 
the origin and source of all things, so that the elders are 
justified in their perpetual ascription of worship before his 
throne (Rev. iv. 11); but God the Son, our Lord, is the organ 
through which the creative purpose moves. Through Him the 
infinite God utters Himself in his works. 

In the archaic record of creation with which the Bible opens, 
two-phrases are to benoticed—created (Gen. i. 1, 21, 27) and God 
said (which occurs ten times). Into each of these we must now 
read the announcement of this text. Note those three acts 
of creation. Whatever else we may concede to men of science, 
we must insist on retaining these for God, and ascribing them to 
our Lord. And whenever God is said to speak, we must listen 
for the well-known accents of a voice we love. 

It was the voice of Jesus that said, “ Let there be light”; and 
the new ethereal substance spread like a haze of glory through 
space. It was the hand of Jesus that made the expanse 
between cloud and sea, in which the birds fly (Gen. i. 20). It 
was the bidding of Jesus that drove the turbulent waters from 
the land into the ocean-bed which He had scooped. It was the 
thought of Jesus to splinter the mountain peaks ; to thrust the 
frozen glacier down into the valley by inches ; to pour forth the 
rivers ; and to shake down over the hills the falling foam of the 


14 Che Word in Creation. 


cataract. It was Jesus that carpeted the earth with flowers, 
and devised the innumerable sorts of plants, and planted 
the noble forest-trees. It was Jesus that rolled the stars 
on their orbits, to tell forth the glory of God, and to keep time 
on Nature’s dial. It was Jesus that made the fish to flash 
in the deep; the reptile to creep in the brake; the firefly 
to glance through the forest; the birds to sing in the woods ; 
flocks to browse on the hills; and herds to traverse the 
prairies. 

It was Jesus who created the human nature which, in after 
years, He was to assume. He made man in the image and 
after the likeness of what He was Himself to be in the fulness 
of time. What strange emotions must have filled his heart as 
He built up that first man from the red earth ! 

“WITHOUT HIM WAS NOT ANYTHING MADE THAT WAS 
MADE.”—This is added to make exceptions impossible. The 
Greek is very emphatic, mot one single thing. You must not 
except angels because too great, nor emmets because too small ; 
not worlds because too ponderous, nor dust-atoms because 
too insignificant ; not electricity, nor light, nor heat, because too 
ethereal, nor the ichthyosaurus nor the toad because too ungainly. 
The hand of inspiration writes the name of Jesus where artists 
put theirs, beneath all things in heaven and on earth, visible or 
invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principal-. 
ities, or powers. 

‘Not a flower 


But shows some touch, in freckle, streak, or stain, 
Of his unrivalled pencil.” 


“In Him was LirE.”—We must light up these words by 
his own: “As the Father hath life in Himself,” the source and 
fountain of all being, “so hath He given to the Son” that is, in 
the subordinate position which He voluntarily assumed for the 
purposes of creation and redemption—“ to have life in Himself.” 
All life is of God in its original reservoir ; and all life is in the 
Lord Jesus, as a cistern of supply, from which all demands for 
life of every sort are met. 

All life —natural and physical, animal and _ intellectual, 
spiritual and religious —is in Him. The whole universe 


“Obrist libeth in me.” 15 


of living things was not simply brought into being by Christ ; 
_ but it is kept m existence and sustained in living beauty by the 
constant communications of his fulness—as a vale is kept in 
fertile beauty, luxuriant with vegetation, by the spray of a 
perennial waterfall. As the Word, He creates ; as the Life, He 
sustains. As the Word, He declares God; as the Life, He 
communicates his essence. “As the Word, He is God without 
us ; as the Life, He is God within us.” 

Apart from Christ, you_may—exist ; but you have no life 
in you. “He that hath not the Son of God, hath not life.” 
You may have many attractive and amiable qualities, much 
that is correct in behaviour, and beautiful in appearance ; but 
you have no /fe. 

But if you are in Christ, opening all your being to Him, : 
door behind door, back into the most sacred chambers of your 
being, so that He has free and unhindered entrance into your 
entire nature; then, as the Nile, descending through the 
channels cut by the Egyptian peasantry, bears life and fertility 
into their gardens and cornfields, so will He bring his own life, 
the life of God, “life indeed,” into you, and though you were 
dead, yet shall you live (John x1. 25). 


(1) Say “No” to your Self-life.—It is in proportion as we 
curtail the self-life that we increase the Christ-life. Michael 
Angelo was wont to say of the chippings that fell thick on the 
floor of his studio, “While the marble wastes, the image 
grows”; and as we chip away ourselves by daily watchfulness 
and self-denial, the life of Jesus becomes more manifest in our 
mortal body (2 Cor. iv. 10, 11). A rosebud may be grafted 
into a briar ; but the briar must never be allowed to put forth 
its own shoots beneath it, or they will drain away its strength: 
therefore the gardener must ever mercilessly bud them off. 
After the same manner must we deal with every assertion of 
self. “I have been, and am, crucified with Christ...Christ liveth 
in me.” 


(2) Vield to the Christ-life—This is the law of all natural 
forces; if you want them to help you, you must yield them 
obedience. In using them, you are less their master, and more 


16 : Che Word in Creation. 


their slave, than you suppose. They are willing to toil for you 
day and night ; but on the one condition that you should study 
and obey the laws of their operation. And it isso with respect 
to that greatest of all forces, the life of the Son of God. It 
is throbbing in every believer’s heart. And the difference 
between Christians consists in this, that some ignore its 
presence, or, at least, are very careless of its promptings, whilst 
others are ever on the alert to translate into instant obedience, 
the tiniest impressions. As you yield to the Spirit of life which 
is in Christ Jesus, you become more conscious of his blessed 
strivings within, they increase in number and power, and bear 
you upward, as when the ocean pours its tides up an estuary or 
river, and reverses the direction of its flow. 


(3) Replenish waste by going again to the source.—There is 
so much leakage in us that we speedily exhaust what we have 
received. The oxygen absorbed by the blood is soon exhausted 
by its contact with the waste of our tissues, and needs to be 
drawn back through the veins to be soaked again in the air 
of our lungs; so does the freshness of the Divine life within 
us need to be daily renewed, and we must go back to Him 
in whom it is ever brimming, that out of his fulness we may 
receive, and grace for grace. It is in the reading of his Word, 
in prayer, and in waiting upon his ordinances, especially in the 
Lord’s Supper, that the inner life becomes thus replenished and 
“fulfilled with his grace and heavenly benediction.” 


“THE LIFE WAS THE LIGHT OF MEN.”—AIl true life is 
luminous. The lowest forms of physical life are light ; as when 
the keel of the vessel ploughs up the wave, and leaves long 
lines of phosphorescent glory in its wake. And who does not 
know of some community which has been lit up by the glow of 
some noble life! During his life in our mortal body, Jesus 
could not be hid; no bushel of obscurity sufficed to conceal 
Him. And now, when He enters into contact with any soul 
or life, that soul begins to glow, that life to shine. 

We are like so many unlit candles, some of coarser and 
some of more refined material, clustered together in a darkened 
chamber, but not one of us able to dispel its gloom, or cope 


“Bis Bite is Right.” = 


with its dense obscurity ; but just so soon as we touch Jesus 
Christ, or are touched by Him, we begin to sparkle and shine. 
His Life is Light. “Arise, shine! for thy light is come.” 
“Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ 


- shall give thee light.” 


_ These then are our closing reflections :— 


(1) How great must He be, through whom this great universe 
was made, who was one with God the Father in its inception, 
and one in its execution ! He could not have been less than 
divine, or the infinite God could not have found adequate 
expression through his means. Only the Infinite can be the 
channel for the Infinite. 


(2) We may learn something of the beauty of his mind. 
The beauty sleeping in a seed reveals itself by the colours 
of the flower as they unfurl to the sun, and the fragrance that 
fills the air. The beauty in the unexplored heart of a friend 
reveals itself in the verses we suddenly light upon, or the books 
which bear hisname. The beauty of the artist’s mind is dis- 
coverea in the pictures or statues which he has produced. 
And what revelations are made to us of the beauty of the 
conceptions of our Lord, as we arm our eyes with telescope or 
microscope, and study the infinite above or the infinite 
beneath ! 


(3) We can trace some lingering remnants of the grandeur 
of our original nature, in that we ourselves, sinful and fallen 
though we be, are able to admire the works of his hands, 
and to repeat his “very good” of all that we behold of 
his power and skill. Devils seem devoid of this power ; for 
they are pictured as haunting uninhabited and desolate places, 
roaming through desert places, and infesting the ruined heaps 
_ of the past. 


(4) We can understand the miracles’ and parables better. 
In the one, our Lord was simply re-asserting his original power 
over nature; as when Ulysses returned after years of wan- 
dering, and bent with ease the bow which had defied the efforts 


of all who had essayed to use it in his absence. And in the 
B 


18 The Word in Creation. 


other, He simply read out the meaning which He had hidden 
in vines, and seeds, and natural processes ; for all things around 
us are made after the pattern and type of spiritual realities. 


(5) We may be sure that He who made can and must 
redeem. It is impossible to suppose that He through whom all 
things were made could stand by and see them vitiated and 
spoilt by sin, without making a single effort to arrest the 
progress of the devastator, and to restore the universe to 
its pristine beauty and order. We are not then surprised 
to learn that the same paragraph which tells us that all things 
were created by Him, also tells us that it pleased the Father by 
Him to reconcile all things to Himself, whether they be things 
in earth or things in heaven (Col. i. 16-20). 

He who is the Alpha must also be the Omega; He who 
created by a word must redeem by his blood; He who 
originated must see that He is not robbed of the fruits of his 
toil; He who said, “ Behold, I make,” must also say, “ Behold, 
I make all things new.” 


Ill. 
— The Word as Light. 


“That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into 
the world.” —JOHN i. 9. 


T is not for us to attempt to celebrate the Praise of 
Light. What a wonderful conception it was of the 
mind of God! How delicate the loom of that 
creative skill on which it is constructed day by day ! 
And how complete an argument for the divine work- 

oe manship is afforded by the adaptation between the 

element of Light and the crystalline gate of the eye by which it 

enters man’s soul! (Luke xi. 34-36.) 

Themes like these rather become such as our great epic 
bard, whose blindness made him more sensible to the value of 
that which he had lost, and whose lofty genius could alone 
find terms to describe its worth. Or, better still, Light might 
well be the subject of a sonnet by that angel minstrel who 
composed the majestic Psalm of Creation which is’ perpetually 
sung before the throne (Rey. iv. 11). But neither could 
proceed Jong with his task without rising from the material 
substance—for ethereal as light seems to be to our dull sense, it 
is still material—to that glorious Being who made it as a 
parable and emblem of his Divine nature. “God is Light, and 
in Him is no darkness at all” (1 John i. 5). 

But the glory of the Father’s nature is of such insupportable 
splendour that it would be impossible for any creature that He 
has made to behold and enjoy it ; and it is very consolatory to 
be told in the opening verses of the Epistle to the Hebrews 
that our Lord Jesus is “the effulgence of his glory” (Heb. i. 
3, R.V.). The human eye could not bear the full splendour of 





% 


20 The Ward as Light. 


the sun’s heart or surface of golden cloud, but it can bear the 
far-travelled and diluted ray ; so, though we could not behold 
the nature of God in its direct and original manifestation, we 
can behold his glory in the face of Jesus Christ (2 Cor. iv. 6). 
And for this reason we hail thankfully and adoringly the 
announcement that the Word is the Light. 


I. THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LIGHT.—Light is pure.— 
It is so pure that evil cannot stain or impurity defile it. It will 
pass through a foetid and poisonous atmosphere without con- 
tracting taint, or carrying a germ of poison with it, as it issues 
forth to pursue its ministries of mercy beyond. So pure was 
our blessed Lord. Evil fled abashed before Him. He gauged 
the power of temptation, not by yielding in a hairs breadth, 
but by resisting and overcoming it. When He died, after 
thirty-three years’ close contact with men, his spirit was as 
absolutely stainless as when He was born of a pure virgin. 
-And the instant effect of his life within our hearts will be 
to kindle a purity as sweet and chaste and unearthly as his 
own. 

Light ¢s gentle—With each dawn its tides revisit us after 
having traversed the abyss with inconceivable speed ; but its 
wavelets break so gently that they fail to shake the dewdrop 
from its blade of grass or the trembling petal from the over- 
blown rose. Even the gossamer of the spider’s web does not 
quiver as the sunbeams strike it. And how apt a symbol is 
here of that gentle goodness which made the shepherd-boy 
great, which leads the flock into pastures of tender grass, and 
fans with anxious care the dull sparkle of smoking flax! And 
when His love is shed abroad in our hearts, it begets a 
corresponding gentleness in judgment, speech, and behaviour. 
All true Christians are gentle folk. “The wisdom that is from 
above is first pure, then peaceable, gem¢/e, easy to be entreated, 
full of mercy” (James iii. 17). 

Light ts all-pervasive.—It kindles a line of watch-fires on the 
pinnacles: of an Alpine range; but it does not neglect the 
hill-slopes up which the plovers follow its last retreating beams. 
It gilds the golden roofs of the palace ; but it glides through 


Ste Ministry, ar 


prison-bars to sparkle in the tear-drops of the repentant 
prodigal. It lights the good man to his work, and the bad man 
to his home after the unholy revels of the night. Nor is it 
otherwise with the loving-kindness of Christ, which misses none 
in its daily ministry, however poor, and sad, and lonely ; which 
includes the evil and the good, the just and the unjust ; which 
“lighteth every man that cometh into the world.” And it is 
thus with those in whom his life repeats itself. They, too, 
are said to be “without partiality.” Their lives resemble 
the sun and the rain (Matt. v. 45). 

Light reveals.—\t. revealed to Jacob the deception practised 
on him by Laban under the cover of darkness. It revealed 
to the host of Midian the meagre force before which it had fled 
panic-stricken, misled by the noise of the crashing pitchers and 
the flashing of three hundred lights. In darkness the traveller 
lies down to spend the night beneath the open sky, in terror 
lest he may stray to the brink of the ravine ; but the morning, 
with rosy finger, reveals that he has been sleeping within a 
stone’s cast of his home. So does Christ reveal. He is the 
light of all our seeing. He not only lights up our inner sight, 
but He casts a light on God, and providence, and truth, and 
the mysteries of redemption, which, apart from Him, notwith- 
standing all our intelligence, had been obscure and unknown. 
In his light we see light. Light is whatsoever doth make 
-manifest. Let us lift up our souls unto Him who is light, so 
that we may be filled and saturated with his nature and being, 
and made to glow with it in this dark world; as I have seen a 
certain kind of diamond, which, after having been held up for 
some short period in sunlight, has continued to sparkle like 
a star when carried thence into a darkened chamber. “ We all, 
-with unveiled face beholding as in a mirror the glory of the 
Lord, are transformed (z.2., transfigured, it is the same Greek 
word as in Matt, xvil. 2) into the same image from glory 
to glory, even as from the Lord the Spirit” (2 Cor. iii. 18), 


I. THE MINISTRY OF THE LicHt.—Zhe Word was the 
Light of unfallen man tn Paradise.—In the glades of Eden two 
trees were planted ; the one the tree of life, the other of the 


22 The Word as ight. 


knowledge of good and evil. It is impossible not to see in 
these a lively representation of Him who is Life and Light, and - 
who, from the first, must have been the organ and channel 
of Divine communication to mankind. 

It was in the person of the Son that the ever-blessed God 
walked with our first parents in the cool of the day ; conversed 
with them ; uttered the memorable prohibition ; sought them in 
their fall; and, with sad prevision of all that it must cost, 
foretold the ultimate triumph of the woman’s Seed. Even then 
He rejoiced in the habitable part of the earth, and his delights 
were with the sons of men. Even then He was the Light 
of man’s moral nature, teaching him all he knew, and prepared 
to lead him on to know the deep things which lay concealed as 
a landscape under a morning haze. Even then the Son had 
commenced his favourite ministry of manifesting the Name 
of his Father (Matt. xi. 27 ; John xvii. 26). 

The Word was Light in the World amid the long dark ages 
which preceded the Incarnation.—“ The Light shineth in dark- 
ness, and the darkness comprehended it not.” There are two 
methods by which darkness is produced. The one by absence 
of light ; the other by loss of sight. It is dark when the sun 
sets, and primzeval darkness resumes for a brief parenthesis its 
ancient sway ; but it is also dark when the eye is blind. And 
the darkness mentioned here is not the first, but the second. 

There has never been an age in which the Divine Light has 
not shone over our world. Not Gospel light, not the light of 
revelation, not light as we have it ; but still, Light. And what- 
ever light existed was due to the presence and working of the 
Lord Jesus. He shone in the good He did; giving rain from 
heaven, and fruitful seasons, and in the food and gladness with 
which He filled men’s hearts, so that He left not Himself 
without witness (Acts xiv. 17). He shone in the clear testimony 
given since the creation, through the works of nature, to the 
everlasting power and divinity of God (Rom. i. 20). He shone 
in the intuitions of truth, which we call conscience, and which 
are his voice in the human breast, and are so evidently referred 
to here as the true light, lightening every man coming into the 
world (Rom. ii. 14,15). /7e shone also in those great movements 


A Family Born Blind. 23 


_- towards righteousness, which seem to have swept from time 
“to time over the heathen world. Whatever of truth there was 
in any of these must have been due to Him. It was of the 
_ heathen that the Apostle spoke when he said: ‘That which 
may be known of God is manifest in them ; for God manifested 

it unto them” (Rom. i. 19, R.V.). 

But the light shone amid blind and darkened hearts, which 
could not comprehend it. Though men knew God, they 
glorified Him not as God, neither were thankful; and, as the 
result, “they became vain in their reasonings, and their senseless 
heart was darkened” (Rom. i. 21). Since they would not believe, 
the god of this world was permitted to blind their eyes. 

It is characteristic of this Gospel, and it well befits its theme, 
that so much space is given to the story of the man born blind 
(ix.), for such is really the condition of the race; and it is 
significant that that story is prefaced by the announcement 
so constantly reiterated by the Lord, “‘I am the Light of the 
world” (ix. 5; see also viii. 123 xil. 35, 46). A family born 
blind ; a race stricken with blindness, as Saul was, and groping 
for some one to lead it by the hand ; a vault, like that in which 
the dead are buried, around which the sunlight plays, whilst not 
one beam can enter—such is a picture of our race. “ The Light 
shineth in darkness.” 

The Word was the Light of the chosen people.—Throughout 
their history God sent them prophets, rising up early and 
sending them, that they might bear witness to the coming 
Light. They were not that Light, but they came to bear 
witness to it (John i. 8); just as the moon and planets bear 
witness to the sun while he is absent, though every moment 
is bringing him nearer to close their reign. Of these John the 
Baptist is here cited as the greatest and last. 

We need not recapitulate their names—the evangelical 
Isaiah ; the plaintive Jeremiah ; the seraphic Ezekiel; the 
abrupt Habakkuk; Amos the herdman; and Haggai the 
priest. They are not all mentioned here ; but are summed up 
in the greatest of all, John the Baptist, of whom Christ Himself 
said: “Verily I say unto you, among them that are born of 
women there hath not risen a greater.” All these were lights ; 


24 Gbhe Word as Light. 


John was “a burning and shining lamp”: but their light was 
not their own, it was derived from Him to whom they all bore | 
witness. They spake of Him. The testimony of Jesus was 
the spirit of prophecy. Overtopping other men in the grandeur 
of their personal character, and by the gift of the Spirit of 
Inspiration, they saw the day of Jesus, as mountain-peaks first 
catch sight of the rising sun; and they declared to the world 
of men below what glory was on the way. 

What a new interest would come into our reading of the Old 
Testament Scriptures, if we always remembered that they testify 
of Jesus, and glisten with light caught by anticipation from his 
life; and if we sought to discover what the Master meant when, 
beginning at Moses and all the prophets, “ He expounded unto 
them in all the Scriptures the things concerning Himself.” 

As every dewdrop on the morning meadow glistens with the 
sunlight, each of them reflecting the whole sun, so do the para- 
graphs of the prophets flash with the presence of Jesus. 
They are beautiful in his beauty ; strong in his strength; true 
in his truth. The lips may be those of man, the voice that 
of a prophet ; but through all, the Word of God speaks, and 
the true Light shines. In the pages of the prophets the quick 
ear of love detects the accents of Him who spake as never 
man spake. Indeed, we are told expressly that the Spirit of 
Christ was in the prophets announcing that Gospel which is 
now preached throughout the world (1 Pet. i. 11, 12). 

Finally, the Light became incarnate.——Too bright to be 
beheld, the Light of God curtained Himself in human flesh, as 
the face of Moses beneath his veil, or the Shekinah beneath 
the folds of the tabernacle. Such is the direct force of the 
word translated dwe/¢ in ver. 14. It might be better rendered 
tabernacled. But of this more afterwards. 

And it is not possible to do more than take one brief foe 
at that bright world which awaits us, when, zz the ages of 
eternity, our blessed Lord will be still the Everlasting Light. 
For it is written that the heavenly city will not need sun 
nor moon to shine in it, because the Lamb is the light thereof 
(Rev. xxi. 23). And so, from the first creation of man till the 
new creation; from the garden of innocence to the city of 


“Che World toas made by Him. 25 


matured and tested holiness; from-the origin of the race in 
its lonely and single representative to the untold myriads of his 
progeny who shall stand in the unsullied purity of robes 
washed white—always and everywhere, the Word of God is the 
Light of men, the ¢rwe light, that is the archetypal light, of 
which all other lights are types and illustrations. 


Il]. THE RECEPTION OF THE LIGHT.—(1) Before his 
Incarnation “ He was in the world.” In every spring, in every 
sunbeam, in every God-breathed thought, in every providence ; 
walking up and down the aisles of his own temple; brooding 
over the teeming myriads of mankind. In Him they lived and 
moved and had their being. He was not an absentee from his 
own creation. In Him all things consisted and were main- 
tained (Acts xvil. 28 ; Col. i. 17). : 

“And the world was made by Him.” Mark this touching 
repetition of the world ; we shall often meet with it again. It is 
used repeatedly, as when a bereaved parent, brooding over the 
sin or misfortune of some beloved child, repeats his name 
again and again. “O my son Absalom! my son, my son 
_ Absalom! O Absalom, my son, my son!” And see how the 
Holy Spirit emphasizes the. fact that our Lord was the organ 
through whom creation was wrought. 2 

“And the world knew Him not.” As though a man might 
build a splendid mansion—with frescoes on its walls, fountains 
splashing in marble wells, luxuriant furniture, exquisitely-planned 
grounds—put it in trust for the sick or destitute, go away 
for years, and on returning be denied admittance, or watched as 
an intruder ; until, touching some secret spring, he showed such 
knowledge and power as to compel recognition of his claims. 

It was a sorrowful confession, extorted from our Lord, 
by all his experiences, both before and after his Incarnation— 
“the world hath not known Thee.” And it is confirmed by the 
Holy Ghost when He says, in the wisdom of God, “the world 
by wisdom knew not God.” Alas for the poor world, vaunting 
its science and its pride, but not knowing that glorious Being 
who was in it from the first ! 

(2) At his Incarnation.—“UHe came unto his own, and 


26 Che Word as Light. 


his own received Him not.” Throughout the Old Testament 
the Jews are spoken of as God’s peculiar treasure ; but here 
they are described as Christ’s, because Christ is God. They 
were his by the calling of Abram ; by the covenant of circum- - 
cision ; by the passage of the Red Sea ; by the desert discipline ; 
by the education of history : but when He came to them, they 
cried, “ We will not have this Man to reign over us.” 

“They received Him not.” This is a note which we shall 
hear again ; but in the meanwhile, the word seems carefully 
chosen to suggest that it was not a case of ignorance, but 
of wilfulness. They knew, or might have known, who He was; 
but they deliberately refused to enquire into his credentials, and 
they shut the door resolutely in his face. This is why they area 
nation of weary-footed wanderers, bronzed by the sun of every 
clime, having everywhere a recognition, but nowhere a home. 

(3) Sznce the Incarnation.—There has been no longer a 
dealing with nations, but with individuals. Many have received 
Him, rising above the general indifference around. Mary 
in the highlands of Nazareth ; Elisabeth in the hill-country of 
Judzea ; Simeon in the temple ; Hannah the prophetess; and 
Zachariah the priest, are representatives of untold multitudes 
beside. And to as many as have thus received Him He 
has given the right to become the sons of God. 

Stepping across the humbie threshold of their hearts, He has 
suddenly thrown aside the garments of his great humility, 
which He had worn as a disguise and test. Then, rising 
in the full stature of his Divine Manhood, He has taken from 
out his skirts a parchment patent of sonship and heirship, and, 
handing it to the recipient and astonished spirit, has declared 
that from henceforth it may dare to reckon itself, without 
presumption, a child of God, and an inheritor of the Kingdom 
of Heaven. 

And for lineage, it is revealed that all such may trace their 
descent past earthly parentage—“ not of blood”; past natural 
instinct or desire—“ not of the will of the flesh”; past human 
volition—“ not of the will of man”: to the thought, and purpose, 
and grace of the Eternal Father, to whom be glory for ever and 
ever. 


IV. 
Ghe Word Made Flesh. 


“The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld his 
glory, the glory as of the only-begotten of the Father), full of grace and 
truth.” —JOHN i. 14. 


q/HE Word Jdecame flesh,” thus the Revised Version 
better renders the original. But what a profound 
mystery these words cover ! 

Open the golden compasses of thought to mea- 
sure, if it be possible, the distance between these 
two extremes, ¢ie Word, and flesh. The Word, the 
eternal and ever blessed Son of God ; the fellow of Jehovah ; 
able to utter God because Himself God ; through whom all 
, things were made. Flesh, a frail and transitory fabric woven 
from the dust, and destined to return to dust; limited to 
time and space ; comprehending, as it does so evidently, not 
only the human body, but the entire human nature of which 
the flesh is the outward and visible embodiment. What verb 
shall unite extremes so infinitely removed? What link is there 
for these two? 

The Word made flesh? It is true, but not enough. 

. The Word was wroth with flesh! So it might have been ; 
but this is not the knot of union. 

The Word #ztzed flesh! That had been marvellous, but also 
insufficient. 

The Word clothed Himself with flesh! Even that were 
inadequate ; for in that case He would only have borrowed 
a temporary disguise, which He might as easily have thrown off, 
and there had been no entire oneness. 

No. THE WORD BECAME FLESH! He was the same 
Divine Being as before. He kept his place in the bosom of the 





a8 5 Che Word Made Flesh. 


Father during his earthly life (iii. 13). Though confined to 
time and space, He kept his identity with Him whose Being is 
beyond either. There was no break or cessation in the essen- 
tial Oneness of his personality, even when He stooped: to 
be born of the pure virgin mother. But, as far as we can 
understand it, though in the essence of his Being He underwent 
no change, yet He voluntarily gave up the Divine mode of 
existence, that He might assume the human, and might bear it 
with Him through death and resurrection to invest it ulti- 
mately with the Divine glory that He had with the Father 
before the worlds were made (xvii. 5). 

Note, for a moment longer, that word /s#.—It seems to have 


- been carefully selected, to show that the nature of the Lord 


ee, 


4 


Jesus sums up in itself all the different traits and attributes 
of our many-sided nature, sin excepted. If we had been 
told that the Word became-a man, it would have seemed as 
if men only could have perfect sympathy with Him, or that his 
nature contained only the elements of manhood. But, since the 
word flesh is used, we feel that not one sex but both, not one 
age but all, not one race but the entire human family, may find 
its characteristic properties in his lovely glorious Being. No 
one form of human life has an exclusive.right to Him. All 
forms of life find their counterpart in Him. All rays of colour 
blend their hues in the white light of his nature. All sides 
of love, like the double optics of a stereoscope, do but set forth 
that one infinite love which fills his heart. 

“Christ gathers up in Himself the ideal virtues of man and 
woman, of boyhood and girlhood, of age and middle life,” of 
European and Asiatic. All that is most noble and strong in 
men, all that is most graceful and tender in women, all that 
is most winsome and engaging in little children, all that is 
lovely in any one, is to be found in our dear Lord, in whom is 
neither Jew nor Greek, neither bond nor free, neither male nor 
female, since Christ is all and in all (Gal. iii. 28; Col. iii. 11). 

This distinguishes Christianity from all religions beside. 
They are tribal, topical, limited in their range to the people 
among whom they have originated. Take Mohammedanism, 
for instance. It no doubt has some grains of precious truth, 


“Ge Tabernacled among ws.” 29 


as, for instance, the unity of God; but it can never become 
a world-wide religion, because there are large portions of our 
common human nature which can find no response or 
representation in the character or teachings of Mohammed. 
To use the expression of another, “the mosaic of humanity 
is not totalized in him.” 


But Christ touches man at every point, man as man, through 
every grade and variety of manhood. There is no note in the 
great organ of our humanity, with the exception of the jarring 
discord of sin, which does not, when it is struck, awaken 
a sympathetic vibration in the mighty range and scope of 
the being of Christ. 


This is the secret of that wonderful fascination which Jesus 
‘has for men. We feel that He can understand us. “He 
is touched with the feeling of our infirmities.” ‘“ He is made 
in all things like unto his brethren.” And, as we shall see 
in a moment, every man can find in Christ the complement 
of his nature, the supply of his deficiencies, the fulness for his 
need. 


DWELT AMONG US.—Tabernacled is the better word. What 
1s there here but an allusion to the wanderings of the desert, 
during which Jehovah dwelt in a tent or tabernacle, a pilgrim 
like the rest! Listen to his own words: “I have not dwelt in 
any house since the time that I brought up the children of 
Israel out of Egypt, even to this day ; but have walked in a tent 
and in a tabernacle” (2 Sam. vii. 6). 

All that was a symbol of eternal realities: The Tabernacle 
was a material representation of the great truth of the In- 
carnation. It was made after the pattern of the nature of our 
Lord, which, as the sublime antitype, was eternally present to 
the mind and thought of God. Well then might Jesus speak in 
the same breath of the temple and of his body (ii. 21). And 
well may the Holy Ghost here use the same comparison. 

We are the pilgrim host. Our bodies are but frail, shifting 
tabernacles, to be as easily dissolved as a tent is struck (2 Cor. 

1), and amidst us has been reared the true Tabernacle, 
which God has pitched and not man ; and through which the 


30 Che Word Made Flesh. 


Shekinah has shone, kindling the frail curtains of mortal flesh 
with dazzling radiance on its passage through their folds in 
waves of glowing glory. 

There were times when the light that shone in the most holy 
place could not be confined there ; but issued forth, and flooded 
the entire structure so that the multitudes without could discern 
its splendour. And so in the earthly life of our blessed Lord 
there were moments when the glory of the Only-Begotten of 
the Father broke through the limitations which He had 
assumed, and bathed his mortal body in transcendent light and 
beauty. Such a season was the Transfiguration, when even his 
garments became white as the light. Then were the Apostles 
“eye-witnesses of his majesty.” Then did they behold his 
glory, “the glory as of the Only-Begotten of the Father.” 


WE BEHELD HIS GLORY.—It is as if the writer said, “ There 
can be no mistake. The Lord was no mere appearance, or 
phantom, or vision of the imagination. My eyes are dimming 
now ; but once they were bright and keen, and could not have 
been deceived. My head is white with the snows of many 
winters ; but it often lay on his bosom. I can easily recal the 
accents of his voice ; often have I felt the clasp of his hand. 
And if there is one day I remember above others, it is that 
in which He challenged us to behold his hands and his feet, 
and assure ourselves that it was not a spirit, but Himself. 
‘We have not followed cunningly-devised fables’; and we 
could not have been mistaken as to the glory, which refused 
to be hid, but inevitably betrayed his divine power and God- 
head.” g 


FULL OF GRACE AND TRUTH.—Grace is mentioned three 
times in this paragraph; and itis the fitting climax to the 
golden series of revelations. The keynote of Nature was 
Order; of History, was Justice; of Conscience, was Righ- 
teousness ; of Jewish revelation, as summed up in the name of 
Moses, was Law. But the keynote of the Incarnation was 
Grace—the unmerited love of God—which made itself of no 
reputation and took up the nature of man. 

God’s glory is his grace. When Moses desired to behold his 


Grace and Grnth. 31 


glory, this was the reply wafted back into his soul: “I will 
make all my goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the 
name of the Lord before thee ; and will be gracious.” 


But tt is grace allied with truth—He is a just God and 
a Saviour. There is a bridal between his righteousness and 
his mercy. Deep down in the solid granite of everlasting truth 
are laid the foundations of the Temple, of which the doors 
stand ever open to welcome the whosoever of mankind. Who 
would wish it otherwise? Who would care for a love which 
contravened the most elementary conceptions of justice in our 
hearts, and which might one day have to yield to disturbing 
scruple and compunction ? 


OF HIS FULNESS HAVE ALL WE RECEIVED.—The all we 
cannot only mean the writer himself and his fellow apostles 
who had seen the Lord, but all the believers of that early age, 
to whom he wrote, scattered in different places, and removed by 
sixty years from the death of Christ ; and not them alone, but 
all who have become one with Him by a living faith. 

The Apostle sheds an exquisite light on these words when he 
says, “It pleased the Father that in Him should all fulness 
dwell. In Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily. 
And in Him ye are made full” (Col. i. 19; ii. 9, 10, R.V.). 

God longs for us to live full lives ; and that we may, He has 
stored all his glorious resources into the nature of the Man Christ 
Jesus, so making them accessible and putting them within the 
reach of the weakest and most sinful of his children. Thus does 
the channel of the Nile bring water which is generated in the 
mountains of Central Africa, within reach of the Egyptian 
peasants, whose gardens are situated on the edge of the 
burning sands. Why then are we so content with poverty and 
emptiness? Let us receive out of his fulness. It is continually 
throbbing like an ocean against the walls of our hearts ; it is 
for us to open and let it in, that it may cover the long unsightly 
reaches of ooze and sand. 


Let us ask the Holy Spirit to teach us the blessed habit of 
taking what we need from hour to hour. The uplifted eye of 


32 The Word Made Flesh. 


faith will at any moment cause a tide of his fulness to enter, 
enriching, strengthening, and blessing the soul. 


GRACE FOR GRACE.—Wave on wave. It is a mistake to 
rest on past or present experiences, eking them out with jealous 
care, lest they should run short. The best means of getting 
more grace is to use the grace we already have. It is the law of 
all life, especially of spiritual life: “‘To him that hath shall 
more be given, and he shall have abundantly.” ‘ 

We may not always perceive the flow of the golden oil of 
grace from its Divine reservoir. We may not be always 
sensible of the Divine communications. But if we claim them 
by a naked faith, and if we live up to the limits of what we 
have got, so as to become spendthrifts of our spiritual revenues, 
there will be no stint in the blessed stores with which we shail 
be enriched for ever. 


V. 
Che Word declaring the unseen God. 


““No man hath seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, which is 

in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him.” —JOuN i, 18. 
5S 
JITH this marvellous verse, the Evangelist brings 
to a close his sublime prologue. It is a befitting 
introduction to all that follows. Like some 
noble portal to a temple of transcendent size and 
beauty, it admits the reverent soul into this Divine 
Gospel, thrilling the heart, quickening the imagi- 
nation, and preparing the thought for things which have 
not entered into the heart of man to conceive. Here is the 
seed-plot of the Gospel. Here is the standpoint from which 
the nature and ministry of the Lord are to be viewed. Here 
are struck those three keynotes—Life, Light, and Love—which, 
in different combinations, vibrate through the entire range 
of the writings of the Apostle John. 

We believe in the Being of God. Vast as this universe 
is with depths and heights, and its immeasurable expanse, 
we believe that it is filled throughout with his mighty Spirit. He 
is everywhere. He knows everything. He can do all things. 
But the human heart pines to know what He is. Man seeks 
after God, groping in the dark, if haply he may feel after 
Him and find Him, and read the secret of his inner being. 
“What is God? What does He think and feel? What will 
He be to me?” : 

You send me to study Nature. But I find there nothing but 
his power and Godhead, his deeds, not his heart. And some- 
times I am baffled by the apparent working of a malign power 
by which the creature is brought into subjection. 





Cc 


34 The Word declaring the unseen God. 


You send me to study Providence. But the march of God 
through the ages is so vast, and his footsteps so far apart, that 
they seem to be hidden in the sea, and his path in the dark 
waters ; so that it is hard to understand the true trend and 
character of his dealings with the children of men. 

You send me to decipher the Names of God. £/-Shaddaz, 
the God of Might, on whom difficulties which threaten to 
overwhelm us break harmlessly, as storms on the brow of the 
Matterhorn. Jehovah, the Unchangeable, who knows no 
shadow of turning ; whose word is inviolable, and his covenant 
sure. Jehovah Sabaoth, the Lord of hosts, on whose bidding 
legions of bright spirits wait. But, after all, these names 
rather disclose the might and splendour of a sovereign, and 
do but increase my dread of Him as my sins come back to 
MSO amet 

Is there nothing more? May I not see Him? Is there no 
open door of vision where I may stand and satisfy the hunger 
of my soul; no spot in all the wilderness where I may shelter 
behind a rock and catch a glimpse of his majesty as He passes 
by, escorted by the serried ranks of angel armies? “ Oh that 
I knew where I might find Him, that I might come even to 
his seat !” 

But it may not be! NO MAN HATH SEEN GOD AT ANY 
TIME. JVever yet. Not Moses ; for he was hidden under the 
hand of God, and saw not his face. Not Elijah; for God was 
not in the earthquake or fire. Not the favoured three ; for the 
cloud of glory dazzled them with its splendour. And even in 
the Apocalyptic vision, the rapt gaze of the seer beheld only 
the circumaimbient halo as of the jasper and sardonyx stone. 
And if we were to search the annals of any other nation, we 
should receive from every quarter the reply, addressed by a 
grey-haired Indian to Sir John Franklin during one of the 
expeditions ef that renowned explorer: “I am an old man 
now, but I have never seen God.” 

And the explanation is given in those memorable words of a 
later Scripture : ““He only hath immortality, dwelling in the 
light which no man can approach unto, whom no man hath seen, 
nor.can see.” “The King eternal, immortal, invisible, the 


Bis Eternity. 35 


i 


only wise God.” If the vision of the glory of God as it was 
veiled by the human nature of our Lord was so awful, in its 
dimmed radiance of glory, that the beloved disciple fell at 
his feet as dead, what would not be the effect of its insufferable 
splendour on the nature of any created being! It is of 
God’s mercy that there are as many dense curtains between _ 
Him and us as covered the tabernacle of old, and veiled the 
unearthly glory of the Light that shone there. 

But, surely, there must be some satisfaction for this hunger 
of the soul to know God, and of that other hunger, more eager 
still and harder to bear, for love. Our hearts pine for God and 
for love. What will we not give to appease our yearning for 
love! This makes us seek so eagerly for human friendships ; 
mourn so bitterly if they are withdrawn ; feel so lonely if they 
come not within our reach. Oh that this great and invisible 
God were Love! But how can we know? Hush! the Word 
hath declared Him ; hath told the secrets of his inner being ; 
yea, more, hath let those inner secrets reveal themselves through. 
his words and life. 


I. THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE WORD FOR DECLARING 
THE UNSEEN GOD.—(1) Hs Eternity.—This was indicated by 
John the Baptist (15). Our Lord was his cousin, younger 
by six months, and John had already been for eighteen months 
before the people when Jesus came from Nazareth to be 
baptized. Thus, in a very true sense, “our Lord came after 
him.” But when the greatest of woman-born saw Him 
approaching, he who had never quailed before the face of man, 
whether royal or priestly, lowered his erect bearing to a deep 
humility, and cried : “This one must take precedence of me ; it 
is his by right, for He was before me.” And so speaking, 
he is the spokesman of the entire prophetic band, whom 
he represents. 

Ask Isaiah, the evangelic ; or Abraham, the ancestor of the 
Jewish race ; or Noah, standing on the green-sward of a new 
world ; or Adam, the first man; or the oldest star that first 
glimmered on the bosom of the night; or the most ancient 
elder who stands at the foot of the eternal throne ; and from 


36 The Word declaring the unseen God. 


each the reply comes back dimmer and fainter from ever further 
distances, He was before me. 

Jesus is the Alpha ; the beginning ; the first. He was before 
time, as we have seen. As Isaiah tells us, He is the Father of 
Eternity. And therefore He is well qualified to declare God. 


(2) His Nature.—“ The only-begotten Son.” Many ancient 
manuscripts give this phrase as God only begotten. God has 
many sons, but only one Son. Angels are sons by their 
creation. Penitent sinners are sons by regeneration and adop- 
tion. But our Lord Jesus is Son in an altogether unique 
and unrivalled sense. He is Son by generation. “Thou art 
my. Son, this day have I begotten Thee” (Psa. il. 7; Acts xill. 
33). And He is the ovly Son thus begotten. 

It is a profound depth, for which our thought has no 
fathoming-line. But clearly this phrase indicates that our Lord 
Jesus shares in its fulness the very Nature of God. “He is 
a partaker of that incommunicable and imperishable essence 
which is’sundered from all created life by an impassable 
chasm.” * He is the object of such love as an Abraham might 
have felt to his son, his only son, Isaac; but multiplied by 
the difference which must ever part the finite from the infinite. 
He used the expression of Himself, because it constituted in 
Jewish speech the very strongest method of claiming equality 
with God. It was well understood in that sense by the Jews, 
who instantly charged Him with blasphemy, and sought to 
avenge so daring an assumption of Deity (v. 18). 

Is it not significant that the humblest and meekest Being that 
ever trod on our world—the pattern of perfect holiness, whose 
perceptions as to the truth of his own being could not have 
been mistaken—dared not withdraw a single iota of his claim, 
but died, rather than evade its entire force ? (xix. 7). He could 
not abate those claims, because He thought it not robbery to be 
equal with God. He was ever conscious of his Divine oneness 
with God (x. 30). He knew whence He was (viii. 14). He 
lived in constant fellowship with God (x. 15). And therefore 
He was well qualified to declare Him. 





* The late Canon Liddon, 


Bis Perfect Acquaintance mith God. 37 


(3) His Intimacy with the Heart of God— “Which is in the 
bosom of the Father.” At a Jewish table the guests reclined 
on couches in such a way that one might easily lean back his 
head on another’s breast. Of this privilege the beloved Apostle 
availed himself at the last opportunity which offered. The 
breast is near the heart. By this tender and sacred clue 
he helped himself, and has helped myriads in succeeding ages, 
to realize the deep love, the close intimacy, the perfect 
acquaintance, subsisting between the Word and the unseen 
God ; so that He is well able to declare Him. “I know Him” 
(vill. 55). The preposition “in” might be rendered “into,” as 
if there was an ever deeper and closer approximation. 

(4) His Human Nature.-—“The Word was made flesh.” 
He was the Son of God ; but throughout this Gospel He speaks 
of Himself repeatedly as the Son of Man. /Vot a Son of Man. 
Not the Son of A Man. But, as if He were the child, offspring, 
and representative of the entire human family—ze Son of 
Man (11. 14). Whilst, therefore, as the Son of God, He was 
able to know God perfectly, as the Son of Man He was able 
perfectly to express, unfold, and reveal Him ; so that all might 
understand the deepest thought and being of the ever-blessed 
One. ; 


I]. THE MODE OF DECLARATION.—This is very wonderful. 
He spoke about God ; corrected men’s false conceptions ; con- 
firmed their vague and visionary hopes; and poured floods of 
light upon the mysteries of God’s nature, which had been 
hidden from ages and generations. 

His choicest revelations were made to the little inner group 
that gathered closest around Him. He gave them God’s word. 
He manifested the name of God to the men who had been 
given Him out of the world. In tender, glowing words He 
made known to them all that was concealed from other eyes in 
that ever-blessed word, which the Jews dared not pronounce, 
Jehovah (xvii. 6, 14, 26). All that language could convey 
was conveyed in the words of the Word. 

But He did more ; He so emptied Himself, He became as 
to his human nature so utterly dependent on his Invisible 


38 The Word declaring the unseen God. 


Companion that the life of God declared itself through his. He 
did nothing of Himself, but what He saw the Father do. He 
lived by the Father. He spoke only what his Father said 
to Him. He made known only what He heard from his 
Father. His words were not his, but the Father’s that sent 
Him. The very works He did were disclaimed by Him. 


Remember his emphatic declaration: “The Father which 
dwelleth in Me, He doeth the works” (v. 19; vi. 57; xii. 50; 
XIv. IO). 


And thus, when Philip said to Him on one occasion, “ Show 
us the Father,” the demand elicited a sad and heart-weary 
reply, “Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou 
not known Me, Philip? He that hath seen Me hath seen 
the Father. Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and 
the Father in Me?” : 

This then was our Lord’s way of declaring God. God 
wrought and spoke through his human life, that as men beheld 
its grace and truth, they were able to study as through a veil, or 
from a reflecting mirror, the very nature of the unseen God. 
In blessing little children ; in welcoming the lost and desolate ; 
in lessening human pain ;- in weeping true tears of sympathy ; 
in bearing our griefs and carrying our sorrows ; in dying for” 
our sins; in seeking and restoring an erring disciple, as a 
gardener might lift up a flower bent downwards by the storm 
—in all these things, Jesus declared God, just letting the God 
that was in Him live through Him in each lovely act and 
tender word. 


III. THE DECLARATION.—“ The Father.” From his first 
talk with the woman by the well to that other talk with women ~ 
at the sepulchre, the one choice word with which he designated 
God was — Father (iv. 23; xx. 17). In that name Hecame. Of 
that name He spoke. By that name He taught us to commence 
our daily prayer. Into that name we must be baptized. 
Within that precious name, as a rampart of sure defence, we 
are to live. He is the Father’s gift. Heaven is the Father’s 
home. True worshippers are the objects of the Father’s 
‘search. Humble hearts are the chosen dwellings of the 


Gbe Blesseduess of Sonship. 39 


Father's love. All who belong to Him are dear to the Father’s 
heart. God is his Father, and the Father of all those who have 
received Him, and in doing so have obtained the right to 
become sons of God. Other men, as Paul said, may be his 
offspring ; but they are sons. 

Not orphans or desolate. are we! Never lonely again ! 
Never pining for a love which mocks our yearnings and evades 
our reach! Never roaming the universe to escape God, or 
dreading Him as unknown and unknowable! Never again 
shrinking from life for its solitudes, or from death for its 
mystery, or the hereafter for its terrors! But nestling ever in 
the strong, tender arms of a Father who pities us, and whose 
love is as much more-sensitive than that of any earthly father— 
as his nature, thoughts, and ways are higher and better than 
ours ; or as the fire is greater than the straw which is lit at its 
blaze (Eph. iii. 15). 

What a blessed lot is this! Let us bathe our tried, fearful 
hearts in these rays of sunshine, with which Jesus has lit up life 
and death, earth and heaven ; and, as the little child, in the 
dark tunnel or on the turbulent waves, forgets its alarm with its 
father’s voice in its ear, its father’s heart as pillow, its father’s 
arms as encircling walls, so, amid the problems and perplexities 
of life and death, let us trust the Fatherhood of God, soft as a 
summer zephyr, deep as ocean depths, and be at peace. 


VI. 
Three Memorable Daves. 


‘‘T am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way 
of the Lord.” —JOHN i. 23. 
‘Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world.” 
JOHN i. 29. 
‘‘The two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus.” 
JOHN i. 37. 
=) ETHABARA lay beyond the Jordan from Jerusalem. 
7? The river there has a breadth of one hundred feet, 
and, except at the time of the winter floods, a depth 
of three to seven feet. It would, therefore, exactly 
suit the purposes of the great preacher, with his 
baptism of repentance. The almost tropical luxuri- 
ance of the valley is in striking contrast to the wilderness of 
sand and hill around. 

The attention of the nation was as much arrested by his look 
as by his words. The spare form attenuated by fasting and 
austerity ; the flashing eye, full of living energy; the unshorn 
Nazarite locks ; the rough haircloth garment ; the independence 
of much that other men hold needful ; the thrilling herald voice, 
piercing like a two-edged sword to divide and discern soul and 
spirit. It is no matter for wonder, then, that the whole commu- 
nity was stirred; and that crowds poured forth to him from 
the neighbouring metropolis, as well as from the towns and 
villages clustering at the foot of the Lebanon. 

This time of success and fame lasted for, perhaps, twelve 
or eighteen months. And then there happened the memorable 
events described in this paragraph, and which transpired on 
three following days (29, 35). 





John's Humility. Al 


The greater number of those that flocked to hear the Baptist 
returned to their homes to discuss his words or to live out their 
new vows ; but several of the flower of Israel attached them- 
selves to Jesus permanently. Amongst them was the writer of 
this Gospel ; and he was, without doubt, a witness of the events 
which he describes, the crisis of his own life, and the culminat- 
ing point of the ministry of his earliest teacher. 


I. THE FIRST DAY: SELF-ABNEGATION (19-28).—As the 
influence of John’s preaching spread, it became impossible 
for the religious authorities to ignore it. The Sanhedrim 
especially, which is constantly referred to in this Gospel as 
the Jews, and which held itself entrusted with the religious 
- interests of the nation, ,was compelled to take action. A 
deputation of Priests and Levites, principally derived from the 
Pharisee party (24), was therefore arranged to go to the Jordan, 
make inquiries, and report. Their inquiries were to be twofold : 
first, who he was; secondly, why he baptized. The former 
question interested the whole council ; the latter, the Pharisees, 
who were the ritualists of their day. 


Imagine a vast circle. On the one side stands the herald of 
the new age, surrounded by the chivalry of a noble youth ; on 
the other the grey-beards, representing an order of things old 
and ready to vanish away. How breathless was the silence 
which followed the first inquiry! ‘Who art thou? Art thou 
the Christ ?” 


Thousands would have been glad to believe he was, and at a 
word would have unfurled the old standard of the Maccabees, 
and rallied to rid the land of the usurper. They had not, 
however, long-to wait. Without a moment’s vacillation he 
confessed, and denied not, but confessed : 

“ T am not the Christ.” 

“ Who art thou, then? Malachi told us in his closing words, 
which have lit our path through the gloom of four hundred 
years, that the great prophet of Horeb should announce the 
Messianic day. Art thou Elijah?” 


Had they asked if he preceded the Messiah in the spirit and 


42 Three Memorable Daps. 


power of Elijah, he must have answered in the affirmative ; but 
to the question as they put it, there was only one reply : 

“Tam not.” 

There was yet another suggestion. ‘‘ Moses said that God 
would raise up a Prophet like unto himself. The Prophet art 
thou?” “The abruptness of the question,” says Bishop 
Westcott, “is remarkable.” 5 

And again, amid the hushed suspense, the Baptist, with 
increasing brevity, answered “ No.” 

Each response must have been followed by the murmur of 
many voices discussing it. And the ardent disciples of the 
great preacher would have felt some little disappointment and 
chagrin. It seemed as if he were deliberately spurning the 
nation’s homage, and missing the greatest opportunity of his 
career. 

The suppositions furnished by the generally received 
Messianic programme were now exhausted; and it only— 
remained to put some general question which should force 
the Baptist to define his own position. ‘Then said they unto 
him, Who art thou? that we may give an answer to them that 
sent us. What sayest thou of thyself?” 

Then came an utterance, sublime in its humility: “I am 
only a voice crying amid the uninhabited places of the wilder- 
ness, Prepare a way for the King.” 

And this humility was characteristic of John, though he was 
the greatest of woman-born. He knew that He was wof¢ the 
Light, but sent to bear witness of it ; zof the Sun, but the star 
that announces the dawn, and wanes in the growing light 3 not 
the Bridegroom, but the Bridegroom’s friend ; zo¢ the Shepherd, 
but the porter to open the door into the fold (iii. 27-30 ; x. 3). 

This humility is as rare as it is fascinating. We are all 
so apt to use our relationship to Christ as a means of enhancing 
our own importance, and attracting attention. Though we 
formally ascribe the supremacy to our Lord, we are elated 
when our name is on every lip, and our work in every thought, 
even though we should never have been heard of had it not 
been for Him. But there was nothing of this in John. He had 
the lowest possible conception of himself. Whilst all men 


“J Must Decrease.” 43 


mused in their hearts whether he were the Christ, he was ever 
heralding the Coming One. As they magnified the worth 
of his baptism, he declared that it was inferior to the Messiah’s, 
as water is to fire in cleansing properties. When they trembled 
before his searching words, he spoke of the great Husbandman, 
who, fan in hand, was about thoroughly to purge his floor. 
The motto of his inner life seems to have been, “I must 
decrease.” Repeatedly he avowed himself unfit even to loose 
the sandal-thong ef Him whose herald he was. 

Two things led him to this blessed condition.—In the first 
place, he realized that a man can receive nothing, except 
it be given him from heaven ; and that therefore all popularity, 
gifts, and influence, are precious talents to be administered with 
the best possible stewardship (iii. 27). And in the second 
place, he had seen the Lord, as was clear from the answer 
he gave to the further inquiry of the deputation concerning 
his right to baptize. 

“Tt is quite true,” said he, in effect, “that I am not the 
Christ, nor Elijah, nor that Prophet; but listen! Though 
ye know it not, the Messiah is already come, and I have seen 
Him. He has stood on these banks. He has mingled with 
these crowds. He has descended into these waters. He 
is standing amongst you now. The new era has dawned. 
And therefore I administer baptism, the sign and initiation . 
cf that long-expected time.” 

What awe must have settled down on the people! How 
they must have looked on each other, wondering of whom 
he spake! Could it be that at last the day had come of which _ 
kings and prophets and righteous men had spoken, but died 
without seeing! And can we wonder at the humility of the 
speaker ? 

We need to cultivate more of this lovely spirit, content to 
stand in the shade and cast a light on the blessed Lord ; to be 
voices witnessing for Him, whilst the speaker’s form is draped 
in gloom. But probably nothing but close friendship with 
the Bridegroom of souls will ever bring this about. We must 
live nearer to Him, catching the glow of his love, baptized into 
its furnace heat, Oh, to love Hin, to listen for his footfall with 


44 Three Memorable Days. 


a lover’s hushed spirit, to find our heaven only in his love, 
and in the thought that He is loved! Then we shall be timid 
of attracting a single thought to ourselves which might have 
found its way to Him. Then we shall be eager to hoard 
up all the love and devotion which men give us, that we 
may cast them as crowns at his feet. Then we shall be willing 
to be pedestals from which his beams shine the farther ; as the 
slender, graceful curves of the lighthouse tower are unseen, 
whilst from its lantern the reflectors flash beams of light far out 
to sea. It is only to those thus humble as little children that 
God reveals the true character of his Son. Thus it was with 
John the Baptist. 


II. THE SECOND DAY; CHRIST-DESIGNATION (29-34).— 
“The next day John seeth Jesus coming to him.” He was 
probably coming straight from the scene of the temptation. 
For forty days He had been alone, with no companionship save 
that of wild beasts, amid the sterile hills which stretch for miles _ 
on either side of the Dead Sea. Directly John saw Him, he 
knew Him. “This is He of whom I said, He that cometh after 
me is become before me, for He was before me.” How did 
John know Him? 

It is probable that, though cousins, they had not met till 
some six weeks before. John had spent his years in the 
seclusion of the deserts, Jesus in the highlands of Galilee. 
Therefore John said, “1 knew Him not.” Was it one of the 
providential arrangements of the only wise God, that the Christ 
and his forerunner never met until Jesus came to Jordan to 
be baptized of John, lest it should be said they were acting 
in collusion? Or even if John may have known Him as his 
cousin (2.é., after the flesh), yet he knew Him not as the Baptizer 
with the Holy Ghost, or the Son of God. But He-who sent him 
to baptize with water had revealed to him a sacred sign by 
which he should recognise the Lord whom he announced. For 
that sign he had watched and waited patiently for a long 
time. Thousands passed through his hands; but as yet he 
had not beheld it, and the months seemed long, as they slowly 
passed away. 


Our Lord's Baptiam. 45 


At last Jesus presented Himself at the Jordan. John would 
have hindered Him, indeed “was hindering Him.” He, 
doubtless, knew of the events which had preceded His birth; 
had heard of “that Holy Thing” which had been born ; was 
familiar with his blameless, holy life ; and desired, therefore, 
to debar Him from a rite which implied confessign of sin. He 
felt that he had himself more need to be baptized as a sinner, 
than to administer the baptism of repentance for the remission 
of sins to Him, who was, so far as observation went, sinless. 

His objections were, however, silenced by the appeal to him 
to do his part in bringing in the everlasting righteousness, 
which Daniel identified with the mission of the Messiah. 
“Thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness.” 

“It was probably the custom that the candidate for John’s 
baptism, either audibly or silently, should confess his sins ere 
he submitted to the sacred rite. But in this case, having no 
sins of his own, our Lord would probably make a vicarious 
confession, confessing the sins of the nation, with which, there 
and then, as the sacrificed lamb He identified Himself. It was 
the Jewish custom to set apart four days before the lamb 
was to be sacrificed in the Passover ; and thus there may have 
been an anticipation of this solemn ‘act of our Lord’s baptism in 
the river Jordan, the river of judgment. 

As He emerged from its waters, the long-expected sign was 
given. The Spirit descended on Him from heaven like a dove. 
We cannot but recal the ancient record of the deluge, and the 
ark, and the dove which found no place for her rest. Here at 
last there was a home in which the dove-like Spirit might take 
up an abode. Here, at least, was one heart in which He, who 
had been long an exile, might settle. From the waste of 
waters He came to the sacred Ark. 

Twice over we are told that “ He abode on Him.” No fitful 
enduement this! No transient baptism! No ephemeral 
experience! For us, too, as for Him, there is an abiding 
experience to be enjoyed—an experience of spiritual grace to 
break on us; not to wane, as in the case of some of the Old 
Testament heroes, but to increase in ever-growing power from 
year to year, until we are filled unto all the fulness of God. 


46 Three Memorable Days. 


We may not stay to note the energy with which the Spirit 
drove Him into the wilderness to be tempted. How marvellous 
that union of brooding gentleness and irresistible driving 
force! As if the blessed Spirit—who had waited with the 
patience of God for four thousand years, while, in one dis- 
pensation after another, man was continually overcome by the 
tempter—now that the Second Man was come, impelled Him 
to the victory which He foreknew. It was from this conflict 
that He returned on the second of these memorable days. 

For six weary weeks the Baptist had eagerly scanned the 
faces of the crowds to discover that face. But hitherto in 
vain. At last he descried it—worn with conflict and fasting, 
but radiant with victory ; and as he saw it, he announced the 
Christ: “This is He of whom I spake. The same is He 
which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. Behold the Lamb of 
God, which beareth away the sin of the world.” 

Dean Milman suggests that when John, beholding Jesus as 
He came to him, said, “ Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh 
away the sin of the world!” he alluded to flocks of lambs, 
intended for the forthcoming Passover, then passing from the 
rich pastures of Perea to Jerusalem by the ford near the scene 
of the Baptist’s labours. But surely there is a deeper thought. 
John was clearly a deep student of Isaiah’s prophecies. He 
cannot but have been quite familiar with that chapter which 
reads like a fifth Gospel, as it foretells how the servant of the 
Lord would be led as a lamb to the slaughter, an allusion 
which, of course, was based on the offering of the morning and 
evening lamb, and on the great Paschal Feast, which lay at the _ 
foundation of the national history. 

We cannot stay to trace the complete analogy between the 
lambs and the Lamb, between the Passover and the supreme 
event of our Redemption. The points of likeness and contrast 
are deeply interesting. But we must let that witness of the 
Holy Ghost, through those human lips, have its due weight 
with us. Evidently the main aspect in which we are to view 


our Divine Lord, is in His sacrificial character. “The Lamb — 


as it had been slain” must be dehe/d both here and hereafter, in 
this world and in all worlds. Not his character, however fair ; 


“Bebolt the Lamb of God!” 47 


not his words, however much light they cast on the mysteries 
of life and death; not his miracles, however strong their 
testimony to his Divine mission: but his appointment to bear 
the sin of the world, ¢4zs is the primary aspect in which we are 
to behold Him. 

Look into these words; the Gospel glistens in them, as 
the whole sun in a single dewdrop.' They tell us that the 
sacrifice of the cross is the outcome of the thought and pre- 
paration of the infinite God. Jesus is the Lamb of God. They 
remind us that his propitiation for sin is not for ours only, but 
for the whole world. They give a clue to the cause of that 
mysterious anguish which at times overwhelmed Him. They ' 
describe the attitude which we should ever adopt of beholding 
Him—an attitude by which we are able to appropriate the 
nutriment of hi$ flesh and blood, of which the paschal supper 
was a type. O blessed Lamb! what shall we say of Thee or 
to Thee? Words fail us. Thou wast made sin for us. Thou 
hast washed us from our sins in thy blood. Thou hast put 
away sin by the sacrifice of Thyself. Thou art longing that 
every soul of man should know and rejoice in thy yearning 
love, thy glorious work. We praise, and adore, and woyship 
Thee. Worthy is the Lamb that was slain ! 

But remember ever to unite the double burden of John’s 
preaching. We need not only blood, but fire. It is much 
to be justified, but we need to be sanctified ; much to know of 
the atoning death, but we need union with the Lamb in his 
resurrection life; much to have the blood sprinkled on the 
inner shrine, but we need that the Shekinah fire should burn 
there with quenchless power; much to have the baptism 
of water, but at the best that is negative, and we need some- 
thing positive, searching, quickening, and God-like. 

After all, John was right. Christ is the greater Baptizer. 
Beyond death and the grave He received the Spirit, that 
He might shed Him forth. And now He stands among us 
whom He has redeemed, eager that, having washed us in his 
blood, He may complete what He has begun with that holy 
baptism of which John spake, and which is as much our 
privilege as the cleansing of the blood. Ah! brethren and 


48 Gbhree Memorable Mays. 


sisters, we have need to be baptized of Him. Not the blood 
without the fire; not the fire apart from the blood. Not the 
Christ of Calvary only, but the Christ of the throne. Not 
pardon alone, but deliverance and salvation. 

But let us remember that just as Jesus could not be mani- 
fested to Israel, until John had come baptizing in water (31) ; 
so it is still. John the Baptist must still do his work in the 
soul. And only when there has been repentance and confession 
of sin, which submission to John’s baptism signified, is a sinner 
prepared to receive the Saviour. There is profound truth in 
that saying of McCheyne, “Only a broken-hearted sinner can 
receive a crucified Christ.” 

This suggests a very serious question to many who have 
no clear consciousness of Christ, no glad realization of his 
presence, no rejoicing with joy unspeakable and full of glory. 
May not this lack arise from their not having entered into 
the meaning of those preliminary conditions which were 
represented by the Baptist? Only as we know the sinfulness of 
sin, and the preciousness of.the atoning blood of Christ, can we 
apprehend the power of his resurrection and rejoice in the — 
hope of his coming and his kingdom. May God the Holy 
Spirit make us a people prepared for the Lord (Luke i. 17). 


Il]. THE THIRD Day; DISCIPLE-DESERTION (35-37).— 
On the third day John again looked wistfully and eagerly on 
Jesus as He walked. It was perhaps the last time those eyes 
were to behold Him. Again he designated Jesus as the Lamb 
of God ; but there was a significance in his words which was 
instantly detected by the two disciples who stood beside him. 
He meant by those words to transfer their allegiance from him 
to his Lord. Henceforth they were to behold Azz. So at 
least they seem to have understood him. “They followed 
Jesus.” 

As the preacher looked on their retreating forms, and realised 
that his work was done, and that henceforth all the crowds 
would follow them and ebb away, did he have a feeling of 
jealousy or regret? Evidently not. Or if there were a 
momentary sense of desolation and loneliness, it must have 


Fulness of Joy. 49 


been instantly wiped out by a great sense of joy. To quote his 
own matchless words, “This my joy therefore is fulfilled” 
(iil. 29). 

It is sad to see the crowds depart ; to note the drying of the 
brook whose waters were so sweet, the ebbing of the tide, the 
waning of the day, the falling of the leaves ; but, where the soul 
has learnt to live in Jesus and for Him, it is not so hard to die 
to all these things, because the Lord has become its light and 
its salvation, the strength of its life and its everlasting joy. 


7 Vil. 
Che Son of Man. 


“Verily, verily, I say unto you, hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and 
the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of Man.” 
JOHN i. 51. 


HIS chapter abounds in striking names and titles for 
«our Lord. They are a study in themselves. The 
Word; the Light; the Life of Men; the Only- 
begotten of the Father; the Christ; the Lamb of 
God ; the Master; Son of God; and King of Israel. 





xh ; : ; : 
8 But the climax, with which this marvellous enumera- 


tion closes, is as wonderful as any: Zhe Son of Man. It 
occurs eighty times in the Gospels, and is always applied by 
our Lord to Himself. 


It is a glorious word, brimful of hope to every member of the 
family of mankind. To be Son of David, or Son of Abraham, 
would limit Him to a family or race; but to be Son of Man is 
equivalent to being the second Adam, and to have a relation- 
ship to every man. He was the epitome of humanity, sin 
excepted. All can find a response in his nature. The one 
Man, the Man of men, the supreme flower and glory of the 
human family, the Divine Man—such was the Son of Man, who 
as such stands now amid the supernal glory of his Father’s 
throne (Acts vil. 56). 

The nature of our Lord Jesus is infinite in its extent. On 
the one hand it touches the heights of Godhead, on the other 
the depths of manhood. To use his own comparison (51), it 
resembles the mystic ladder, which in the dream of the 
wanderer, linked the far distant depths of sky—where, more 
brilliant than sun or moon, the light of the Shekinah shone— 
with the moorland, strewn with huge boulders of stone, on 
which he lay. At one end is the title, Son of God; at the 


Hix Potwer of Attraction. wg 


other, Son of Man. And there is not one of the human family 
too frail or sinful to pass upward through the blessed Lord, his 
birth and death, his resurrection and ascension, from the lowest 
depths of degradation to the further heights of blessedness. 

Here, probably for the first time, our Lord used this title of 
Himself. It is possible that its full meaning will only be 
disclosed long ages after we have entered the meridian light of 
eternity. 


I. THE SON OF MAN ATTRACTING MEN.—He had just 
come victorious from his encounter with the devil. With an 
imperative of spiritual energy, which human lips had never 
addressed to the tempter before, He had made the prince of 
this world slink behind Him. The next step was to lay the 
foundation of a society, through which He might carry forward 
his victories, opposing the kingdom of darkness with a kingdom 
of light, until that has been realized for the race which He 
realized on the mountain brow for Himself. 

In the Apocalypse, John beheld the completed city, New 
Jerusalem, descending out of heaven ; and was able to study 
its foundations, as he could not have done had it been earth- 
born. They seemed like the breastplate of the high priest in 
colour, though greatly multiplied in extent. There were the 
blue sapphire; the green emerald; the dark-red sardonyx ; 
the brilliant topaz; the hyacinth; and the amethyst. And 
on each the name of an Apostle. In this chapter we find the 
Master-builder quarrying the stones, which seem common 
enough in their origin, but which, under his touch, shall glisten 
as slabs of jewels in the foundations of his Church. There is 
no forecasting what will be the outcome for the simplest 
believer who once is willing to let Christ have his way with 
him. 

Christ attracted men largely from the lower ranks.— 
Macaulay tells the story of the famous cathedral window, 
constructed by the apprentice from materials which his master 
threw away, and which was so much more beautiful than his 
that he made away with his life in jealousy. And it was out 
of those orders of society which the great men of the time 


52 | Ghe Son of Man. 


held in contempt that Jesus began to construct the society 
against which the gates of hell cannot prevail. “The common 
people heard Him gladly.” “Then drew near the publicans 
and sinners for to hear Him.” The true David recruited his 
army from the lapsed and lost, and chose his officers 
from the ranks of publicans, and fishermen, and artisans 
(1: Sam. xxii. 2). 


Christ attracted men of very different make. —\n the 
Apostolic band there were at least three groups, besides 
minor varieties. The Boanergic, comprising those of largest 
gift and strength of character—Peter and Andrew, James and 
John. The Reflect’ve, who were apt at questioning and slow to 
believe—Philip and Thomas, Nathanael (or Bartholomew) and 
Matthew. The Practical, who superintended the business 
arrangements of catering for the rest. All these varieties were 
“attracted to Jesus. He needed them, and they Him. 


Christ attracted men to Himself—He published no mani- 
festo; elaborated no system of doctrine; insisted on no 
theological examination. His person was his theology. He 
appealed to the craving of the human heart for love, and offered 
_ Himself to supply its needs, pledging Himself to lead his 

disciples from the “Come and see” of the first interview, to the 
vision of “those greater things,” which include the Sermon 
on the Mount; the Sacrificial Death ; the Resurrection and 
Ascension ; the Descent of the Holy Ghost ; and which extend 
also to those marvellous discoveries of Divine truth which 
fill the Epistles. “ Not the Man through the doctrine ; but the 
doctrine through the Man.” Not first the head and then the 
heart ; but first the heart and then the head. The trust of the 
soul in One who gathers up our intellectual assent as He bears 
us forward into all the truth. 


Men were attracted to Christ in very different ways.—Some 
by preaching, as when the Baptist proclaimed Him on the 
Jordan bank to the disciples standing beside him. Though 
that sermon failed on the first occasion, on the second it was the 
means of converting his entire audience: “And they followed 
Jesus.” 


* Follo Ste!” 53 


Others are brought through human relationships. God has 
bound us together in families, that these human relationships 
may become a very network of communicating wires, through 
which to send the sparks and impulses of his own love. The 
Bible does not say how many souls Andrew brought afterwards 
to Jesus ; but it does say, he fvs¢ found his own brother Simon. 
As boys they had played on the silver sands’; as youths they 
had sailed the long night through in their father’s yawl; as 
young men they had left their homes drawn by a common 
impulse to the Jordan. And when Andrew found Christ, he had 
an irresistible influence over Peter and won him. The little 
taper lit up the great light. Have we all used our home ties 
enough for the winning of souls to our Lord? 

Others were brought by the Master’s direct influence. “He 
findeth Philip, and saith unto him, Follow Me.” I love to 
think of the thousands who owe their all to the direct touch 
of the love of Christ, falling on them as the light of an infinitely 
distant star through the tube of the telescope, photographing 
itself for ever on the prepared paper. Far from the sound 
of the church-going bell, amid the deep silence of the night 
watch in the bush or on the prairie, or tossing on the bosom of 
the deep, the Love of God still finds men. 

Others are brought to Christ by the call of friendship, follow- 
ing on long courses of previous preparation. Often must 
Philip have left the shores of his native lake, and crossed 
the hills for Cana, where Nathanael dwelt ; and the two would 
earnestly discuss the signs of the times, the desperate straits of 
their country, the preaching of the Baptist, the advent of the 
King. And for long periods the guileless Israelite would be 
lost in deep reverie as he sat beneath his favourite fig-tree, 
pondering the things which Moses in the Law, and the 
Prophets, did write, and engaged in earnest prayer. It was not 
difficult to win such an one, when Philip broke in on his retire- 
ment with the news of his discovery. 

Jesus Christ is God’s magnet put down amongst men to 
attract them to Himself. 


II. THE SON OF MAN READING AND REVEALING MEN.— 


54 The Son of Man. 


The Spirit had been given to Him without measure ; and by 
his indwelling He knew what was in man, read men as we read 
books, and interpreted them to themselves that they might 
know themselves and Him. 

He knew the yearning for love that dwelt in the heart of 
John, who clearly was one of the two who first followed Him 
with timid footsteps, longing to know some of the secrets 
of his inner life : “ Master, where dwellest Thou ?” 

He knew how timid and weak was the soul that lay beneath 
the burly form and impetuous self-assertion of Andrew’s 
brother, and He called him by a name which well became 
him—Simon Bar-Jona, the son of a timid dove. 

He knew where to find Philip; the qualities which were 
worth finding in him ; and the magnetic sentence which would 
bind him for ever to his side: “ Follow Me.” 

He knew the guileless simplicity and purity with which 
Nathanael’s soul was filled, untainted by the luxurious tastes 
with which the Romans were enervating his native land; and 
had seen the devout thoughts passing through his heart, before 
Philip called him, The tree has never grown which could 
conceal a soul from the eye of Jesus. 

So He reads us still. He knows our downsitting and our 
uprising, and understands our thoughts afar off. We lie before 
Him naked and opened, as the sacrificial victim before the 
priest. What though the sharp two-edged sword be in his 
hand, yet He is not a High-priest who cannot be touched with 
the feeling of our infirmities ! 


The Lord who dwells on high 
Knows all, and loves us better than He knows. 


III. THE SON OF MAN COMPLETING MEN.—Whatever we 
need most, we can find in Him. He is the all-sufficiency for 
all human need; the supply of every lack; the answer to 
every inquiry. Not his gifts, but Himself. Do we need purity? 
He does not simply give us purity, but He is in us “that Holy 
Thing.” Do we want life? He does not merely impart it, 
but He is Himself our life. Do we require strength? The 
Lord is the strength of our life. As the rest of a circle is the 


Andreu, Peter, and John. 55 


complement of a segment, however small, so is Jesus the com- 
plement of all who_believe. 

Andrew is always ranked with Peter, James, and John ; yet 
he was excluded, not arbitrarily, of course, from three memor- 
-able scenes, where the others witnessed the glory of their 
Lord. He reminds us of men of large gift, who yet fall short 
of the first rank by some defect in ardour, dash, enthusiasm. 
O ye Andrews of the Church, come to the Son of Man! that 
He may supply that missing link; breathe into you that 
lacking power ; baptize you in his sacred fire: “so that ye 
come behind in no gift,” waiting for his coming. 

A very different man was Peter. Liking to gird himself ; 
foremost to speak, to act, to deny ; the born leader and spokes- 
man of the rest ; ardent in love, but sadly needing stability ; 
essaying to walk the waves, and sinking ; meeting with God- 
given answer the Master’s challenge as to His nature, and 
within a few moments becoming an offence ; flashing his sword 
in the moonbeams with terrible execution, and denying with 
oaths ; plunging into the lake for the shore, where in the grey 
dawn the beloved form was standing, but presently silenced by 
“What is that to thee?” A strange mixture of strength and 
weakness, of ardour and inconstancy! Such are some of us. 
But when men like Peter come to the Son of Man, He completes 
them, and impregnates them with the strength of his own rock- 
like character ; so that they become rock-men in their degree, 
as mossy nests are turned to stone beneath the drip of the 
limestone caves. 

John’s nature reminds us of the lakes, which, like his own 
Galilee, lie among the hills. On calm days the placid and 
pellucid waters mirror the curtains of the heavens, whether 
blue, or dark, or star-bespangled. But when the wild winds 
rush down on them, they are lashed into fury, and no boat 
can live. John was filled with an almost divine power of 
loving. This won the love of Jesus; led him to lean on that 
sacred breast ; secured the trusteeship of the beloved mother ; 
and enabled him to read the secrets of. the Redeemer’s 
character hidden from the rest. But, withal, he would sit 
on the right or left of the throne, and call for fire from heaven 


56 The Son of Man. 


on offending villagers. Evidently, such a nature needed to be 
softened and toned, and taught how long-suffering, and for- 
bearing, and pitiful, Divine love could be. Some of us also 
need to take our love to Jesus that it may be rid of earthly 
elements, and attempered to his own. 

Nathanael made use of such fragmentary hints as were 
within his reach, and arrived at one of the sublimest of 
conclusions ; but there were great gaps which needed to be 
filled up, like the blanks in the maps of Africa some twenty 
years ago. He saw something; but he was capable of seeing 
more, and he was told that he should see greater things 
than any that had come within his ken. He recognised in 
Jesus the Son of God, the King of Israel: but he had yet 
to learn that Jacob’s ladder was a sign of blessing beyond the 
limits of his own children; that it was a type of Jesus the 
Son of God, who was not only King of Israel, the nation, 
but Son of Man, the race. 

This is Christ’s invariable mode. There is always more to 
follow. On every blessing which He puts into our hands He 
writes this inscription, “Thou shalt see greater things than 
these.” If conversion, adoption; if adoption, heirship ; if 
heirship, the throne ; if grace, glory. 

I know not how many maimed and incomplete hearts may 
be reached by these words. But it may be that hundreds who 
will read them have been wearily conscious of heart-ache and 
heart-need ; waiting for some one who never comes ; watching 
for a light which never breaks ; bemoaning a lack which lies at 
the bottom of the heart, saying Give, give, but is never 
satisfied. “Blessed are ye that hunger; for ye shall be 
filled.” But the filling can come from no human or earthly 
source. In Christ alone can we. be replenished and satisfied. 
Take the infirmity, the deficiency, the yearning, the sense of 
maimedness, to the Son of Man, whose nature will flow into 
yours, as an ocean into some new dock or reservoir, adapting 
itself to the shape of the receptacle, and filling it throughout. 
“ Veware complete [R.V., made full] in Him.” 


VIIL 
Ghe First Miracle. 


“This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested 
forth his glory ; and his disciples believed on Him.”—Joun ii. 11. 


4/HIS is one of those precious memories which the 
mother of our Lord pondered in her heart, and doubt- 
less often recited in that home to which this Evan- 
gelist led her from the cross. Several incidents in 
this Gospel may be traced to that fellowship in love 
and sorrow which, until her death, must have linked 
his mother and the disciple whom Jesus loved. 

Is it not wonderful that this was our Lord’s first miracle ! 
Had we been asked to select the one which seemed most 
appropriate to stand as the frontispiece of his earthly ministry, 
we should have selected the raising of Lazarus, the calming 
of the storm, or the feeding of the hungry crowds ; but who 
would have chosen this? The inventive genius of man would 
have conceived an introductory scene which combined the 
chief features of the Transfiguration and of the giving of the 
law. How different is the simplicity of this incident ! 

In the previous chapter we are told that the Apostles beheld 
in Jesus Christ the glory of the Only-begotten of the Father ; 
and when we ask one of those eye-witnesses to give a sample 
of its choicest manifestations, we are conducted to a little 
village in the highlands of Galilee, at the distance of an after- 
noon’s walk from Nazareth, where the Master sits at a simple 
marriage feast amongst his friends, and makes wine out of 
water to supply their lack. 

The miracles of this Gospel are signs (xx. 30), carefully 
selected as bearing upon the special characteristics of our Lord’s 





58 Ghe First Miracle. 


person and work, which the Evangelist had set himself to 
portray. There was a distinct purpose in his performing this 
miracle as his first, and in its being set so prominently at the 
front of this narrative. We are told that He manifested 
forth his glory ; and we reverently ask, How? As we strive 
to answer that question, may we again sit at his table, and hear 
Him speak ! 


I. Ir WAS. HIS GLORY TO SHOW THAT TRUE RELIGION IS 
CONSISTENT WITH ORDINARY LIFE.—There is a common 
tendency to associate the highest type of religion with rigorous 
austerity of life, as if the human were too common to be divine. 
We fancy that he whose thoughts commune most deeply with 
the Eternal must be a stern, silent, and solitary man. This 
type.of the religious life was exemplified in the old prophets, 
who dwelt in the solitudes of unfrequented deserts and hills, 
withdrawn from the common joys and engagements and ties of 
human existence ; only emerging now and again*to pour on 
the ears of awestruck crowds the burning words of the living 
God. Such had been John the Baptist. The deserts, his 
home ; the locust and wild honey, his fare; the camel’s cloth, 
his dress. And we might have expected to find the Son of 
God more rigorous still in his isolation; rearmg Himself in 
severe and solitary grandeur, like the Jungfrau among the 
Alps. 

But no. His early years are spent, not in a desert, but 
ahome. He comes eating and drinking. He moves freely 
amongst men as one of themselves. He interweaves his life 
with the life of the home, the market-place, and the street. 
And in pursuance of this purpose He wrought his first miracle 
ata peasant’s wedding. 

Travelling by easy stages from the Jordan valley, He had 
reached Galilee. Finding his mother gone from Nazareth, He 
followed her over the hills to Cana, and for her sake was 
invited with his six new-made followers to the simple feast. 
It was a time of simple-hearted enjoyment. “The bridegroom 
crowned with flowers with which his mother had crowned him 
in the day of his espousals ; the bride adorned with her jewels, 


= 


Practical Holiness. 59 


sitting apart among the women.” And though He was the Son 
of God, no cloud would veil his face or cast a restraining spell 
upon the guests. 


This ts the harder type.—Easier, like the anchorite, to be 
_separated from the world, than, like the Saviour, to be in it 
and not of it. Easier to decline an invitation to the house of 
the great than to go there and behave as the Son of God. 
Easier to refuse the things of sense than ito use them without 
abuse. Easier to maintain a life of prayer far from the haunts 
of men, than to enter them maintaining constant fellowship 
with God in the unruffled depths of the soul. Nothing but the 
grace of the Holy Spirit can suffice for this. But this is 
sufficient if daily and believingly sought. 


Lt ts most honouring to God—The idea of the ascetic life is 
that every human feeling is a weakness, and every natural 
instinct a sin. No woman’s caress, no childish voice, no tender 
love, none of the jewels or flowers of existence, may soften the 
rigours of that lot. But is not all this a libel on God’s original 
creation? Has He made so great a mistake in creating us that 
we must thwart his ideal at every step, ere we can rise to our 
true manhood? Must we make ourselves other than men 
before we can be saints? Surely, to reason thus is to dishonour 
the wisdom and love of God in our original creation. And 
the Incarnation teaches us, as does this miracle, that God . 
does not require an emasculated, but a fulfilled and purified 
humanity. 


It ts most useful to the world.—Of what use is salt, except in 
contact with the corrupting carcase? The holiness which 
builds three tabernacles amid almost inaccessible rocks is 
of little help to the breaking hearts of devil-possessed men 
in the valley below. This, at least, is not our Saviour’s message. 
“ Go,” says He, “to Jerusalem and Samaria, to the crowded 
cities and homes of men. Live amongst them, kindling them 
with the passion of your holiness. Suffer little children to 
come to you; publicans and sinners to draw near to you; 
crowds to follow you. All I ask is. that whether ye eat or drink, 
or whatsoever ye do, ye should do all to the glory of God.” 


60 «Che First Miracle. 


Il. Ir was HIS GLORY .TO TEACH THE BEAUTY OF 
WAITING MEEKLY FOR GOD.—If ever there was a being who 
might have claimed to act on the prompting of his own spirit, 
it was surely our blessed Lord. But there never was one 
who lived in more absolute and entire dependence on the 
Father from the first. It comes out very clearly here. 

His advent with his friends threatened the whole family with 
a disgrace which to the hospitable mind of the Jew would 
be irreparable. The wine ran short. Mary, who seems to have 
had considerable influence in the house, was made aware of the 
fact, and quickly guessed its cause. She could not endure 
the thought of inflicting, however unconsciously, so great a 
mortification on that kindly circle ; and she suddenly conceived 
the hope of helping them through Him whom she had been 
wont to count her obedient son. Why should He not now 
assume the position which had been predicted from his birth ? 
She could not have been deceived in all that had been told her; 
but it had been long and hard to wait. Yet surely the saluta- 
tion of the Baptist and gathering of disciples were omens of an 
approaching change. Why should He not now blossom .out 
into all that splendid glory with which Jewish anticipation 


~ invested the Messiah ? 


Her implied request must have appealed closely to the tender 
heart of Christ. All that she felt, He felt also. But He could 
not take his commands from her entreaty, or even from the 
warmth of his own emotions. He addressed her with a title 
consistent with the most perfect tenderness—indeed, He used it 
from his cross; but, waiving her suggestion with a common 
Aramaic expression, went on to announce that henceforth his 
eye would be, if possible, more closely fixed on the dial-plate of 
his Father’s will, following the ‘index-finger of his purpose, 
waiting till it should reach the hour, and the alarum for action 
should ring out. “ Mine hour is not yet come.” 

It was so that He waited or acted throughout his life. The 
Gospels abound in references to his hour. Before it struck He 
was calm and peaceful, however pressing might be the apparent 
need for action. When it struck He acted instantly and 
decisively. Afterwards, He returned unto his rest. This is 


Gxternal Rites and Inward Cleansing. 61 


almost the hardest lesson in Christian living. We listen to the , 
advice of friend ; the threatening of foe ; the pressure of circum- \ 
stance. We think we must do something. Like King Saul, 
we force ourselves and offer the sacrifice. We pray hurriedly 
and throw ourselves into the breach, to discover, when too late, 
that we have run without being sent, and have defeated our own 
object by too much haste. “ My soul, wait thou,” might often 
be addressed to ourselves by ourselves. Not a moment behind 
God ; but not a moment before Him. Ready for his hour 
to strike. 


III. IT WAS HIS GLORY TO SHOW THE INWARDNESS OF TRUE 
RELIGION.—In the entrance-hall six stone waterpots were 
standing, “after the manner of the purifying of the Jews.” 
Their superstitious dread of uncleanness made it necessary 
to have large supplies of water ever at hand. Without washing 
no one ate (Mark vii. 3). The feet of each guest were washed 
on arrival (Luke vii. 44). The washing of cups and jugs and 
bottles, says the Talmud, went on all day. And in this we 
have a symbol of that religion which consists in external rites, 
and is content if only these are maintained. 

But the Master turned the water of outward éeremionidl, 
washing into wine for inward drinking. Surely there is deep 
symbelical meaning here, in illustration of which we recal two 
sentences, the one from the Old Testament, the other from the 
New. “Thy love is better than wine”; and “Whoso.... 
drinketh my blood hath eternal life.” 

The most spiritual men in the old Jewish system were 
constantly emphasising the impotence of mere ritual to save 
and sanctify the soul. David felt it (Psa. li. 16). Isaiah felt it 
(Isa. i. 13). Micah brings it out in Clear relief (Micah vi. 7). 
And here our Lord in this striking miracle seems to say, “ The 
days of ceremonialism are past ; the system which was sent to 
teach spiritual ideas by material substances and external rites 
is at an end; the tedious routine of outward ablutions, which 
has diverted men’s attention from the inner life and the 
befitting garb of the soul, must be laid aside; I am come to 
teach men to love, to live by faith, to array themselves in robes 


62 Ohe First Miracle. 


washed white in my blood, and to rise through close participa- 
tion in my death to a life of stainless purity and flawless beauty. 
Not water, but blood. Not washing, but drinking. Not the 
outward cleanliness, however fair and right ; but the purity of 
the heart, the deliverance of the spirit from the polluting taint 
of evil.”. We are not surprised to learn next that He cleansed 
the Temple, and that He told Nicodemus that even he must be 
born again. 


IV. It was HIS GLORY TO AWAKEN US TO SEE THE 
DIVINE POWER IN THE ORDINARY PROCESSES OF Na- 
TURE.—The world is full of miracles ; but they are so gradual 
and quiet that we are often blinded to their wonderfulness, till 
the flash of a sudden “sign” awakens us from our strange 
neglect. 

It seems doubtful whether the Lord changed all the contents 
of the six stone jars, or only that which was drawn from them. 
The latter would more resemble his way, who gives us, not 
granaries of grain, but daily bread ; and who deals out supplies 
of daily strength. But, even if He had turned all the water into 
wine, there would be no obstacle to our faith. The sin of 


_ drunkenness was not the sin of Palestine, as it is of London ; 


and therefore did not require the special methods of prevention 
which the principles of his Gospel now lead us to adopt. And 
we must remember that the light wines of the Galilean vintage 
were very different to the brandied intoxicants with which we 
are too familiar. 

But this is the interesting point: that we see compressed 
into a single flash the same power that works throughout the 
wine-lands every summer, transforming the dew and rain into 
the juices that redden the drooping clusters of the vines. The 
superficial man looks at this miracle and cries, “ Oh, wondrous 
day that beheld so great a deed!” The spiritual man looks at 
it, and, whilst not underrating its marvel, walks the world with 
a new reverence, because he knows that the same Divine 
power is throbbing all around. The power revealed in feeding 
the five thousand is required to cover the autumn fields with 
grain. The power needed to raise the dead shows how much 


The Gifts of Gob. 63 


is constantly demanded to keep us living. The power that 
quells the storm indicates how much is being exercised to 
maintain the stable equilibrium of the world. 

This is the glory of the miracles of Jesus, that they have 
taught us to look on the world around us with new and opened 
eyes. We hear his voice in the summer wind, and amid the 
roar of the pitiless storm. We catch sight of his form 
awakening Nature from her wintry sleep by his touch, as 
once the daughter of Jairus from her couch. We stand 
spellbound before his power, as once they did who saw the 
wonderful works of his hands. He is the same yesterday, 
to-day, and for ever. In Him all things consist. And as for 
this world, it teems with the miraculous : 


And every common bush afire with God ; 
But only he who sees takes off his shoes. 


V. IT WAS HIS GLORY TO SHOW THE ASCENDING SCALE OF 
Gop’s Girts.—The devil ever gives his best first ; and when 
the appetite is somewhat palled, he puts on his worse, even to 
the worst. Gold at the crown, clay at the foot. Feasting with 
harlots, then famine with swine. Goshen with its pastures, 
followed by Egypt with its fetters. Ah! you who read this 
page, and are living a heartless, worldly life, make the most of 
‘it, it is 'the best you will ever have. After you have “ well 
drunk,” there will come coarser tastes, more depraved appetites. 
That which has satisfied will fail to satisfy ; and in its stead 
will come forms of sin and temptation from which at the first 
you would have started back, crying, “Do you take me for a 
dog, that I should ever come to this !” 

The Lord Jesus, on the other hand, is always giving some- 
thing better. As the taste is being constantly refined, it is 
provided with more delicate and ravishing delights. That 
which you know of Him to-da 7; certainly better than that 
you tasted when first you sat down at his board. And so it 
will ever be. The angels, as his servants, have orders to bring 
in and set before the heirs of glory things which eye hath not 
seen, and man’s heart has not conceived, but which are all 
prepared. The best of earth will be below the simplest fare 


64 Che Ftret Miracle. 


of heaven. But what will heaven’s best be! If wine in the 
peasant’s house is so luscious, what will be the new wine in 
the Fathers kingdom! What may we not expect from the 
vintages of the celestial hills! What: will it be to sit at the 
marriage supper of the Lamb, not as guests, but as the Bride ! 
Oh, hasten on, ye slow-moving days ; be quick to depart, that 
we may taste that ravishment of bliss! But for ever and ever, 
as fresh revelations break on our glad souls, we shall look up 
to the Master of the feast and cry, “ Zhou hast kept the best 
until now.” 


IX. 
Ghe Gemple of the Body. 


‘He spake of the temple of his body.” —JouN ii. 21, 


HAT is your body? An inn, thronged with busy 
traffic! A library, whose shelves are being 
gradually filled with the gathering stores of 
knowledge! A counting-house, dedicated to 
money-making, in which the amassing of wealth, 
-or the maintenance of a competence is the one 

and all-important object! A playhouse, used for no higher 

purpose than pleasure-seeking !_ A stye, where swinish passions 
revel! “But He spake of the temple of his Body.” 

The conception was full of beauty.—As the temple at Jeru- 
salem, with its marble pavements, its pillared cloisters, its 
terraced courts, its rich adornment, was one of the fairest 
spectacles under the sun, so is the human body, designed and 
built by the Divine skill, worthy of its Creator. Consider those 
ivory pillars of bone; those alabaster walls of flesh; that 
many-toned organ of speech ; those long corridors of brain and 
nerve, through which thought and emotion move ; those storied 
archives where memory resides as the custodian of the records 
of the past: and tell me if you do not see an exquisite beauty 
and delicacy in the Lord’s comparison, as “He spake of the 
temple of his Body.” 

The conception was as new as it was beautiful.Men had 
been wont to consider the body as the seat of evil, and the 
principal impediment to a saintly life. The Epicurean, like the 
‘“fleshly school” of the present day, gave himself up to obey 
its wildest impulses, as though a rider should throw the reins 
on the neck of a fiery steed. The Stoic sought to crush out 
and starve all natural instincts. And this has been the motive 
of asceticism in all ages. “I fear that I have ill-treated my 


brother the ass,” said St. Francis of Assisi, a few hours before 
E 





66 Ghe Gemple of the Body. © 


his death, as he looked with a kindly and half-humorous pity 
on his worn and emaciated body, prematurely exhausted by 
vigil, fasting, and maceration. . 

At the most, men were prepared to give to God a part of 
their being, one room out of many to be his shrine, the organ 
of veneration, the attitude of worship, the hour of morning 
prayer. But the Son of Man said that the body was not in 
itself evil, and that it might be the shrine and home of God ; 
the temple of Him who dwells in the high and holy place ; 
whose Being fills the immensity of the universe, but who makes 
his dwelling-place with loving and contrite hearts. He said, 
moreover, that not one organ but every organ ; not one attitude 
but all; not one engagement but each—should be pervaded 
by the thought of worship and dedication, cleansed in the 
blood of atonement, made fragrant with the perfume of incense, 
and included in priestly ministry and service. 

And the conception became characteristic of Christianity.— 
Wherever the religion of Jesus went, men conceived a new 
idea of the sacredness of the body. Had He not worn it? 
Had He not carried it through death into the light of Easter, 
and the glory of the throne? Had He not spoken of it as 
‘atemple? The natural instincts could be neither common nor 
unclean. And it must be possible so to order and rule them as 
that they should be the willing servants of a holy will and 
consecrated purpose ; not impeding the symmetrical beauty 
of the loftiest characters, but promoting it ; and doing the will 
of God on earth as it is done in heaven. 

From this source the Apostle derived the motive-power with 
which to nerve his converts in their conflict with the evils 
of their time. Writing to those at Corinth, one of the fairest 
in the sisterhood of fair cities with’ which Greece had adorned 
herself, the beauty of whose temples was only equalled by 
the voluptuousness and impurity of the worship which defiled 
the loveliest achievements of human art, he said emphatically, 
“Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the 
Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple 
of God, him shall God destroy ; for the temple of God is holy, 
which temple ye are.” (1 Cor. iii. 16, 17; vi. 19; 2 Cor. vi. 16.) 


Ghe Threefold Nature of Man. 67 


Is it not significant that, in his first miracle, our Lord 
hastened to put honour on marriage at the wedding feast ; 
and in his second public act, by a single word, reinstated 
the body in its rightful place as the help-meet and shrine of the 
consecrated soul, a thing which may be presented as a sacrifice 
unto God, holy, and acceptable, and reasonable (Rom. xii. 1) ? 
Surely thus it became Him as Son of Man! ‘He spake of the 
temple of his Body.’ 


I. THE TIME OF HIS SPEAKING.—It was the month of April. 
The land was green with pastures, and carpeted with myriads 
of flowers ; the air vocal with the singing of birds, and laden 
with sweet scent ; the thoroughfares thronged with pilgrims for 
the Passover, and with flocks for the Paschal Feast. Jerusalem 
was in her glory. And at such a time there seemed nothing 
extravagant in the panegyric of the patriot Psalmist, when 
he sang, “ Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth is 
Mount Zion, the city of the great King.” 

After the miracle at Cana, our Lord went down to Caper- 
naum, with which most of his disciples were associated, and 
which thenceforward became his home. But He did not stay 
there “many days,” as the time had come for Him to inaugurate 
his public ministry in the metropolis of his people, and at 
the very heart of their religious system. 


II. THE PLACE OF HIS SPEAKING.—It was in the temple 
that He who was Himself the temple of God, spake of the body 
asatemple. And there was a special fitness in the coincidence. 
The temple had three divisions. The outer, which lay beneath 
the gaze of Israel ; the inner, or Holy Place, where the white- 
robed priests went to and fro on their sacred ministries, awed by 
the sense of the nearness of God’s manifested presence; and the 
innermost, or Most Holy Place, where the Shekinah, in Solomon’s 
temple, shone between the bending forms of the cherubim. 

Similarly tripartite is the nature of man. The body is its 
outer court. Next to that is the soul, the seat of consciousness, 
of thought and will, of emotion and imagination, a family of 
priests meant to minister to God, in robes of stainless purity, 


68 The Gemple of the Body. 


under the sense of his presence, their every movement music, 
their every act worship. But beyond this wondrous play of 
soul-life is the spirit ; that in which man is most like God, and 
by which he is capable of becoming God-filled and God- 
possessed. For it is through the spirit that man’s nature opens 
out into the world of spirit, of the infinite and eternal, and 
becomes the residence and shrine of God (1 Thess. v. 23; 
Heb. iv. 12). 

The nature of man is a trinity in unity. Three constituent 
portions make up each individual unit of the human family. 
All are not temples, but all may be. In many, alas, the most 
sacred chamber, with its marvellous capacities for God, is 
untenanted and unexplored, given over to darkness and neglect. 
At regeneration the Divine residence is inaugurated. The 
Holy Ghost is distinctly described as dwelling within the 
believer; not therefore always patent to our consciousness, 
because deeper than the sphere of emotion, and in the spirit. 

In our second birth marvellous possibilities present them- 
selves. Almost immediately the soul, which 1s the seat of 
consciousness and choice, must elect whether it will permit 
itself to be most largely influenced by the body or the spirit. 
If it choose the former, saved though it be, it will inevitably 
become carnal, and unable to digest God’s deep and secret 
teaching (1 Cor. iii, 2); but, if it choose the latter, it will 
become increasingly spiritual—the light of the Most Holy will 
stream with growing intensity into the holy place of thought 
and feeling, until the whole tenor of the inner life is ennobled 
and purified. And thence the waves of blessed life will pass 
outwards to the body, till every member experiences the sacred 
influence, and begins to sparkle and glow; as when the light 
of the Shekinah brake through all curtaining restraints, and 
bathed in glory the entire fabric, standing in its earliest 
completeness. How perfectly this was illustrated in the Trans- 
figuration, in which the body of the blessed Lord shone as the 
sun, and even his clothes were white as the light ! 

You will never be able to govern the body by the unaided 
power of the soul. Go deeper than the soul-life, however fervid 
its love or strenuous its resolves. Avail yourselves of the 


Grattic in the Temple. 69 


indwelling grace of the Holy Ghost. Let the parting veil 
be rent and withdrawn. And then, through the recipient soul, 
the life and light and love of God will stream forth to ennoble 
and irradiate the entire nature. 


III. THE OCCASION OF HIS SPEAKING.—The hills of Moab 
were hardly purple with the dawn before the highways were 
crowded with throngs hurrying to the temple. But the 
tortuous streets were rendered almost impassable on account 
of the traffic and business caused by the vast concourse of 
people. There were sellers of trinkets and souvenirs ; drovers 
of sheep and oxen with their charge ; exchangers of the coins 
of all the world for the half-shekel, which must be paid by 
every Jew in temple currency. Had all this hubbub been 
confined to the adjacent streets, it had been sufficiently 
objectionable ; but, for purposes of gain, it had been permitted 
to intrude into the lower temple court, that of the Gentiles. 
There, steaming with heat, and filling the sacred edifice with 
stench and filth, were penned whole flocks of sheep and herds 
of oxen ; while drovers and pilgrims stood around in eager 
contention as to price. There, too, were men with cages of 
doves, the offerings of the poor. And beneath the shadow 
of the arcades, sat the money-changers, each behind his little 
table, covered with piles of coin. A very shambles, with the 
noise of an Eastern bazaar ! 

An apt symbol this, not only of the intrusion of the world- 
spirit into the Church, but of the harbouring of darker and 
sadder evils in the heart. Not alone amid the ruins of heathen 
fanes, but in the secrets of our hearts, do vultures build their 
filthy nests, and unclean creatures make their lair. Traffic in 
the forbidden ; the forms of brutelike passions; the rattle of 
unhallowed gain ; the sweltering press of care and worry and 
rush—have crowded God out of our life. Mammon, Beelzebub, 
and Satan, have usurped his place. With us, as in Ezekiel’s 
vision, the walls of the chambers of imagery are covered with 
delineations of obscene creatures, before which we offer incense. 
With us, as with Job, our increasing knowledge of God 1s gauged 
by a deeper abhorrence of ourselves : “ Behold, I am vile.” 


70 Che Temple of the Body. 


But when the Lord Jesus enters, He cleanses.—¥astily 
knotting together a number of small cords, gathered from 
the litter at his feet, He advanced to the traffickers, and bade 
them begone. They looked at Him aghast. Who was He, 
that He should issue such a decree? But they quailed beneath 
the glance of that flashing eye and the commanding attitude 
of that spare form. Sin is weakness. The evil-doer cannot 
stand before the servant of God armed with no weapon save 
the force of a blameless character and the energy of a 
quenchless zeal. So, moved by a sudden and _ irresistible 
impulse, they slowly and sullenly began to retire, driving their 
charge before them, and uttering the deepest maledictions 
against an authority they dared neither dispute nor resist. 
The dove-sellers followed them, carrying their wicker cages ; 
whilst the money-changers, after a scramble to collect what 
coins they might amid the ruthless overthrow of their tables, 
and the pouring forth of their stores, also hastened away. And 
the temple-court was clear. 

Would you be rid of darkness? let in the light ! Would you 
cleanse the stable? let in the river! Would you be delivered 
from impurity of heart and life? let in the Saviour! He will 
cleanse the temple. This action was deeply significant of 
what He will effect in us. 

Many would meet Him at the threshold and make terms ; 
but this will never do. You may wish Him to pass into 
the upper courts without noticing the lower. You may desire 
to know before admitting Him what He will consider wrong 
and contraband, and to enter upon a discussion of the whole 
matter. You may seek to bribe Him into inaction or acquies- 
cence. But it may not be. Jesus must be Lord or nothing. 
He will have his way, or not enter. He will only take from us 
what we would be the first to. renounce, did we know all that He 
knows. He will do it gently, if we will let Him, taking away 
the evil desire, giving us something better, extracting the 
cancer under chloroform. But He must be free to act. 

Sometimes, when He cannot attain his end by gentleness, 
He uses @ scourge of small cords. Very small things aid 
Him in his work of purification. A child’s remark ; a case 


“Cbrist must Triumph.” 71 


in a newspaper ; a sentence in talk, or from a book; a disap- 
pointment ; an illness ; a loss ; a sarcastic rejoinder ; any one 
of these may be a strand in the cord, or a cord in the scourge, 
‘employed to drive out evil. But better these than hornets 
(Exodus xxiii. 28). 

There always will be remonstrance.—The Pharisees challenged 

his right to act thus, and demanded a sign. His answer fore- 
shadowed his violent death and the perfecting of his body 
through resurrection. These allusions were a dark saying even 
to his disciples, till after they were fulfilled. His words were 
angrily referred by the Jews to the fabric of the temple, and 
were never forgotten. At his trial, and at his cross, they 
were repeatedly flung against Him as a taunt. But they 
_ have been abundantly verified. In destroying his body so far 
as death could do it, they in effect destroyed their temple, and 
struck the death-knell of their system, whilst his risen body is 
now seated on the right hand of the throne of God. 

But over all remonstrances the zeal of Christ must triumph.— 
Ah, that blessed zeal, which ate up his life in three short years ; 
which quailed not at its task, and shrank not back though the 
path it trod led straight to the cross ; which set against the 
opposition and malice of men the vision of the accomplished 
purpose of God ; and which conquered by the fire of its own 
pure passion! It cleansed the temple courts, not once only, 
but again. And will it do less for us? We too are the house 
of God; and the zeal that led our Saviour to cleanse the 
temple, because it was his Father’s, will lead Him for the same 
reason to do as much for each of us. 

Present your being to Him. It matters not how strong the 
evil, how deeply, or how long entrenched. Only open the 
portal of your life for His entrance in mingled love and power. 
He will not fail nor be discouraged till the work is done. Only 
trust Him. Only abandon yourself utterly to Him. Only work 
out what He works in. Amid failure, and the rising of your 
corruption, and untold opposition, his zeal will live and work, 
until the whole temple is rendered worthy of its Divine 
Occupant. “He is the Saviour of the Body.” 


X. 
A Psalm of Lite. 


‘That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the 
Spirit is spirit.” —JOHN iil. 6. 





» ORN! That is true of us all. We were not asked if 
Z? we would be born, or of whom we would be born. 
But we awoke gradually from months of almost 
unconsciousness to find that we had- been born. 
And birth was the gate into life. Through birth we 
entered the biessed kingdom of life. 

But what Life? There are many kingdoms of life, rising 
one above another. Into which of these were we born? The 
lowest is the kingdom of vegetable (fe, with fungus and palm, 
with lichen and oak, with hyssop and cedar. But our kingdom 
is higher than this. The next is the kingdom of animal life, 

~ separated by an impassable gulf from that beneath it, embracing 
all living things, from the microscopic organisms of deep-sea 
dredgings, or the invisible kingdoms that exist in drops of 
water, to the noblest forms of creature-life around the throne of 
God. But our kingdom was higher than this. The next is the 
kingdom of mind and soul: in which there are the faculty 
of reason; the rudiments of conscience; the sparkle of wit ; 
the aurora-glory of the fancy ; memory as librarian ; poetry as 
minstrel; hope, as fresco-painter; love (to use Spenser’s 
exquisite simile) as mother of all: Into this kingdom we were 
born, when in our first birth we passed into the light of life. 
If we were to adopt the phraseology of the New Testament, we 
might call this the kingdom of the flesh; for the flesh is 
employed in a very wide and special sense, and includes the 
whole drift of human life, even to its thoughts, “ That which is 
born of the flesh is flesh” (Rom. vill. 6, 7)._ 
But above this kingdom there is another—the kingdom of ¢he 


“He must be Born Again!” 13 


spiritual and eternal. This is the supreme realm of life, 
the element and home of God. Our Lord alludes to it twice 
in the same breath as “the kingdom of God” (3,5). The 
kingdom into which we are born as babes is filled with bright 
and beautiful things ; but it is shut off from this by a gulf 
as vast as that which severs the vegetable from the animal, 
or the animal from the moral nature of man. As easily might 
the water-lily become the spaniel that dived for it, or the spaniel 
the poet Cowper, who sings his exploit, as that which is born 
flesh become spirit. As there is no entrance into the kingdom 
of the flesh-life save by natural birth ; so there is no entrance 
into the kingdom of the spirit-life, save by spiritual birth. Only 
that which is born of the Spirit is spirit. And this made 
our Lord so emphatic in repeating his announcement, “ Ye 
must be born again.” 

Nicodemus was an admirable type of the world of men 
outside the kingdom of the spirit-life. He believed in God, 
having no sympathy with the cold infidelity of the Sadducees. 
He was, probably, like another of the same school, blameless in 
all the righteousness of the law, and irreproachable in moral 
character. He would be classed among the high-churchmen of 
his time. Courtly, thoughtful, inquisitive ; willing to consider 
the claims of any new system; prepared to acknowledge 
Christ as a teacher ; perplexed at spiritual truth ; thinking that 
it was only needful to know in order to be—how apt a type is 
he of the children of the flesh ! 

See him as he muffles his face in his cloak, and steals along 
in the shadows cast by the full Passover moon, startled by his 
own footfall, fearful lest the watchman on his beat should 
recognise the magnate of the Jewish Sanhedrim in the suppliant 
for entrance at the door of the humble lodging of Jesus of 
Nazareth. A nervous, timid old man this, defending his friends 
on general principles ; not liking to identify himself too publicly 
with a dead enthusiast ; fonder of asking questions than of 
arguing points (John iii. 4, 9 ; vil. 50, 51; xix. 38, 39). 

To such a man Christ said, “Ye must be born again.” 
When Christ says 7zzsz, it is time for us to wake up. He is so 
gentle, winsome, tender. He is always persuading, inviting, 


74 A Psalm of Bite. 


entreating. He so seldom uses the imperative mood. When, 
therefore, He speaks thus, it becomes us to inquire into the 
matter on which He insists so earnestly. 


I. THE NATURE OF THIS LIFE.—It is “eternal life.” This 
is the epithet perpetually applied to it throughout this chapter 
and the writings of the beloved Evangelist. Our Lord was the 
first so to describe it (15). The Holy Ghost repeats the words 
as though to stamp them on our minds (16, 36; iv. 14, 36; vi. 
54; x. 28; xi. 25; 1 John v.13). Surely they cannot simply 
mean everlastingness, the duration of a never-ending existence. 
To have that alone were to gain nothing by our second birth. 
Nay, it would repeat the mistake of the old Greek myth, 
in which the goddess obtained for her lover immortal life, but 
forgot to claim also immortal youth, so that his years became an 
insupportable anguish. “Eternal” refers rather to the quality 
than the quantity of that life, and tells us that it is altogether 
removed from the conditions of space and time, and partakes 
of the blessed, timeless, glorious, spiritual, nature of God. 

This life is never shadowed by dread of condemnation (18); it 
suns itself in the very light of God’s face (20); it does the truth 

(21); it finds its true nest and home in the very heart of God (13). 


II. THE SOURCE OF THIS LIFE—Gop. “The Father hath 
life in Himself” (v. 26). To use the sublime language of the 
Psalmist, “In Thee is the fountain of life.” All life finds its 
source and origin in the nature of God; as the verdure of 
an oasis in the desert, or of a valley among the hills, is entirely 
due to the presence of a perennial fountain, which makes music 
through the years. Drain away the fountain, and the glade 
slowly fades into desert. Blot out God, and the universe 
becomes as devoid of life as the moon. 

From the firefly that flashes through the forest ends to 
the firstborn sons of light—the seraphs, who burn in ceaseless 
adoration before the throne—all the life that exists throughout 
the universe is due, if I may say so, to the spray of the Divine 
fountain of life. And this is specially true of spiritual life. 
Underived, independent of supply, original and ever- flowing, all 
spirit-life has its centre, home, and fountain-head in God.’ 


Hite stored in Christ. 98 


III]. THE STORAGE OF THIS LIFE.—If we may use the words, 
the Father stored his life in the human nature of our Lord. It 
dwelt in Him in its fulness, and it pleased the Father that 
it should be so. By a deliberate act, He gave to the Son 
to have life in Himself. And so at last that life was manifested, 
and men saw it, and bore witness of that eternal life, which was 
with the Father, and was manifested to them (Col. ii. 9 ; John v. 
26 ; 1 Johni. 2). 

Of course we know that, as the second person of the ever- 
blessed Trinity, our Lord Jesus shared from before all worlds in 
the inherent life of God ; but when He became the Son of Man, 
it was the Father’s special bestowment that stored up in his 
human nature all the marvellous life of which we speak. - It was 
as if our God yearned to make us partakers of his Divine 
nature ; but, since the fountain-head was in his own being, 
and He knew that it would be inaccessible to us, therefore, 
in tender pity and condescension, He brought it within our 
reach in the human nature of our blessed Lord. Who need be 
afraid of Jesus? What little child may not venture to his arms? 
what penitent not kiss his feet? what trembling one not lose ail 
terror in his presence? Thank God that He has put his best 
gift on so low a shelf that the weakest and smallest of his 
children may go and take it for themselves ! 

But it was not enough simply to store the life in Jesus. 
It had to be made accessible to us through his death, resurrec- 
tion, and ascension. There is, therefore, special significance in 
_ the repeated references of this chapter to the Son of Man being 
lifted up on the cross (14, 16). That precious death was the full, 
perfect, and sufficient sacrifice and satisfaction for the sin of the 
whole world, through which alone our sins can be pardoned, or 
we accounted worthy to stand in the presence of the holy God. 
But, at the same time, it made Him able to pass on to others 
that life which was in Himself; and, as He passed through 
death into resurrection, He became the author of eternal life to 
all who are united to Him by faith. 

He was filled, that out of his fulness we might be filled. He 
died that we might live. Having overcome the sharpness of 
death, He opened the kingdom of heaven to all believers. 


76 A salm of Hite. 


IV. THE COMMUNICATION OF THIS LIFE.—“ Born of water 
and of the Spirit.” All the world of Judeea was ringing with 
talk of John’s baptism. At this very time he was baptizing in 
Enon, because there was much water there. This then was 
our Lord’s point, when He spoke of water. He clearly referred 
to the work of his Forerunner, and all that it meant of 
repentance and confession of sin. It was through John that 
men were to come to Himself. The porter must open the gate 
of the true fold. And the Lord Jesus would not for a moment 
allow this man, ruler though he were, to escape the wholesome 
ordeal of taking his place with every other sinner on the Jordan 
banks, and of thus becoming one of the people prepared for the 
coming of the Lord. In every soul there has to be a process 
analogous to that signified by the baptism of John. First the 
baptism of water, then the baptism of fire. First repentance, 
then remission of sins. Born of water and of the Spirit. 


‘But at the most this is only part, and, though necessary, 
the less part, of the process. We need not only to turn from the 
old life, but to become possessed of the new. And this is 
the express function of the Holy Spirit. He is significantly 
called “the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus” (Rom. viii. 2). 


Faith is receptiveness. Those that believe are those that 
receive (i. 12). Now the one spot in all the universe where 
faith is most easily and constantly called into operation is at the 
cross of Jesus. When the soul beholds that mystery of love, 
the Son of Man dying for its sins, uplifted on the cross, as 
the serpent on the pole, it yearns after Him with a passion 
which is God-begotten ; it cannot refrain from faith ; it opens 
towards Him the deepest recesses of its being: and ¢hat is the 
blessed moment of the impartation of the germ of the new life 
through the agency of the Holy Spirit. We may not say which 
precedes the other. They are simultaneous, as the simultaneous 


movement of the spokes of a wheel, or as a child’s first cry with 
its first breath. 


We may not have been conscious of this gracious over- 
shadowing of the Holy Spirit, our hearts may have been too 
much occupied with love and penitence and ecstasy to think 


The Hatus of the Netw Wife. ay 


of aught else than of the death which atoned for sin and made 
us nigh to God; but in after years we must look back to 
that moment as the birthday of our eternal life, the hour when 
we passed from death unto life, and became alive unto God 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Ah, august and glorious 
experience, never to be forgotten, never to be excelled in all 
that may transpire through untrodden ages, by which we were 
translated from death into life, from the power of darkness into 
the kingdom of God’s dear Son ! 


V. THE LAws OF THAT LIFE.—(1) MZystery. As the wind 
(8). Whilst our Lord was speaking with this inquirer, “trusting 
Himself to him,” as He did not to the majority of those who 
sought Him (ii. 24), the night-breeze may have passed over the 
City, stirring the vine-leaves as they drooped over the casement, 
and breathing through the open window. “Mark this wind,” 
said our Lord; “how mysterious it is! You cannot see it, 
though you can feel it. You know not from what scenes it 
comes, or to what it hurries ; its laws and ministries ; why it is 
now a hurricane, and again a zephyr, now laden with the 
softness of the western sea, and again hot and feverish with the 
fire of the desert waste—of all this you are ignorant; and 
do you think that you will be more able to understand the 
nature or laws of that new life of which I speak ?” 

It must be always so. No kingdom can understand another 
kingdom. You must be born into life to know life. It is only 
by what you experience of life in yourself that you can judge of 
it in others. This is the contention which the Apostle enforces 
in words that burn with undimming flame, though almost two 
thousand years have elapsed since they were first penned: 
“The things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God” 
(1 Cor. ii. 11-16). 

Those, therefore, who hear us talk of the new birth may well 
marvel, as did Nicodemus; and it is almost useless to try to 
make these mysteries plain. As well ride on the wind, or 
follow the rush of the tide as it drives its foaming steeds up the 
estuary. But we who have it know it. We are conscious of its 
throb, its pulse, its ecstasy. We have traced its parentage to 


48 A Psalm of Wife. 


the nature of God. We hear its music as it rises up like a 
fountain towards eternity. 

- Thank God that, with all its mystery, the wind is all-pervasive. 
No lung so consumptive, no mine so deep, no orifice so small, 
no court so feetid, but it will enter to purify and heal. So, 
unless we seal ourselves hermetically against Him, the Divine 
Spirit will enter our natures, ridding them of the miasma which 
has gathered there, sowing the germs of life, and inspiring us 
with the very nature of God. 

(2) Knowledge.—Though we do not come to the Lord Jesus 
primarily as Teacher, yet we cannot receive the new life 
without turning naturally to Him as its Teacher and Guide. 
Come to Him as Teacher, and you only marvel. Come to Him 
as Saviour, and, being saved, you learn, whilst sitting at 
his feet, not earthly things only, but heavenly (12). 

It is passing wonderful how soon the new-born babe begins 
to understand things which baffle the wise and prudent. That 
which the intellect cannot receive is welcomed by the loving 
humble spirit. We receive the Spirit of God, and we come to 
know the things that are freely given to us of God. They are 
revealed by the Spirit, who searches the deep things of the 
Divine nature. Oh for more time to spend bending over these 
translucent but infinite depths, beneath the teaching of such a 
Master ! 

(3) Growth.—As the Baptist said ot the Lord, using the 
third ust of this chapter, “He must increase, I must de- 
crease.” This also is true of the Christ-life within. It is 
destined to grow and increase, from strength to strength, from 
grace to grace, till Christ is perfectly formed within us. 

The growth of the Divine life is in exact proportion to the 
denial of the self-life. Bear about in the body the dying of the 
Lord Jesus. Learn what it means to be crucified with Christ 
in daily acts of unselfish love and pity. Mortify the deeds of 
the body in the power of the Eternal Spirit ; and as the mould 
is broken, the true ideal will emerge in the perfect beauty of 
eternal life. 


XI. 
The Shadotw of the Cross. 


“As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son 
of Man be lifted up.” —JOuN iii. 14. 





#7/)) N a well-known picture, a modern painter has given us 
an imaginary incident in the youth of our Lord. It is 
the carpenters shop. Boards sawn for use are 
propped against the walls, the floor is strewn with 
chips and curls of wood and heaps of sawdust, various 

4 tools mingle in the confusion, or are placed in the 
rack ready foruse. Mary is kneeling close beside the Christ, the 
level rays of the setting sun strike through the casement, and 
as the young carpenter draws Himself to his full height and 
extends his arms, a shadow as of one crucified is thrown on the 
opposite wall. . Mary, at least, sees that shadow of the cross, 
and it recals the prediction of the venerable Simeon, which had 
for the moment chilled her motherly rapture, whilst he foretold 
the sword which should pierce her soul. 

This, of course, is fancy ; and yet it is without doubt that, to 
Mary at least, the anticipation of crushing sorrow, in connection 
with that wondrous Being with whom her own life was so 
mysteriously entwined, was an ever-present source of grief. ~ 

When did the first realization of his death break on the 
human consciousness of our blessed Lord? Of course, as the 
Son of God, He must always have anticipated it. From 
eternity it had been present to his mind. Before the moun- 
tains were brought forth, or the foundations of the earth were 

‘laid, in purpose and intention, He was the Lamb slain. He 
emptied Himself with the express purpose of becoming 
obedient to the death of the cross. But there was perhaps 
a moment when it first broke on his soul as the Son of Man. 


80 Ghbe Shadote of the Gross. 


Whenever that moment was, it lay far back before the day 
when He took up his public ministry; for from his earliest 
words and onward to his latest it is evident that He was living 
in the anticipation of Calvary. 

The shadow of the cross rests on all the incidents and words 
of his public life. Nowhere does the sun of his life shine in 
a clear sky. The darkness is denser here and thinner there, 
but it is everywhere ; “as the twilight creeps noiselessly into 
evening’s sunniest nooks, and quietly masters all the land 
without the winnowing of its silken wing being heard or seen.” 
Let us for a moment trace it. Calvary is a low hill; but it 
casts a long shadow. 


In his first appeal to his fellow-countrymen from the court of 
the cleansed Temple, He spoke clearly of the destruction of 
his body, in which the destruction of their own Temple was 
foreshadowed (ii. 19). 


In his first recorded conversation He said positively and 
unmistakeably that He must be lifted up, not simply to the 
right hand of the Father, but as Moses lifted up the serpent in 
the wilderness (iil. 14). Between Him and the bright Home 
whither He was going lay the blackness of the midnight of the 
cross. 


He spoke of his flesh as given for the life of the world (vi. 51). 
He broke the full horror of his death to the inner circle of his 
adherents on the eve of his transfiguration, exciting their 
vigorous remonstrance (Matt. xvi. 21); He set his face to 
go to Jerusalem, knowing full well that the predicted hour had 
nearly struck (Luke ix. 51) ; He described the Good Shepherd 
as giving his life for the sheep (John x. 11) ; He accepted the 
gift of Mary’s love for his burying (xii. 7); his last utterances 
were full of similar references (xv. 13); He went to meet the 
band which dais led, knowing the while to what He went 
(xvili. 4). 

And perhaps there is no scene in all his life more touching 
than when the question of certain Greeks, at the close of his 
public ministry, plunges Him into deep and _ heart-rending 
meditation ; from the midst of which come the cries of his 


Calvary. eee 


human soul in agony, and He uses again these very words 
about the Son of Man being lifted up, adding to them a 
marvellous forecast of the effect that it should have on the 
minds and hearts of men throughout all lands and all coming 
years (xil. 32; 33). 


I. THE HEROISM OF THE SON OF MaNn.—He evidently 
foresaw all. The bodily torture—the shame and spitting ; the 
racked muscle and quivering flesh ; the slow agony of death— 
these were present to Him, and the bitterness of the soul, and 
the God-forsakenness of the spirit. He to some extent must 
have gauged the weight of the world’s sin, which He was 
to bear away. And his soul was troubled beyond what words 
can tell, as He came within the penumbra of that eclipse. No 
eye would pity, no hand would save; lover and friend must 
stand afar off; the disciples would forsake Him and flee ; the 
very heavens would veil their blessed light. He must be 
accounted as “‘sin,” and go forth alone as the scapegoat. In 
front of Him He saw the winepress which He must tread alone. 
And yet He was not rebellious, neither turned away. He 
gave his back to the smiters, and his cheeks to them that 
plucked off the hair; He hid not his face from shame and 
spitting (Isa. 1. 6). . 

Who does not know the pain of anticipating some awful 
agony—a separation from some twin soul, an operation, an 
inevitable break-up of some blessed abode of human bliss? 
Under circumstances like these, the life drags on its weary ~ 
length in almost unsupportable anguish, which gnaws it away, 
as the fret of the sea-billow does the base of the cliffs. At such 
times the very event we dread is almost a welcome relief from 
the agony of anticipation. And it is conceivable that the 
outward tumult of Calvary was positively this to the human 
nature of Jesus. 

And yet He never faltered. Is there not a side light here on 
the heroic tenacity of his purpose, on the strength of his will! 
Gentle as a woman, He is mightier than the mightiest of men. 
Simple as a child, He is strong as God. Lamb though He be, 
He is Lion too, “For the joy set before Him, He endured the 

F 


82 The Shadoin of the Cross. 


cross, despising the shame.” What wonder, then, that having 
overcome the natural instinctive dread of the pain of death ~ 
in which all men, more or less, participate, He has been able to 
overcome the world, and its prince, and the power of darkness, 
and to save with a great salvation ! : 


This Saviour of ours, my brothers, is no effeminate weakling, 
no creature of circumstances, no hysterical enthusiast ; but a 
Man who knew what it was to endure the long strain of 
anticipated agony; who could suffer silently, locking up the 
secret in his heart ; who could face without blanching the direst 
anguish that man ever bore. It may be that you, too, have 
some kind of prevision of the cross and shame which await you ; 
but be strong, yea, be strong, because He has gone this way 
before you, and can make you more than conquerors. You can 
go through no darker rooms than He has traversed ; and 
you may have what He could not have, the company of One 
who is touched with the feeling of your infirmities, because He 
has been tempted in each point like you. Let those especially 
who, through fear of death, are all their. lifetime subject to 
bondage, understand how completely the blessed Lord can 
sympathise with them; and let them claim his heroism, and 
that He Himself should be in them that strength and confidence 
which they need. 


II. THE NATURE OF HIS DEATH.—£vidently tt was not a 
martyrdom.—A martyr is wholly at the discretion of his foes. 
His main object, as the name denotes, is to give a witness 
to certain neglected and unpopular truths. He is engrossed 
with this, and does not specially address himself to the question 
of his fate. If he prove a hindrance and reproof to the men 
of his time, he must probably suffer the direst penalty they 
can inflict. But it is no part of his primary purpose to incur 
that fate ; and he has no thought of expiating the sin of those 
who hound him to his death. 


Far different was the main purpose of the Lord Jesus. True, 
He came as a witness to the truth ; but most of all He came 
to be the sin-offering of our race, and to pass through death 


Wondrous Bote! » 83 


into resurrection on behalf of a company which no man can 
number. Other men die because they have been born; our. 
Lord was born that He might die. 


flis death was voluntary.—The Father sent the Son; but 
the Son came. He was not forced suddenly and unexpectedly 
into the scenes of death. He deliberately walked directly into 
them, fore-knowing and choosing all. Never fora moment did 
He admit that his life was taken from Him. He said that He 
laid it down of Himself, and that He had received this power 
from his Father. Never for a single moment did He swerve 
from the acquiescence of his will with his Father’s. And can 
we doubt the voluntary character of his death, as we remark 
how safe He was until his hour had come, and whilst He 
‘remained among the hills of Galilee, or as we behold the 
marvellous display of his power which flung his captors to 
the ground on their backs ? 

No unwilling victim He! Not dragged to the slaughter ! 
“Led!” From the depths of his steadfast soul the words rang 
out, “I delight to do thy will, O my God.” He trod the path to 
the brow of Mount Moriah as willingly as Isaac had done 
in his innocence before Him ; though He knew, as the lad did 
not know, that He was to be God’s Lamb. 

But if all were voluntary, how splendid the tribute to his 
love! A love that never faltered ; that counted the gain more 
than the pain ; that was prepared to bear all to win his Bride. 
Oh, love of the heart of Jesus, the more we think of thee, the 
more thou passest knowledge, whilst we stand baffled before 
thy depths and heights! A love that gave itself under the spell 
of some sudden impulse were much; but a love that could 
steadily face years of soul-gnawing agony, this is love indeed ! 
Blessed is the spirit which will resign itself to the inevitable ; 
but more blessed far the spirit which, for very love, will resign 
itself to the evitable, ind stand at a stake, or hang on a cross, 
constrained, not by chains or nails, but. by its own devotion. 


His death was necessary.—The corn of wheat must fall into 
the ground and die, if it were not to live alone. I love that 
word must. If there had been another way it would have 


84 Whe Shadow of the Cross. 


been selected ; but there was no other way. In no other way 
could the love of God have free course and be glorified. In no 
other way could the curse of Adam’s sin be removed from the 
race. In no other way could our sins be borne, or our salvation 
achieved. In no other way could we obtain the life of God 
stored up in the human nature of Jesus. In no other way 
could He pass to his great reward. M/ust—God Himself had 
considered all other possible alternatives in vain, and this was 
the verdict of Deity. M/zst—in the very nature of things, 
it was peremptory. M/us¢—it could not have been otherwise, if 
He would become the Saviour, Priest, King, Brother, and Life- 
giver of men. Oh, sad yet blessed necessity! Sad, because it 
cost Him so much; @lessed, because it has brought us so 
much, 


III. THE Joy OF THE SON OF MaNn.—Throughout all the 
long travail of his soul He was sustained and animated by one 
delightful anticipation. For the joy set before Him (Heb. xii. 2), 
He looked through the shadow towards the sun-glints on the 
horizon to which He went. The joy of doing his Father's 
will, of rolling away all imputation from his Father’s character. 
The joy of undoing the work of the first Adam, and of 
becoming, as the second Man, the Head of a redeemed race. 
The joy of drawing all men to Himself, and of winning for 
Himself the Church as his Bride. The joys of marriage, and 
victory, and deliverance, all crowded into one long ecstasy. 
This sustained and nerved his spirit. 

We may just now be near despair. The days are dark. 
There is much to depress in the slow progress of the Church. 
The angels must weary as they stand at the twelve open gates 
of heaven counting the driblets. that pass in, while the 
multitudes reject the invitation of God’s love. Iniquity abounds, 
and the love of many waxes cold. But why should we falter or 
despair? He never did. 

Let us keep our eye on the streaks of the breaking day. Let 
us keep our ears attentive for the first peal of the marriage 
bells. Let us cultivate his patience and his joy. “If we suffer 
with Him, we shall be glorified together.” “O death, where is 


Gbhe Jou of Christ, 85 


thy sting! O grave, where is thy victory! The sting of death 
is sin; and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be to 
God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus 
Christ.” Wherefore lift up your heads and rejoice, for your 
redemption draweth nigh. 

Ah, what will not that day of redemption bring !—when the 
regions of the air will no longer be infested by wicked spirits, 
which rule the darkness of this world ; when creation herself 
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, which was, 
perhaps, flung upon her by the sin and fall of Satan and his 
hosts ; when the Bride of Christ, built up as Eve of old from 
her Bridegroom’s wounded side, shall be brought to Him to 
share his authority and glory ; when from our position beside 
Him we shall rule angels, and reign on the earth ; when God 
shall have vindicated his wisdom and love in the permission of 
moral evil! Oh, day of surpassing blessedness ; of light too 
dazzling for mortal eye ; of rapture too intense for mortal hearts, 
we long for thee even as our Lord does! And for love of thee, 
will be content to wait till the mystery of iniquity has fulfilled 
its destined course, and we hear the voice that shall welcome us 
who have shared his sorrow to be partakers of his joy. 
“ Everlasting joy shall be upon their heads. They shall obtain 
joy and gladness ; and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.” 


XIL 
“Sent.” 


“ For He whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God : for God giveth 
not the Spirit by measure unto Him.—JOHN iii. 34. 


ec; 2) at 
7/E, pass but slowly over these earlier chapters of 
fi this marvellous Gospel, because they are so 
thickly strewn with treasures. And we need not 
grudge the time or labour ; because they are the 
~ seed-plot of the whole. To understand them is 
to have a key to the inner life of our blessed 
Lord, and to gain the true standpoint for understanding not 
only this Evangel, but the other writings of the beloved 
Apostle. 

The word which stands at the head of this chapter is full of 
the music rung out by the Christmas chimes. It was one of the 
watchwords of Jesus; and, with the exception of the word 
Father, oftener on his lips than almost any other; occurring 
twice in this chapter and more than forty times in this book, it 
challenges our attention. What does it mean? “The Father 
sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world.” This is an 
inquiry which is shrouded in deep and impenetrable mystery, 
dark with excessive light, before which angels are speechless ; 
and yet it becomes us to know all we may, for employing one 
of his expressive parallels, on the evening of his first resurrec-— 
tion day, our Master said, ““As my Father hath sent Me, even 
so send I you” (xx. 21). In so far, then, as we can understand 
the true meaning of the Father’s mission of the Son, we shall 
be able to understand also the Son’s mission of that little band 
which included not the Apostles only, but the two who had 
arrived from Emmaus, together with several others not formally 





« Ohe Father sent the Son.” 87 


included in the Apostolic circle (Luke xxiv. 33); and which 
thus represents the entire Church, of which we are part. 


I. THE ORIGIN OF OUR LOoRD’s MIssIon.—In his Divine 
nature our Lord was one with the Father and the Spirit in 
conceiving the marvellous scheme of man’s redemption. In 
the essence of his being, the Lord our God is one God; and 
in the very depths of that absolute oneness, the plan of our 
redemption was conceived and planned, and its purpose 
executed. But it is also true that the whole Godhead was 
one with Christ in every act of his incarnation. ‘God was in 
Christ, reconciling the world unto Himself.” “God was 
manifest in the flesh.” : 

It is a mistake to describe the work of Jesus as if He 
stepped in between an offended God and a race of sinners, 
averting the thunderbolts which were being launched upon 
them, and interposing by his own action to appease an other- 
wise implacable wrath. It is undeniable that the holy nature 
of God is absolutely set against the wilful disobedience and 
ungodliness of sinful men. But, nevertheless, the loving 
nature of God yearns, with all the love that ever breathed 
through the being of our Saviour, over the fallen and erring 
children of our race. 

The Roman Catholic errs in attributing more tender love 
and sympathy to the mother of Jesus than to her Son; 
and in calling upon her to intercede with Him for sinners, 
reminding Him of her motherhood. This we condemn, and 
rightly. We turn away, in spite of their consummate art, from 
the pictures in which the mother pleads with her enthroned 
Son, as from his throne He meditates vengeance upon the 
race that crucified Him. But let us take care lest we fall into 

_a similar error, and suppose that the Son is more merciful than 
the Father ; when, in point of fact, they are one in an indis- 
soluble unity. Just as you may analyse the ocean brine in the 
creek that runs far up into the land, so you may analyse the 
nature of the Godhead in that marvellous inlet of Deity into 
the life of men, which we know as the Holy Incarnation, 
“He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father.” 


88 “* Sent.” 


All this lies embedded in these most precious words : “He 
gave his only-begotten Son.” “The Father sez the Son.” At 
certain times, it may be desirable to accentuate the willinghood 
on the part of our dear Lord, which made his incarnation and 
death his own act and deed of unparalleled love. But just- 
now it is befitting to emphasize the other side of the wondrous 
mystery, and to insist that the love of the Giver is not less 
than the love of the Given; and that the compassion of the 
Sender was every whit as tender as that of the Sent. And 
in saying this, we surely gratify the heart of the Son, who 
repeatedly turned the thoughts of men from Himself to Him 
who had sent Him, as if He would attribute to Him any credit 
or praise which was due for so marvellous an interposition. 
“Neither came I of Myself, but He sent Me” (viii. 42). Just 
as the Holy Spirit deprecates the concentration of attention on 
Himself, lest aught should be diverted from the ever-blessed 
Son who sent Him (xvi. 14); so does the Son pass on our love 
and trust, which gather around Him so fondly, to the Father 
whose commissions it was his meat and drink, as the Son of 
Man, to fulfil. To use his own words, He sought the glory of 
Him that sent Him (vii. 18). 

We often meet with those who concentrate all their thought 
and love on the Lord Jesus, but who have not yet learnt towards 
the Father that love which casteth out fear. To Jesus they 
pray. On Jesus they lean. In Jesus they rest. This is natural 
in the earlier stages of the Christian life. But it should not be 
ever so, or we shall become stunted and one-sided in our 
growth. As the Spirit reveals the Son, so we must ask the Son 
to reveal the Father, as He has promised to do to the weary 
and heavy-laden who come to Him; and ultimately the Father 
will reveal Himself to the loving and obedient heart (Matt. 
x1. 27; 283° John xiv. 23). 


II, OUR LorD’s CONCEPTION OF HIS MISSION.—We cannot 
tell what was in his thought when our Lord spoke so constantly 
of having been sent. Was there present to Him some parting 
scene in which the Father gave Him up to the work of our 
redemption? Is there an allusion in his words to a wrench, a 


Ghe Aim-of Christ's Lite. 89 


surrender, a sacrifice, like that which rends our hearts when we 
give up to some necessary but distant and painful expedition, 
the one who is dearer to us than life? When the mother gives 
up her boy to the service of his country; when the newly- 
married bride waves her heart-breaking farewell to the husband 
who sails on some distant and perilous enterprise, and the 
chords of nature are strained to breaking: is there not some 
faint shadow of the yet more stupendous giving up on the part 
of the Infinite God? Gifts are only worth the love that makes 
them ; an infinite gift means infinite love ; and such love is 
capable of infinite pain (x. 36). 

But whatever it was that the Lord looked back upon, it is clear 
that the consciousness of his mission was one of the Strongest 
and most formative factors in his human life. He realized 
that the Father had sent Him, not to condemn but to save the 
world (iii. 17); to be its Life, and Light, and Love; to reveal 
to men the hidden nature of the invisible God; to put down 
all rule, authority, and power ; and to deliver back the kingdom 
to God the Father, so that God might be all in all. 

He was utterly absorbed in this commisston.—Ue had no 
thought of Himself, of his own glory, or of the esteem of 
men. To be about his Father’s business; to do the works 
which his Father had given Him to finish (v. 36); to speak 
the words which He had heard from the Father (viii. 26) ; to 
fulfil the commandment enjoined on Him by the Father 
(xii. 49)—these constituted the programme and object of his 
life. Dear as was the salvation of the world, and the winning 
of the Bride of his choice, all was subordinated to a higher 
purpose, and included in the sweep of a wider plan, by the 
accomplishment of the purpose of his Father's will. Hence 
his judgment was unbiassed and just, because his motive was 
absolutely pure (v. 30). 

Surely it would be well if we were animated by the same 
ardent passion. We set ourselves too low an aim, hence so 
much of the disappointment that comes in Christian endeavour. 
We set ourselves to seek the conversion of the unsaved, the 
building up of believers, the extension of the kingdom of our 
Lord ; and are depressed unless the special aim on which we 


an Po Toshe 


go “ Sent.” 


have set our hearts is realized. But if only we could labour in 
the spirit of our Master, and understand that we are co-workers 
with Himself in his devotion to his Father’s purpose, we should 
feel, that, if only we were true to that, we were fulfilling our life- _ 
plan, even though some pet ambition remained unrealized and 
unfulfilled. “Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be 
glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my 
strength.” The sun includes in his march through space, 
the motions of his satellites; and to live to do the will of 
God includes all those other motives which enter into the life 
of men. 

Our Lord believed that the Fathers supplies were adequate 
to the needs of his commisston.—God never sends us to doa 
work for which He does not equip and enable us. And in 
doing his work, it is wise constantly to be falling back on his 
resources. The one thing of which we need to be assured, 
and the only thing concerning which we should be at all 
anxious, is the assurance that we are where God would have 
us be, and engaged on his work. Where this is clear, we need 
have no care for anything beside. God is pledged to find the 
stuff for every tabernacle which He commissions us to build. 
He expects no soldier to conduct a campaign at his own 
charges. If we go down the mine, He will hold the rope, and 
send down all supplies. 

This was our Lord’s attitude. As Son of Man He had 
emptied Himself of those inherent attributes which were his 
as the equal and Fellow of God ; they were always within his 
reach, but He forbore to use them; and elected to live a life 
of complete dependence, yielding up his holy will, and receiving 
by faith, as we should, all the reinforcements and supplies 
required in the execution of his.commission. 

He lived by the Father (vi. 57); He was ever conscious of 
his Fathers companionship, robbing life of its loneliness 
(vill. 29); He expressly denied that his works or words were 
his own, and insisted that they were all given, as He needed 
them, by Him who had sent Him forth (xiv. 10-24). Remember 
how He said, “My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent 
Me” (vil. 16); and how He hastened, amid the gathering 


Duing to Self. gI 


shadows, to work the works of Him that had sent Him 
(ix.4). It was his sufficient justification’ to the accusation 
of his foes, that He was only working out what the Father 
had wrought within Him, up to that very moment of time, 
Sabbath though it were (v. 17). 

It is a lesson which we need in this busy life to ponder 
deeply. There are three stages in the dying of self. First, we 
must die to self as being able to achieve our justification ; then 
as being able to effect our sanctification ; and lastly, as being 
able to accomplish any efficient spiritual work. We must learn 
to die to the energy of the self-life in our Christian activities. 
He who sent us must give us the plan, and supply us with the 
power. The doctrine we teach, the words we speak, the works 
we do, must be received by us from Him who has sent us, as 
his were received from the Father who sent Him. Then a great 
peace would settle down upon us, born of a great faith ; and we 
should be able to say, with the saints of a former age, “Thou 
wilt ordain peace for us ; for Thou hast wrought all our works 
in us.” He whom God hath sent has only to speak the words 
of God. 

Difficulties are absolutely nothing to the man who knows 
that he is on the mission on which God has sent him. They 
are only opportunities for Him to show His power ; problems to 
manifest His skill in their solution ; thunder-clouds on which to 
paint the frescoes of His unrealized tenderness. Oh to live as 
Jesus did, putting Him in that place in our lives, which his 
Father occupied in his own life ; so as to say, The living Saviour 
hath sent me, and I live by Him, eating of his flesh, and drinking 
of his blood, depending on his help ! (vi. 57). 


III. THE. HIDDEN POWER OF OUR LORD’S MIssION.— 
“God giveth not the Spirit by measure.” What a word is this ! 
It is said that Solomon gave up the task of enumerating the 
wealth of treasure that he put mto the house of the Lord ; and 
our Father puts no limit on the supply of his Spirit to those 
whom He sends forth. 

As the Son was sent forth to do a work unparalleled in its 
scope, its sufferings, and its results, the blessed Spirit was 


92 ; “* Sent.” 


bestowed on Him to a commensurate extent. Conceived of the 
Holy Ghost in the pure virgin ; anointed by the Holy Ghost at 
his baptism ; driven by the Spirit into the wilderness ; nerved, 
empowered, sustained by the Eternal Spirit in his sacrifice on 
the cross ; raised by the Spirit of Holiness from the dead ; and 
ever receiving from the Father new supplies of the Spirit in his 
ascension and mediatorial reign : let us be glad and rejoice, for 
if such measufeless supplies came down on the head of our 
Aaron, we may gladly anticipate some droppings for ourselves 
as they run down to the fringe of his skirts. 

That Spirit which rested on Him is ours. And we may have 
all of Him that our exigencies demand or our faith can take. 
There is absolutely no limit save that which we ourselves 
impose. The oil will go on running so long as we can bring 
vessels, and will only stay when there is not a vessel more. 
“He is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask 
or think.” 

On the one hand is our life mission to do the will of Jesus, 
who has sent us, and who waits to show us what He wants us 
to do; on the other hand is the unmeasured supply of the 
measureless Spirit that empowered his earthly life. He is our 
life-blood, our inspiration, our bond of connection with our 
Head ; nothing shall daunt, nothing overmaster us; the works 
that He did we will do, yea, greater works than these, because 
He is gone to the Father, and with added power shall do 
through us by his Spirit what even He, in his earthly life, 
could not effect. 


XIII. 
—Kife as a Fountain. 


“Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never 
thirst ; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water 
springing up into everlasting life."—John iv, 14. 
oon : 

VG 1S nine months’ tour in Judea was too successful to 
please the Pharisees ; and it became necessary for 
our Lord to transfer the scene of his ministrations to 


Se Galilee, where the authority of the Sanhedrim was 





less rigorous, and the people were liberalised by the 

larger-admixture of Gentile residents. There were 
two roads thither from Jerusalem, the circuitous one along the 
Jordan valley, and the more direct one through Samaria. Jesus 
selected the latter for reasons which dated from the council- 
chamber of eternity. 

It was the month of January. The weather bright and warm ; 
the copses vocal with sweet-voiced birds ; the brooks murmuring 
along their beds ; the pasture-lands bright with flowers ; and all 
the land astir with the sounds of industrious toil. After a 
morning’s walk, about noon, the little band reached the neck of 
a narrow valley that lay between the mountains of Ebal and 
Gerizim. And there the embrasure of an ancient well lent a 
ready resting-place for the Master; whilst his disciples went 
forward to the town of Sychar, lying some mile and a half 
further up the valley, to purchase food. 

He sat there, deeply musing on the beauties of the scenery 
and the historic associations of the place, and in fellowship with 
his Father. Few came to the well at that hour, though later it 
was thronged with women, bringing their pitchers to obtain 
a supply of water for their homes. But, presently, the solitude 
was broken by a woman of Samaria, who, avoiding her sex, 


94 Life as a Fountain. 


came at an hour when she would be unobsetved, and escape the 
taunt, the sneer, the averted look, of those who had not fallen, 
perhaps because they had never been tempted, as she had. 
‘To this woman, on that spot, our Lord spake words which 
are immortal. 

That well-head is, indeed, a pulpit from which He addresses 
all who wearily seek after life and joy and blessedness, bidding 
them to Himself. 


I. THE CONTRASTS OF THIS CHAPTER.—He is evidently 
under constraint, for the word mst (4) is applied to Him; yet 
He speaks with the accent of unhimited prerogative. 

He is weary; yet He proposes to give rest from heavy 
burdens and wearisome pilgrimages (15). 

He asks for a drink of water; yet He offers to set flowing 
wells and fountains of water (10). 

_ He isa suppliant for the gifts of another; yet He talks of 
being able to give with unlimited munificence (14). 

He is an obscure stranger; yet He is greater than the 
venerable patriarch whose name had lingered for long centuries 
round that spot (12). 

He hungers ; yet He eats of meat of which no one knows, 
and finds sustenance in the act of doing the will of his Father 
(34). 

He is surrounded by the signs of sowing time; yet He 
proclaims that He is amid the joys of harvest (35). 

But chief among these contrasts is the one drawn by Himself 
between the cool, deep, dark depths of Jacob’s well, about a 
hundred and fifty feet below, and the springs or fountains which 
He was prepared to open up in the heart of this woman, and of 
whomsoever else He could induce to accept them. 

The “living water” should be a fountain. —At the best the 
water in Jacob’s well was stagnant ; but ¢/zs should rise up with 
all the spontaneity and freshness of a spring, whose sources lie 
far up among the hills, and which is ever flashing up with 
graceful beauty from the surface of the ground. 

lt should be within.—The inhabitants of Sychar, like us, 
had to go out to get their supplies. Like the woman, they all 


Gternal and Satisiping. 95 


went ¢hither to draw ; they have thus become types of all the 
world (for it is the universal habit of men to go outside them- 
selves for their delights and pleasures); but ¢h/s should be 
within, like those springs of water in the castles of Edinburgh 
and Dover, which are beyond the reach of the invader, and flow 
with perennial blessing for the beleaguered garrisons (14). 

Lt should be eternal—Jacob’s well would dwindle in its 
supplies, choked with stones and débris ; but thzs would rise up 
in the hearts where it was opened, unaltered by the flight of 
years, unstanched by summer’s heat or winter’s frost, descending 
from the timeless life, and returning to it again, eternal as the 
nature of God (14). 

It should be satisfying.—“ Whosoever drinketh of this water 
shall thirst again,” is a legend that might be engraved on the 
low stone wall of Jacob’s well; and equally on every theatre, 
and other place of worldly amusement or sin, the votaries 
of which get sips, not draughts : but this would satisfy. In the 
failure ef human love, in the absence of blessed friendships and 
companionships, in the subsidence of every Cherith brook, those 
who received what He longed to bestow should never thirst. 

Oh, brother-men, have ye received this blessed gift, with its 
fresh spontaneousness, its inner hidden blessedness, its eternal 
timeless essence, its power of entire satisfaction? If not, 
why not seek forthwith from Him by faith a boon so inex- 
pressibly precious, to have which were to make wildernesses 
flower and deserts sing? How foolish to barter this for jewels, 
pearls, or gold ; for earthly delights ; for worldly success ! 

And if you ask me what it is which He describes under this 
charming imagery, I reply, It is true religion ; nay, better, it is 
the love of God in the soul; nay, best of all, it is Himself. 
Jesus in the heart—living there by the power of the Holy 
Spirit ; descending thither in great humility ; and rising up 
in us ever fresh, ever refreshing, ever fertilising, amid the 
droughts and desolations and wildernesses of our mortal 


life. 


II. THE INDEPENDENCE OF CHRIST.—(1) He zs tndependent 
of race.—It was of no consequence to Him that this woman 


096 Life as a Fountain. 


was a Samaritan, He being a Jew. At one bound He over- 
leaped the barriers of national prejudice, and offered his most 
precious wares to an alien. He is the Son of Man, and deals 
with that one human heart which beats under all breasts alike. 
In Him is neither Jew nor Gentile. His Gospel, like bread, 
water, spring flowers, love, is independent of race. 
(2) He ts independent of religious bigotry.—In the days of 
Ezra and Nehemiah, these mongrel Samaritans had sought to 
be included with the Jewish people; a proposal which met 
with strong rebuffs. They resented the dose ; built a temple 
of their own at Gerizim to rival that at Jerusalem ; claimed for 
their mountain a superior holiness to that of Zion ; favoured 
the Romans because the Jews hated them ; and even defiled 
the Jewish temple by scattering bones there at the time of the 
Passover. The Jews therefore had no dealings with the 
Samaritans, and held that salvation was only from them- 
selves. 
But the Lord Jesus brushed all this aside, as a man might a 
cobweb swinging across a garden pathway. What were these 
distinctions to Him, so long as those who sought the Father 
did so in spirit and in truth? (24). The flock was more to 
_ Him than the folds ; the army than the device on the banner 
of any single regiment. And so it will be with us, in proportion 
_as we partake of his spirit. Surely the time is coming when we 
shall see Christians of all schools drawing into an outward 
unity, and viewing with comparative indifference the various 
names by which they have been tarred. 

(3) He ts independent of character—The people who possess 
a character of which they are proud, who can produce first- 
rate testimonials as to their flawless conduct, and who can 
trace back a long pedigree of religious ancestry, do not stand 
so good a chance with Him as this woman did; because, 
though hitherto she had been abandoned and fallen, yet of 
late there had been gleams of desire for better things, which 
proved her capacity for the richest bestowments that He could 
make. It is to the worthless, and sick, and hopeless, that our 
Lord is primarily sent. 


(4) He is independent of payment.—“ The water that I shall 


“¥% Thirst!” ‘ise ae 


give. The white-robed company clustering around the throne 
cannot give it, nor the morning stars that rejoiced over the 
birthday of the young world; nor the venerable elders; nor 
the living creatures with their ceaseless chant. But the Lamb 
who is in the midst of the throne pours forth its ceaseless floods 
from the very heart of that throne. And He can give, because 
He gave Himself up to the death of the cross. By the agony 
that issued in the cry, “I thirst,’ He was enabled to open 
fountains adequate to banish thirst from the universe of 
God. 

(5) He «ts independent of apparatus.—“ Thou hast nothing 
to draw with, and the well is deep.” Yes, it is deep—deep as 
the nature of God ; as his deep things; as the excellent height 
of glory ; as the bottomless pit of human need ; but He needs 
nothing with which to draw the waters. He speaks, and it is 
done. He utters his voice, and the earth melts. He breathes a 
‘wish, and life pours into the sea of death, and sweeps it away 
for ever. ‘ 

III. THE PROBING OF THE SINNER’S HEART.—“ Go, call 
thy husband!” What a train of memory that word evoked! 
Beneath its spell, she was back long years ; again an innocent 
girl, courted by him in the sunny vineyards of Gerizim ; going 
with him to his home as his loving wife. Then perhaps there 
came a growing coldness, leading to alienation and dislike, 
ending in infidelity. That husband might have died of a 
broken heart. She had tried to banish his memory and his 
face, though they would haunt her. What a spasm of remorse 
and fear seized her, as she remembered that grave within her 
heart, where her first love lay buried, trampled down by the » 
unholy crew of wilder later passions ! 

But why awake such memories? Why open the cupboard. 
door and bid that skeleton step down? Why unsod that grave ? 
Why lay bare that life-secret? It could not be otherwise. The 
wound must be probed to the bottom and cleansed, ere it could 
be healed. There must be confession before forgiveness. The 
sin had to be called to remembrance, ere the son could be 


raised from death by the prophet’s hand. This woman must 
: G 


98 ; ite as a Fountain. 


judge her past sins in the light of those pure eyes, ere she could 
know the bliss of the fountain opened within the soul. 

So it must be with us, if we would have the living water. Go, 
call thy husband ; pay back those dishonest gains ; make up 
that long-standing feud; recal those violent, uncharitable 
words; summon husband, wife, child, that bright-eyed boy 
whom you misled, that pure fame you tarnished, that nature, 
like virgin snow, which you trampled under foot. Call them, I 
say. Will they not come? Then call them louder and louder 
yet. Ah, they cannot come; they will never come till sum- 
moned by the archangel’s voice! But, though ¢#ey come not, 
Jesus says to thee, “Come hither.” At his feet there is forgive- 
ness and plenteous redemption. His hands can scatter 
benediction. His lips are laden with messages of comfort and 
peace. 

But there must be complete confession.—“ The woman said, I 
have no husband.” It was quite true; but there was a further 
truth. She was living in illicit union with one not her husband, 
having had five husbands. Ah these fatal secrets which no 
man has the right to pry into !—shame bids us hide them ; but 
in dealing with the great High Priest we must not hide or cloak 
one of them. 

If we will not do this of our own accord, He will do it for us, 
extracting the whole black story from our lips by questions ; or 
Himself telling us, as He did this woman, the naked story of 
the past. Nothing that has ever occurred in our lives has 
escaped the keen notice of Christ, or been forgotten by Him ; 
and here or hereafter we must hear every detail told with 
circumstantial clearness by his lips. But it is a thousand times 
better to hear it now, when the dread recital may be followed 
by the loving announcement: “Thy sins, which were many, 
are all forgiven thee.” 

How we wince when our Lord comes into such close quarters 
with us !—as the bloodshot eye dreads the light, or the broken 
limb evades the touch, or the bankrupt hides his ledgers. 
Like this woman, we start some old worn-out theological 
controversy, to put Him off the scent (20). There are plenty 
of people who spend their lives in theological disputes and 


Confessing Sin. 99 


refinements, because in this way they dexterously manage to 
pass muster as religious people ; though, all the while, they 
dread anything like definite appeals to their hearts. 

But when the ordeal has been borne, and the confession 
made, the soul receives the blessed inrush of the living water ; 
and, unable to contain itself, speeds to tell the wondrous story 
to those who have been most familiar with its former life ; and, 
as it narrates the marvellous experience of what it has dis- 
covered Christ to be, a whole cityful of people are stirred with 
the throb of genuine revival, and hasten to the feet of Him who 
is Priest and Prophet both—Prophet to tell us of all things that 
ever we did, and Priest to absolve. 


XIV. 
Baring to Act in Faith. 


“Jesus saith unto him, Go thy way, thy son liveth, And the man believed 
the word that Jesus had spoken unto him.’’"—JOHN iv. 50. 






| PEAKING after the manner of men, our Evangelist 
: ‘is very particular in his selection of the incidents in 
the life and ministry of our Lord which he records. 
For the most part, he avoids those given by the 
Synoptists ; and chooses fresh and unique illustra- 
tions of the outflowing of that fulness which it 
pleased the Father should dwell in Him. 

But, in addition to this, he selects those that suggested 
conversations and discourses which he desired to record. 
In nearly every case there is an evident object in the recital of 
any given incident, because of the deep and blessed spiritual 
lessons to which it gave rise ; the kernel in the shell ; the apple 
of gold in the picture of silver. 

It has often, therefore, been a matter for question, what 
specific purpose was served by the introduction here of the 
story of this pious nobleman. It is an exquisite incident ; and 
no doubt chronologically it belongs to this period of our 
Saviour’s ministry. It may have been one of those stories 
which the mother pondered in her breast, from the day when 
she first heard it fresh from the lips of those who were imme- 
diately concerned. But is there no further reason for its 
insertion here? Surely there is. And we can but adore the 
grace of the Holy Spirit who arranged that there should be 
placed on record so graphic and touching an illustration of 
what faith is, and how it takes and appropriates God’s best 
gifts. 





Claiming the Ansiuer. TOI 


We all know what it is to ask for blessings which the heart 
craves, as flowers do sunshine, and children love. For some 
of these we are able to quote a definite promise, in which God 
has pledged Himself to give what we need. When this is the 
case, it is not enough to plead for an answer in a perfunctory, 
careless way on the one hand, or in 4 half-despairing tone on 
the other. But to clazm the answer, and take it from the open 
hand of God, not always feeling a sensible communication pass 
between Him and us, but sure that it has done so, and that we 
have the petitions we desired of Him; the basis of our con- 
fidence being our certainty that He will keep his word. At 
such times, though there may be no single sign of an answer 
to our prayer, no cloud, small as a man’s hand, presaging the 
great rain, yet we are able to go down the mountain slopes, 
thanking God in anticipation for the blessing which we have 
received from his fatherly bounty. 

There are other cases in our inner history in which we are 
unable to cite a specific promise, or an analogous case, from 
God’s Word ; but a conviction is wrought into our hearts by 
the Spirit of God. It cannot be accounted for by natural or 
constitutional causes ; it thrives amid the most searching self- 
scrutiny, and gathers strength as we pray about it through 
the years ; it is corroborated by the trend of spiritual principles, 
and the circumstances of daily providence. Concerning any 
such matter, it is also possible, not only to beseech and pray, 
but to reckon with an assured faith—a faith based on the 
character of God—that He will do according to the Word on 
which He has caused us to hope. The cases of the conversion 
of beloved friends, and of restoration to health, amongst 
many others, may be included in this second class of claiming 
prayers. 

It is obvious that many of our prayers do not come under 
either of these two headings. They are not based on promise ; 
they cannot stand the tests which have been just suggested. 
And, as a consequence, we cannot exercise faith concerning 
them ; or reckon on the answer being forthcoming ; or give 
thanks as those who are sure that the blessing has been 
consigned, even if not delivered. Such prayers after awhile 


102 Daring to Act in Faith. 


will fade and die away on the lips which once uttered them 
most passionately. The man who lives near God cannot 
exercise faith for, and will soon leave off praying for, or 
desiring, the things which it is not God’s will to grant. 

Dismissing, then, these latter prayers, which are born in the 
unreclaimed wastes of our inner life—as the zgms fatwus in the 
swampy morass, and which vanish before the increasing light 
of the perfect day—we have to deal with those prayers con- 
cerning which we are authorized to exercise a faith that cannot 
be misled. And in all such cases it is clear that we are called 
upon, not only to offer up prayers and supplications, with 
strong cryings and tears, unto Him that is able to save and 
help, but zo cake deliverance, and go on our way sure and glad ; 
not looking for our warrant to any set of emotions, but to the 
unchangeable word and character of the Eternal God. 

This is precisely what this nobleman did. News travelled 
fast through the crowded populations of Galilee. With 
lightning speed the tidings spread that He whose boyhood and 
manhood had been spent among their hills, whose first miracle 
had been wrought in one of their village homes, and who 
had already attracted the notice and hatred of the leading 
dignitaries of the metropolis, was again among them, and at 
Cana. The Galileans received Him with open arms, “ for they 
had seen all things that He did at Jerusalem at the feast.” 

Amongst others, the tidings reached this nobleman, perhaps 
Chuza, Herod’s steward, or Manaen, his foster-brother. It was 
a sad time with him; for his son was at the point of death. 
But there was suggested a sudden hope ; and he started at once 
to use every endeavour to bring this wondrous Miracle-worker 
to his home. He never supposed that the Master could as 
easily heal from a distance; or that He could, if need were, 
raise the dead ; but he had faith to believe that where He came 
disease must flee. 

Our Lord, with unerring accuracy, detected the weak point 
of his faith : it needed so many outward signs and encourage- 
ments ; it must have the assurance of the outstretched hand, 
the audible voice, the physical presence ; it craved the assurance 
which the outward and physical, the sensuous and emotional, 


Beliehing the Promise. 103 


supply. And in the absence of these it was in danger of 
expiring, But faith like this hardly merits the name, though, 
alas! it is too common with us all. We are brave at swimming 
so long as we are in our depth. We are grand soldiers so long 
as we stay within the castle enclosure. We believe so long as 
we can see or feel. 

But wherever our Lord finds faith He sets Himself to mature 
and foster it. There was a germ of it in this suppliant’s heart, 
capable of expansion into a noble growth; and He beheld it 
with eager joy, and immediately sought to develop it by the 
only means through which faith can ever grow—namely, by 
trial. “Jesus said unto him, thy son liveth.” That was all. 
-No sign, no renewed assurance, no appeal to emotion or sense ; 
just the assurance of those majestic lips, and it was enough. 
Without another word, and apparently without hesitation, 
“the man believed the word that Jesus had spoken unto him, 
and went his way.” 

Comparing the length of time occupied on his homeward 
journey with the distance between Cana and Capernaum, the 
conviction forces itself home on our minds that he made no 
particular haste back. Why should he? The boy was living, 
doing well. The home was already astir with glad surprise. 
He was sure of it, probably had thanked God for it, and could 
not be more sure though he were to see the bright smile of his 
darling. And it is quite likely that he stayed for the night at 
some wayside inn to sleep off, in a long, deep, child-like sleep, 
the effects of long watching, intense anxiety, and the swift 
journey to Cana. There was nothing extraordinary in this. 
Faith, when it is as it should be, is as restful and glad for a 
promise as for some evident deliverance. Could there be a better 
illustration of the simple faith which believes the promise of 
God, and acts upon it, reckoning on the accomplished purpose 
of its prayer? We may apply this in several directions. 

. (1) For forgiveness.— Suppose you come, as a penitent, to the 
great High Priest, conscious of a very heavy load of sin. It 
may be for the first time or the thousandth. You tell the sad, 
dark story, not hiding or extenuating aught ; not excusing or 
palliating ; not trying to shift the blame on others ; not lumping 


104 Daring to Act in Faith. 


all sins together, but naming each alone, as brought to mind by 
the Holy Spirit. And when the confession is complete, you 
naturally look up and ask for forgiveness. But you have a 
perfect right to go a step further, and claim it; yes, and be 
thankful for it, even though as yet you have not caught a glint 
‘of light from his face. 

He who said to the nobleman, “Thy son liveth,”: says that 
“if we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our 
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.” Oh that 
we would believe this word which Jesus speaks, and go our way, 
restful and satisfied that so it is! Instead of this, we try to /ee/ 
forgiven. Now, suppose that the nobleman had tried to feel 
that his son lived before he started home.’ In all probability he 
would never have started. But the question of what he felt 
does not seem to have entered his mind. It was enough to him 
to have heard the voice of Jesus, and he started with buoyant 
assurance. 

It is a mistake to wait for feelings. Believe the word of God. 
Will to believe it. Take forgiveness. Thank the Lord for it. 
Reckon that it is so because He has said it, even if you do not 
experience a thrill of emotion. And if you dare to step out in 
faith, you will discover how blessed are they that believe ; for 
there is always a performance of those things spoken by the 
Lord. 

(2) For victory over known sin— How many fail because 
they are always praying for deliverance, without claiming and 
giving thanks for it! They go to the Lord Jesus each night 
with the same story of defeat, and each morning utter the same 
almost despairing cry for help—a cry that seems to strike 
against the irresponsive heaven, for it brings no deliverance. 
Yet the Lord has promised to save his people from their sins, 
and to keep them from falling. It is not enough, then, to ask 
Him to do it. We may, and should go further, and say, “ Do as 
Thou hast said.” ; 

Claim victory, take victory, thank for victory before even you 
go into the fight, in the assurance that Jesus will be around you 
as a wall of fire, an invisible but real defence. He said, “I give 
you power to tread on all the power of the enemy, and nothing 


The Priceless Gifts of Gor. 105 


shall by any means hurt you.” There it is waiting for you; 
appropriate it, and go your way, saying like David as he 
entered on his conflict with Goliath, “The Lord saveth, for the 
battle is the Lord’s.” 

(3) For all the priceless gifts of the Christian life—How shall 
we take that gift of living water of which our Lord speaks, 
which quenches all thirst and pacifies all desire, and makes the 
inner life like a garden of the Lord, and even issues forth to 
water and refresh others? We cannot feel it enter.’ There is 
no flow of purling streams in liquid music. But we can take 
the priceless boon by faith. : 

The heart, for instance, may be aching ‘for “the touch of 
a vanished hand, and the sound of a voice that is still.” It 
thirsts. But it goes to Christ, and lays open its need, and 
claims the all-satisfying draught. Instantly Christ meets the 
claim, and fills the longing soul with goodness. .“ My peace, 
my rest, my satisfying joy I give thee, dear heart,” says 
He; “be comforted.” And the soul believes the word which 
the Master has spoken, and goes its way, not feeling any 
strong surge of emotion, but assured that it has received great 
spiritual bestowment ; and as the days go by, in its power to 
endure, its patience, its calm joy, it knows that it was not a 
vain thing to wait on God. 

And so it is with all God’s promised gifts, and especially that 
of the Holy Spirit. If we wait to feel them, we shall miss 
them. But if we dare to claim them, taking them by faith, 
and uttering words of thanks, it shall be to us according to 
our faith. 

It is not always possible to exercise this faith which claims. 
At such times it is useless to fix our attention on the faith, for 
faith is the result of other things. And if it is deficient, it will 
be wise on our part to turn our thought on these, and question 
where we are wrong. 

Of course, God will never allow us to believe for anything 
which is outside his purpose to give. Very often we lack faith, 
not because the object we seek is outside God’s purpose, but 
because our spiritual life is at so low an ebb. The thing is 
there on the shelf; but our faith cannot reach high enough to 


106 Baring to Act in Faith. 


lift it down. Let us not rebuke ourselves merely as deficient 
in faith ; but let us adopt that regimen on which alone faith 
can wax strong. 


There are three conditions for the faith that can claim all 
that God is ready to give. 


It must be associated with a good conscience (1 Tim. i. 5-19). 
So long as the conscience is uneasy and perplexed, conscious 
of evil not judged, and of a perpetual struggle to pacify itself, 
faith is as impossible as a mirror of the heavens on the sea 
when it is being swept by violent winds. 

It must feed on the promises of God. Abraham is said not to 
have considered the physical difficulties in the way of the 
accomplishment of the Divine promise, but to have looked 
steadfastly towards, and reckoned absolutely upon, the word 
of his Almighty Friend. So must it be with us all. We 
cannot live by bread alone, but by every word of God. 

It must dare to act in the absence of emotion, stepping out as 
bidden on the yielding water, in sheer faith, and finding that it 
becomes a sheet of rock beneath the feet. To such a faith 
nothing is impossible. 


XV. 
Ghe Divine Master Workman. 


‘“My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.”—JOHN v. 17. 


N interval of some months lies between the previous 
chapter and this, in which many of the incidents in 
our Lord’s crowded Galilean life took place. Our 
evangelist does not touch on them—first, perhaps, 
because they had already been fully described by 
the other three ; and secondly, because he wanted 

to concentrate all his force on the great contest which his 

Master waged in the very stronghold of Jewish prejudice, and 

which led, step by step, to the terrible final catastrophe of his 

death. 

This visit to Jerusalem was, without doubt, crowded with 
incidents, of which a single specimen only is given here, because 
it introduced one of those startling disclosures of our Lord’s 
inner being which roused undying opposition among his foes, 
but constitutes for ever a mine of spiritual wealth to those who 
love Him. 

We must pass over the touching pathos of the incident itself, 
in order to fix on the salient feature, that our Lord not only 
healed the sufferer after thirty-eight years’ deferred hope, but 
did so on the Sabbath, and bade him carry his bed home. 
This bidding clashed with Jewish custom and Pharisaic ritual ; 
but the man rightly inferred that He who could work so great a 
miracle was supreme in the spiritual sphere, and could set aside 
the petty and vexatious exactions of the religious leaders of the 
time. 

It was impossible, however, that the Pharisees and others 
could silently acquiesce in this assumption of a superior 





108 The Divine Master Workman. ° 


authority to their own; and they seem to have cited Jesus 
before the authorities.on the formal charge of Sabbath-breaking. 
But his judges were little prepared for the line of his defence, 
which convulsed the assembly in paroxysms of religious fury, 
and revealed some of the deepest facts in our Lord’s life and 
consciousness. His opening words contain the text and pith of 
all that followed : “ My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.” 


I. OUR LORD’S CONSCIOUSNESS OF DEITY.—“ He said that 
God was his Father,” or, as the Greek might be rendered, “ His 
own Father” (18). At another time He addressed God as our 
Father, and the Jews heard Him without scruple. But, when 
He spoke thus, they felt that He claimed God as Father in a 
unique sense, and they sought the more to kill Him; not only 
because He had broken the Sabbath, but because, in saying this, 
He had made Himself equal with God. 

It is most important that we should not read our western 
notions into our Lord’s references to his Sonship. We must 
understand them as they were understood by those to whom 
they were first addressed. In their judgment they conveyed 
the assertion of equality. And He who uttered them knew that 
_it would be so, and carefully picked these very words because 
they meant somuch. “He thought it not robbery to be equal 
with God.” 

To my mind that is almost the strongest proof of the Deity of 
our blessed Lord. Not primarily that He wrought marvellous 
works, or rose from the dead ; but that his holy, humble spirit 
thrilled with the consciousness of his Deity. On these grounds 
I would be prepared to argue the whole question of our Lord’s 
Divinity. By friend and foe alike, He is held to have been the 
holiest that ever trod our earth. But the holiest must be the 
humblest. He will not strive, nor cry, nor lift up, nor cause his 
voice to be heard in the streets ; He will not assume anything 
which He is not ; He will curtain, so far as He can, the intrinsic 
splendour of his nature. And yet, for all that, see how this 
meekest and lowliest of men accentuates his oneness and 
equality with God. This, indeed, was the charge on which He 
was condemned to die. Silent in reference to all other charges, 


“Ggual with Gov.” 109 


when He was solemnly challenged as to ¢hzs, He saw no 
incongruity between his desolate, suffering, rejected condition, 
_and the claim to be,in a unique (and, to the Jewish mind, a 
blasphemous) sense, the fellow and equal of the Eternal (Matt. 
xxvi. 63, 64; John xix. 7). 

But the Holiest must also be the clearest and most certain in 
all spiritual insight. Could it be otherwise? Our perception of 
the truth of things is dimmed and obscured by the grossness of 
our flesh, the earthwardness of our dispositions, the evil of our 
hearts. But when these are removed, we no onger see through 
a glass darkly, but face to face. ‘‘ Blessed are the pure in heart, 
for they shall see God.” It is a commonplace of moral phi- 
losophy that character means vision, insight, knowledge. We 
cannot but believe therefore, that, even apart from his divine 
self-consciousness, our Lord could not have been deceived when 
He announced Himself as his Father’s equal. To his perfect 
human soul all truth lay revealed as a summer landscape 
beneath the eye of the sun; and especially this truth, rearing 
itself prominently from among all the rest. 

~All other holy beings refuse in horror ascriptions of Divine 
homage and worship. Apostles and angels join in crying, “See 
thou do it not.” Consider, then, how great this Man was who, 
though holiest and humblest of men, forbade none who would 
prostrate themselves before Him, falling on the ground and 
praying to Him as God. 

Clearly, then, the Son of Man is competent to fulfil all the 
functions of God. 1s untiring energy working ceaselessly 
through the ages characteristic of the living God? So it is of the 
Son of Man: “My Father worketh hitherto, and I work” (17). 
Is it the prerogative of the Father to raise the dead, and 
quicken them? So it is of the Lord Jesus ; listen to the majestic 
words: “The Son quickeneth whom He will” (21). Is it the 
peculiar right of the Creator to be the Judge of men, because 
He understands the mechanism of their inner being and weighs 
their opportunities? This also is the Redeemer’s right : “ The 
Father hath committed all judgment unto the Son,” and his 
voice shall summon the dead from their graves to his bar (22). 
Is it the peculiar attribute of God to be the fountain of life, so 


110 The Dibine Master Workmat. 


that life, inherent, underived, perennial, is ever rising up in his 
mighty being, maintaining here an angel and there a humming- 
bird? ‘This is also an attribute of our blessed Lord. The 
glorious possession of inherent life is his also; it has been 
given-Him to have life in Himself (26). The entire sum and 
totality of the attributes of Deity are resident in the nature 
of the Son of Man. =: 

Obviously, then, men should honour the Son as they honour 
the Father (23). Nor has this been lacking. When He 
ascended to his throne, there followed Him from the heart of 
the Church a tide of adoration, which has only become deeper 
and wider with the lapse of time. In the first days of the 
Church, believers were known as those who called on the name 
of the Lord Jesus. To Him, the ascended and glorified Master, 
were addressed the prayers of the infant Church about to select 
an Apostle ; of the first martyr, in the moment of his mortal 
agony—a moment which must ever test the habitual practice of 
the soul; of Ananias, who talked with a holy familiarity, which 
gives a glimpse into his prayer-closet: and these are but 
specimens of myriads. The records of early Church history 
teem with hymns, and prayers, and dying words, and fervent 
ejaculations, written on parchment, or scrawled in rude hiero- 
glyphics on the walls of catacombs and prisons, all te the same 
effect. 

The instincts of the Christian heart are not then hopelessly at 
fault when they prompt prayer to our ascended Lord. He does 
not scruple to ask for such honour as men give to God. He 
insists that they who do not honour Him withhold honour from 
the Father. He claims that every knee should bow to Him, 
and every tongue acknowledge that He is Lord. He does not 
chide the threefold circle of adoration, by which his throne is 
ceaselessly surrounded, as elders, saints, and angels fall down 
and worship the Lamb with the same devotion with which they 
adore the Supreme. 


II, THE FELLOWSHIP BETWEEN THE SON AND THE FATHER 
DURING OUR LORD’S HUMAN LIFE.—And as we study it, let us 
remember that golden key to the unlocking of the treasures 


Oneness fith God. III 


of this precious Gospel, that we are to be to the Lord Jesus all 
that He was to his Father, and that He is willing to be to us all 
that his Father was to Him. And as we con these wondrous 
statements of that inner fellowship between Father and Son, 
we shall see that the after parable of the vine was founded on a 
union which already subsisted ; and shall learn how close, and 
intimate, and all-embracing our Lord would fain have our union 
with Himself to become. 

“ He did nothing of Himself,” t.e., He originated nothing, did 
nothing at the prompting of his own will; but always leant on 
his Father for direction and inspiration (19). No vine ever 
clung to its trellis-work, and no child to its mother, as He to his 
Father. Though all his Divine attributes were within his 
reach, and might at any moment have been called into operation, 
He forebore to use them, that He might learn the life of 
dependence and faith, the life which was to be ours towards 
Himself. This is why the sacred writers speak of the faith 
of our Lord Jesus (Gal. ii. 20; Heb. xii. 2). 

fle was ever conscious of his Father’s love and presence.—He 
lived in the present tense of his Father’s love, which was so real 
as to rob his life of all sense of loneliness (20; viii. 29). He 
knew that his Father heard Him always, as his spirit rose 
in perpetual fellowship and communion, unhindered by the 
densest clouds of human unbelief (xi. 42). Yea, there was 
something deeper still in his habitual realization that the Father 
dwelt in Him; so that his words, and works, and influence, and 
plan of life were the perpetual working out of what his Father 
was working in (17; xiv. 10). And why should not we live ina 
fellowship equally hallowed and close? It was his one desire 
that his relationship with his Father should be the model of our 
relationship with Himself (xvii. 21,23). And thus it shall be by 
the grace of the Holy Spirit who, Himself God, is Gf I may use 
the term) the all-pervasive medium between the Father and the 
Son, and who links all whom He fills into that same sacred 
oneness. 

He was perpetually engaged in reading the open book of his 
Father’s will—He had no will of his own to seek, no object 
of his own to serve (30). He had come, in his Father’s name, 


112 Tbe Divine Master Workman. 


to do his Father’s will, and to glorify his Father’s name (30, 43 ; 
xvii. 4). It was the passion of his being to do God’s work 
on God’s plan. And his eye was thus ever kept on the move- 
ment of the cloud of his Father’s unfolding purpose. The 
Father showed the Son what He was doing. And the Son, 
having seen it, translated it into the language of daily human 
life (20). But what a model for ourselves! If He whom we 
worship as Lord took on Himself so absolutely the form of a 
servant, how fair would our life be if we more deeply received 
of his spirit ; and, through obedience here, prepared ourselves 
to sit by his side in‘the glory, and reign with Him! aoe 
These are glimpses of what our life may become. There will 
be pain to suffer, a conflict to maintain, a work to do, in face of 
opposition which may grow ever more violent; but, amidst 
it all, there may be unbroken fellowship with the ascended Lord 
by the grace of the Holy Spirit, through whom alone it can be 
originated and maintained. Ah, that clear heaven of azure blue, 
unflecked by cloud—what a reflection it casts on the face of the 
quiet, upturned heart! This is the spiritual equivalent of the 
land that drinketh water of the rain of Heaven ! - 


III. THE PLAN OF OUR MASTER’S WoORK.—Our Lord was 
as careful of the promptings of his Father as a jeweller of gold 
leaf. If the Father wrought within Him up to any given 
moment of time, He never hesitated to give free play to the 
holy impulse, though it should bring Him into collision with the 
religion of his time. “See,” said He, “ Sabbath or no Sabbath, 
my Father moved Me to this miracle. I could do no other than 
yield. Ye must reckon with Him” (17). 

' He waited for the Father to show Him what next He would 
have Him do. The pattern of his life was gradually outspread 
before Him, as that of the tabernacle was unfolded before the 
great lawgiver, shut up with God. He seemed ever a learner in 
his Father’s workshop, making all things on the pattern shown 
Him from hour to hour. This made Him so still, so calm, 
unmoved by difficulty, unperturbed amid a hail of murderous 
stones (vill. 59; ix. 4). And it would bring rest, and unity, and 
power, into our own lives, if it were the one purpose of our being 


Our Lord's Life-Work. 113 


to discover and do only the good works which God hath before 
ordained that we should walk in them. Better do less that 
we may do more. Better stand still than run without being 
sent. Better withdraw oftener from the valley to the brow 
of the Transfiguration mount, than, by fussy activity, miss the 
radiant vision, and the bitter need which waits for us at the 
mountain foot. 

And thus our Lord’s life-work was ever on an ascending 
scale. From making water wine, to making blood the ransom 
price of souls ; from raising the daughter of Jairus, to the calling 
of Lazarus from a three days’ death-sleep ; from cleansing the 
temple, to works of redemption, resurrection, and judgment. 
God was ever showing Him yet greater things. The plan of 
his life was ever becoming fuller; its stream deeper, its cur- 
rent swifter. Nor will it be otherwise with ourselves. Be true 
to the power you have, and it will increase. The limb becomes 
defter by use. And he who yields his ’prentice hand to be 
nerved and used by the great Master Workman, shall find, as 
the years pass by, that he will be able to accomplish results, the 
mere dreams of which had never visited him in the most 
ecstatic moments of his youth. 

O glorious Servant of God, and worker for men, breathe 
into us thine own spirit ; that following in thy steps we may at 
last participate in thy rest and reward ! 


XVI. 
The Will of God. 


“JT seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent 
Me.” —JOHN vy. 30. 


HE passionate desire of the heart of the Lord Jesus 
was to do the Will of God. As He stepped down 
into our world, He appropriated David’s words, with 
a significance that David could never have put into 
them, “Lo, I come ; in the’volume of the book it is 
written of Me ; I delight to do thy will, O my God.” 
As often as He asked for daily bread, He prayed that that will 
might be done on earth, and doubtless in his own life. And He 
clung to it as a handrail down the steep dark staircase by which 
He went to his death, saying, as He descended into the gloom, 
“O my Father, thy will be done !” 

It is evident, though we cannot penetrate the mystery in 
which the whole subject is enshrouded, that our Lord, as far 
as his human nature was concerned, had a will, which could 
be denied and subordinated to the will of his Father. We 
cannot fathom or explain, but we cannot ignore his repeated 
references to zs own will, It was the perfect expression of 
his holy, glorious nature; but it was a distinct and special 
force in the mechanism of his inner life. “I seek not mine 
own will, but the will of the Father”; “I came down from 
heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of Him that 
sent Me”; “Not my will, but thine be done” (John v. 303 
vi. 38; Luke xxii. 42). He subordinated his own will to God’s ; 
and so came, as all do who begin by choosing it, to delight 
in it as altogether lovely. 





The Divine Purpose. 115 


To do God’s will meant, in the experience of our Great High 
Priest, obedience to death, even the death of the cross; it 
meant shame and spitting, a breaking heart, a soul exceeding 
heavy, as laurels bending low under a weight of rain ; it meant 
the cry of forsakenness. But He was ever nerved and sustained 
by the thought that it was the will of his Father. He did 
not look at the Fatherhood through the cross ; but at the cross 
through the Fatherhood. Never for one moment did He lose 
faith in the infinite love which was leading Him through darkness 
into light, through death to life. 

There are many thoughts given us in our Lord’s acceptance 
of his Father’s will. 


I. IT IS THE SUFFICIENT PURPOSE OF LIFE TO DO THE 
WILL OF Gop.—Among the aims of our Saviour’s life we may 
enumerate his desire to save the lost; to put away sin; to 
purchase for Himself a people; to win for Himself a bride ; 
to destroy the works of the devil. But all these were included 
in the sweep of a wider, grander purpose than any, as the orbits 
of the planets are included in the march of suns; viz. the 
sublime aim of doing his Father’s will. 

Nor is there anything loftier or more inclusive throughout all 
worlds than this ; for the will of God is the perfect expression 
of his character, which is infinite love, strength, and wisdom, 
woven in perfect unity. But do we not often sink below this 
level, and, missing this high purpose, involve ourselves in 
disappointment ? 

Not infrequently do I receive letters from discouraged 
Christian workers in which they complain sorrowfully. of the 
lack of conversions in their ministry, and questioning whether it 
would not be better for them to abandon their positions for 
some other calling. Now, it is right and Christlike to yearn 
with soul-travail over the lost, and to track them in their 
wanderings through the wild; and, if there is a cessation 
of salvation work in our service, it should lead to solemn 
questionings and searchings of heart. But neither this, nor the 
ebbing away of people, nor the appearance of failure, is a 
true indication that we should forsake our post. We cannot 


iis The Will of God. 


explore the Divine purpose, or know the special function which 
God is fulfilling by our means. The one question for us is, 
Are we where God would have us be? ‘We may be pawns 
standing for hours on the same square of the chessboard ; 
or sentries at outpost duty far from the camp : but if it is the will 
of God for us to be there, it is enough.. We can laugh at what 
the world deems failure ; we can exist without the fulfilment © 
of our chosen gauges of success, if only we are in the current 
of our Father’s’ will. 

The ground is hard ; the outlook unpromising ; helpers few ; 
success rare as a gleam across the sea on a stormy day. But 
God has put us where we are * and it is enough, abundantly 
enough. 

We know God’s will by several’ unmistakeable signs ; by the 
sure impression of his Spirit on our heart; by the teaching of 
his holy Word ; by the unerring indication of the circumstances 
in which we are placed, and by which we may be bound or tied 
or nailed to a certain post. We may suffer keenly ; heart and 
flesh may threaten to fail; our life-blood may seem to be 
ebbing drop by drop from our heart: but, if God shows us no 
way of escape, and no path of retirement, we must take it 
as his will that we should keep just where we are. It is his 
will, and it is enough. His blessed will! His lovely will! 
The will of our Father! Hush, my heart, there can be no 
mistake! He has not forgotten thee. And some day it will 
be a sufficient reward to know that He was satisfied. 


I]. THE BLESSED RESULTS OF DOING THE WILL OF 
Gop. 

(1) Lt feeds the spirit_—An hour before, the Master had sent 
his disciples to buy food, and He, too exhausted to accompany 
them, awaited their return beside the well; but now that they 
have hastened back, He seems indifferent to the bread they 
bring. “Hath any man brought Him aught to eat?” No. 
But He has been fed in doing. ‘My meat is to do the will of 
Him that sent Me, and to finish his work” (iv. 34). 

So is it ever. Not only in the devout study of the Word, or 
in attendance on some public ministry, but in doing the will of 


Bote to Discern it. 117 


God, though it may only lead to a wayside talk with a wayfarer, 
the soul is nourished and fed. Obedience to God’s will can 
never take the place of communion with Him; but it is a 
valuable adjunct. Do what lies to your hand, not because you 
must, but because you discern God’s will in it; and you will 
discover that to expend is to expand; that to give out is to 
increase; that to feed crowds is to accumulate baskets of 
provision ; and that:-to water others is to be watered. / 


(2) Zt clears the judgment.—How often are we perplexed 
about our course! We stand where many roads meet, not sure 
which to take. We waver and vacillate, and finally run to this 
friend or the other, or adopt some questionable method of 
ascertaining our path. Why all this difficulty? Much of it 
arises from the intrusion of self-will, which deflects our judgment, 
as the masses of iron on a steamship deflect the needle from the 
pole. Our eye is not single, and therefore our body is not full 
of light. “My judgment,” said our Lord, on the other hand, 
“is just, because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the 
Father which hath sent Me.” 

Our God must have a purpose for each of his children, and in 
everything. In his mind there must be an ideal of what we 
should do under all circumstances of daily living. And He is 
not unwilling to show it to us; it is there held out for us to see ; 
and if we fail to see it, it is probable that there is some obliquity 
in our vision. Beware of this ; search your heart to see what it 
may be which prevents you from apprehending God’s purpose. 
It will not be long ere you discover some lurking reluctance to 
have God’s will done completely ; and only when this is dragged 
to light and judged, will you descry the Star of Bethlehem 
glimmer out in the morning sky to guide you. 

There are cases in which the will is unbiassed by self-will, 
and yet it seems impossible to discern God’s will: then we 
must wait ; the lesson is evidently patience, and there is no 
alternative but to stand still, in spite of all remonstrances to 
the contrary, till a path is cleft through the mighty waters. 


(3) Zt géves Rest—What an agony must they suffer whose 
life seems at the mercy of some cruel fate, or iron destiny, or 


118 he Will of God. 


implacable, unalterable law! They beat their breasts against 
the bars of their cage till they fall panting, dying to the floor. 
Many an imperturbable face hides a broken heart, or one eaten 
through with unrest. But as soon as the soul has learnt to 
recognise God’s will in all the events of life—in the falling of a 
sparrow to the ground, and of a hair from the head ; in what 
God permits as well as in what He appoints: in the coming 
of a Judas to betray, as much as in the advent of an angel to 
strengthen—then there is rest.. The current of the life which 
had dissipated itself in many side channels settles down 
to an even and steady flow towards the sea, which draws it to 
itself. 

If you would look up, though with tear-blinded eyes, and 
recognise that it is your Father’s will for you to be fixed in that 
difficult position; to be separated from that twin soul; to 
drink that bitter cup; to be exposed to calumny and hate ; 
to do that uncongenial task ; that it is the will of One who 
loves you infinitely, and is making all things work together for 
good—then you would find rest to your soul. This was Christ’s 

-way. The doing of the Father’s will was the yoke He took 
and bore, and has consecrated for ever. So take your side by 
Him in the long, difficult furrow, yoked with Him. “Take 
my yoke upon you, and learn of Me,” said He, “for I am 
meek and lowly in heart : and ye shall find rest to your souls” 
(Matt. xi. 29). 

(4) lt zs the key to certain knowledge.—We want to know. 
All around us stretches the great unexplored continent of 
God’s nature, in which we have appropriated but a few acres 
of clearing. To know God would surely bring into our lives 
deeper draughts of that eternal life to drink of which quenches 
the inner thirst. But how shall we know Him, and how be 
sure of aught we think we know? There is no hesitation in 
our Lord’s majestic answer: “If any man will do his will, he 
shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I 
speak of Myself” (vi. 17). 

The cause of much of the ignorance of men is traceable to 
the will. They are not willing to know or to retain God in 
their knowledge. But when they renounce their prejudices, 


The Antidote to Loneliness. 119 


and put their wills on God’s side, and become as little children, 
content to be taught, the true knowledge begins to steal into 
their being, and grows unto the perfect day. Then they no 
longer need books of evidences or arguments to prove the 
truth of Christ ; they have seen Him for themselves, and know 
that the Son of God is come, and has given them an under- 
standing, that they may know Him that is true. 

In dealing with professed sceptics or seekers, or those who 
seem unable to believe, it is of the highest importance, there- 
fore, to probe their will, and see if they are holding to anything 
which is inconsistent with this attitude of entire acquiescence 
with the will and ways of God ; until this is the case, neither 
conversion nor regeneration is possible. 

(5) L¢ introduces to a large family.—Our Master knew what 
loneliness was in his family life ; for, with the exception of his 
mother, his nearest refused to believe in Him. What ecstasy, 
then, must He have felt on that day when, after his friends had 
endeavoured to stay Him from getting into deeper collision 
with the Jewish leaders, “ He stretched forth his hand toward 
his disciples and said, Whosoever shall do the will of my 
Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, 
and mother.” 

And is this really the case, that those who live in the will of 
God may claim the kinship of all in all worlds that live for the 
same? Are there bonds, invisible as air, yet firm as adamant, 
which bind us for evermore in family ties with all holy souls, 
and which knit us, above all, to Him, the Royal and Divine Man? 
‘Then isolation is impossible. Gulfs are bridged. Barriers are 
pierced. Space is annihilated. Christ and we may be one; 
and we may be one also with redeemed spirits, and bright 
angels, and all great souls that have been, are, and shall be, 
in so far as we and they participate in the fixed resolve to do or 
suffer in all things the will of God. 


III. AN EXHORTATION TO CHOOSE THE WILL OF GOD.— 
Refuse it, and it will crush you. Take it grudgingly, and it 
will chafe you into sores. Withhold from it some portion of 
your life, and you spoil your obedience in all the rest. But 


120 Whe Will of God. 


why all this reluctance? The will of God must be infinitely , 
lovely and beautiful, because He is that. To put it away is to 
put Him away. To refuse it is to refuse Him. Stand out no 
longer, but yield ! 

So many make the mistake of trying to like the will of God, 
or of working themselves up into a state of resignation and 
stoical indifference. This will never do. Begin, not with it, but 
with Him. Distastefulness passes out of the will of those we 
love and trust. Choose Him, and you will come to choose his 
will. Will his will, and you will come to delight in it. Tell 
Him that you are willing to be made willing, and leave Him to 
bring every thought into captivity to Himself. 

The will of God may lead into the garden of Gethsemane ; 
but the path to the Easter dawn lies there. There is no other 
way, and there is no danger of being lost (vi. 39); but the 
certainty of an ever-deepening sense of blessedness, and 
serenity, and heaven, the law of whose perfect joy is that 
strong angels do his will, hearkening unto the voice of his 
Word. 


XVII. 
Ghe Father's Name. 


‘‘T am come in my Father's name.”—JOHN v. 43. 


OW much there is ina name! A palace lay wrapt in 
mysterious slumber. The king asleep on his throne; 
his counsellors strewn in various attitudes on the 

{)*y-  highly-polished floors, each grasping tightly the 
se symbols of his office, but all beneath the spell ; 

the maidens twined in various attitudes by fountain 
and loom, which for many a year had steod unused. And what 
was needed to awaken all that sleep-bound palace, save the 
speaking of one word, the right word, the word which should 
untie the mystic spell? Many essayed to speak it, but in vain. 

Yea, themselves succumbed to the charm they failed to loose. 

And all around them crept the briar-rose. Until one came, 

before whose tread the thorns were changed to myrtles, and the 

thickset hedge to honeysuckle. He spoke the word which 
broke the spell of slumber, and again filled the silent palace 
with the hum of many voices and the stir of life. 

It isa parable. And yet it isa truth. It is true, to a limited 
extent, in the case of individual hearts and lives, wrapt in 
lethargy until one voice shall speak that single word which 
shall arouse to animation, and kindle the glow of life and love. 
But it is a true picture also of the moral condition of the world. 
The hearts and consciences of the majority of mankind were 
drugged in fatal stupor, waiting through the ages spell-bound 
and torpid. Many a philosopher and teacher, reverend and 
grave, essayed to awaken the ear and heart of men; but all 
failed, till One came for whom all were waiting, though they 





122, The Father's Name. 


knew it not, and He spake the great word which broke the 
silence of centuries, and shed life on death, light on darkness, 
love on despair. Do you ask what that word was? I answer: 
it was the name so constantly applied by our Saviour to 
God—F ATHER. 

But, after all, a name may mean comparatively little. It 
may tell us something of the person who bears it, but not 
much. Call a man Jacob, or Moses, or Peter, and we infer 
that he is crafty in character ; or was drawn out of a watery 
grave ; or has a rock-like nature, in the clefts of which weaker 
men may hide. Yet, at the best, it is only a spar from a ship; a 
brick from a house ; a flower from a garden. And the man is 
labelled, but not known. 

So the Son of God was not content to speak of God as the 
Father ; that name had been guessed in the previous centuries. 
Did not David sing that God pitied us, as a father pities his , 
children? Did not Isaiah address God, saying, “ Doubtless 
Thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us”? It 
was not quite a new name, though it was spoken with new 
force, and reminted as it passed through those gentle holy lips. 
But our Lord spent his life in showing how much that name 
“Father” connoted, or méant, when it was applied to God. 

To understand this, let us imagine two young men standing 
together in some gathering of men for the interests of art or 
science or literature. Presently the attention of all is directed 
towards one standing to speak, who wins breathless hearing by 
his face and voice, “ Who is that ?” whispers one to the other. 
“He is my father,” is the proud reply. But how little do the 
words mean to his companion! ‘Then, as the two pass out 
together, the son begins to explain to his friend how much, in 
this case, lies behind that title, “father.” It may mean so 
little. It may mean nothing more than the progenitor of life. 
But in this case it means brother, friend, teacher, adviser, all 
that men love and revere in one. So Jesus Christ was not 
satisfied to say that God was a Father. He set Himself to 
show what sort of Father He was; and what heights, and 
depths, and breadths, and lengths of meaning lay hidden in 
that one sweet, tender, though common and oft-spoken, word. 


Hou Christ Declared it. 1237 


This is what He meant when He said, “I am come in my 
Father’s name.” 

Men are apt to speak lightly ‘to one another about the 
Fatherhood of God, and to ignore the ministry of Jesus in 
explaining what that phrase involves. But in ignoring Him, 
they trample under foot the one torch which can illumine the 
sculptured glories of this wondrous title, Father. “No man 
knoweth the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the 
Son will reveal Him” (Matt. xi. 27). We can only know the 
Fatherhood of God through the teachings of Jesus ; just as we 
only know the Lord Jesus through the teachings of the Holy 
Ghost, who makes Him real and present and precious. And, 
in fact, the man who talks of God the Father, and rejects 
Christ, proves that he knows nothing of the Father. “If 
God,” said He on one occasion, “were your Father, ye 
would love Me; for I proceeded forth, and came from God” 
(John viii. 42). 

Many will read these words who do not know God as Father. 
They cannot look up into his face, and say, with a child’s lisp, 
Abba. They are Christians; but they lack the consciousness 
of this benignant side of the character of God. He is rather 
the Judge, the Almighty, the Supreme. Such have need to 
know what Jesus meant when He said, “I am come in my 
Father’s name.” They have need te drink in the meaning of 
those words, with which our Lord summed up his earthly 
ministry to his own, “I have manifested thy name unto the men 
which Thou gavest Me out of the world” (xvii. 6). They have 
need to learn the whole force of that promise with which our 
Lord forecast his posthumous ministry, and with which He 
closed his intercessory prayer, “I have declared unto them thy 
name, and will declare it; that the love wherewith Thou hast 
loved Me may be in them, and I in them” (xvii. 26). 


I. THE MANNER IN WHICH OUR LORD DECLARED HIS 
FATHER’S NAME DURING HIS EARTHLY LIFE.—Sometimes tt 
was by contrast.—He would recal some trivial instance of a 
father’s love and pity in giving bread, or fish, or eggs, to some 
suppliant child. And when his audience were listening with 


124 Ohe Father's Name. 


rapt attention, whilst tears glistened in the eyes of some, He 
turned quickly on them, and said, ‘‘ God is just like that, only 
as much more delicate, and tender, and responsive, as his 
ways are higher than your ways.” It seems as if the Lord loves 
us to rise heavenwards from the commonplaces of our homes, 
and as each tiny incident transpires, to say to ourselves, “This _ 
is a little snatch of the love of God; a clue to the labyrinth of his 
infinite nature; a glimpse through an aperture, small as a 
pin-prick, into his very heart. Yea, our heavenly Father would 
do much more than this.” And-the Apostle Paul brings out the 
same idea, when he tells us that every fatherhood gets its 
meaning and value from God, as torches lit from the sun 
(Eph. iii. 15). 

Sometimes tt was directly.—He would point to sparrows lying 
for sale in the market, of which two were sold for a farthing, and 
five for two farthings, one being thrown into the bargain, and 
He would say, “You see how little men think of one sparrow ; 
but it cannot fall to the ground without your Father.” Admire, 
said He, your Father’s taste ; He clothed these flowers. Mark, 
said He, your Father’s care; He provides for these birds, 
winging their flight overhead. Behold, said He, this little 
child ; its angel beholds my Father’s face. 

Here are some of the direct statements He made: The 
Father is perfect in his forgiving love (Matt. v. 48); He knows 
what things ye need (vi. 8); He is merciful, and longs to give 
you the kingdom (Luke vi. 36); He sees in secret, and will . 
most certainly reward (Matt. vi. 4); He is the Husbandman of 
souls (John xv. 1); his hand is great enough to hold all his 
sheep, and to keep them safely (x, 29). Living in the heart 
of God, and between the heart of God and man, He was 
continually telling men what He saw there (viii. 38). 

lt was also by his life.—His life was one long denial of his 
intrinsic glory ; as we are called upon to deny our fallen evil 
selves. And why? Why did He refuse to speak his own 
words, to do his own deeds, to follow the promptings of his own 
will? (xii. 49, 50; v. 19; vi. 38; vili. 28). The reason is to be 
found in his intense desire that the Father should shine through 
his human life ; that the glory of God might be thrown on the 


Ghe Giiect of Christ's Testimony. 125 


canvas of mortal flesh ; that the Deity might be translated into 
the familiar speech of men. So, when Philip asked Him to 
show the Father, He answered him in amazement, “Have I 
been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known Me, 
Philip? he that hath seen Me hath seen the Father” (xiv. 9). 
In his life, and especially in his death, Jesus showed what 
meaning was hidden in his Father’s name. To understand 
these things is to see stars invisible to the naked eye, and 
to drink draughts further up the stream than is granted to 
others. 

And there is here a deep lesson, too ; whatever the name 
Father was to Jesus, that the name Jesus should be to us. It is 
in that name we pray. Through that name the Comforter 
descends. By that name we are called. On that name 
believing we have life. And we are chosen vessels to bear it. 
We have not only to hold it fast ; we are called upon to declare 
it. By lip and life, by precept and example, by what we say and 
what we are, we are called upon to lift up treasure after treasure 
from the unsearchable riches concealed in the sweet name 
Jesus, until the appetites of men are whetted with a strong zest, 
and they are attracted to Him; as the Queen of Sheba was 
to Solemon by the report which reached her in her own land. 
“The Name” was the common epithet for Christianity in its 
earliest days (Acts ii, ill., iv., R.V.). 


Il. THE EFFECT OF CHRIST’S DECLARATION TO HIS 
FATHER’S NAME.—/J¢ closed his mouth in self-vindication.—He 
stood there in that Jewish court charged with Sabbath-breaking. 
There were many grounds on which He might have based his 
claim to be exonerated of any heinous crime ; but He forbore to 
use them. He expressly refused to establish his right to act on 
his own motion, or the prompting of his own will. “If I bear 
witness of Myself, my witness is not true” (31). It would 
almost appear that He thought that He would have been false 
to his mission, if He had spoken a word on his own behalf. 

It stayed Him from summoning wrtnesses.—He could have 
summoned into that court John from the dungeon, where he was 
lying ; and the Jews would hardly have been able to refuse his 


126 Ohe Father's Mame. 


testimony (33). He could have summoned the long lines of 
healed ones, who had been the subjects of his miraculous 
power (36). He could have summoned page after page, and 
line after line of the writings of Moses (46). But He only 
touched on these things very lightly ; as if He mentioned the 
names of his witnesses, and then refused to subpcena them. 
And this was his dread, that the attention of men should be 
diverted from his Father to Himself. And as He took every 
opportunity to reveal his Father, so here, with no thought 
of Himself, He set Himself to his wonted task. In utter self- 
oblivion, in distinct refusal to come in his own name, in 
passionate eagerness that men should understand the great 
ocean, God, by this creek which had run up into a human life, 
He said, “I am come in my Father’s name.” 

But in doing this, He has set up the best vindication of 
Himself. He refused to vindicate Himself; but his vindication 
of God is the strongest proof that He had been from all eternity 
in the bosom of the Father. He lived to reveal God; but 
in doing so He best revealed Himself. He refused honour 
from all but from God alone; and such honour has come to 
Him, that heaven rings with the acclaim, “ Worthy art Thou to 
receive... honour.” 

So it is ever. If you love your life, you lose it. If you lose 
your life for his sake, you find it. We are too careful of our 
reputation and standing and honour, and what men say and 
think. Oh for that divine self-forgetfulness, that self-efface- 
ment, that self-oblivion, which finds its one all-sufficient aim 
in making men think better of Christ, without realizing that 
there is a backward reflex result in the vindication of the 
faithful servant. Anything which reflects light shows that it is 
itself polished. 


III. CHRist’s PostHuMOUS REVELATION OF THE FATHER’S 
NAME.—Notice these wondrous words: “The time cometh 
when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs, but I shall 
show you plainly of the Father” (xvi. 25). And again, “TJ 
will declare it” (xvii. 26). These passages can only point on 
to his post-resurrection ministry, when, through the Holy 


Ohe Woice of Jesus. PEARY 


Spirit, He. continued the teaching which in his earthly life He 
had commenced (Acts i. 2). It is of this ministry, also, that 
He speaks by the mouth of his servant, saying: “I will declare 
thy name unto my brethren ; in the midst of the Church will I 
sing praise unto Thee” (Psa. xxii. 22 ; Heb. ii. 12). 

Whenever in a congregation of the saints, there is an 
outburst of genuine song, you may detect the voice of Jesus 
singing with them, and identifying Himself with it. And He 
still teaches us by mystic influences and infallible tokens the 
deeper meaning of the Fatherhood of God, leading us, not to 
anything outside the boards of the Bible, but to a deeper 
appreciation of what is there. So also He will do for ever. 

O souls of men, do ye not long to know the Father, to hear 
his voice, to feel his touch, to be canopied by his love, so that 
all life may be a residence in his home? It is gloriously 
possible, if you are really born again, for only such have the 
right to call God, Father, after this inner sense (i. 12) ; and if 
you are willing to let the Master teach you some of those things 
which are prepared for the lovers of God, and which He reveals 
by his Spirit. 

And as we know more of the meaning of God’s Fatherhood, 
we shall experience more of the love of God, and of the 
indwelling of the Lord Jesus. In his own emphatic words 
He has taught us that the amount of the one will be the 
measure of the other ; ¢Aat “the love wherewith Thou hast 
loved Me may be in them, and I in them.” 


XVIII. 
Ghe Father's Gitt to the Son. 


‘« All that the Father giveth Me shall come to Me; and him that cometh 
to Me I will in no wise cast out.” —JOHN vi. 37. 


to 


‘4 N these chapters we are engaged in catching up some 
of the favourite thoughts and words of the Redeemer, 
thinking them over again, and trying, so far as we 
can, to look at them with his eyes and from his 
stand-point.. And we cannot leave this marvellous 
chapter without accentuating an expression which 
comes into prominence here for the first time, but is destined to 
re-appear more than once or twice—that expression is, chose 
whom the Father giveth Me. And may it be that all who read 
these lines shall be included in that casket of very precious 
jewels which the Father has given to his Son! There is 
nothing higher in this world or the next to which any human 
being can aspire. 





I. WHO ARE THEY ?—We may not look into the Book of 
Life, and read the names written there from before the founda- 
tion of the world. One only can take that book, and break 
its seals, and look upon its mysterious pages. The Lamb 
alone, whose blood purchased each individual mentioned there, 
may scan its records. But it is not necessary that that book 
should be opened or read ere we know its contents. There is 
another method of ascertaining the names it records. 

The verse quoted above contains an identical proposition. 
Its extremes may be reversed in their order, for each is the 
other’s equivalent. And if, on the one hand, it is true that all 
the given ones shall come; it is also true, on the other hand, 


Coming tao Christ. 129 


that all who come are included among the given ones. Would 
you know whether you are one of these? Ask yourself if you 
have truly come to Christ, or believed in Him as Saviour, 
Friend, and King ; for if you have, you may rest assured that 
you were included in that Divine donation which dates from 
the eternity of the far past, and shall be a theme of praise in 
that which is to come, world without end. 

This is Christianity. It does not consist in the acceptance 
of the Bible as the Word of God ; though Christians do accept 
it to be such, and account it the stable foundation of their 
hopes. It does not consist in the belief of a creed; though 
Christians necessarily hold certain definite beliefs. It is not 
adhesion to any visible church, or body of Christians ; though 
Christians do for the most part associate themselves together. 
It is coming to Christ. And it is evident from comparing the 
parallel clauses of the thirty-fifth verse, that coming to Him 
and believing in Him are one and the same thing. 

To come to Christ is to lift your heart to Him ; if not in 
prolonged prayer, yet in trustful confidence, in desire and 
aspiration, in mute expectancy. To come to Christ is to 
despair of yourself and all others, and to venture all on 
Him. To come to Christ is to turn your back on the sinful 
past, and your face towards a glimmering streak of dawn, now 
visible on the horizon, but destined to grow into a great light. 
Have you so come to Him, who, though the meekest of men, 
proposes Himself as the panacea for the world’s ills, the bread 
for its hunger, the satisfaction of its need? If so, then you 
are certainly amongst the given ones. 

Look at that stone, agitated for ages in the depths of 
primeval oceans, and rounded by the attrition of the currents 
of unnumbered centuries ; or at those hills composed of the 
remains of infinite myriads of infinitesimal organisms, falling 
through the still depths of untroubled seas ; or at the moon, 
which bears the evidence of the terrific convulsions do which 
she has been exposed : and, as you consider any one of these, 
you are almost overwhelmed by the thought of their antiquity. 
Yet know, O soul of man, that, before any of these were made, 


before the silence of eternity was broken by the first angel-voice, 
I 


130 Ghe Father's Gift to the Son. 


in the infinite azure of the immeasurable past, you were 
named, and passed in deed of gift by the Father to the Son. 
There was no surprise, therefore, when you came to the Son 
of Man—this had been anticipated before time began ; and it 
was the answer of your life to the summons of the foreknow- 
ledge of God. You have come in time, but you were given in 
eternity. 

Suppose that a geologist, amid his explorations of the traces 
of earth’s earliest life, were suddenly to come across a slab 
inscribed with his own name and a prediction of the precise 
date of his coming. With what amazement would he scan 
that mysterious tablet, and with what awe recognise the Divine 
omniscience! He did not come because he knew that he 
was expected, but because of what, as he thought, were the 
promptings of his own sweet will; but, having come, he 
discovered that his advent had been long anticipated. So we 
come to the Saviour under a sense of sin or the stress of 
sorrow, unaware of any mysterious influence at work: but, 
having come, we find that we have been the subjects of the 
drawing grace of the Father (44) ; that the very grace to come 
had been given by the Father (65) ; and that we were included 
in the Father’s gift, so that of us the Son could say, ‘“ Thine 
they were, and Thou gavest them Me, and they have kept thy 
word.” 

In dealing with the unconverted, we have only to reiterate 
the invitation, “‘Come to Him.” This is the one legend that 
stands over the doorway of the House of Mercy. But, having 
entered, we learn that all who enter have been given, as a flock 
of sheep, to the care of the Good Shepherd, whose name is 
branded on them, defying time and age to erase it (x. 29; 
Gal. vi. 17, R.V.). 


I]. THEIR PRIVILEGES.—It is a marvellous list ; and, as we 
write and read, it is through a blinding mist of tears, because 
we have made so little of our marvellous prerogative—ours by 
an inalienable right. 

(1) They obtain Eternal Life.—Outside this charmed circle 
there is existence, but no life (53). Men may live in pleasure, 


The Privileges of Belicbers. 131 


but they are dead while they live (1 Tim. v. 6). Eternal life 
is as much above the ordinary life of men as that in turn is 
above the brute’s. It partakes of the nature of that world which 
awaits us, unseen and eternal, in those glorious ages which we 
are nearing with every heart-beat. So that of the regenerate it 
may be said that they are already the children of eternity. 

Christ gives eternal life. He not only has life in Himself, - 
but He has received from the Father authority over all flesh, 
that He should give eternal life to those whom He has given 
Him (xvii. 2). The life which man forfeited in Eden is given 
back in the second Man, the Lord from heaven. He is the 
tree of life, to eat of whom is to become impervious to death ; 
and no sword now turns every way to hinder us from taking 
and living for ever. 

We cannot explain the mystery of the imparting of this 
eternal life ; and we know as little of the life itself. We are 
sure that it cannot be acquired, but must be given. We are 
sure that life is not the result of knowledge, but knowledge the 
result of life. “This is life eternal], that they might know Thee, 
the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom Thou hast sent” 
(xvii. 3). We are sure that to have it is to drink draughts of 
blessedness with which no earthly joy can compare. And we 
know that by this the religion of the Bible is distinguished from 
all other religions whatsoever, that it provides for the communi- 
cation of this life to all who believe. Whatever a man professes 
and knows, without this life he is no Christian ; but, with this 
life, the humblest and weakest believer is a child of God, a 
member of Christ, and an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven. 
And this is the life which Jesus gives to all who come to Him, 
at the first moment of their coming. 

(2) They are safe for ever.—Notice how He reiterates this, as 
if to exclude the possibility of mistake. JZ wz// in no wise cast 
out. The Greek is very strong, “I will never, never, cast out.” 
So great was the pressure brought to bear on the Patriarch that 
he was obliged, though against his will, to cast out the slave- 
girl and her child ; and they nearly perished in the desert-wastes. 
But no pressure shall ever avail with Christ to cast out one who 
has come to Him. No matter how weak and sinful; though a 


132 @be Father's Grit to the Son. 


wreck through sin, with only a fragment of a life to give, He 
will never, never, cast out. Once inside, there is no putting out. 
Again, He says that it is the Father’s will that He should lose 
nothing of all that He has given (39). In fulfilment of that will, 
_ He stood forth in the garden, accosted the armed band, as their 
swords were flashing in the gleaming torchlight, told them that 
He was the object of their search, and bade them let the terror- 
stricken band of disciples go their way (xviii. 8, 9). An image 
this of how He stands between us and all assailants, whether 
they be the righteous demands of the Divine law, or the dark and - 
malignant powers of hell. Ever like this He is inserting Himself 
between our enemies and ourselves; covering us with his 
feathers ; actmg as our shield and buckler ; and receiving into 
his own royal heart the blows meant for our worthless selves. 
We cannot be lost, unless we be very Judases, who deliberately 
open our hearts to admit the prince of hell (xii. 26; xvii. 12). 

And as if to make assurance doubly sure, the Lord speaks of 
those whom the Father had given Him, as enclosed not only in 
his own hand, but also in the grasp of his Father’s hand (x. 29). 
There we lie within the double safeguard: first of the hand 
of the Son of Man, and then of that of the Eternal Father. No 
member of his body can be amputated. No sheep of his flock 
can be torn by the lion of the pit. No Jonah shall be east out 
to lighten the ship of the Church. We are sef/ by One who 
neither slumbers nor sleeps, but guards his flock with ceaseless 
vigilance ; exercising his gracious oversight, not by an iron 
restraint which we cannot resist, but by a sweet persuasiveness 
of love from which we do not wish to escape (xvii. 11, 12). 

(3) They are the subjects of his intimate solicitude.—For these 
He gives his flesh and blood to be meat and drink indeed (54). 
To these He gives choice revelations of his Father’s name 
(xvil. 6); and passes on the very words which He receives 
fresh and living from his Father’s voice (8). These He leads 
into a certain and settled belief in his Divine mission (8). For 
these He specially prays, excluding at times the very world 
from his thought, that He may concentrate all his attention on 
their interests (9). For these He prognosticates a unity like 
that between Himself and the Father. Concerning these He 


A Glorified Body. 133 


wills that they may be with Him where He is, so as to behold 
his glory, and to receive those further communications concern- 
ing the name of God which shall lead to their fuller reception 
of the love of God, through the untold ages of the hereafter 
(24, 26). Oh, destiny of surpassing wonder! Oh, mystery of 
love! Oh, rapture of delight! And does all this hang on our 
coming to Jesus? Who then will delay? Ah, purblind race, to 
hesitate, and miss privileges so exalted, bliss so supreme ! 


(4) They shall be raised up at the last day.—That expression, 
the last day, was frequently on his lips (John vi. 39, 40, 44, 54; 
xl, 24 ; xii. 48). It isan indefinite expression for those final scenes 
in which the history of our race is to be consummated through 
resurrection and judgment. Our Lord does not discriminate 
between the successive scenes in the last great act ; but bulks 
the whole together, leaving the Holy Spirit to show the various 
stages through later writers. 

It is, however, noticeable how much stress He lays on the 
Resurrection as essential to the completeness of his work on 
behalf of those who come to Him. Four times in this discourse 
He reiterates the assertion (39, 40, 44, 54). It is not enough to 
impart eternal life. That would bless the spirit, but leave the 
body untouched. And the Saviour will not rest until the whole 
of our complex nature shares the emancipation and blessing of 
his salvation. A transfigured manhood and a glorified body 
must be the crown of his work for his own; and so, by his 
mighty power, He will raise us up in the likeness of his glory, 
and make us the sharers of his royal and exalted state 
(Phil. ii. 21). 

It seems incredible, and yet it must be so. Nothing less can 
explain those mysterious yearnings which thrill within our 
hearts, and which, unless the structure of our nature is in this 
single particular abortive, must have their satisfaction. And 
nothing less will undo the devil’s masterpiece of mischief, and 
bring glory to God out of it all. 

But in speaking thus of the given ones, let it not be forgotten 
that they are given, not for their enjoyment, but for service. 
The disciples to whom our Lord so often referred under this 


134 Ghe Father's Gitt to the Son. 


designation, were the first preachers, teachers, workers, and 
martyrs of his church. To them, more than to any others, are 
due the sacred Scriptures of the New Testament, and the 
structure of the Church. And if we be in the same category, 
we must never forget, that though we are not of the world as to 
our calling, yet we are in the world for ministry ; and that we 
have been given to the Saviour to be allied with Him in the 
service of men, He fulfilling through us the purposes on which 
He set his heart, and we sharing with Him the travail of his 
soul, and his ardent, patient, undiscouraged toil. 


XOX, 
Ghe Bread which Gites and Sustains Wife. 


““As the living Father hath sent Me, and I live by the Father: so he that 
eateth Me, even he shall live by Me.” —JOHN vi. 57. 
ww %ERO 
: HIS verse may fairly be said to be the pivot around 
which our Lord’s words about Himself revolve. It 
certainly gives the secret of his inner life. And it 
excites our deepest wonder as we read it over and 
FiVG af over, trying vainly to explore and understand its 
5 wealth of significance. It furnishes a clue also to 
the interpretation of those other words with which He met the 
devil, on his first assault, and told him that “ Man doth not live 
by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the 
mouth of God.” But here He takes a further step, and says 
that He lives not only by the words of God, but by God 
Himself. 

And there is a further interest in this verse, that it not only 
affords the clue to the inner life of the Son of Man, but contains 
an admonition for each one of us to do as He did; exercising 
towards Himself the same dependence of spirit and attitude as 
he did towards his Father. 

There was a sense, of course, in which, as the Second Person 
in the Holy Trinity, all power was his in heaven and on earth. 
But of this, to use the expressive phrase of the Apostle, “He 
emptied Himself” (Phil. ii. 7, R.v.), and voluntarily took up a 
life of momentary dependence on his Father ; living on his plan, 
by his strength, for his glory; losing Himself utterly in his 
all-sufficiency, and appealing to Him in every episode and 
emergency of his daily life. His spirit was as dependent on 
Him as his body was on bread ; and clung to Him as the vine 
to the trellis-work on which it is reared. Such is the character 
of the life which He bids us live towards Himself. “He that 
eateth Me shall live by Me.” 







\ 


136 @he Bread which Gites and Sustains Lite. 


I. OuR LorD AS BREAD.—We might discover many ingenious 
analogies to please the fancy and delight the mind, but be 
diverted from the main conception pressed on us, with repeated 
emphasis, in this discourse. 

Bread contains life-—It is made of fine flour, but in the 
grinding of the flour the life-germs of the wheat are not 
destroyed, and it is their presence which makes bread the life 
of our life, the true fuel of our fire. In bread, the life of nature, 
that living principle which underlies all vegetable growth, and 
which is due to the direct operation of the living God, is reduced 
to such a form that it can conveniently become the raw material 
out of which we weave the texture of our being. And in the 
human nature of the Lord Jesus there is stored the very life 
of God. “As the Father hath life in Himself, He gave to the 
Son to have life in Himself”; so that the Son has brought to 
our world, incarnated in his wondrous nature, the underived, 
infinite, and ever-blessed life of the Eternal. 

It is the presence of life in bread which causes it to sustain 
physical life ; it is the presence of life in the words of the Bible 
which renders it a book for all ages and of endless application ; 
it is the presence of life in Jesus Christ which makes Him the 
food of men. Hearken to his majestic words : “I am the life”; 
“Tam the Resurrection and the Life”; “I am the living One” 
(xiv. 6; xi. 25; Rev. i. 18). 

Bread ts all-sufficient for life.—It contains in itself all the 
elements needed for nutrition. Though a man have an unlimited 
supply of flesh, he cannot find in such a diet, however plentiful, 
certain qualities required to build up his frame. But on a 
bread-diet man will thrive ; and he will thrive in proportion 
to the number of original elements left when the processes 
of its preparation are complete. Nor is it otherwise with Jesus. 
In Him there is everything that‘ we need “for life and godli- 
ness.” He is a hiding-place in a storm of wind; a covert 
from the tempest; rivers of water in drought ; the shadow of 
a great rock in scorching heat. For the polluted, He is purity ; 
for the irritable, He is patience ; for the faint, He is courage ; 
for the weak, He is strength ; for the ignorant, He is wisdom. 
God, who knew the needs of our bodies, stored all nutritive 


Bot to Appropriate Christ. 137 


qualities in the corn for us to assimilate as we need, And 
knowing the needs of our spirits, He stored all the elements 
required for our spiritual nutrition in our blessed Lord, leaving 
us to appropriate them as we will. 

We cannot understand that wonderful inner mechanism, in 
virtue of which each part of our nature comes to the bread as 
soon as eaten, and carries off from it the special particles it 
requires. But we may all learn the lesson of their participation, 
and take to ourselves just those things in the blessed Lord 
which we want most. 

Bread must be appropriated ere it becomes life-giving.— 
However much bread lies around, it avails not to appease 
hunger, or to do its work of nutrition, unless it is masticated and 
digested. And what digestion is to food, assimilating it with 
our bodies, ¢#a¢ devout and loving meditation on the words and 
life and work of the Lord Jesus is to our spirits. By the one 
process there is brought about a union between our bodies and 
the bread; by the other a union between our spirits and the 
risen Jesus. In the one we extract the principle of physical life 
from bread ; in the other the principle of spiritual life from 
the Lord of life. 

No figure can unfold the meaning of all this. The only true 
clue is to be found in the personal experience of believers. 
They know what is meant, though they cannot tell the art of it 
to others. But it is a living fact with them, that by turning 
hearts and thoughts towards Jesus they are able to get strength 
to suffer and act in, ways which, as they look back on them, 
appear almost past believing. O weak and suffering ones, the 
greater your need, the more imperative the necessity to eat his 
flesh! Deliberate eating and mastication are essential to good 
health ; but not less so, after a spiritual sort, to all who would 
live in soul-health before God. 

Yet we may illustrate what feeding on Christ is. A whole 
family may be fed by the words, and gentleness, and patience, 
of a single invalid, who thinks herself useless lumber. A 
generation of young men may be fed by the heroism, or intellect, 
or example of some chosen leader. An expedition may feed, 
through long privation and bitter disappointments, on the 


138 «6 @ be Bread which Gites and Sustains Lrte. 


undaunted courage and inspiring hope of some chivalrous 
captain. A nation may feed on the deeds or words of a Pitt, a 
Fox, or a Wellington. And so, in the higher sphere, we may 
all feed our spirits on Him who offers Himself as the true 
Bread of man. | 

The great need for us all is to feed more constantly on Christ. 
We are so fitful and irregular in our dealings and fellowship 
with Him. We do not sufficiently “handle the Word of Life.” 
We pray in a kind of despairing way for help, but do not take 
Him by acts of assimilating, appropriating faith ; going forth from 
fellowship with Him, not gauging by our emotions the amount 
of benefit received, but by the faith which knows that it cannot 
look to Christ for aught, without receiving that and more also. 

But there are times in every life when, all unexpectedly and 
unannounced, there steals into our hearts some rich experience 
of the love and presence of Jesus. It is sent by One who 
forecasts a coming trial, and prepares us to meet it as He did 3 
who gave his Apostles a rich banquet and an evident token 
of his power, ere He thrust them forth with his own hand into 
the very heart of the storm, which was even then gathering 
about the hills. They had been ill-prepared to meet the toils 
of that arduous night, had they not been previously so well fed 
by their Master’s royal bounty. And often amid their perils 
they must have cheered each other by recalling their Master’s 
power. Surely He who brake the loaves into food for thousands 
could hush the storm into.a calm! God sends no crews to sea 
without first provisioning them. The miracle of the feeding of 
the multitudes preceded the terror of the storm. 


II. THE TEACHING OF THE MANNA.—The manna, of course, 
contained all the elements of true bread; but there was this 
peculiarity in it, that it was not produced by any: natural 
process, nor did it grow from the soil of earth : as it is written, 
“He gave them bread from heaven to eat.” How it came, and 
when, no one knew ; but each morning, beneath the hoar frost, 
round about the camp, lay the small round thing which angels 
might have made their food, and which heaven had dropped for 
the sustenance of the chosen hosts. 


Bread from Geaben. 139 


This ts the food to which our Lord specially alludes. For 

_ purity and sweetness and sufficiency, the manna was a fitting 

emblem of Himself; but much more, because it came down, as 
He had done, from heaven (32, 33, 38, 42, 50, 51, 58). 

What a marvellous tribute is here to the heavenly origin 
of man! His nature is fallen and degraded ; but it refuses to 
be satisfied with anything less than that which comes down 
from heaven. Men try to content the hunger of their souls by 
husks from the swine trough and garbage from the dog-kennel, 
but in vain. And the fact that man, of all the living things on 
this earth, fails to find his satisfaction in the products of earth, 
proves that his origin must be sought outside the bounds of the 
earth-sphere. He whose nature craves heavenly food must 
himself be of heavenly origin. And God who made him what 
he is could not fail to provide the nature which He has given 
with the food of its native sphere. 

There was, therefore, special reason why our Lord so 
repeatedly affirmed that He came down from heaven. He was 
something more than a son of man. His body might be an 
earthen vessel, but it held a heavenly treasure. He came down 
from heaven, and in those words lie the glory of his pre-existence, 
and the mystery of his incarnation. He came from God, and 
went to God. Heaven was his home, as, indeed, it had been 
the creation of his power in ae that lie beyond time’s bourne 
or human vision. 


III. LIFE-GIVING THROUGH DEATH.—It is impossible for 
any one illustration to convey all God’s thoughts to us. And 
though bread is only possible through the death of myriads 
of corns of wheat, yet this is not the primary thought which 
bread suggests to us. And, therefore, to emphasize the truth, 
that the power to communicate life can only be acquired 
through death, our Lord speaks of the bread which He would 
give, as fzs flesh, which He would give for the life of the world. 
Obviously flesh is that which has passed through death. 

These are the words that proved so great a stumbling-block 
to some of his disciples. They said it was a hard saying, and 
they would not hear it. It was distasteful to them to hear their 


140 Obe Bread twhich Gihes and Sustains Lite. 


Master speak of an inevitable death, instead of the thrones of 
glory on which they had set their hearts. “From that time 
forth many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with 
Him.” How little did they realize that the crown is only 
reached by the path of the cross, and that the only life which 
can be communicated is that which has passed through the 
grave! There is an evident allusion in these words to that 
approaching death, which was never far from our Saviour’s 
thoughts, the death of propitiation and atonement. But He did 
not fail to see that what He was to suffer would be as the 
breaking of the shrine to let forth the imprisoned spirit of 
life to bless the world. 

Death and resurrection and ascension must precede Pentecost. 
He must first descend, if He would afterwards ascend to fill all 
hearts, all lives, all worlds, with the aroma and power of his 
endless life. The life He had before his death was fair, but not 
communicable ; that which he won in death and its defeat 
is fairer still, and capable of being given to all who hear and 
obey his invitation to come. 

Doubly precious then is that life which He has given, and 
gives in unceasing supplies to those who feed on Him in loving 
lowly trust! It is a life which is death-proof; which has 
passed through Hades unscathed ; which has acquired in the 
ordeal a virtue that renders it unique; and which, whilst it 
deals death to all that is of the flesh, enters us to abide, and to 
lift us to share his glorious life and endless reign. 


IV, THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE BREAD.—How significant 
the lesson of the miracle which served as the text for this 
discourse! It was the Passover at Jerusalem; but He had 
kept a royal Passover on those hillsides, which teemed with 
spiritual significance. To do all things decently and in order 
(10); to begin each meal by giving thanks (11) ; to expect 
something more than the bare necessaries of life at the hands 
of God (11); to guard against waste (12); to learn that giving 
is the true means of increase (13); these and other lessons 
were taught, as the wolds and vales were being carpeted with 
the first sweet green of spring. 


Sharing in the Work af Christ. 141 


But two lessons stood out conspicuously—first, that there was 
enough for all ; and secondly, that the fainting crowds must be 
fed through the ministry of his disciples. ‘He distributed to 
his disciples, and the disciples to them which were set down.” 

In all our Lord’s miracles there is a marvellous economy 
of power. The servants must fill the water-pots with water 
before He makes it wine. Jairus and the mother must give 
their daughter something to eat when the Master has given her 
back to them. Others must roll away the stone, though only 
He can throw the life-giving word into the tomb. So here. 
He used the lad’s loaves and fishes as the basis of the miracle ; 
and, instead of distributing the food by miraculous agency, He 
passed it through the hands of his disciples, giving them a 
memorable share in the joyous work. 

‘Nor is it otherwise to-day. There is enough in our dear 
Lord to meet the demands of all that are in heaven and on the 
earth ; no man, or woman, or child, need go unfed. But if the 
precious Bread of Life, for lack of which men are famishing, is 
to be brought to them, it can only be by our hands, who stand 
around the Lord as a kind of inner circle. Oh, shame on us 
that we are so apt to feed ourselves, neglectful of the cry of the 
perishing ; and that we content ourselves with giving again and 
again to the same few ranks immediately around us, till they 
are surfeited, and the rest left without a crumb! What wonder 
that we cease to enjoy the provisions we misuse ; and that 
they fail before our eyes, leaving no basketfuls of fragments for 
coming days ! 

Say not that your knowledge of Christ is too small and 
fragmentary to be of any avail. Take it to Him; beneath his 
touch a wondrous transformation will ensue ; and, as you give 
away your all, you will find it grow beneath your hand, because 
it has passed from his hand to yours, and the slender provision, 
which threatened to be too little for yourself, shall avail for 
multitudes. 


XxX, 
Obe Words of Jesws. 


“Thou hast the words of eternal life.” —JOHN vi. 68. 





(j-T was a touching question which elicited this reply: 
5, Only the night before it had been proposed by some 
F\\ enthusiastic followers that they should take Him by 
force, and make Him a king. And if our Lord had 
been the mere enthusiast that some men dare to term 

tas Him, and had vacillated for only a moment, the 
standard of revolt had been erected amid the littered fragments 
of the supper, and a movement had been started before which 
the Government of Rome must have trembled. 

But our Lord had no ambition to be a literal successor of 
David and the kings. His kingdom was not of this world. He 
had told the devil so, at the beginning of His ministry ; and now 
He held steadfastly to his plan. In a few moments the revolt 
was quelled. His disciples were forcing their little boat 
towards the other side, beneath frowning skies, and in the teeth 
of a rising storm. And the crowds suddenly missed Him, as 
He sped away towards the mountain heights, for a night of 
fellowship with his Father. 

On those lonely heights He perceived the position in which 
He was placed. He was becoming surrounded by a motley 
crowd, who came to Him for what they could get, and hoped 
that He would serve the fierce passions of their revenge. It 
was needful clearly to undeceive them, and reveal the real 
character of his mission; and this must be done at once— 
to-morrow, though at the cost of his popularity. Henceforth 
his way would be as difficult as that of the tiny craft, which, 


Ghep Prove bis Diviniiy. © 143 


when the moonlight broke out now and again, He could see as 
a black speck on the turbulent waters beneath. 

The following morning, on the further shore, saw a renewal 
of the excitement of the preceding evening. So our Lord 
withdrew into the friendly shelter of a synagogue, and spoke 
the discourse of this chapter, the most deeply spiritual of any 
of his discourses hitherto ; and it changed the whole aspect of 
his career. 

We all know the interest given to the record of a speech by 
the parentheses, which tell us how it was received. And we 
are not left without symptoms of the effect of these searching 
words on the crowds around Him. In the 4Ist verse, the men 
who, a few hours before, wished to crown Him, murmured at 
Him. In the 52nd verse, they strove among themselves. In 
the 60th verse, many of his disciples, as they listened, said, 
“This is a hard saying ; who can hear it?” In the 66th verse, 
many of them went back and walked no more with Him. And 
now, as the shades of evening were beginning to fall, the 
synagogue was almost empty; and the Lord was left alone 
with the little company of the twelve, who had been the sorrow- 
ful witnesses of the shattering of their Master’s popularity, and 
of the fabric of their own ambitions. He looked round on 
them, and put the infinitely pathetic question, “ Will ye also go 
away?” And it elicited from Peter, the ready spokesman of 
the rest, a reply which showed that in those very words, which 
others had felt so startling and terrible, he at least had found 
fuel for that inner fire which the Master had kindled by the 
_ breath of his lips. 

Yes ; the words of Jesus are enough to prove that He is the 
Son of the living God. In their cool depths weary souls bathe ; 
through their pure glow, the dark passages of life are irradiated 
with heavenly lustre; and by their fascination our wayward 
hearts are closely bound to Him who spake as never man 
spake. As He speaks down the long corridors of the ages, his 
words float towards us with undiminished beauty and force ; 
thrilling, soothing, teaching us, and shedding light on God, and 
life, and death, and the world to come. 

His words are gracious.—So the crowds found them, as they 


144 The Words of Jesus. 


listened in breathless silence to his first sermon in his highland 
home (Luke iv. 22). And that tender grace has not passed 
away from them ; as the fragrance exhales from flowers after -- 
they have long been gathered. They still distil as dew on 
tender grass, and drop as rain on mown lawns. Disciple as He 
was in the school of sorrow, He perfectly acquired the art 
of speaking words in season to them that are weary, words that 
heal the broken-hearted, and comfort the mourner, and bid the 
accused go to sin no more. Well may we look up from his 
words, which are as music issuing from an /Zolian harp, into 
his face and say, “Thou art fairer than the children of men, 
grace is poured into thy lips ; therefore God hath blessed Thee 
for ever.” 

fits words are authoritative.—So the people said as they 
broke up into little groups, and went wondering away from the 
mountain of the Beatitudes, when the spell of the speaker’s 
voice was still fresh upon their memories (Matt. vii. 28, 29). He 
did not stay to prove the truth of what He said. That was 
entirely needless, for his words were self-evidencing. They 
were as incapable of demonstration as the axioms of Euclid ; 
but they were as obviously true. The mind of man might not 
have been able to elaborate them for itself; but it instantly 
perceived their truthfulness when presented. Do you try to 
prove that a coin is genuine gold, when it rings? Do you need 
to prove that the strain of music which softly steals through 
Gothic arches is beautiful, when it entrances the listening soul ? 
Do you need to prove that the friend is sincere, when you can 
detect the rhythm of his heart-throbs? And there is less need 
to prove the words of Jesus : the soul knows that what He says 
is true ; it has within itself that which assents to every syllable ; 
from its very base there rises a deep Amen, like the boom 
of the sea-waves in a hollow cavern far below the brink of the 
cliffs. And this constitutes their authority. Their authority is 
not in the reason, but in the soul. 

Fis words make the deepest truths current coin—The world’s 
teachers have hedged themselves about with a narrow circle of 
disciples, leaving the masses to take their chance. The Phari- 
see says that the people which does not know the law are 


hen are Lite. 145 


cursed (vii. 49). Plato says that it is not easy to find the Father 
of all existence ; and when He is found it is impossible to make 
Him known toall. Celsus charges this against Christianity, that 
woollen manufacturers, shoemakers, and curriers had become 
its zealous supporters. But it is the glory of Jesus that He 
disembowelled truth’s deepest mines of their golden ore, and 
minted it into common coin, which He threw in lavish handfuls 
among men. Only when they refused to hear did He hide his 
meaning in dark sentences ; but wherever there was willingness 
to receive, He was prodigal to bestow. Yea, He set Himself to 
enwrap his teachings in the fascinating story, the pithy proverb, 
the sharp antithesis, the methods of speech dear to the crowds 
of every age, never lowering the truth by its dress, but hallowing 
the dress, just as common articles are counted heirlooms 
because once used by the hands of a prince. 

All through his ministry, the common people heard Him 
gladly. The publicans and sinners drew near to hear Him. 
The officers of the Sanhedrim beneath the power of his words 
were unable to arrest Him. Thousands would gather in the 
desert or on the hills, forgetful of all beside, and willing to 
stand the live-long day to listen to lips which dropped with 
honey. His words swayed the multitudes as vines swing in 
the autumn air. 

Fits words are life-—The Master said so Himself, and so did 
his Apostle (63, 68). They gave life as they were spoken in the 
ear of death. Those who were in the graves of sensual and 
sinful indulgence heard Him and came forth ; just as those who 
are in the literal graves of mother earth shall do one day. As 
the tiny torch of life burns in every seed, so does the life of God 
Himself tremble in each word of Jesus. “Cast forth thy word,” 
says Carlyle, ‘into the ever-living, ever-moving universe; it is 
a seed-germ that can never die; unnoticed to-day, it will be 
found flourishing, perhaps as a banyan grove, perhaps as an 
oak-forest, after a thousand years.” How true this is of the 
words of Jesus! Sow them in the scantiest, poorest soil, and 
leave them; you will be surprised to see the result in the 
multiform manifestations of holy and useful life. 


Those who most ponder Christ’s words are most conscious 
K 


146 The Words of Jesus. 


of the life that is in them. They are the best witnesses to 
verify the repeated references of this chapter to the ving 
bread, given for the fe of the world, of which, if a man eats, 
he shall Zve for ever. Oh that each reader would acquire the 
precious habit of feeding on these words, till they become in 
actual enjoyment both spirit and life ! 

They are the words of the Father.—lt is very beautiful to 
notice how constantly our dear Lord refused to take credit for 
his words. He insisted that his doctrine was not his own, but 
his by whom He had been sent (vil. 16). He spake what He 
had heard, and had been taught, and had seen with his Father 
(vill. 26, 28, 38). He said that his Father had given Him a 
commandment as to what He should say and speak, by which 
He was absolutely guided. As the Father said unto Him, so 
He spoke (xii. 49, 50). His word was not his ; but the Father 
who dwelt in Him spoke through his yielded nature (xiv. 24). 
He simply passed on words as they had been given to Himself 
(xvii. 8, 14). 5 

What a condemnation and a lesson are here! The one, that 
we have spoken so many of our own words ; the other, that we 
should henceforth wait more humbly and resolutely on Him, 
not seeking enticing words of man’s wisdom, but waiting for 
the word from his lips, and warning men from Him. 

To whom then shall we go if we leave Him? To Agnosti- 
cism with his negations? to Ritualism with its outward pomp? 
to the religions of the world, which are waning in the lands of 
their birth, because no longer able to satisfy the cravings of 
men? To turn to these would be to leave the fountain of living 
crystal for the broken cisterns, which, at the best, can hold but 
a few drops of brackish rain-water. No; we will not go away, 
but only ask that He would still speak to us the words of 
eternal life. 


X XI. 
Rivers of Libing Water. 


“Tf any man thirst, let him come unto Me and drink. He that believeth 
on Me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living 
water. But this spake He of the Spirit which they that believe on Him 
should receive.""—JOHN vii. 37-39. 


HAT music there is in these words! We are 
transported to the banks of a mighty river, down 
the bed of which the waters are ever hurrying to 
the sea. There is very little sound. The great 
Z volume of water moves majestically and silently 

ache f onward, with now and again a musical ripple on 

its broad and waveless bosom. Flowing from mountain ranges 

where melting snows feed its springs; replenished from a 

hundred rills leaping the crags in a veil of mist; purified 

by being torn and combed in its rush over many a cataract— 
that river is the perpetual emblem of fertility, freshness, abun- 
dance, and sufficiency of supply. 

But this is not all. The Lord is not content with speaking of 
ariver. He speaks of rivers. It is as if He bade us add the 
Missouri to the Mississippi, and to these the Amazon, and to 
these the Orinoco, and to these the Ganges, and the Danube. 
River added to river; stream to stream; torrent to torrent ; 
and a// to set forth the freshness and the abundance of the life 
that should stream from each thirsty soul, who, having come to 
Him, the Rock, should in turn become a yock; and, having 
received out of his fulness, should pass it on to a drought- 
smitten world. 

Do you, my reader, know anything of this? Is your life 
comparable to a river, nay, to many rivers of holy influence? 
In the first place, do you know what it is to be satisfied? and in 





148 —-Ribers of Libing Water. 


the second place, do you know what it is to communicate to 
others what you are receiving from the risen Lord? — If not, are 
you not living below your privileges, and would it not be wise 
to do what the present writer did on one memorable occasion— 
put your finger on these words, and claim that, in all their 
heights, and depths, and widths, and lengths .of meaning, they 
should be realized? The world would soon cease to be thirsty 
if only each believer were to become like one of the ancient 
rivers of Paradise, which was parted into four heads. 


I. THE SPEAKER.—To look at, there was nothing specially 
remarkable. Very meek and lowly was the King, clad in the 
simple homespun of the country, perhaps not knowing where 
He would sleep that very night. Often hungry, because the 
money was exhausted in the wallet, and thirsty beneath that 
hot Syrian sun. And yet He speaks of Himself as able to 
quench the thirst of men, from Himself. 

It would seem as if He overleapt the intervening weeks, and 
thought of Himself as already back in his Father’s glory, 
glorified and sitting-on that throne from which the river of the 
water of life is ever descending to refresh and save. That 
river is Himself. 

Christ is Christianity. In this He differs from all other 
teachers. They talk about truth, and set themselves to invent 
vast systems of philosophy which men must master. But our 
Lord has one ‘panacea for all woes, all needs, all the infinite 
want of the spirit—and it is Himself. He stood and cried, as 
if the urgency of his spirit would brook no further restraint, 
“If any man thirst, let him come unto Ze and drink. He 
that believeth on JZe...” 

Do we always believe this? We are conscious of almost 
infinite needs ; we thirst and pine for happiness, for rest, for 
peace, for that indefinable satisfaction which seems so perfectly 
set forth in the sweet, deep word Jove; we turn from side 
to side for an answer ; for a moment we think we have found it, 
as we see not far away some rock-hewn cistern, and make for 
it, only to find that it is broken and will hold no water. Human 
love fails to quench our thirst, though we drink deeply and 


“$f any Thirst.” 149 


widely of its stores. But Jesus is all-sufficient. Rutherford’s 
most rapturous words never told a thousandth part of all-His 
sufficiency and fulness. 

He is the Sun ; the-heart that has learnt the art of basking 
in His beams may live without human love. He is the Ocean ; 
the life which is open to his fulness is preserved from ebb 
or fluctuation, and is independent of passing showers, with 
their pattering raindrops. He is the Man; the Man of men, 
in whom all the strength of the strong and.the sweetness 
of the lovable dwell in unstinted and infinite abundance : and 
the nature which has acquired the habit of living in union with 
Him can exist amid the failure and disappointment of all 
earthly friendships. All the fulness of God-head is in his vast 
and multitudinous nature. 

Worlds cannot satisfy souls, any more than cart-loads of earth 
could fill the mouth of the Amazon. Alexander, the conqueror 
of the world, weeps with discontent, because there is nothing 
left to conquer. But Christ is always a brimming river; nay, a 
fountain whose drops are oceans, and whose jets are rivers ; 
and whosoever will bare the soul to Him again and again, not 
trying to feel satisfied, but trusting for satisfaction, will find 
longings subside, the ache of disappointment anodyned, the 
fever-thirst slaked. Try it, O brother man ! 

II. THE INVITATION.—“ If any thirst.” “Any!” Those 
who are grimed with sin. “Any!” Those who have no claim 
but their exceeding need. “Any!” Those whom all the world 
and the Church spurn.. “Any!” Publicans and sinners ; 
outcasts and dying malefactors ; persecutors and procrastinators. 
Richard Baxter used to say that, if his name had stood on this 
page, he would have feared that it referred to some other who 
bore it; but, since the Lord said amy, he knew that even 
he was welcome. The one and only qualification is ¢hzrs?. 

Coming to Him is believing on Him. It is the touch of 
the soul and the Saviour. It is contact; the opening of the 
inner life to his entrance; the willingness to be possessed ; 
the clinging to Him, as the drowning sailor to the out- 
stretched hand or floating spar. -With no emotion, or effort at 


150: Ribers of Libing Water. — 


self-improvement, or endeavour to adjust the circumstances of 
the outward life, lift your eyes from this page to Him and say, 
“OQ Lamb of God, I come!” And instantly you are at the land 
whither you go. As you come on the earth side, He comes on 
the heaven side ; you go to the utmost bourne of the visible, 
He comes to the same spot from the bourne of the invisible ; 
and on the borderland you meet Him. Perhaps it were true to 
say that his arrival there is the attraction which, without your 
realizing it, draws you to arise and go forth to Him. The sun 
attracts sparks ; the earth, asteroids ; the ocean, rivers ; and 
Jesus, souls. To answer that attraction, however feebly, is to 
come 


Ill, THE SuppLy.—“ This spake He of the Spirit, which 
they that believe on Him should receive.” During his earthly 
life, our Lord supplied so far as possible what each disciple 
needed by his personal care and oversight. He knew each 
sheep by name; anticipated by prayerful sympathy the tempta- 
tions of each; and sought to supply the need of each out of 
his royal bounty. But even then, as an external presence, He 
was not able to meet and satisfy the inner restlessness and 
craving of their hearts. How much less could He do it for 
them, or for us, when He became invisible and exalted to the 
right hand of power! But this lack is more than compensated 
for by the gift of the Holy Spirit. 

When Jesus ascended He received of the Father the promise 
of the Holy Spirit. And then a new era broke on the world. 
Before the Ascension, the Spirit of God had rested upon men, 
fitting them for service ; henceforth He was to be zz them. 
This is the glory of our present dispensation. the crown of 
redemption, the climax of our Saviour’s work. “He abideth 
with you, and shad/ be 7m you” (John xiv. 16, 17). 

In Regeneration the Holy Spirit does literally indwell the 
believer. His life may be stunted, dwarfed, repressed, as 
plants in a sickly atmosphere, and as streams choked with the 
débris brought down from the hills ; but it can never again be 
lost. “He abides for ever.” But what does He bring, save 
the life of Jesus? These two are identical. When we are 


Receibing the Bolu Spirit. 151 


strengthened with might by the Spirit in the inner man, Christ 
dwells in our hearts by faith. If the Spirit of Christ be in us, 
Christ Himself is in us. It is a mistake to dissever these two. 
They are one. 

This, then, is the sum of the whole matter. When weary, 
thirsty souls go to Jesus, He gives them instant relief, by giving 
them his Holy Spirit ; and in that most blessed of all gifts, He 
Himself glides into the eager nature. He does not strive nor 
cry; there is no sound as of a rushing storm of wind, no 
coronet of flame ; whilst men are watching at the front door to 
welcome Him with blare of trumpet, He steals in at the rear, 
unnoticed ; but, in any case, He suddenly comes to his temple, 
and sits in its inner shrine as a refiner and purifier of the sons 
of Levi. Jesus Himself is the supply of our spirits, through the 
Holy Ghost, whom He gives to be within us and with us for 
ever. 


IV. CONDITIONS OF RECEIVING THE HOLy Spirit.—He 
was not given to be an indwelling life till Jesus was glo- 
rified :— 

Because the expiation of sins must precede our reception of the 
new life-—We must be Justified before we can be sanctified. 
The prodigal must be reconciled with his father before he can 
sit at the table arrayed in festal robes, and admitted to the 
highest privileges that the home can yield. The second Adam 
must undo the results of the sin of the first Adam before He 
may give to his posterity the most priceless gift of heaven. 

Because the power to give the Spirit could only be the reward 
of accomplished service.—\t was only when our Lord had 
positively regained his Father’s throne, standing where He did 
ere He started forth to the work of our redemption, that He 
had really finished the work which had been entrusted Him to 
do. And it was only then, when not only the Atonement of 
Calvary, but the Resurrection, the teachings of the forty days, 
and the Ascension leading captivity captive, had been accom- 
plished, that He was able to claim the perfected reward which 
had glittered before his eyes amid the shame and sorrow of the 
cross. 


152 Ribers of Libing Water. 


Because the glory of the Lord Jesus must be perfected ere it 
could be communicated—There is a sense in which, as the 
Second Person of the Holy Trinity, our Lord had all glory, 
underived, inexhaustible, and unchanging. But we are speak- 
ing of Him now as the wondrous Being who has taken human 
nature into eternal union with the Divine; who has, so to 
speak, created in death and resurrection a new unit of being in 
the-universe of God ; who has learned obedience by the things 
that He suffered, that He might be perfectly qualified to be a 
Priest. And it is surely right and true to affirm that, though, 
as regards Himself, there was nothing to desire, nothing to 
add; yet, as regards his office and the communication of his 
glorified life to others, He could not become all that He 
needed to be, and is, except through death and resurrection 
and ascension. But so soon as these were accomplished, He 
was able, as the perfected second Adam, to bestow his crowned 
and victorious life on men, and instantly the Spirit was given. 
The Spirit of Christ came to bring the life of Christ into our 
hearts; but He could not do it till that life was perfected in 
ascension glory. This done, the Spirit came. 


There are some practical suggestions here for those who are 
longing for the Holy Spirit’s fulness. 


(1) Exercise faith in the Lord Jesus.—Do not concentrate 
your thoughts on the Blessed Comforter ; but on Him who is 
exalted to bestow Him, and who constantly says, “I will send 
Him,” “TI will give Him to you.” To receive the Spirit, we 
must believe in Jesus ; that is, we must open our entire being 
to Him, expectant and believing. 


(2) Remember that, tf you believe, you have received the 
Spirit.—“The Spirit which they that believe on Him should 
receive.” You could not believe or call Jesus Lord, but by the 
Holy Spirit; and ever since you did these things, He has 
been within you. Do not then ask for a new blessing ; but for 
more of that which you already have. Remove the silt and 
rubbish which have occupied his place. Put away the sins 
which have grieved Him. Deny self which has crowded 
Him out ot your life. Keep your soul in an eager believing 


The Reign of Jesus. 153 


attitude towards Jesus, and He will flood you with wave on 
wave.of spiritual power. 

(3). Let the Lord Jesus occupy the place where God has set 
Him —the throne.—The glory of Jesus is ever connected in 
Scripture with the reign of Jesus. There must be an ascension 
and an enthronement within ; all things must be put under his 
feet ; principalities and powers must own his sway ; and when 
we glorify Jesus in our hearts and lives, setting Him on the 
throne, then the Spirit fills us with successive waves of 
power. 


XXII. 
The Penitent’s Gospel. 


‘‘And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no 
more.” —JOHN viii. 11. : 


A(HIS passage has been the subject of more eager 
debate than any other in the Gospels. It is omitted 
by many ancient MSS.; it is rejected by several 
of the Fathers ; it bears in its fabric, in the original, 
traces of the tremendous storm through which it has 
passed. And yet there is no possibility of accounting 
far its existence, save on the supposition that the incident 
really took place. It reveals in our Saviour’s character a 
wisdom so profound, a tenderness to sinners so delicate, a 
hatred of sin so intense, an insight into human hearts so ~ 
searching, that it is impossible to suppose the mind of man 
could have conceived, or the hand of man invented, this most 
pathetic story. 

Our Lord, who had spent the night on the Mount of Olives, 
re-crossed the Kedron, and entered the Temple, probably as 
one of the first worshippers. When a sufficient number had 
gathered, He withdrew to a seat against the Treasury wall ; and 
sitting down, began to teach the expectant people. 

He had not proceeded far in’ his discourse, when a band of 
scribes and Pharisees, adorned with their customary badges of 
sanctity, and bringing in their midst one who had been guilty 
of flagrant sin, was seen approaching across the Temple square. 
Making their way through the opening crowd, they placed 
their trembling, shrinking prisoner before Him, and intimated 
that they had come there early for his opinion. 





Dealing with Sin. 155 


Immorality at_that time had reached such a pitch, that the 
laws of Moses had fallen into disuse, for the very reason that 
it is impossible to legislate in advance of public opinion. _ If 
He confirmed the Mosaic sentence, and insisted on its execu- 
tion, they would accuse Him to the people as a relentless 
censor, desirous of reviving the penalties of primitive Judaism. 
If He refused to confirm it, they could put Him to death, as an 
assailant of God’s law. It seemed impossible for Him to show 
that tender pity to sinners, which had marked his whole career, 
and which had placed a publican among his chosen friends, 
whilst at the same time He maintained the sanctity of the 
ancient code. It was a shameful plot ; and some have thought 
that He stooped down to write on the ground to conceal the 
burning shame and holy indignation that leaped to’ his face. 


The accusers stood there unabashed, holding the woman in 
their midst, and pressing their brutal question. They may 
have thought, indeed, that his very silence proved Him to be 
caught in an inextricable dilemma. But their triumph did not 
last long, for the Saviour raised Himself up, and spake a word 
which fell in their midst like a bolt from a clear sky: “ Let 
him that is without sin among you cast the first stone at her.” 
In a moment memory and conscience began to work, and at 
length the oldest man drew back in the crowd and vanished ; 
then the next, and the next, one by one, till the last was gone. 
And Jesus was left alone with the woman; not alone in the 
sense of there being no one else present, but that there was no 
one save the woman left of all who had broken in on his 
blessed presence ‘ Woman,” said He, turning on her those 
searching, tender eyes, “hath no man condemned thee?” 
She said unto Him, “No man, Lord.” Then said Jesus, 
“ Neither do I condemn thee ; go, and sin no more.” 


There are three ways of dealing with sin. 


I. THE SINNER’S WAY OF TREATING SIN. —It is a terrible 
thing for a sinner to fall into the hands of his fellow sinners. 
Sin blinds them to their own faults, but sharpens them to 
detect the faults of others. They cover themselves beneath 


156 The Penitent’s Gospel. 


the glistening robes of fair excuses, but ruthlessly strip them 
away from the offenders whom they drag into the light 
of day. 

What a terrible spectacle is here! There is not one of these 
men who can plead his freedom from this very sin. As they 
drag this woman forward, each one remembers scenes in the 
past in which he played a leading part, and which strangely 
resemble this, with the single exception of not having been 
found out, or of having been condoned. But they have no 
burning shame in the presence of their sin; no pity for the 
sinner; no jealousy for the honour of God; no apparent 
desire to bring back the wanderer. To them the incident 
is simply a test-case, suggesting curious speculations, and 
affording a convenient net for entrapping the steps of Him 
whom they hated as darkness ever hates the day. They take a 
prurient pleasure in enumerating all the details—“in the very 
act.” They hold the sinner up as a public spectacle—“ setting 
her in the midst.” They: leave her to her fate. 

There is little hope for the sinner at hands like these. They 
may send him to the judge and the officer ; to the gaol or the 
reformatory. They may make the case one for light gossip and 
casuistical distinctions, studying it as an anatomical deformity. 
They may proudly gather up the robes of their virtuous horror 
as they sweep past. But there is no attempt to measure 

“the anguish of the sin-stained heart, or the suffering which 
burns the heart of the Saviour. And the sinner is presently 
dropped as a curious specimen, when its special peculiarities 
have been duly examined and entered in a book. Ah, how 
many there are around us who had never come to what they 
are, had they not béen driven to it by the way in which the 
religious people around them dealt with their first deviation 
from the paths of strict integrity! The first wandering steps 
were eagerly watched, not with the view of following and 
reclaiming the erring one, but for purposes of gossip or fault- 
finding. The special features of the sin were eagerly noted and 
discussed, whi st any palliating excuses were repressed. The 
sudden silence, the averted looks, the chilling, cutting manner, 
branded the sin as unpardonable; shut the door upon 


Gbhe Lat and the Saviour. 157 


repentance ; and plunged the sinner into deeper and more 
_abundant transgression. 

Would that each of us would lock the story of another’s guilt 
in some deep chamber of the heart, until floods of tears 
had been shed and abundant prayers offered ; and, if mentioned 
ever to others, only told with the view of securing their co- 
operation in winning back the stray sheep to the green pastures 
and still waters of the fold. The world is full of sinners who 
are plunging into deeper sin, because they have been taught by 
their more religious fellows that there is no hope for such as 
they are. But they might be saved if they could only be freed 
from the religious world and left alone with Jesus. 


II. THE LAaw’s Way OF TREATING Sin.—“ Moses said that 
such an one should be stoned.” It is with the moral, as with 
natural law —the least violation of its provisions is immediately 
and terribly avenged. It may be the first offence, or a very 
slight one, or one the commission of which was followed by 
floods of tears and an agony of remorse; but the law at once 
lifts its heavy arm to smite. Its executioner is commissioned 
to do his work ; and the offender falls beneath its curse and 
penalty. 

The function of the law is twofold. First it has to reveal our 
need of salvation ; to hold up the looking-glass that we may go 
for soap ; to convince us of our disease that we may hasten for 
the physician ; to make us feel the badness of our best till we 
are shut up to Christ. Next, it has to smite, and scourge, and 
punish us, when we go aside from the narrow thread-like path 
of perfect goodness. ‘The sinner, therefore, has no hope as he 
stands beneath Mount Sinai. He cannot climb those cliffs. 
Nay, he is smitten down by the pieces of the broken tables 
as they leap downwards from crag to crag. And Moses, with 
one blow of his fist, so Bunyan tells us, completes the work. 


III. THE Saviour’s Way OF TREATING SIN.—In that 
bowed head and hidden face we get a slight indication of how 
much it costs Him. Sin cannot change his royal heart, or 
- staunch his pity, or freeze the fountains of his compassion. 


158 The Penitent’s Gospel. 


Nay, it makes Him more careful to show his tender, pitying, 
pleading love. Was it not to Peter that He sent a special 
message from the open grave, on the resurrection morning? 
But though sin cannot alter Him, it makes Him suffer keenly, 
bitterly. 

Have you not seen a woman dying by inches beneath the 
dissolute conduct of her son? She does not murmur, or chide, 
or blaze abroad his sins. No other hand than hers shall open 
that front door to him, as he comes home drunk night after 
night. And he never hears an upbraiding word from those 
gentle lips. But God alone can measure what those acts of sin 
are costing her. Her figure becomes more bent, her hair more 
white, her steps slower, her heart feebler. And shall woman’s 
love suffer thus, and shall not the Saviour suffer as much more, 
as his love is more than hers? It is easy for us to come 
to Him for forgiveness, and to go our ways knowing that the 
words of complete absolution have been uttered; but do 
we think enough how much that sin, so soon confessed and put 
away, cost Him on the cross, costs Him now, and will cost 
Him, as the scar of it is borne by Him, “ crucified afresh ” ? 

The early Church was inclined to suppress this story, lest it 
might lead to sin. They did not realize how that averted face 
would make men bow their heads in shame, and beat upon 
their breasts ; not for themselves alone, and not because of any 
thought of penalty, but because they had torn open his 
wounds, and woven again thorns for his brow. _We go forth 
from that vision, by his grace, to sin no more. 

He sometimes. seems to wait ere He utters the words of 
peace. But this is from no tardiness in his love. He wants 
those ruthless accusers to drop away, and the soul to have time 
to realize its sin in his holy presence. And when all hope 
beside is abandoned, and the hour of self-despair has struck ; 
when He can detect signs of genuine repentance and wistful 
yearning ; when the soul turns from its sin to Him in a very 
agony of desire— He says, “ There is now no condemnation ; 
neither do I condemn thee ; go, and sin no more.” 

Oh, souls conscious of sin, do not wait to be brought into 
his holy presence! haste thither of your own free will. It is 


“He will Forgibe thee.” 159 


the only place in all the universe where you will be safe. 
Accusing voices are hushed there, and accusing forms are 
banished. Wait! He will condemn thy sin, but not thee. 
And his condemnation will be more in what He looks and is 
than in his words. Yea, thou wilt accuse thyself a thousand 
times more than He will. And finally, by right of the - 
propitiation of the cross, He will forgive thee, and send thee 
forth to tell others the story of a love which fails not, nor is 
discouraged, in its conflict with human sin ; but sets itself to 
substitute for the reign of sin the reign of grace through 
righteousness unto eternal life. 


XXIII. 
he Hight of tte. 


“JT am the Light of the world: he that followeth Me shall not walk in 
darkness, but shall have the light of life.’ —JOHN viii. 12. 


a N either side of the temple court stood a huge golden 
candelabra. On the first and on each succeeding 
night of the week of the Feast of Tabernacles, these 
were lit, and became two immense globes of flame, 
pouring a brilliant flood of light over temple and city 
and the deep shadows of Olivet. And it was prob- 
ably to these that our Lord alluded, when He spoke of Himself 
as the Light of the world. 

Of course it would be quite legitimate to compare Him to 
the glorious orb of day, “of this great universe the eye and 
soul.” What the sun is to the world of nature, Jesus is in the 
world of the invisible and spiritual. By Him all things consist 
in harmonious rhythm and order. From Him come all tides 
of life and beauty, which go to make us truly blessed. And 
his influence is exerted so noiselessly and quietly, that we can 
only compare it to those waves of transparent beauty, which 
break in their untainted loveliness on the world around ; but 
no ear catches the music of their ripple or the throb of their 
tides. However, it will be better to turn away from this seduc- 
tive comparison, in order to apprehend exactly what was in his 
heart when He said, “I am the Light of the world.” 

The Feast of Tabernacles commemorated the march of the 
pilgrim hosts through the desert, fed by manna for their food ; 
supplied with water from the smitten rock for their thirst ; 
guided by a pillar of cloud which had at its heart a torch of 
fire, though this was only apparent when night had veiled the 





The Pillar of Clond and of Fire. 161 


glaring light of the sun, and it brooded tranquilly over the 
camp. Our Lord compared Himself to the first of these 
symbols in the sixth chapter; to the second in the seventh: 
and to the third in this. He declares that to all the pilgrim 
hosts of men, He is what the cloud with its heart of fire was 
to that race of desert wanderers. 


Let us form a clear conception of that wondrous symbol, 
which God took not away from his people ; the pillar of cloud, 
in which He went before them by day to lead them in the way, 
and the pillar of fire to give them light, to go by day and night 
(Exod. xili..21 ; Num. ix. 15-23). 


I. AS TO ITs NATURE.—In appearance it was probably like 
one of those white cumulus clouds which sail majestically and 
slowly through the blue of a summer sky ; like some aerial snow 
mountain, which is to the heavens what the iceberg is to the 
seas. We have seen such in the process of being manufactured 
from the mists that le low at morning in Alpine valleys ; 
and at night we have watched them as they came to anchor, or 
were stranded on some rocky peak. The one point of difference 
lay in the Shekinah fire that shone in the heart of the pillar of 
cloud. It was always there, though only visible when daylight 
was gone. But that fire in the heart of the cloud was prophetic 
of our Lord’s Deity, enfolded and enshrined in his humanity. 
The Word was made flesh and tabernacled among men, who 
knew not what He was, save when on the night of the Trans- 
figuration the glory that dwelt in Him became evident, bathing 
his form in waves of light and fire. 


And it was his consciousness of this marvellous union of the 
Divine and human elements, though the Divine was so carefully 
and constantly veiled from ordinary eyes, that enabled our 
Lord to speak of Himself as the source of spiritual illumination 
to all the inhabitants of this million-peopled world. There was 
no egotism, or self-assumption in his claim. It was the literal 
truth. He bare record of Himself, because He could say 
nothing less; and He knew whence He came and whither 


He went. 
L 


162 Che Hight of Mtfe. 


And there is a consistency between his claims and his powers 
which has stopped the mouth of objectors and critics. Though 
this assertion has stood upon the page of Scripture for eighteen 
hundred years, in a world quick to detect conceit and expose its 
hollow pretensions ; yet no infidel has ever thought of assailing 
Him in this, which is the weakest and absurdest assertion ever 
made, if it be not the deepest, truest, and most sacred. Is there 
not a secret conviction in the heart of men that Jesus is well 
‘able to be this which He professes to be? Does not his 
universal influence—which is confined to no one type of man, 
but touches equally European and Asiatic, the shivering Esqui- 
maux, and the enervated South Sea Islander—prove that He is 
more than man, and that in his human nature there burns the 
fire of Deity? Nay, as the darkness has grown thicker over 
the world, and one light after another has died out, leaving 
Him shining in brilliant and glorious loneliness, has there not 
been abundant witness borne to the fire which is in the heart 
of the cloud: 

Yes, Jesus is God; in Him the fulness of the Godhead 
dwells bodily, and it is because of this that He is able to light 
and guide the generations of mankind. The Life has ever 
been the Light of men. Not to believe that degrades the 
character of Christ below contempt, and leaves us face to face 
with an insoluble problem of how to account for his influence 
upon the world. 


II. AS To 1TSs FUNCTIONS.—The work of the fire-cloud was 
threefold—to lead, to shield, and to illumine. - 

It led. The wilderness was a trackless waste to the hosts of 
Israel, and they were absolutely dependent on the cloud to. 
show their path, and to find out a resting-place each night. 
On this point the Divine commands admitted of no doubt or 
question. When the cloud gathered itself up from the Taber- 
nacle‘on which it brooded, the hosts must strike their tents and 
follow. \lowever desirable the site of the camp, they must 
leave it. However difficult the desert paths, they must traverse 
them. However uninviting the spot where it stopped, they 
must halt there, and remain just so long as it tarried. 


“Gbe Lord God gabe them Light.” 163 


It might be a Marah, without palms, or wells, or shelter ; 
but thither they must go, and there they must remain, though 
many days should elapse. It might be an Elim, with palms 
and wells of water, and everything that could render a 
residence desirable to the tired travellers ; but they must be- 
gone from it when the cloud started, though they had enjoyed 
it for but a brief spell. The cloud might be taken up by day or 
by night ; but there was no choice, except to follow, or to 
wander in a trackless waste and die. For the manna fell and 
the water flowed, and the Divine protection was enjoyed, only 
where the cloud rested. 

It shielded.—F¥ or, probably, when the people had pitched 
their tents on some exposed and scorched plain, it unfolded 
itself like a vast canopy, its base resting on the Tabernacle 
which stood in the midst of the camp, whilst its fleecy folds 
were spread out so as to screen the furthest extremities of the 
camp from the overpowering heat of the noontide sun. 

It gave light—Whilst the camp was hushed in deep slumber 
it watched over it like the eye of God. The people had no 
need of the sun by day, or of the moon by night; for the 
Lord had become their everlasting Light, and the days of their 
mourning might have been ended. There was a sense in 
which there was no night there, and they needed not candle or 
beacon-fire or torch; for the Lord God gave them light. 
Following the cloud, they had no need to abide in darkness ; 
they already possessed the light of life. 

All this the Lord Jesus is willing to be to us. In Him all the 
fulness dwells. In his many-sided nature God has made all 
grace to abound, that we, having all-sufficiency in all things, 
should be abundantly filled and satisfied out of Him. In days 
of doubt He will be our Guide ; in days of trial our Covert and 
Shade ; in days of darkness our Light. Nay more, as in the 
Pullman carriage the electric light comes on before the tunnel 
is entered and lingers after it is left, so special manifestations of 
the presence of Jesus will precede and follow times of special 
trial. 

The peace and blessedness of our earthly pilgrimage will be 
in direct proportion as we appropriate Jesus in these various 


164 The Light of Hite. 


aspects of his character and work. Too many of us reserve 
Him for special times and purposes, as we keep our capital 
sacredly sealed from use in the bank; too few of us use Him 
as the spending money which we carry in our pockets and 
employ for every trifling need. 

The needs and trials of life are probably intended by God 
to compel us to search for and discover the fulness of Jesus. 
It is probable that men would never have discovered the 
treasures of the natural world had it not been for the pressure 
of hunger and want; and it is certain that many of us had 
never known what the Lord Jesus can be to the human soul 
but for the failure of everything beside, which drove us to Him. 
Our Father sometimes gives us a glimpse of perfect bliss 
through some earthly channel; and then as suddenly closes 
it up, that we may be forced to take the freshly realized thirst 
to the only fountain which can really appease it. 

When we first enter the kingdom, God gives us a whole 
Christ for the supply of our infinite requirements ; but at first 
we catch only a glimpse of the lower shelves of his Divine 
sufficiency, and perhaps suppose that they are all. But as we 
help ourselves to these and grow, the veil slowly uplifts, and 
we see other and higher shelves; and gradually our faith 
becomes stronger, and taller, and more able to help itself to 
the added wealth which it perceives to be its own in Christ 
Jesus. 

There is no need for us then to spend our lives in this world, 
desolate and forlorn, lacking the blessedness and power which 
others so evidently possess, and bemoaning the barrenness of 
our lot; there, right before us, is Jesus in all his glorious 
fulness, waiting to take the shape of our need, as water of the 
pitcher that carries it. It is for us to claim Him, and make 
ours by faith any special side of his being which our circum- 
stances specially demand as necessary. When we have learnt 
this lesson, we can look with equanimity on frost and thaw, on 
autumn and winter, on the dying Cherith and the blighted 
grain ; our sources of supply lie far away in the nature of God, 
who is the perennial fountain, the unwaning day, the unending 
summer of love. The differences which obtain among Christian 


Following Christ. 165 


men are very largely due to the different ratio in which they 
have learnt to appropriate Christ—not by a rush of emotion, 
but by a naked faith. Rutherford said truly, “There are 
curtains to be drawn aside in Christ that we never saw, of new 
foldings of love in Him; I despair that ever I shall win to the 
far end of that love, there are so many plies in it.” 


III. As TO THE CONDITIONS.“ He that followeth Me....” 
We must put Christ first. He must hold the position of Leader 
and Guide, Primate and King. Our one question must ever be, 
Which way is He taking? and we may generally ascertain this 
as we endeavour to answer one of the following questions : (1) 
What is the law of Christ? (2) What is the will of Christ? 
(3) What would Christ do under these circumstances? If we 
are not sure, we must wait till we are; but knowing, we must 
follow at all costs. Oh to keep just behind Him—not running” 
on in front, or lagging behind! They say that lambs are 
taught to follow at the heels of a shepherd, by his dropping for 
them savoury morsels, such as they like ; and we may well 
follow hard after Him whom we love, and who loves us, upheld 
by his right hand, because of the inestimable benefits which 
will accrue. 

We cannot follow Jesus except we leave all—our own 
judgment and wisdom, our schemes and preferences, our 
predilections and fancies ; but if we dare to forsake them, and 
step right away from the boat, we shall win an abundant 
compensation. Was Paul a loser, who suffered the loss of all 
things that he might win Christ ? 

Follow Jesus, Christian ! keep Him always well before thee 
in every path of duty ; in every sphere of service; in every 
attack, like Jonathan’s, on the stronghold of the foe. Tread no 
track where his footprints do not appear. But when thou 
descriest them, plant in them thy feet, defying aught to 
separate thee from Him. 

Shall not walk in darkness—Not in the darkness of 
ignorance and error ;. not in the darkness of perplexity and 
confusion ; not in the darkness of joylessness and depression. 
If any man dares to follow Christ so far as he knows, 


166 The Hight of Lite. 


deliberately sacrificing his own will and way to his, it is simply 
marvellous how the mists will roll up, the night clouds disperse, 
and the perplexities which had beset the soul give way as 
brushwood before the tread of the sportsman. Endeavour to 
please Christ absolutely ; and you will know almost immediately 
what He wants to be done, and how. You may not be able to 
see more than a step in advance ; but dare to take that step, 
and you will see the next and the next. “If thine eye be single, 
thy whole body shall be full of light.” 

But shall have the light of life.—Light is essential to life. 
Without light flowers would be colourless, even if they grew ; 
animate and inanimate creation would fail; and the world 
would hasten back to primeval chaos, out of which light came. 
And equally necessary is it for the inner life to be sustained 
and nourished by communion with, and obedience to, the Lord 
Jesus. Apart from Him it is doomed to wither. In Him, 
through Him, and by Him alone, can it thrive. There is 
no doubt about this. Begin even now to believe in and follow 
Him, though it may involve death and the grave; yet, as 
surely as the soul follows Him, acting up to all its present 
convictions of duty, it will emerge into a clearness of vision and 
a vigour of life which shall vindicate its choice for ever. Let 
Jesus be your pillar of cloud and fire ! 


XXIV. 
Christ’s Absorption in His Father. 


‘When ye have lifted up the Son of Man, then shall ye know that I am 
He, and that I do nothing of Myself; but as my Father hath taught Me, | 
speak these things.” —JOHN viii. 28. 


BELOVED friend of mine told me that on one occa- 
sion he met an aged lady, a member of the Society 
He): Of Friends, who in her earlier life had known Stephen 
estor Grellet ; and he asked her if that notable evangelist 
woe were as good and noble as he is depicted in his 
“SGA biography. This was her reply: “We have many 
excellent Friends, but no Friend like Stephen Grellet; when 
he came into a room you felt that he brought God in with 
him.” 

And is not this the distinguishing characteristic of some men, 
who are perhaps notable for nothing else? Of others we say, 
How splendid! How noble! How good! Of these we say, 
How much there is of God in such an one! That was a great 
saying of the Apostle, ‘They magnified God in me.” And we 
should not be content with anything less than the ideal set 
before us by our Lord: “Let your light so shine before men, 
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father 
which is in heaven.” 

And this was one of our Lord’s most striking characteristics. 
His whole being was absorbed in acquiring glory for his Father, 
and in pleasing Him. At the age of twelve He started to do 
his Father’s business. At the Jordan He submitted to baptism 
that He might fulfil his Father’s plan. At the well of Sychar 
He confessed that to do his Father’s will was both meat and 
drink. He called all those his kinsfolk who set themselves to 





168 Christ’s Absorption in His Father. 


do the will of his Father.. The only witness He cared for was 
that which his Father bore to Him (v. 32; vill. 18). The name 
in which He came was the Father’s (v. 43). He professed that 
all the attraction wrought by Him upon men was due to his 
Father’s agency (vi. 44). He was sent by the Father; He lived 
by the Father; He could do nothing of Himself; the life He 
had was given, so also was the authority with which He 
executed judgment (v. 26, 27; vi. 57). He spoke only as the 
Father taught Him (viii. 28). He could dispense with all 
human help, because the Father never left Him alone (viii. 
16, 29). To honour Him, to please Him, to work his works, to 
live in his love, to perform his commandments, to show good 
works from Him, to glorify his name, to divert the attention of 
men to Him—such was the passion of his life (vill. 29, 49 ; 
ix. 43 X. I7, 323 xil. 49, 50; xiii. 31). He ascribed both words 
and works to the indwelling of the Father (xiv. 10). He avowed 
his intention to answer prayer that the Father might be glorified 
(xiv. 13). And, as his hour approached when He must pass 
through death to glory, from the lowest of the one to the 
highest of the other, He only wished for glory that He might 
shed it back again on Him; “Father,” said He, “glorify thy 
Son, that thy Son also may glorify Thee” (John xvii. 1). And 
im the ages yet to be we are told that He will deliver up the 
kingdom to God, even the Father, that God may be all in all 
(1 Cor. xv. 24). 

There is much for us to learn here. We choose for ourselves 
aims and ends too subsidiary, too low. The conversion of the 
unsaved, the building up of the Church, the extension of the 
kingdom of God, are in themselves worthy and glorious 
objects ; but they are not the very highest. They do not 
include it, though it includes them; as the planet does not 
include the sun, but the sun it. ‘Aim at the planet, you miss 
the sun; aim at the sun, and you include the planet. There is 
a purpose, foreshadowed in the life of Jesus, the sweep of 
which is so wide, the march of which is so majestic, the depth 
of which is so infinite, as to comprehend all other motives, and 
to be worthy of an endeavour which, though we approach 
towards it through infinite ages, must yet for ever be far 


“Of wo Reputation.” 169 


beyond us. And this is the intention, that God may be pleased 
and glorified and magnified in our bodies, whether by life or 
death (Phil. i. 20). There are three stops to this. 


I. WE MUST MAKE OURSELVES OF NO REPUTATION.—This 
is what our Master did. He carefully avoided needless 
publicity, and never courted notice. Indeed, He chose 
obscurity for Himself, that men might be compelled to ascribe 
the marvellous results, which were patent to all eyes, to God. 


The leper was to tell no man (Matt. viii. 4); the blind men 
were straitly charged not to make Him known (ix. 30) ; whilst 
the paralyzed man was yet feeling the raptures of new-found 
health, Jesus stole away from the eyes of the crowd (John v. 13); 
when the people were about to make Him king, He escaped 
from them, and went away alone (vi. 15). His brethren were 
well aware of this trait in his character, and urged Him to 
abandon it; but, in spite of all, He went to the feast, not 
openly but as it were in secret (vii. Io). It was enough for 
Him to fall into the ground and die, and to accept any title of 
opprobrium with which his foes chose to brand Him (Matt. x. 25; 
Luke vii. 34). 


It is a hard lesson ; but one well worth our while to set our- 
selves to acquire. Let us, too, choose rather the shady than 
the sunny side of the street. Let us be content to be accounted 
nothing. Let us lay our reputation down beneath his feet, as 
of old they put their garments beneath the hoofs of the ass 
that bore Him. So only shall we cease to intercept from Christ 
any ray or glory which may accrue to Him to garner for his 
Father. 


The last thing that some of us are willing to forego is our 
reputation. Not that it is wrong to be anxious to maintain our 
good name, so far as our doing so may adorn his holy Gospel ; 
but that.we are often anxious to maintain it as an end in itself, 
and altogether apart from the glory of Jesus, and the claims of 
entire surrender. It is not easy to look up into the face of the 
Master, and say, “If it be thy dear will, I am willing that my 
name should be cast out by men as evil, and my reputation 


170 Christ's Absorption in His Father. 


trampled in the dust, whilst I am counted as the off-scouring 
of all things, despised and rejected of men.” 

But it is men like these wno, during their life, were accounted 
vile and worthless—men like Joseph Alleine, and John Bunyan, 
and Charles Simeon—who shine now with undimming beauty 
in the firmament; whilst their persecutors’ names have been 
written in the dust, or are preserved only in connection with 
the sufferings they inflicted on God’s saints. 


II. WE MUST TAKE UPON OURSELVES THE FORM OF THE 
SERVANT.—The household slave who does the most menial 
service, and washes the feet of the guests, was the chosen type 
to which our Lord conformed Himself, in the upper chamber 
on the eve preceding his death. Some are proud of their 
humility, and will stoop to lowly offices to excite admiration. 
But there was nothing affected here. The men that beheld the 
lowly deed felt that it was the natural outcome of the holy heart 
that throbbed in his breast. 

It is probable that none of us can stoop to such a depth as 
He did. He that has ascended far above all heavens to reign 
could descend to lower depths than all beside to serve. Still it 
well becomes us to imitate this lowly office ; a task, however, 
which will be impossible for us to fulfil unless we are so utterly 
absorbed in our devotion to God in Christ, that we come to feel 
no office too mean, no service too servile, no ministry too 
trifling, to render to Him or his. Service like this is a fruit 
which can only be plucked from trees which have been 
planted and are tended by the Spirit of God. 


III. WE MUST BECOME OBEDIENT UNTO DEATH.—Until our 
eyes are anointed with the eye-salve of the Holy Spirit, we 
have no conception of how full the New Testament is of 
exhortations to death. On three different occasions our Lord 
insisted on the necessity of a man losing his life. Frequently 
He spoke of his cross as inevitable for Himself and his 
disciples ; whilst the Apostle of the Gentiles discovered that 
he must be ever bearing about in his body the dying of Jesus, 
and filling up that which was behind-hand of the sufferings of 
‘he Lord. 


“ Obedient unto Death.” 171 


It is a searching question for most of us, Have you died ? 
Of course we died in the death of our Lord, so far as the 
purpose and intention of God are concerned ; but have we, by 
the eternal Spirit, ever really and practically drunk of his cup, 
and been baptized with his baptism, had fellowship in his 
sufferings, and been made conformable unto his death? Death 
is no child’s-play. It is impossible not to be aware of it, when 
it has become the experience of the soul. There has to be a 
moment of choice, when one elects to take the hand of Jesus 
and step down with Him into the valley of the shadow; 
trembling as to the flesh, but glad in the inmost heart. We 
then yield to death our intellectual conceptions of truth, our 
warm and vivid emotions, our keen ambitions, our members 
that are upon the earth; not making ourselves die, but 
.accepting death wrought in us by the life of the risen Jesus 
through the grace of the Holy Spirit ; not vaunting our death, 
but dying, which is a very different matter; not inventing 
methods of self-crucifixion, but accepting the stern discipline 
of his cross in all the providential circumstances of our lot and 
according to his inworking. So only can we bring glory to 
God. 

What a touching picture is that of the intercourse between 
John Tauler, the celebrated preacher, and the humble peasant, 
Nicolas, of Basle. “ Know,” said the simple-hearted friend of 
God, “that you must needs walk in the path of which our 
Lord spake to the young man ;—you must take up your cross 
and follow our Lord Jesus Christ in utter sincerity, humility, 
and patience ; you shall set before you the sufferings of our 
Lord, and contemplate your own life in the mirror of his. And 
so doing, without doubt, the eternal Prince will look down on 
‘you with the eye of his good pleasure, and will not leave his 
work undone in you, but will, purge you still further as gold in 
the fire.” Is it to be wondered at that after two years of lonely 
converse with God in this attitude, Tauler entered on a ministry 
which has never ceased in bringing glory to God? 

It is a great mystery, of which each one of us may say, “ Not 
as though I had already attained, or were already perfect, but I 
follow after to apprehend.” May the Lord Jesus Himself 


172 Christ's Absorption in His Father. 


teach us what this means, that, as we have been together in his 
death, we may be together in his resurrection, not only here- 
after, but now; that having ventured, not merely to look into 
his grave, but to tarry there for three days and nights, we may 
pass through it and upwards into a life which shall be absorbed 
in no other aim than the glory of God, and shall bring forth 
abundant fruit to Him whose way is through the sea, and his 
path in the great waters, and whose footsteps are not known— 
save by those who dare to follow Him through the dark night, 
led by his hand down the shelving beach, whilst the waters 
stand on either side, and thunderstorms roll heavily above. 
This is the shortest passage to abundant life, and to glory to 
God in the highest. 


XXV. 
Made Free by the Son of God. 


“Tf ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed: and ye 
shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. . . If the Son 
therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.” 

JOHN viii. 31, 32, 36. 


NEW invention has lately been announced to the 
world, by which it is possible to cleanse the smoke 
of our great cities, impregnated not only with carbon, 
but with other deleterious products. In the shaft of 
Er some great chimney, or in connection with the funnel 

= of a railway engine, a cistern half full of water is 
arranged, into which the smoke is drawn through a narrow 
valve. The smoke being sucked into the cistern is compelled 
to pass through the water, and leaves there not only the black 
soot, but also the other products which are destructive of life. 
And after the process is complete, it escapes back into the 
chimney purified, colourless, odourless, and, to a large extent, 
innocuous. But the water is almost fetid, charged as it is with 
ink and poison. One may dare to imagine how glad the smoke 
itself must be to be freed from that which made it harmful 
to men, to pursue its glad way now into the upper air. And 
’ here surely is an illustration of how sinful souls, laden with 
crime and with the deleterious products of evil, may be made 
- free by the Son of God, “loosed from their sins” (as the R.v. 
puts it, Rev. i. 5) “in his blood.” 

We have nothing to do with the origin of sin. That lies far 
beyond our ken. Nor can we tell the ultimate out-working of 
sin in those ages which are yet to be ; except that we know that 
its course will be determined by the limits raised by the 
infinite justice, the infinite holiness, and the infinite love of 
God. But we find ourselves and all mankind tainted, blighted, 
and condemned ; accosted, from our very cradle, with tears 
and pain and the sweat of toil, and the certainty of death, 





174 Slade Free by the Son of God. 


which has passed upon all men, for that all men have sinned. 
Oh, blessed announcement that God our Father has taken our 
part against our sin, and, in the person of his Son, has come to 
make us free, that we may be free indeed ! 

Sin blinds us.—Never did men utter a more barefaced lie 
than when those Jews exclaimed : “ We were never in bondage 
to any man.” Never in bondage! Had they forgotten the 
long and bitter bondage of Egypt, commemorated annually by 
the Passover? Or the dreary captivity of seventy years in 
Babylon, the memory of which lingered in the most plaintive 
odes of the Psalter? From that very Temple court, could they 
not see the Roman standard floating over the ancient palace of 
their kings, and hear the bugle-call regulating the movements 
of the victorious Roman soldiery, whilst Roman officials met 
them at every turn? They could not have forgotten all this ; 
but, in their pride, they wilfully shut their eyes to distasteful 
truths. Thus prejudice blinds men. “The eyes of their 
understanding are darkened.” And just as some virulent 
disease attacks the eyes, by which alone its ravages upon the 
human frame can be discerned, so does sin rob us of the power 
of self-knowledge. The ungodly man needs to be convinced of 
sin. The young Christian permits many things which, in the 
growing light of coming years, he will be the first to condemn. 
‘They who pursue most eagerly the upward path, in proportion 
as they behold the glory and the purity of God, abhor 
themselves and repent. But for all that, it is certain that 
we should never have formed a true conception of what sin is, 
with our enfeebled vision, and in the murky atmosphere of this 
world, had it not been that God had shown us its true 
character in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. That agony 
and bloody sweat, that cross and passion, constitute the only 
true gauge of the enormity and exceeding sinfulness of sin. 

Sin enslaves us.—Here is one of the profoundest sentences 
ever spoken by our Lord. Men had not been wont to count 
themselves slaves. They were in the habit of thinking that 
they could take up sin, or lay it down, at their will—that they 
were its masters. Christ, however, has shown us that it is not 
so; but that, every time we yield to sin, we increase its hold 


** Serbants”’ and “ Children.” 75 


over us, and become more deeply enthralled under its tyrannous 
power, so that we are compelled to obey its behests, however 
cruel or malignant they may be. “He that committeth sin is 
the servant of sin.” 

But sin ts not a necessary part of our being. —This comes out 
so clearly in these remarkable words: ‘The servant abideth 
not in the house for ever.” This, of course, is an obvious truth. 
There is a great difference between the relation of your child 
and your servant. Your child is an integral part of the house- 
hold. He has been born in it, has become part of it; and, 
however far he travels, he is one with it by a tie which defies 
the gnawing tooth of time and the growing distance of long 
journeying. Itis different with aservant. Especially under the 
provisions of the Levitical law, it was impossible for the servant 
to abide in the house for ever. His slavery was limited in its 
duration to the amount of debt he had to work off. The 
trumpet of jubilee, ringing out its welcome notes, bade the 
slave go free. In like manner, however iong a man may have 
served sin, and however tightly he may be held in its meshes, 
yet it has no necessary right over him; he need not abide for 
ever, he is but a slave in a tyrant’s household, who, at any 
moment, may go free. 

How this truth must thrill the hearts of some who read these 
words! For long they have been sighing under bondage, 
compared with which that of Egypt was light; they have 
bitterly cried, “‘ Who shall deliver us?” they have thought that 
there was no release from their bitter bondage; and their 
tyrant-master has whispered, mockingly, “Mine for ever!” 
But let these know that sin is an intruder, a usurper, an alien 
influence other than God meant in his original making of men. 
The prison walls need not be perpetual. The chain need not be 
eternal. The house may be left for ever, never to be darkened 


again by those who have groaned within its precincts. 


Freedom from the tyranny of sim must come to us from 
without. The slave cannot free himself. He cannot scale 
those walls, pick those locks, elude that tyrant. Resolutions 
cannot do it, nor prayers, nor tears. Every struggle only 
tightens the noose. The slave must be made free. Hence 


176 Glade Free by the Son of God. 


the mission of the Son of God. Himself free, He came into 
our prison-house, put his Divine Person under the conditions 
induced by our sins—as Theseus sailed in the ship with the 
yearly tribute of- Athenian youth to the dread monster of 
Crete whom he was destined to destroy—“and, by death, 
destroyed him that had the power of death, that is the devil ; 
and delivered them who, through fear of death, have all their 
life-time been subject to bondage.” He shared our lot, though 
He did not share our sinfulness. Mighty as God, yet weak 
and frail as man; able, on the one hand, to wield and use 
infinite power, and, on the other, to suit Himself to the 
weakest and feeblest of his brethren. “Such a High Priest 
became us.” 


I. THE NATURE OF THIS FREEDOM.—It is not freedom to 
do as we like. That were not liberty, but licence. To be 
emancipated from all rule and law would be impossible in a 
well-ordered world, and incompatible with the well-being of 
others. But the Son sets us free from the unnatural conditions 
into which sin has brought us; so that we, “being delivered 
from the fear of our enemies, may serve Him without: fear in 
holiness and righteousness all the days of our life.” 

We are free from the imputation of Adam’s sin; because He 
as the second Adam has borne it away. Free from the lash of 
a broken law; because He has paid the penalty, and met its 
last demands. Free from the weary gnawing of remorse; 
because He has forgiven us our sins, and blotted them out of 
his book, and cast them behind his back for ever. Free from 
the hopeless endeavour to weave for ourselves a robe of stain- 
less righteousness ; because He gives us his own, as Jonathan 
exchanged his apparel with David. Free from the bondage of 
corruption ; the chains of which have been struck off by his 
mighty hand. Free from the very love of sin; so that its least 
breath or approach is instantly shrivelled before those habits of 
woven fire with which He arrays the soul. Free from the dread 
of death ; because He has died. Free from the whole entail of 
evil; except those limitations and failures which must ever 
weaken the strength of our purpose and lower the temperature 


“@be Cruth shall make you Free.” 177 


of our motives, compelling us to apply constantly for daily 
cleansing and acceptance through his flawless righteousness. 

We do not want more than this. The swallow, with a broken 
wing, seeks not liberty to feed on carrion ; but only to be able 
to mount again imto the sunny air, which is its native sphere. 
And the soul which is athirst for God and holiness asks for no 
other freedom than that it should be able to pursue its divine 
quest unhindered by the restraints of sin. 

I]. THE MEANS OF THIS FREEDOM.—“ The truth shall make 
you free.” The only-begotten Son speaks of truth because He 
was full of truth, and truth came by Him (Johni. 14,17). And 
from this point the Light of the world repeats often this great 
word—truth (villi. 32, 40, 44, 45, 46; xiv. 6; xvi. 13; xvil. 19; 
xvili. 37). When He speaks of truth, He means the inner heart 
of things; their essence and kernel ; that panorama of the unseen 
and eternal which lay before his eye in open vision. 

Truth always frees.—The villager will no longer dread to 
pass some haunted spot when he learns the truth that there 
are no such things as fays or goblins. The slave girl will no 
longer remain in the house of her cruel oppressor when she 
discovers that he has no longer any claim on her; because 
some time ago the Act of Emancipation was passed, though 
the tidings of it have been carefully concealed. The timid soul 
will no longer question whether it may not have committed the 
unpardonable sin, when it is taught that that very fear is proof 
positive that it has never entered this awful state. The dying 
will be free from all fear, if they realize the truth that the wasp 
has lost its sting, the viper its fangs, the roaring lion its teeth ; 
and that the iron gate will open of its own accord. 

So, when the Lord Jesus reveals the truth of all that He has 
done for us—that in Him we are accepted and triumphant ; 
that through Him we sit in heavenly places with Satan beneath 
our feet ; that from Him we are equipped with power to tread 
on serpents, and scorpions, and all the power of the enemy— 
then the whole aspect of our life alters ; we see our position, 
and we take it ; we learn our power, and we use it; we realize 
that we are free, and as such we begin to act. Knowing that 


we have the right to walk the waves, we step out on them 
M 


178 Slade Free by the Son of God. 


in faith, and find them as rock beneath our tread. Acting by 
faith in the truth revealed to us, we discover that it is so. . 
Things are not what they seem. We think we are powerless 
and helpless, and destined to be overcome ; but, if we would 
venture out on Christ’s revealed truth, and dare to live by 
faith, and not by sight, we should discover that all the world is 
new, and life is ours, with victory and sweetness and power, 
such as we have never known or dreamt of. 


III. THE RESULTS OF THIS FREEDOM.—It is the prerogative 
of the son ; and if you rise up from the chains of the prison to 
the freedom and joy of the Father's house, if you are no longer 
entangled with the yoke of bondage, it is a sign that you, too, 
are no longer a servant, but a son; that, by a blessed act 
of regeneration, you have passed from the one to the other, 
from death to life. The moment of soul-emancipation witnesses 
to the moment of regeneration and adoption. And this again 
attests that there shall be no going out any more for ever. 

“The Son abideth ever in the house”; and the sons abide 
there for ever, too. Hagar and Ishmael are cast out; but 
Isaac, the divinely-given Laughter, stays in the home for ever. 
The child can never cease to be a child. It may sin, and grow 
cold, and cause pangs of anguish to hearts which would give 
themselves to save it, but it is a child still, to be brought back 
through seas of sorrow and 4res of pain; it may wander 
into the far country and waste its years, but it will certainly 
return home, never to go forth again. 

There are many among us who are really in a much better 
position than they have any conception of. They are children ; 
but they do not know it. They shall never perish ; but they 
fail to realize it. They are in the piace of power; but their 
eyes are blinded and they cannot see it. Oh that such would 
cry for the heavenly eyesalve, that the eyes of their heart may 
be enlightened to know “the hope of his calling, the riches of 
the glory of his inheritance in the saints, and the exceeding great- 
ness of his power toward them that believe”! And, as the Spirit 
of Truth shall lead them into all the truth, their freedom shall 
increase with their knowledge in ever-widening circles. 


XXVI. 
The Glory of Christ. 


‘‘T seek not mine own glory.”—JOHN viii. 50. 


q/ ROM this point our Lord begins to speak of his glory, 
as if He already beheld its dawn, and pressed on 
with renewed speed to where it beckoned ; although 
the dark ravine of death lay between Print and its 
sunny heights. The Shekinah that shone within the 
veil of his human nature was, for the most part, 
veiled from all besides; except that once on the mount of 
transfiguration it burst from all restraint, and saturated his 
humar. nature with torrents of light, so that the favoured three 
beheld his glory. But, speaking generally, it was veiled, and 
the curtains kept close drawn. The time was coming when 
He should be glorified ; and it shall be our task reverently 
to consider the elements of which that glory was composed, 
and the conditions on which it rested. 

In the olden time, Moses asked to see God’s glory. It is 
difficult to understand what he precisely meant by his request. 
Did he think that some superb procession would sweep down 
the mountain rent, in which the loftiest archangels should take 
a part, as the body-guard of Deity? Did he expect some 
supernatural unfolding of the mysteries of light, or of fire, or of 
the spirit-world? We cannot tell. But we eagerly notice that, 
in his reply, God spake of none of these things; but said, 
“1 will make all my goodness pass before thee.” The prayer to 
behold God’s glory was answered by a catalogue of the moral 
qualities of the Divine nature. In other words, we may accept 
the affirmation of Professor Drummond, and say that glory 





180 Che Glory of Christ. 


means character, or, rather, the revelation of character ; so that 
those who behold it, keen in their appreciation of moral worth, 
may be constrained to admire and imitate. The glory of Jesus 
is, surely, the manifested beauty of his matchless character. 

In speaking or thinking of the glory of the Lord Jesus, we 
must ever distinguish, as He did, between the glory which He 
had with the Father before the worlds were made, and that 
glory which accrued to Him as the result of his human life. 
The former was his by inherited right, as the fellow of Jehovah; 
the other was given to Him by his Father as the reward and 
guerdon for his obedience to death. The one is incom- 
municable, the unique property of his Diety; the other is 
transferable, for He graciously speaks of passing it on to his own. 
For the first, see xvii. 5 ; for the second, see xvii. I, 22, 24. 

That He might the better preserve his zzcognzto (if we may 
reverently so term it), and become a merciful and faithful High 
Priest, by a thorough participation in our human life, He laid 
aside the evidences of his Divine glory. To use the expressive 
word of the Holy Ghost, “He emptied Himself.” And so He 
set Himself to win that glory which should result from a per- 
fected character, and from suffering even unto death. It is of 
this that He speaks, when He says, “I seek not mine own glory.” 
Let it be clearly understood that it is of his glory, as the Son of 
Man and the obedient servant, that we are now speaking. 


I. THE MOTIVE OF CHRIST’s DESIRE FOR GLORY.—That _ 
He desired glory is evident. Did He not directly ask for it ?— 
“Father, glorify thy Son.” Was there not an accent of satis- 
faction in his twice-repeated ejaculation—first, when He heard 
of the inquiry by the Greeks, and again when Judas went out 
to do the fatal deed of treachery—‘‘ Now is the Son of Man .- 
glorified!” Are we not warranted in believing that it was the 
anticipation of the glory into which He must pass through 
suffering that quickened his pace into the valley of the shadow? 
(Luke xxiv. 26). 

And yet we cannot believe that our Master sought glory for 
any selfish end. This He could not do. He said explicitly, “I 
seek not mine own glory.” There was not the shadow of 


“Father, Glorify Tho Name!” 181 


personal ambition resting as a cloud over that pure and noble 
heart. But He desired glory, that He might shed it back again 
upon his Father. 

It was the supreme passion of his being to glorify the Father. 
As He descended into the dark valley, this was his one cry, 
“Father, glorify thy name!” Deeper and deeper still He 
went; and this same entreaty, breaking from his agonized 
heart, comes back to us yet fainter, and ever fainter. ‘“ Now is 
my soul troubled ; and what shall I say? Father, glorify thy 
name!” Pethaps even the love of the race and the desire to 
redeem had failed to support his fainting soul, unless his 
resolution had been empowered and maintained by this all- 
_ masterful desire. He was greedy, therefore, of every vestige 
of glory that He could win by suffering, even though it were 
unto death ; that He might be able, though it were with but a 
feather-weight additional, to augment the revenue of glory 
which, through Him, should accrue to God. “ Now is the Son 
of Man glorified, and God is glorified in Him.” Glorify thy 
Son, that thy Son also may glorify Thee.” 

What an example He has left us that we should follow in his 
steps! Human applause, and admiration, and reward, would 
not hurt us, if we gathered them all only as the vinedressers 
pluck the produce of the vines for presentation to the owner of 
the vineyard. It is a high ideal, and yet evidently the Apostle 
thought it attainable; else he would not have exhorted his 
converts to seek that glory even in their meals (1 Cor. x. 31). 
But it is only so that we can come into the deepest fellowship 
with our Saviour, when we, too, have so drunk of his spirit 
that we become absorbed in the same supreme object, and seek 
for the prizes of our high caliing that we may cast them at the 
feet of God. That God may be better understood, and admired, 
and loved through our life ; that men may turn from us to Him 
as from the jewel to the sunlight in which it sparkles; that 
more hearts may be brought beneath his sway—be this our aim, 
at all costs to ourselves. 


II. THE DIRECTIONS IN WHICH HIS DESIRE WAS REALIZED, 
—The Apostle Peter says, “God gave Him glory” (1 Pet. i. 21). 


182 Gbe Glory of Christ. 


In what did that glory consist? (1) lz the indwelling of God 
in his human nature.—The glory of the desert acacia-bush was 
in the fire that burnt there ; of the tabernacle in the Shekinah 
glow ; of Zion that God had chosen to dwell there. And the 
glory of our Lord, as to his human nature, was that in Him the 
Divine and human blended in perfect union ; that the Father 
dwelt in Him, spake and wrought in Him ; and that He was the 
perfect vehicle for the expression of the incorruptible life, which 
was, and is, and is to come. This was the glory which the 
Apostles beheld expressed on the Holy Mount. 

(2) In his perfect endurance of the severest tests—The whole 
brunt of evil broke on Him, as the roll of the Atlantic breaker 
on some weather-beaten rock. It is impossible to imagine 
tests more searching and complete than those through which 
He passed; in journeyings often; in conflicts with the 
Pharisees and Sadducees ; in conflicts with his own brethren ; 
in conflict with the devils that possessed the afflicted; in 
conflict above all with the prince of this world in that last~ 
terrible duel of the cross; in weariness and painfulness ; in 
watchings often; in hunger and thirst; in fastings often ; in 
bloody sweat and nakedness ; in the anguish of God-forsaken- 
ness and of dissolution. But, so far from being overcome, 
He rose out of each successive test, having set forth in perfect 
beauty the appropriate grace which it demanded, and absorbed 
the whole force of the trial with which He was confronted ; 
so that it passed into Him, and became an addition to his 
moral strength, as the savage warriors think that the strength 
of each foe they slay in battle becomes incorporated into 
themselves. 

(3) L the benefits which He has conferred on men.—There is 
no glory so dear to the noble heart as that accruing from help- 
fulness to others. When‘it comes we cannot be inflated with 
pride, because we are already so thankful to know of the 
blessing which we have been the means of bestowing. And, 
ah, what glory was it to the blessed Lord, that He has 
delivered us. from the consequences of Adam’s sin; that He 
has borne away the sins of the world; that He has opened 
the kingdom to all believers ; that He has made it possible for 


“Sabiour, Priest, Ring.” 183 


sinful creatures to receive and be impelled by the very Spirit of 
God ; that He has obtained for us a life which is death-proof, 
-sin-proof, devil-proof, the essence and crown of blessedness ! 
To be loved as Saviour, to be trusted as Priest, to be enthroned 
as King, to receive the unutterable devotion of myriads, and to 
be able to help them to the uttermost—this surely is one prime 
element in his glory. 

(4) In the exaltation of his nature.—“The God of our 
fathers,” said Peter, ‘““hath glorified his Son Jesus.” And in 
his mouth, fresh from the scenes of the Ascension and of 
Pentecost, these words referred to the glory of his exaltation — 
(Acts ii. 32, 33; ili. 13). We are told that, as a guerdon for 
his tears and obedience, the Father gave Him a name above 
every name, and set Him at his own right hand far above all 
creature life. But this was only possible because his nature 
was already supreme in its quality. It was no arbitrary act of 
enthronement ; it was the recognition of superlative worth. 
And as He that descended ascends far above all heavens, that 
He might fill all things with floods of light, there is given an 
evidence of the glory of his being, of which the princes of this 
world were ignorant, but which now shines forth to illuminate 
all worlds. 

These are but the guesses.and babblings of a child; yet do 
they seem tracks that lead our feet towards the heart of this 
maryellous subject. But who shall tell of the love of the heart 
of God towards his Son, or of its expression? Here are 
depths which must be hidden from our scrutiny. As it was 
the passion of Christ to glorify the Father, so it was the 
passion of “the Father of glory” to glorify the Son. Yes, and 
as yet that glorification is only in its beginnings ; the first 
~ stages alone of the coronation and enthronement of Jesus “in 
all his glory” have taken place: the full outburst of his 
meridian splendour is yet future. Ah, we are yet to behold 
some wondrous scenes, which will ravish our eyes and fill our 
hearts with an exceeding weight of glory! “God shall also 
glorify Him in Himself, and shall straightway glorify Him.” 
And we shall behold his glory, nay, better, share it for ever and 
ever (John xiii. 31, 32 ; xvii. 22, 24). 


184 Gbe Glory of Christ. 


III. THe Cost AT WHICH HIS DESIRE WAS REALIZED.— 
The glory glistens in our view, but we are not always ready to 
consider its cost. The only path to the glory is that which lies 
through the tangled thorn-brake of sorrow. The corn of wheat 
must fall into the ground and die, lying alone and forsaken 
through the winter with its pitiless blasts and frost. He must 
descend ere He can ascend. Pain must inflict the wounds in 
which the pearls of untold glory shall glisten. 

Nor can it be otherwise with ourselves. We must be witnesses 
of the sufferings, if we would be partakers of the glory to be 
revealed ; only as we suffer can we reign with Him; there must 
be fellowship with his sufferings if there shall be attainment to 
his resurrection ; we must drink of his cup and be baptized 
with his baptism, if we would sit right and left of his throne. 

But let us not invent death for ourselves ; let us put our hands 
into his, and ask Him to lead us down one step at a time whither 
He will. It must be right to go where He takes us. It cannot 
be dreadful when He is there. He will not give us more than we 
can bear, because his own experience of pain will be a safe guide 
in his dealings with us. And, as we go down with Him into 
darkness and death, let us sing with assured hope, as He did, 
“Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell; neither wilt Thou suffer 
thine Holy One to see corruption. Thou wilt show Me the path 
of life : in thy presence is fulness of joy ; at thy right hand there 
are pleasures for evermore.” 


XXVIII. 
Ghe Works of God. 


“TI must work the works of Him that sent Me while it is day: the night 
cometh, when no man can work.’’—JOHN ix. 4. 


Jesus is beautifully manifested in the introductory 
verses of this chapter. At the close of the preceding 
one He is seen amid the heated altercation of his 
foes, enduring the contradiction of sinners against 
Himself, and compelled to use some of the severest 
epithets that ever fell from his gracious lips. The climax of the 
argument was reached on his claiming to have existed before 
Abraham was. He appropriated the incommunicable name of 
Jehovah, and said, “Before Abraham was, 1 AM.” And in a 
frenzy of indignation the Jews caught up the stones lying about 
for the repair of the temple to inflict forthwith the doom of the 
blasphemer. ; 

But there was a force at work which they little understood, 
rendering them powerless to harm Him. Was it the spell of 
his majestic presence? Was it the aureole of his spotless 
character? Was it the protecting power of his Father? What- 
ever it was, He passed unscathed through the midst of them ; 
and so left the temple, and began to descend the great flight 
of steps, and to pass through the successive courts. On the 
way his attention was attracted by a blind beggar, who for 
years had been a familiar object as he sat and begged. And 
albeit that there was every need to put as far a distance as 
possible between Himself and the missiles of his foes, He 
stopped, made clay, and leisurely healed him. Is it not evident 


%Ro ' 
iy HE utter restfulness which filled the heart of the Lord 
é& 


J 





186 Ghe Works of God. 


that He realized his absolute safety until his hour arrived ; and 
that if there were an opportunity and a prompting to do God’s 
work, there was the strongest ground also to count upon perfect 
immunity till the work was done? 

His enemies might chafe and storm around Him; but they 
could not hurt Him, or penetrate with word and stone the 
encasing envelope of the presence of God. Secure of that 
protection, He was able to go and come, fearless and unharmed, 
serene and quiet, restful and peaceful, blessing and blessed. 
Oh for the quiet heart which looks from itself to God, and 
considers neither difficulty nor peril, because it is so absorbed 
in doing his work! Here the blessed Spirit broods undis- 
turbed, amid the wild fury of earth’s tumult, whispering 
intimations of God’s will, and nerving the soul with sufficient 
power to perform. 


I. THE*CONDITIONS IN WHICH GOD’S WORKS ARE DONE.— 
The phrase, “works of God,” is a familiar one throughout this 
Gospel. To do them was to feed the Redeemer’s soul (iv. 34) ; 
they were in an ever-ascending scale (v. 20); they were of a 
certain definite number, given Him to finish (v. 36); they were 
the signs and seals of his mission (x. 38); they were not his 
own, but wrought through Him by the Father (xiv. 10); they 
were unique in the history of the world (xv. 24); they were 
definitely finished ere He left it (xvii. 4). But it becomes us to 
learn the conditions under which they were wrought, that we 
may be able to do those greater works of which He spoke. 

(1) His heart was at rest in God.—When suddenly aroused 
amid the tumult of the storm, or pursued by infuriated crowds, 
or amid the anguish of the grave of Lazarus, or in the garden 
of his arrest, there was ever the same deep inner calm, which 
spread an awe on nature, and cast its spell on men. And it is 
impossible to expect any great thing to be done in the world 
through a man whose inner life is ever in a state of ferment. 

Nature herself teaches the need of repose for the putting 
forth of her mightiest efforts. It is in the closet, the study, the 
cave, the woodland retreat, that problems have been solved, 
resolves formed, and schemes matured. And the river of life 


“ Filled mith the Bolu Ghost.” 187 


itself will lose its most precious properties, if it flows through 
the muddy and perturbed waters of restless hearts. 

It is not possible for us all to have a life of outward calm. 
In such a world as this, with the opposition of men and the 
intrusion of sorrow on our most ‘sacred moments, there is per- 
petual interruption. But beneath all the heart may keep its 
Sabbath. Trusting in God, resting on Him, rolling off to his 
charge its anxieties and cares before they have time to soak 
down poison into its springs, the inner life may thus retain its 
tranquillity, reflecting God’s heaven above, and recipient of the 
least impulse of God’s will. 

(2) He was specially endued with the Holy Spirit—Our Lord 
had his Pentecost before Pentecost. In the same hour He was 
baptized as to his body with the waters of the Jordan, and as 
to his spirit with the Holy Ghost. In his address to Cornelius 
and his friends, the Apostle Peter lays distinct stress on this as 
the condition on which Jesus of Nazareth went about doing 
good: “He was anointed with the Holy Ghost and with 
power” (Acts x. 38). i 

It should be a serious question with each of us, Have I 
claimed my share in Pentecost? On his ascension, our Lord 
received from the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost in its 
fullest plenitude, that through Him the whole Church might 
get it. It is ours in Him; we have not to go up to Heaven 
or down to Hades to win it ; we have not to endeavour to merit 
it, but only to claim it by faith. If on comparing ourselves 
with the symptoms of Spirit-filling given in the Acts of the 
Apostles, we are conscious of a grievous deficiency, let us by 
believing prayer dare to ask for all that is ours in the risen 
hving Saviour. 

(3) He was willing that the Father should work through 
Him.—On the day of Pentecost, the preacher clearly empha- 
sized this: “Jesus of Nazareth was approved of God among 
you by miracles, and wonders, and signs, which God did by 
Him in the midst of you” (Acts ii. 22). And this statement 
bears out the affirmation of the Lord Himself, “the Father 
that dwelleth in Me, He doeth the works” (xiv. 10). 

Blessed are we when we learn that secret, no longer to work 


188 he Works of God. 


for God, but to let God work through us; to be brooks of 
Siloam, pent in given beds, instead of wandering at our own 
sweet will; to be clay kneaded into any shape; to be earthen- 
ware pipes, if needs be, hidden under ground, and trampled 
beneath the hurrying feet of men, with one end open to the 
reservoir, and the other to the empty cistern of human need, so 
that the torrent may come in with even flow on the one side, 
and pour out on the other with a regularity which escapes 
notice because it is so unbroken. It was thus that the great 
- Apostle lived who said, “ Christ hath wrought through me in 
word and deed to make the Gentiles obedient” (Rom. xv. 18, 
literal rendering). So are we bidden to yield ourselves to God, 
and our members as instruments of righteousness, that He may 
work in us that which is well pleasing in his sight (Rom. vi. 13 ; 
Heb. xiii. 21). ‘ WE must work,” the R.vV. says. 


Il. THE NEED FOR THESE WorRKS.—“A man blind from 
his birth.” We have observed before that the miracles of this 
Gospel were evidently selected in each case with a special 
purpose of becoming foils to bring into prominence some 
characteristic feature in the ministry or teaching of Jesus Christ. 
Nor is this one an exception to the rule. What emblem could 
better set forth the condition of mankind than a born-blind 
beggar? That men are blind, that they are born so, and that 
they are destitute and bankrupt, needing gold and white linen, 
and eyesalve, needs no proving. But amid all, He comes who 
is the Light of the world, and is able to give sight to the blind, 
and to the poor a share in his measureless wealth. 

The Jews had but two hypotheses on which to account for 
human suffering. “ Either this man sinned” (in some previous 
state of existence), “or his parents, that he was born blind”; ~ 
with them, special suffering was always the sign of special sin 
(Luke xiii. 1-4). 

There are many who argue thus in the present day. The 
occurrence of special disaster leads them to search for the 
sin which must have led to it; forgetting that it does not 
always follow, and that it has been the problem of the ages’ that 
so many of the worst of men have had comparative immunity 


A Message to Sufferers. 189 


from suffering—“‘there have been no bands in their death ”— 
whilst for the godly the waters of a full cup are wrung out. It 
is true that sin brings suffering; but there is some suffering 
which is not the evidence of special wrong-doing. 

This is therefore a third and broader hypothesis, which our 
Lord suggests here. ‘‘ Neither hath this man sinned, nor his 
parents ; but that the works of God may be made manifest in 
Him.” Suffering is permitted for wise and good reasons, 
which we shall.one day comprehend, and amongst them is 
this: that it may provide a platform on which the grace and 
power of God may manifest themselves, each new phase of 
evil leading to some new forth-putting of the heart of God. 
To how many suffering ones may the Lord Jesus send the 
message: “This sickness is not unto death ; but for the glory 
of God, that the Son of God may be glorified thereby” ! 

If only the sufferers who may read these words would 
bracket together these two texts, this spoken of the blind 
beggar, and that of the sickness of Lazarus, surely it would be 
easier to bear the long nights of weariness and the days of 
pain—not in punishment, not by neglect or mischance, not as 
the inevitable results of the mistakes or misdeeds of others, 
but—to give an opportunity for the works and glory of God. 
What works? What glory? Surely the works of humility, 
and patience, and gentleness, which his Spirit instils ; and the 
glory of that lovely spirit which his Spirit begets. 

But how necessary is it that, as there is the need, we who 
have the supply be not wanting. If there is need for the 
works of God to be manifested, we must be at hand, and 
willing at all costs to manifest them. If there is the oppor- 
tunity for the glorifying of Christ, we must not be slow to seize 
it. Make haste !—the night is coming, in which no man can 
work. Life at the longest is but a day; and before we are 
aware the shadows have stealthily crept far across the grass, 
the air has become chill, and the silver crescent of the moon is 
rocking in the dimming light. What works await us yonder 
we cannot tell. But the unique work of healing blindness and 
enriching beggary is confined to earth ; and we must hasten to 
do all of this allotted to us before the nightfall. He lives 


190 The Works of God. 


intensely whose eye is fixed on the fingers of the dial; as the 
poor sempstress works swiftly whose last small wick of candle is 
rapidly burning down in its socket. 


III. THE SUBJECT OF THESE WoORKS.—What a contrast 
between the opening and the close of the chapter! The blind 
sees, the beggar is rich. The abject is an apologist. The 
intruder on the temple steps is a worshipper within the true 
shrine. The soul ignorant of Christ owns Him as Son of God. 
And all this because of the individual interest our Lord took in 
him. 

(1) He detected what was working in his mind.—Beneath 
that unpromising exterior were the elements of a noble 
character. The power which might have run to waste, being 
dammed up, wrought deeper into his soul. He heard the con- 
verse of the crowds as they passed, caught the veices of the 
Levites chanting their majestic psalms, detected the benedic- 
tions of the priests; and awoke in him indefinable yearnings 
after God. Unknown to any besides, these arrested the 
attention of Jesus, who, unconscious of personal danger, bent: 
over him with eager interest, as a child over the first primrose 
of spring. 

(2) He developed the latent power of faith.—It was there, but 
it had nothing to evoke it; and yet it must be evoked ere 
Christ could give him sight. He could feel, though he could 
not see. So the Lord put clay on the eye-socket, awaking 
wonder, hope, expectation ; and such was the ladder put down 
for his faith to climb up into the light. And then in the com- 
mand to go and wash there was a still further test to his faith, 
to conform and strengthen it. Is it not thus that the blessed 
Lord still deals with us ; watching the smallest spark of faith, 
and fanning it into a flame, giving it some very small and 
obvious thing to do, that it may from a thread become a 
cable? 

(3) He found hin when cast out by all besides.—His parents 
disowned him, and the Pharisees cast him out of their syna- 
gogue, depriving him of a highly-prized privilege ; but Jesus 
found him, He had been cast out Himself, and knew the 


“ Dost Thou Beliche ?” gt 


weariness and pain of excommunication ; and thus acquired 
_ the desire and the clue to help another, suffering beneath the 
intolerance of the religious world. Does not Jesus always 
steal to our side when we are cast out, or deserted by our 
friends ? 

(4) He answered his hunger for faith— Dost thou believe 
on the Son of God?” The question startled him; and yet it 
explained one of the deepest instincts of his nature, though he 
may have been little conscious of it, and perhaps felt only an 
utter dissatisfaction with all else, and an insatiable yearning 
after God. If we live up to what we know, at all costs, we 
shall most certainly be led into further discoveries of truth. If 
we dare to go to the pool of Siloam and wash, we shall be 
’ gladdened by great revelations and unfoldings of God in 
Christ. We think we are going to plough a field; and we 
suddenly come on a box of treasure, struck by our plough, 
which makes us independent of work for the rest of our lives. 

And so obedience passes into worship, and we see that He 
who has made our life his care, tending us when we knew Him 
not, is the Christ of God, in whom are hid all the riches of 
time, all the treasures of eternity: and we worship Him. 


XXVIII. 
Che Blessed Wife of Trust. 


‘‘When He putteth forth his own sheep, He goeth before them, and the 
sheep follow Him; for they know his voice.’’—JOHN x, 4. 


STO 
4/ EW images could better express the relationship 
between our Lord and his people than that of Shep- 
(ew herd and sheep, so often applied to God in the Old 
et Testament, and appropriated by Christ Hinaself in 
at the New. He had already shown that references to 
& Himself underlay the manna, the water, and the fire- 
cloud. And now He shows that beneath the sweet pastoral 
imagery of the prophets He was ever the glorious substance 
and reality. 

The Eastern sheepfold is a mere enclosure surrounded by a 
palisade. The sheep are brought into it in the evening, several 
flocks being committed to the care of the common keeper or 
porter for the night. In the morning the shepherds return and 
knock at the closely barred door of the enclosure, which the 
porter opens from within. Each separates his own sheep by 
calling to them ; and the sheep respond, disentangling themselves 
from the rest, and when thus collected they follow their own 
shepherd, wherever he may lead. 

The shepherd alone enters by the door. The robber may 
break in by force, the thief by stratagem ; but their object is 
plunder and slaughter, and the sheep will neither respond to 
their voice, nor follow them. “A stranger will they not follow, 
but will flee from him ; for they know not the voice of strangers.” 
Huddled into a corner of their pen, stricken with alarm, they 
dread the rough hand of the intruder. 

That sheepfold is the Jewish people. The irruption into the 





st9\ 6, 


Christ, the True Shepherd. 193 


fold of the sheepstealer represents the audacity and hypocrisy 
of the Pharisees and Scribes, who had no purposes but plunder 
in their heart. They fleeced the flock for their own advantage 
(Ezek. xxxiv. 3). 

In opposition to them, the Saviour comes as the true Shepherd. 
_ He has no need to scale the wall, or to establish his authority 
by force or guile. In Him the porter, who is well represented 
by John the Baptist, recognised the true Shepherd of Israel : 
and He was now prepared to lead forth his own to green 
pastures, and beside waters of rest. 


I. THE PUTTING FORTH OF THE SHEEP.— Up to the end 
of the last chapter it might have appeared that the whole of 
Israel might be included in his flock. But recent events had 
proved that this could not be. The Messiah, as Zechariah had 
foretold, had taken to Himself his two staves, “ Beauty” and 
“Bands,” and had fed the flock for one month, but had finally 
been compelled to renounce the task as hopeless (Zech. xi. 10-14). 
The expulsion of the blind man; the decree of excommunication 
which had struck at Himself and his followers; the violent 
hostility that dogged his steps—-all pointed to the impossibility 
of gathering the whole nation into his care. 

There was but one alternative. He must bring his own from 
out the Jewish fold— separating them, not by force, but by his 
gentle voice; calling them by name and leading them out. 
Is not Jesus always leading us out? He calls the souls of men 
from the fishing-net and the toll-booth ; from scenes of worldly 
pleasure and haunts of sin; from associations with the flock 
of slaughter. And the one test of their being his own is that 
they hear his voice and follow. Not to believe, or obey that 
voice, or follow it, proves that the soul is none of his. 

But a stronger word is used: “He putteth forth his own 
sheep.” The phrase is a very strong one. He casts or thrusts 
them out ; as when He constrained his disciples to get into the 
ship. So was Israel thrust out of the luxurious fare of Egypt 
to the simplicities of the desert; so are the young eaglets thrust 
out by the mother bird when she stirs up her nest, and forces 


them to learn the joys of flight. : 
N 


194 The Blessed Lite of Grust. 


He puts us forth by his providences.—We may have been 
living in some sheltered home, where love screened us from 
every contact with a strange and unkindly world ; but suddenly 
the encircling arms are withdrawn, and we are driven forth to 
stand alone, and to act for ourselves, so far as any human help 
is concerned. Or we are compelled to leave the dear country 
village, or the ancestral home, or the land of our birth, to fare 
forth we hardly know whither. All that is sure is that there is 
no return ; that we have no alternative ; that the angel with 
flaming sword drives us out and keeps the gate behind us. 

He puts us forth by the constraints of his Spirit.—We may 
have been living a self-contained, self-contented life, shut up in 
some narrow circle of religious thought and life, when suddenly 
there break on us the voices which summon to another and 
truer life. We become aware of possibilities of Christian living 
that had never been suggested to our hearts. From some 
loftier peak than usual we catch sight of a wider range of truth. 
We yearn with eager desire for the new power, and joy, and 
blessedness, which look in at the windows of our soul, and 
beckon us to go with them ; as children who ramble for a long 
summer day through wood and hill. It is not so much then 
the outward constraint as the irresistible impulse from within 
which thrusts us out. 

Fle puts us forth by his direct caill—To how many a young 
life, all unexpectedly, there has come.the summons of the 
Master, “I am about to evangelize such and such a district, 
and I want you to accompany Me.” To students in the great 
seminaries of America, to bowed heads and hearts in conven- 
tions at home, to souls worshipping in the loneliness of the 
shrine, there have come voices, bidding them arise and depart, 
because they are to be sent far hence to the heathen. What 
heart-searching, what tremour, what mingling of fear and hope, 
of expectancy and anguish, sweep over the heart when first it 
hears its name spoken by the Master’s lips, and rises up to 
follow where He leads the way ! 

If you are his own, it is certain that in some one of these 
ways you will hear his voice, and feel his crook, putting you 
forth. The fold is warm and sheltered, and you are accustomed 


“He Leadeth me.” 195 


to it, and shrink from the unknown ; but it is bare of grass, and 
lacks the fresh breeze and dew of the mountain-side ; there 
can be no true peace and satisfaction within its walls ; beyond 
its precincts the true life awaits you; and to that the Good 
Shepherd puts you forth. 


I]. THE SHEPHERD’S LEAD. — “He goeth before them.” 

This is the place ever assigned to Him in the Old Testament. 
“He leadeth me by the still waters.” “Thou leadest thy 
people like a flock.” He permits none of his own to go 
along a path which He has not trodden, and in which He 
has not had previous experience. There is only one exception 
to this—the experience of sin. With this single exception, 
“He was tempted in all points like as we are.” Take heart, 
O trembling believer! However strange and hard your path 
seems to you, if you look closely at it you will detect in its 
dust the footprints of the Shepherd ; and where He has pre- 
ceded you, you need not fear to follow. 
- And it is not only true that He passed through all possible 
experiences of human life during those wonderful years of his 
sojourn on our earth, drinking every cup, exposing Himself to 
every grief, tried by every woe, that He might be a merciful 
and faithful High Priest ; but in addition, He accompanies 
and precedes by only a step each timid child that steps forth 
from the warm fold to follow Him. To the eye of faith 
He is always a little in front—removing the stones ; selecting 
the least difficult paths; bending back the briers ; driving 
before Him the wild beasts or robbers that threaten us; and 
conducting us as safely and quickly as He can to the sweetest, 
truest life. 

It would seem as if the Shepherd is never so real as when 
we are being put forth from the fold. We could better exist 
without Him when we are there ; but directly we emerge on the 
life of faith, away from the familiar and friendly, we need Him, 
and our heart entwines itself around Him with a tenacity which 
grows stronger as every new trial is met, and mastered, and 
left behind in the onward journey. 

It may be that you cannot discern Him; but this makes no 


196 The Blessed Hite of Crust. 


real difference. Dare to believe that if you are in his place 
—that is, if you are treading a path which is clearly marked out 
for you by inevitable circumstances and by unmistakeable in- 
ward promptings, although you cannot see Him, and the way 
seems lonely, yet—that He is just before you ; the darkness veils, 
but does not obliterate Him ; the Lord is going before you, and 
the Holy One is your rereward. 


III. THE FOLLOWING OF THE SHEEP.—“ The sheep follow 
Him.” The utter dependence of the sheep on the Eastern 
shepherd is a beautiful emblem of our attitude towards our 
Lord. In those vast pasture-lands, rolling over mountain 
slopes, and dipping into darksome glens, brooded over by a 
silence that can almost be felt, there arises a very close intimacy 
between the shepherd and his flock. He forgets the distance 
between them, and becomes their friend. He is as intimately 
acquainted with their history, faces, and dispositions, as with 
those of his own children. He has a name for each, which is 
sufficient to bring it to his side. And common peril or 
privation, shared together, but cements the friendship closer. 

Nor is the affection only on his side. Stupid as they appear 
to us, they develop under such conditions an amazing power of 
attachment, which they manifest in touching trust. They follow 
the shepherd anywhere. 

Let us so trust our Lord. It often grieves the Christian 
teacher to find souls writing hard things against themselves, 
because they are attempting to acquire a certain lesson; to 
reach a certain experience ; to attain and keep a certain attitude 
—altogether apart from Him : asif they had to do all this before 
they could count on his love and help. They are always trying 
to know or do something before they get to Him. Whereas 
the opposite is the only true and safe way ; first to keep by his 
side and at his heel, and then to let Him lead the soul into all 
it must learn and achieve. Do not attempt the Christian life 
as a means to closer acquaintance with Jesus; but let your 
closer acquaintance with Him lead you to pass onward through 
the land in the length and breadth of it. 

If He call you to know some new aspect of truth, throw on 


Submission to Christ. 197 


Him the responsibility of adding line to line, precept to 
precept, till it is clear. If He desire you to live a life of daily 
appropriation and dependence, trust Him to make it possible 
and congenial. If He bid you separate yourself from some 
unhallowed alliance, or to quit some unhealthy companionship, 
or to confess your new-found rapture, let Him understand how 
absolutely you look’to Him to show you just how He would 
have you act. 

Let Jesus Christ stand between you and everything—between 
you and circumstances; between you and dreaded trials ; 
between you and temptation; between you and your attain- 
ments in the blessed life; between you and your projects of 
Christian usefulness. Follow Him, ze., let Him go first. If 
He does not go forward, wait for Him. Every step taken 
apart from Him, or in front of Him, will have to be retraced 
with bitter tears. 

The attitude of the sheep is swdmzsston. From the first its 
attitude is one of utter obedience to the will of another. It 
has no will of its own; or if it have, it is instantly repressed. 
So there must be the entire and utter surrender of our will to 
the will of Christ. This is the hardest lesson we have to learn; 
but everything of blessedness depends on our coming to a 
point at which we say, “From this moment and for evermore, 
in the smallest details, in the routine of daily life as well as in 
its great crises, I choose the will of God.” Never again to do 
what we wish because we wish it; never again to consult our 
own preferences or choice ; never again to have a way or will 
of our own; but to follow absolutely and always the path 
marked out by another: this is the secret of blessedness. 

The attitude of the sheep is dependence. It would be 
impossible to submzt, if we could not also commit. But it 
becomes easy to do the former when we can do the latter. 
To have an absolute confidence in Him, to lean on Him, to 
look to Him for direction and help as each moment needs ; 
to trust Him on the rocky mountain path equally as on the 
green sward ; to believe in Him against appearances and our 
own hearts; to refuse to take a thread or a shoe-latchet from 
any other hand; to abstain, as David did, from taking advantage 


198 Ge Blessed Hite of Crust. 


even of a means of deliverance, which may seem ready to_ 
hand, but which would be inconsistent with his revealed will ; 
to wait only on the Lord till He shall pluck the feet out of 
the net, and give the heart’s desires—this too is the secret 
of blessedness. 

Let us quiet ourselves as weaned babes. The world is 
unfriendly, and life’s paths are perplexing ; but He is leading 
us on who cannot make a mistake, who will give us just as 
much of rest and refreshment as we require, and who is more 
than sufficient to deliver us from the lion and the bear. The 
memory of his agony and death shall ever be with us, nerving 
us to believe that He loves us too much, that we have cost Him 
too much, for it ever to be possible that we should be forsaken 
or neglected. And so at last we shall be folded with all the 
flock beside in those sweet pasture lands, in which the Lamb 
leads his flock unto living fountains of water, and God wipes 
away all tears from our eyes. 


XXIX. 
Che Ideal Shepherd. 


“I am the Good Shepherd: the Good Shepherd giveth his life for 
the sheep.””—JOHN x. 11. 


q/ HIS chapter is a pastoral idyll, composed and spoken 
by the Chief Shepherd Himself. It resembles some 
masterpiece of art, which one visits for days together, 
only finding on each successive occasion some new 
beauty. It naturally falls into the three divisions 
of morning, noon, and evening. 

Its morning. The dew lies heavy on the upland wolds ; the 
fresh morning breeze is airing the fevered world; the sun’s 
pavilion glows with gorgeous colours, as he prepares to emerge 
on his daily pilgrimage ; and the shepherds stand knocking at 
the barred gates of the fold, calling to the porter to let them 
have their flocks. When the door opens, each calls to his own 
sheep, and leads them forth, and they follow him to pastures 
green and waters still. They would flee from a strange voice ; 
but they know their shepherds. 

Is not this a true picture of the response which Christ’ Ss own 
give to his voice? Many are the voices which fall on the ears 
of men in the early morning of their life, summoning them to 
follow ; and in the majority of cases with only too much success. 
In the hubbub the voice of the true Shepherd is undetected or 
unheeded, except by a few. But these hear its soft gentle tones, 
and obey, and follow; and to do so is certain evidence that 
they are his own. The desire to hear and follow Jesus proves 
that you are his sheep (4, 8, 27). 

Again, /¢ 7s noon. The downs are baking in the scorching 
glare, and every stone burns like fire ; but in that oppressive 





200 The Ideal Shepherd. 


hour the shepherd remembers a little green glen, where a 
tranquil lake reflects the azure sky, or a brooklet babbles 
musically over the pebbles. The grass is green and the 
boulders cast black shadows. Perhaps an old fold is there, 
with open doorway, so that the sheep may go in for shelter or 
out for-pasture, till the shadows begin to climb stealthily up the 
hills. 

Thus our Beloved makes his flock rest at noon. He is 
not Shepherd alone, but fold. In Him as in a safe enclosure 
we lie down secure. He is the secret place of the Most High, 
in whom our life is hidden. Nor is He the fold only, He is also 
the door; there is no ingress to rest, or egress to pasture, 
except through Him. We can get pasture, abundant life, and 
salvation only by the Lord Jesus. 

Lastly, /¢ 7s evening. The sun is setting, the air is becoming 
chill, the valleys are deep in gloom. The shepherd hastens 
downward with his flock to the fold. They are’ descending 
together the last dark gorge, densely shadowed by foliage. 
Suddenly the ominous snarl and scream tell that a wolf has 
sprung from the thicket, and seized on one of the hindmost 
ewes or tender lambs; and then the shepherd rushes to the 
rear, prepared to lay down his life, if needs be, to save. And 
who can view the struggle which ensues between the shepherd 
and the wolf, without being reminded of the fourfold allusion of 
our Lord to the fact that He was about to lay down his life for 
the sheep (II, 15, 17, 18). 


I. THE DOUBLE CONTRAST TO THE GOOD SHEPHERD.— 
Good does not mean benevolent and kind; but genuine and 
true. And its significance is pointed by the contrast with the 
thief and the hireling; by which it appears that the Good 
Shepherd is One who is imbued with the true spirit of his work, 
and is an enthusiast in it, not for pay or reward, but by the 
compulsion of the noble instincts of his soul. 

Robbers may turn shepherds, climbing the walls of the fold, 
or swooping down on the flock and driving it off, as Nabal’s 
were seized on Mount Carmel. But their purpose is for the 
flesh and fleece, to kill and to destroy. They have no more the 


Ghe HFireling. 201 


true shepherd’s heart than a bandit has a soldier’s or a pirate a 
sailor’s. 

Many such nominal shepherds had the Jews in their national 
history : kings ruling for their own aggrandisement ; teachers 
who prophesied false and smooth things for place and pelf; 
Pharisees who lined their nests with what they appropriated 
wrongfully. Such were the thieves and robbers who came 
before the Good Shepherd, stealing from God his glory, from 
men their souls and goods. What a contrast was the Saviour, 
who expected no reward but hatred and a crown of thorns 
a cross and a borrowed tomb, and whose supreme object was 
to give life, and to give it more abundantly—abundant as the 
flowers of May ; exhaustless as the perennial fountains of his 
own being ; infinite as the nature of God! 

The Xzreling, too, may turn shepherd, and, to a certain point, 
may do his work with credit. He will not desert the flock for 
frost, or hail, or a thunder shower. His pay will be more than 
an equivalent for hardship in these respects. But when it 
comes to the supremé test of sacrificing the life, he breaks 
down. Love alone can nerve a man voluntarily to lay down his 
life. Of what use is hire to a dead man? “He that is an 
hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, 
seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep and fleeth ; and 
the wolf cometh and scattereth them.” 

There are good men about the world, in the Church and out 
of it, who have come to sheep-tending as an occupation, because 
it affords a means of livelihood; men who become pastors 
because there is a family living to be filled, or the position is an 
honourable one. Such do their work fairly well, so long as 
there is no particular danger to be faced. But when the winds 
of persecution are let loose, and the fires are lit, and the 
dragoons scour the moors, they renounce their office, and even 
endeavour to efface the vestiges of their calling (Zec. xiii. 5-7). 

Very diferent to this has been the spirit of the true shepherd, 
revealed in hundreds of cases of Church history, and above all 
in our blessed Lord. He has received a great reward, which: 
dazzled his gaze throughout his earthly life. “For the joy set 
before Him He endured the cross,” But there was nothing 


202 The Ideal Shepherd. 


selfish in it. And it was not for this alone that He fulfilled 
his self-set task. He loved us. He had taken us to be his own. 
He had set his heart upon us. And when the question arose of 
delivering us from peril, He never hesitated to lay down his 
life. It was his own act and deed. “TI lay it down of Myself.” 

For the most part his life was not his own, but his Father’s 
in Him ; yet special power was given Him that He should be 
able to take individual and personal action in this matter. 
“He had power to lay it down, and power to take it again.” 
And as the voluntariness of his sacrifice unto death is insisted 
on, there comes out more evidently the mighty passion of his 
love for us who hear his voice, and may therefore claim to be 
his own. Why has He loved us thus? We cannot tell. It is 
a mystery which will for ever baffle us; but love knows no 
reason, no law. - Surely the Son of God might have discovered, 
or made, beings more worthy of his attachment. But it was 
not to be so. He has loved us with the greatest love of all, the” 
love that recks not the cost of life; and there is nothing now 
of good which He will withhold from his own, his loved, his 
chosen and purchased flock. 


I]. THE WORK OF THE GOOD SHEPHERD. 

(1) Ais knowledge of his sheep—The Revised Version brings 
out the exquisite meaning of verses 14 and 15, which was some- 
what obscured in the older version: “I know mine own, and 
mine own know Me; even as the Father knoweth Me, and I 
know the Father.” 

The Eastern shepherd knows all the particulars of each of 
his sheep; its genealogy, defects, temper, and tastes, and 
embodies some one of these in the name he gives it. Thus 
did the Father know all about that one Lamb which stood in 
so peculiar a relationship to Himself. There was nothing in 
Jesus hidden from the Father. His eyes beheld his substance, 
when it was yet imperfect; and in his book were all his 
members written, when as yet there was none of them, whether 
of his mystical or of his physical body. Who shal explore or 
adequately elaborate the perfect knowledge subsisting between 
the Father and the Son before the worlds were made? 


The Shepherd's Bnotuledge. 203 


And it is just in this way, with a Divine, comprehensive, and 
perfect knowledge, that the Lord Jesus knows each of us. He 
is of a quick understanding to take in our past, with its sad 
and bitter failures, and our present with its unrealized longings. 
He knows our downsitting and uprising ; our motives so often 
misunderstood ; our anxieties, which cast their shadows over 
our lives; our dread ; our hopes and fears. He intermeddles 
with the bitterness of our hearts, known only to us and Him. 
He scrutinizes each guest as it enters, and needs no census to 
tell Him the inmates of our hearts. ‘There is not a word on 
our tongue, but Thou, O Lord, knowest it altogether.” It is 
very blessed to be known thus; so that we do not need to assume 
a disguise, or enter into laboured explanations. He cannot be 
surprised, or taken unawares by anything we may tell Him. 

Let us, on our part, seek to know Him as He knew the 
Father; the eyes of our heart being enlightened; the soul 
illumined by the knowledge which is born of sympathy, fellow- 
ship, and purity. 
~ (2) His seeking love.— Again the Revised Version, in ver. 16, 
gives us the true intention of our Saviour’s words. “Other 
sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must 
bring (lead), and they shall hear my voice, and they shall 
become one flock, one Shepherd.” 

There may be, and there will be, many folds. By the very 
constitution of our minds we are sure to have different views 
of truth, of church government, and of the best methods of 
expressing our love and worship. And there are many who 
would have us believe that if we do not belong to their special 
fold, we have no right to assume that we belong to the flock. 
But it is not so. Our Master never said there would be one 
fold. There may be many folds, yet one flock ; even as there 
is one Shepherd. The more one climbs up the mountain side, 
the less one thinks of the hurdles that pen the sheep below in 
the valley, and the more one rejoices in the essential unity of 
the flock. Whatever may be your special fold, the one question 
is: Do you hear and obey the Shepherd’s voice? If so, you 
belong to the one flock, part of which is on that, and part on 
this, side of a narrow parting brook. 


204 Ghe Ideal Shepherd. 


These other sheep must be the Gentiles—ourselves. Though 
He belonged by birth to the most exclusive race that has ever 
existed, our Lord’s sympathies overflowed the narrow limits of 
national prejudice. He was the Son of Man; and in these 
words He not only showed that his heart was set on us, but 
He sketched the work which was to occupy Him through the 
ages. Ever since that moment He has been bringing in these 
other sheep, and folding them. Perhaps the work is almost 
done, and the flock complete ; and soon, as He leads his blood- 
bought ones forth to the pasture-lands of eternity, their unity 
shall be manifest, and the world shall admire and believe 
(John xvii. 21). 

(3) Hts words to his own.— He calls them by name.” We 
often speak to the dumb animals of our homes, telling them 
words which they can hardly understand, and to which they 
can certainly give no response. But there is a dialogue ever 
in process between the Good Shepherd and his own. He not 
only calls them by name as He leads them forth, but He 
talks to them, encouraging, soothing, communing with them 
about his purposes, explaining his reasons, indicting his com- 
mands. 

Holy souls become aware of impressions which are made on 
them from time to time, promptings, inspirations, largely 
through the words of Scripture, and sometimes. otherwise, 
which they recognise as the Shepherd’s voice. That voice ever 
calls to self-sacrifice, fellowship, purity, and is different to all 
other voices. And there grows up a response, the more 
specially so when the path is lonely, and the sheep keeps close 
to its Shepherd’s heel. Those who follow very nearly behind 
Him will bear witness to the perpetual converse by which the 
human friend is able to keep in touch with the Divine. 

(4) His care of his own.—“T give unto them eternal life, and 
they shall never perish.” Time wears out all things else. It 
crumbles the mountains, dims the sunshine, loosens the 
machinery of the universe ; but it cannot touch or impair the 
life of the blessed God, whether it be in Himself, or imparted 
through Jesus Christ to the hearts of those who love Him. 
When once that life has come to indwell the believer’s heart it 


The Shepherd's Potuer. 205 


must remain. Beneath worldliness, carelessness, and frivolity, 
burning feebly perhaps, almost quenched in the heavy atmos- 
phere, it is there as an incorruptible seed. 

Christ’s sheep shall never perish. They may wander far 
from Him, lose all joy and comfort, fall under the rebuke of 
men, and seem to be living under a cloud; but, if they are’ 
really his, his honour is pledged to seek them out in the cloudy 
and dark day, and bring them back to Himself. His body ~ 
cannot be dismembered ; He cannot forfeit that which it has 
cost Him so much to purchase. He would rather lose his 
throne than one of his sheep; for the lion of the pit would 
glory over Him, and it would be a fatal blemish on his escut- 
cheon that He had attempted but had failed to perform. 

You may be a very lame and timid and worthless sheep ; but 
you were purchased by the Shepherd’s blood, because He loved 
youso. There is not a wild beast in all hell that He has not 
vanquished and put beneath his feet ; there is no fear, there- 
fore, of his ability, as there is none of his love. He will 
deliver you from the lion and the bear, and bring you in 
triumph to the fold, with all the rest. 


XXX. ' 
The Work of an Ungifted Worker. 


“ And He went away again beyond Jordan into the place where John at 
first baptized : and there He abode. And many resorted unto Him, and 
said, John did no miracle; but all things that John spake of this man were 
true. And many believed on Him there.”—JOHN x. 40-42. 


,EYOND the Jordan! Toa Jew that was banishment 
indeed. For that district, called Perea, was com- 
paratively desert. The hills, seamed by impetuous 
torrents hurling themselves headlong into the Jordan 
valley, were marked by a few patches of cultivated 

* soil and scattered hamlets ; but for the most part 
they were bleak and cold, and none came there from the 
country west of the Jordan, except driven by stress of 
persecution or to escape the arm of the law. 

Why, then, did the Son of Man betake Himself thither? At 
the close of his inimitable parable of the shepherd and his flock, 
He had gathered all his force to assure his trembling followers 
that they had nothing to fear from man or devil. On the one 
hand, they could never perish, because they had within them an 
indestructible life, identical with his own; and on the other, 
they were within his hand, whence none should be able to pluck 
them. But, in case that was not enough to assure timid hearts, 
He went on to declare that his own hand, with its contents, lay 
within the strong, all-encompassing hand of his Father; so 
that there was a double assurance, and none would be able to 
pluck them out of the Father’s hand. How safe are they 
who hear his voice and follow Him ! : 

But this assertion as to the identification ef the Father with 
Himself in the blessed work of preserving the flock, led Him to 
affirm the deep underlying truth of the essential oneness of the 
Father with Himself. He would have us think of the Father 





“Beyond the Jordan.” 207 


and Himself as being one in the deepest and most holy unity. 
One in essence, in purpose, in operation; so that neither 
thinks, nor wills, nor acts without the other; and each is 
altogether present where the other is manifested. The 
assertion implicated the Deity of the speaker, and startled the 
Jews to take up stones, so as to inflict at once the doom of 
the blasphemer. 

Nor was this all. He went on to insist that He was the Son 
of God in a unique sense, and that his life was the outworking 
of the indwelling of the Father. “The Father is in Me, and I 
in Him.” From all this it is clear that, whatever may be 
the speculations of modern thinkers, there was no doubt in the 
human consciousness of Jesus as to his unique relationship with 
the Father. He used the strongest terms that could set it 
forth. It is true that He quotes an Old Testament Scripture, 
which speaks of men who exercise judicial functions as gods, 
when, by reason of their office, they wield special prerogatives 
and exercise functions which are Divine in their quality ; but 
He does not for a moment compare these with Himself; and 
only adduces the passage to show how unreasonable was the 
attempt to punish Him for a phrase which in the most awful 
times of Mosaic authority had been allowed to pass without 
challenge. But their vindictive hate would brook no parley ; 
and, as his hour was not yet come, He deemed it better to 
go away beyond Jordan, into hiding, until the hand should reach 
the exact figure on the dial. 

. There was a special reason why He was attracted to the 
region beyond Jordan. “It was the place where John at first 
baptized.” Those solemn hills and valleys had been black with 
the crowds that had gathered from all the land at the cry of that 
trumpet voice. Those waters had been the scene of countless 
baptisms. And the people living around had many a story to 
tell of the grand and fearless prophet who had met with so 
tragic a death in the dungeon of the neighbouring castle of 
Macheerus. And as the disciples, all of whom had been first 
moved by the Baptist’s influence and preaching, passed over 
the ground in company with Jesus, what recollections must have 
been stirred within them; and how sadly must they have 


208 The Work of an Angifted Worker. 


contrasted those sunny days with the overcast heavens beneath 
which at that moment they were passing ! 

“Many resorted unto Him.” Those who had felt the mar- 
vellous fascination of the person of Jesus were glad to follow 
Him anywhere ; and as they too came on the familiar scenes, 
they could not but talk much of the great preacher. “Here he 
used to sleep. There he used to preach. Yonder he would 
stand knee deep in the waters to baptize. Do you not remember 
him calling the Pharisees a set of vipers; and telling the 
deputation from the Sanhedrim that he was only a voice; and 
pointing to the Master as the Lamb of God?” “And yet what 
a contrast was his life to our Master’s,” might another rejoin ; 
“he did no miracles, there was not a single scintillation of this 
miraculous Divine power.” “No,” said a chorus of voices ; 
“John did no miracle, but all things that John spake of this 
man were true.” 

John said that this Man should be from heaven, and above 
all: and it was true. 

John said that He should be the Bridegroom of all faithful 
souls : and it was true. 

John said that the Father would not give the Spirit by 
measure unto Him: and it was true. 

John said that his fan would be in his hand, and He would 
throughly purge his floor : and it was true. 

John said that He would bear away the sin of the world: 
and it was true. 

And many, as they compared the predictions of the fore- 
runner with their verification in Jesus, “believed in Him 
there.” 


I. MIRACLES ARE NOT NECESSARY FOR A GREAT LIFE.— 
“Among them that are born of women there hath not risen 
a greater than John the Baptist,” said our Lord; but John did 
no miracle, was the verdict of the crowd. Evidently, then, 
there may be a great life without miracles. 

In the judgment of the world, birth, wealth, genius, deeds of 
valour, and statesmanship, are deemed essential for the living 
of a great life ; and many an one that can lay claim to none of 


Ghe Nature of True Greatness. 209 


these has relapsed into apathy and discontent. But how little 
do such understand the nature of true greatness! The fairest 
flowers of our race have bloomed from hidden roots. Those 
who have most enriched the world have said with the Apostles, 
“Silver and gold have we none.” Genius has been overtaken 
and passed by plodding patience. Great wars have generally 
been great mistakes and greater crimes. Whereas true great- 
ness consists in doing the appointed work of life from the 
platform of a great motive ; and in nurturing all that is divinest 
_ and noblest in the character. 

John never thought whether or not he was living a great life. 
It was his one aim to obey the promptings of the Spirit of God, 
and to fulfil his course. When all the world was ringing with 
his fame, in an outburst of genuine humility he said that he was 
only a voice borne on the desert breeze. It was no care to him 
that he was unable to work a miracle. He who sent him had 
not put miracles in the programme of his life; and he was 
perfectly satisfied with the arrangement. As the herald, it 
was his business to raise his voice in repeated proclamation of 
the King ; why, then, should he be sad because he had not the 
special qualifications of others in his Master’s retinue? To 
fulfil the task for which he had been qualified and sent, and to 
do it so as to please his King—that was his one ambition and 
aim; and to do it undaunted by the threats, and unfascinated 
by the blandishments, of the world—that made him great. 

The lesson is for us all. Many who will read these lines 
are powerless to work miracles. They cannot dazzle or 
bewilder by the splendour of their intellectual gifts or the 
brilliance of their endowments. For them, the path in the 
valley, the monotony of the commonplace, the grey sky of 
uneventful routine, seem to be the predestined lot. And the 
very expectation of doing aught worth living for seems to have 
died out of them. But let such take heart! The real great- 
ness of life is within their reach, if they will only claim it by 
the grace of God. 

Do not try to doa great thing: you may waste all your life 
waiting for the opportunity which may never come... But since 


little things are always claiming your attention, do them as 
: oO 


210 The Work of an Angifted Worker. 


they come, from a great motive, for the glory of God, to win 
his smile of approval, and to do good to men. It is harder to 
plod on in obscurity, acting thus, than to stand on the high 
places of the field, within the view of al], and to do deeds of 
valour, at which rival armies stand still to gaze. And no holy 
act, however trivial, goes without the swift recognition and the 
ultimate recompense of Christ. 

To fulfil faithfully the duties of your station ; to use to the 
uttermost the gifts of your ministry ; to bear chafing annoy- 
ances and trivial irritations, as martyr bore the pillory and 
stake ; to find the one noble trait in people who try and molest 
you; to put the kindest construction on unkind acts and 
words ; to give of your best to the least; to love with the 
love of God even the unthankful and evil ; to be content to be 
a fountain in the midst of a wild valley of stones, nourishing 
a few lichens and wild flowers, or now and again a thirsty 
sheep ; and to do this always, not for the praise of man, but for 
the sake of God—/hzs makes a great life. 


II. THE THEME OF OUR MINISTRY.—“ John spake of this 
Man.” ‘The Baptist did little else than speak of the coming 
One. But this was the sufficient object of his ministry. That 
was all that he was required to do; and to do this well was to 
fulfil the purpose for which he was sent. And it is not other- 
wise now. The splendid miracles that shone as jewels on the 
brow of the first age of the Church have long since passed 
away ; and it may be truly said of her, “ She can do no miracles” : 
but her noblest function still remains untouched. She can 
speak true things of her Lord. 

Do it privately—tJohn spake of Jesus to ¢wo disciples, as 
they stood beside Him; and each became a convert and an 
apostle. It was so that Christianity spread in the first age, 
until the whole world was penetrated with its power. And 
probably fewer souls have been won by great preachers than by 
private individuals, speaking to children, friends, and neigh. 
_bours, and saying, “ Know the Lord.” 

Do it experimentally.—“1 saw and bare record.” There 
is nothing like personal testimony in this age of speculation 


Personal Testimony. 211 


and doubt. There is no voice so captivating as that which 
says, “ Come and hear, all ye that fear God ; and I will declare 
what He has done for my soul.” Who can resist the men, that 
pointing to their own history as evidence, say, “We know that 
the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding 
that we may know Him that is true; and we are in Him that is 
true, even in his Son Jesus Christ”? This is an age which asks 
eagerly for evidence ; let us give the evidence of our spiritual 
senses, which is every bit as good as that of our natural senses, 
or our intellectual faculties. The spiritual eye is as certain a 
guide as the physical. ‘The eyes of our heart have been 
enlightened, and we have seen the Lord.” 

Do it unostentatiously.—Let it be as natural as the laughter 
which bubbles up from the glad heart ; or the song of the little 
child that knows no care, whilst it roams amid the flowers of 
* spring. Do not divert men to yourself. Count yourself to have 
failed when they speak of you. Be content to be a voice, 
a messenger, a mirror, flashing the light on to the face of Christ 
from which it came. And that it may be so, keep the heart 
full of Jesus. The mouth must speak the things which it 
has made touching the King, when the heart is bubbling over 
with good matter. 

The one thing which closes the lips of so many is the feeling 
that critical eyes would detect a flaw between the words and 
the life of the speaker. But, if there be ground for this fear, 
why not put the finger of faith on 1 Thess. v. 23, 24, and claim 
that He who has called to his work, and has inbreathed a 
yearning for the blameless life, should make it possible, and do 
exceeding abundantly, far more than He has even taught us to 
ask or think. 

The mouth is one of those members which must be yielded 
to Jesus for his use ; and, if only it is taken away from the 
service of sin and self to which it has too often been devoted, 
and handed over to be kept and used by the Master Himself, 
it is marvellous how all difficulties will disappear, and how 
easy and blessed it will become to speak of Him. When He 
wants you to speak, He will show you the audience; He will 
give you the message ; He will supply you with the power. 


212 Che Work of an Angifted Worker. 


III. AN ILLUSTRATION OF POSTHUMOUS MINISTRY. — 
Though John had been dead for two years, his words were 
fresh in the people’s memories ; and, as they were compared 
with their fulfilment, they led many into the faith. 

We are doing more good than we know. We are setting 
streams flowing that shall go on refreshing and blessing men 
long after we have passed away. We are planting orchards 
whose shades shall protect, and fruit refresh, generations that 
shall be born long after our heads are laid low in death. We 
are giving men thoughts about Christ which now seem utterly 
wasted and inoperative, but to which they will refer some day - 
as the means of their conversion. And, as they stand over our 
graves, or meet in the old places where they were wont to 
gather with us, they will say: “Well! well! he was a good 
man; he did no miracles, he was not brilliant, he had no 
genius ; but all things he spake of Jesus were true.” 

What better epitaph could any of us wish? It seems a 
magnificent recompense for a life of arduous and brilliant 
service to be buried in the mausoleum of the fatherland, amid 
the boom of cannon and the peal of muffled bells, whilst the 
great and good mingle their tears with the lamentations of 
unknown millions ; but for my part I should be satisfied, if I 
could be sure that, when I am gone, some should gather, in 
after years, on the simple hillock headed by the stone that 
records my name, and assent to the truth of this epitaph, as 
they witness to it from the depths of their own glad experience, 
“He did no miracle ; but all things that he spake of Jesus were 
true.” 


XXXI. 
Lobe’s Delays. 


‘*When He had heard therefore that Lazarus was sick, He abode two 
days still in the same place where He was.”—JOHN xi. 6. 


omy 


HE lapse of years made it possible for the beloved 
evangelist to draw aside the veil which curtained 
the happy intercourse of our Lord with the home at 
Bethany. We are thus furnished with a conception 
of the one green oasis in the rugged wilderness 
through which He passed to his cross ; and are able 

to think of the pur@ and holy love that broke in upon his 
loneliness, and with true affection softened the bitterness of his 
last days, so far at least as human love could. 

' There were marked diversities in that home. Martha, prac- 
tical, business-like, and thoughtful of all that could affect the 
comfort and well-being of those she loved ; Mary, clinging, 
spiritual, gifted with all a woman’s delicacy of insight and 
tender svmpathy ; Lazarus, a man of few words, quiet and 
unobtrusive. But Jesus loved them each. In the 1orefront of 
this marvellous chapter stands the affirmation, “Jesus loved 
Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus” ; as if to teach us that at 
the very heart and foundation of all God’s dealings with us, 
however dark and mysterious they may be, we must dare to 
believe in and assert the infinite, unmerited, and unchanging 
love of God. Whom the Lord loves He rebukes; the sons 
whom He receives He chastens ; the boughs that are capable 
of bearing fruit are rigorously pruned. This is not joyous, but 
grievous ; nevertheless, in the golden Afterward it yieldeth the 
peaceable fruit of righteousness to them that are exercised 
thereby. 





214 Lobe’s Delays. 


I. LovE Permits PAIN.—To that hidden retreat in Perea 
there came one day a breathless messenger with the tidings of 
the illness of Christ’s friend. The sisters never doubted that 
He would speed at all hazards to his side, and stay him from 
death. And if He had done as they expected, He would not 
only have saved his life, but have spared the sisters the anguish 
of long suspense, the flickering out of hope, the agony of the 
death scene, the grave, and the desolate, darkened home. 
How different were his love and their thoughts of it! ‘“ When 
He had heard ¢herefore that he was sick, He abode two. days 
still in the same place where He was.” 

What, a startling ¢herefore! He abstained from going, not 
because He did not love them, but because He did love them. 
His love alone kept Him back from hasting at once to the 
dear and stricken home. Anything Jess than an infinite love 
must have rushed instantly to the relief of those loved and 
troubled hearts, to stay their grief, and to have the luxury 
(which only love can appreciate) of wiping and stanching 
their tears and causing their sorrow and sighing to flee away. 
Divine love could alone hold back the impetuosity of the 
Saviour’s tender-heartedness until the Angel of Pain had done 
her work. 

Who can estimate how much we owe to suffering and pain? 
But for them we should have little scope for many of the 
chief virtues of the Christian life. Where were faith, without 
trial to test it ; or patience, with nothing to bear ; or experience, 
without tribulation to develop it? These qualities could not 
be perfected in our Lord without suffering. “He learned 
obedience by the things that He suffered.” And we can 
only secure the fruit of the autumn by paying the price of 
wintry frosts and equinoctial hurricanes. Suffering robs us 
of proud self-reliance, and casts us in an agony at the feet 
of God. Suffering prunes away the leaves in which we 
rejoiced, that the sap may find its way into fruit. Suffering 
isolates the soul, shutting it away from all creature aid, and 
surrounding it by a wall of fire. The leaves of the aromatic 
plant must be crushed ere they will emit their fragrance ; 
the ore must be plunged in the furnace ere the gold is set 


“@bhou art tith me.’ 215 


free ; the pebble must be polished on the lapidary’s wheel ere 
its brilliant colours are apparent. 


This leaf, this stone—it is thy heart: 
It must be crushed by pain and smart, 
It must be cleansed by sorrow'’s art, 
Ere it will yield a fragrance sweet ; 
Ere it will shine a jewel meet 
To lay before the Saviour’s feet. 


Flow soon does pain drive us to the Saviour! Whilst Lazarus 
was in health, no messenger hasted to bring the Saviour to 
Bethany. But when death hovered over the little group, 
they summoned Him with all speed. This is an illustration of 
how pain, like a surge of the ocean, lifts us up and flings us 
down at the feet of the Saviour. The dark moaning waters 
drive the dove to the Ark; the dreary winter sends the 
swallows south; the sharp pruning knife compels the sap 
into the leafy crown or ripening branch ; tempest roar makes 
the timid nurslings nestle close to their mother’s side. Pain 
makes God a necessity. It is in the valley that we exchange 
the word “He” for “Thou.” “Thou art with me.” 

Pain often reveals some unrealized side of our Saviour’s 
character. The sisters had never known Him as the Resurrec- 
tion and the Life, if Lazarus had not died. David had never 
known God as his Rock, and Fortress, and Deliverer, if he had 
not been hunted on the hills of Engedi. Israel had never known 
God as a Man of War if the nation had not endured the horrors 
of Egyptian captivity. Thus our very necessities read us lessons 
of the variety and fulness of the resources of our God. Every 
stormy wind in its rush whispers some new name for Christ. 
Every wave that dashes at our feet flings there some message 
from the ocean fulness of his nature. Every crucifixion rends 
some impenetrable veil that had hung before his heart. 

And pain ts often suggestive of the noblest acts of sacrifice and 
self-devotion. It was after Lazarus had suffered that Mary 
broke her alabaster box over the head of Christ, not only 
viewing Him as the Resurrection, but preparing his incorruptible 
body for its brief sojourn in the grave. Many of the master- 
pieces of literature and art owe their existence to the strange 


216 Lote’s Delays. 


touch of pain, giving a fire, a passion, and an intensity to the 
brain and heart of genius. If the Master is about to use thee 
largely in ministering to others, do not be surprised if He puts 
thee to serve an apprenticeship in the School of pain. Poets 
learn in suffering what they teach in song. Blood and water 
flowed from a pierced side. Pearls must be dived for by those 
whose feet are heavily weighted to make them sink. 

And there is this further thought. The Lord permitted those 
sisters to suffer because of the benefit which would accrue 
to others. Speaking to his disciples shortly afterwards, He 
said : “I am glad for your sakes that I was not there.” The 
sisters suffered because their pain offered a platform on 
which Jesus could erect one of his greatest miracles, to 
stand as a beacon to weary hearts of all ages. This idea 
is not foreign to even heathen philosophers. “Accept,” says 
the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, “everything that happens to 
thee, even if it seem disagreeable, because it leads to the 
health of the universe; for God would not lay on any man 
that which he suffers, if it were not useful for the continuance 
and perfection of the whole.” It is probable that no one suffers 
nobly without in some degree ministering to the glory of God in 
the well-being of others. Let those who live to suffer, who lie 
all day in pain, and all night in utter weariness, take heart ! 
In some way that passes our thought they too are fulfilling 
a useful and blessed office to the entire family of man. 

Such are some of the results of Pain; and as we count them 
over we cannot wonder that God’s love allows us to suffer, and 
is even eager to stand aside to let her do her work. For 
the time in which Pain can perfect her work is short. She 
needs to make haste, because the morning cometh in which she 
will not be able to work. 


II. Gop’s LOVE SOMETIMES LEAVES OUR PRAYERS UN- 
ANSWERED.—What has become of so many thousands of our 
prayers’. They were not deficient in earnestness ; we uttered 
them with strong crying and tears. They were not deficient in 
perseverance ; we offered them three times a day for years. 
They were not deficient in faith; for they have originated 


Guansinered Prayers. 217 


in hearts that have never for a moment doubted that God was, 
and that He was the rewarder of them that diligently sought 
Him. Still no answer has come. ‘The argosies went forth to 
sea ; but, like some ill-fated vessel, have never been heard of 
since. There was no voice, nor any to answer, nor, apparently, 
any to regard. 

What is the history of these unanswered prayers? Some 
may say that they sought things which were not good—and 
this may explain some of the perplexity; but a better clue 
is given here: this was a prayer touchingly pathetic and 
earnest, for something which was prompted by natural 
affection ; for something which it was in the scope of God’s love 
to give, for it was given; and yet the prayer was apparently 
unanswered. The answer was postponed and delayed. 

When prayer is unanswered it may be that it has been 
mistaken in its object, and the mistake will be indicated by 
inability’to continue praying, and by the dying down of the 
desire in the soul. In other cases, especially when desire and 
faith remain buoyant and elastic, and still the answer comes 
not, God’s intention is that in the delay the soul may be led 
to take up a position which it had never assumed before, 
but from which it will never be again dislodged. No praying 
breath is ever spent in vain. If you can believe for the 
blessings you ask, they are certainly yours. The goods are 
consigned, though not delivered ; the blessing is labelled with 
your name, but not sent. The vision is yet for an appointed 
time ; it will come and will not tarry. The black head may 
have become white, the bright eye dim, the loving heart 
impaired in its beating ; but the answer must come at length. 
God will give it at the earliest moment consistent with the true 
well-being of the one He loves. 


III. Gop’s LOVE COMES AT LENGTH.—To the sisters He 
must have appeared neglectful; but He was not really so. 
Notice, that after two days, though no fresh message had 
reached Him, “ He said to his disciples, Lazarus is dead.” How 
carefully He must have watched all that transpired in that 
much-loved home! He saw the messenger’s return; the 


718 - Lobe’s Delavs. 


momentary joy his tidings gave; the gradual waning of life ; 
the anguish of the watchers as they beheld the slackening of the 
silver cords of life. He had followed in thought the funeral 
train to the rocky tomb. The whole situation was constantly 
present to Him, till He saw that He could interpose with 
the best possible result. 

So is it ever. His step may linger ; but his watchful interest 
never falters. There is not a sigh, a pang, a tear, that escapes 
his notice. There is not a fluttering pulse which He does not 
feel, noticing its tremulous anxiety. He sz¢s as a refiner of silver. 
He knows our sorrows. He is acquainted with our grief. He 
slumbers not, nor sleeps. 

And when He comes He does more than we asked or 
thought. He raises not the sick, but the dead. He makes the 
darkness of the tomb the background against which to set 
forth the lustre of Resurrection glory. He does much more 
than the wildest fancy could have dreamed. Prayer is seen to 
be answered in a sweeter, deeper, diviner form than could have 
been hoped for,. The benefit gained by the long delay is 
evident ; and the wisdom of the Divine patience is acknow- 
ledged. ‘Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and 
knowledge of God ; how unsearchable are his judgments, and 
his ways past finding out !” 

In after days the three would not have wished it otherwise. 
They would review it all, as we shall review things from the 
hill-summits of glory. And as the whole marvellous story 
passed before them in after years, they would anticipate the cry 
with which the Redeemed Church shall hail the unfolding of the 
Divine purposes in relation to our race, “Amen! Hallelujah! 
Amen! so be it!”—the reverent assent of the understanding, 
the acquiescence of the soul. “Hallelujah!”-—the glad, long 
outburst of adoration and praise, of worship and love. 


XXXII. 
Anointed for Gis Burial. 


‘Then took Mary a pound of ointment of spikenard, very costly, and 
anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair: and the house 
was filled with the odour of the ointment.’’—JOHN xii. 3. 


“CL ed: 

ETWEEN the last verse of the foregoing chapter and 
’ the first of this, an interval of many weeks took 
place, during which our Lord was in retirement 
from the hate of the priests, until his hour had come. 
At first He took refuge in Ephraim, sixteen miles 
N.E. from Jerusalem, amid the wild, uncultivated hill 
country which fences middle Palestine from the Jordan valley. 
Thence He crossed to Perea, further from Jerusalem, and 
more secure. The few weeks spent thus teemed with incidents 
omitted by our Evangelist but fully recorded by the other three. 

At the beginning of the last week of his life our Lord found 
Himself again in Bethany, and in the beloved home where He 
desired to spend as much time as possible before He suffered. 
It was easy to go across to Jerusalem in the early morning, and 
to return in the cool of the afternoon. On one of the precious 
evenings a simple entertainment in honour of their Friend was 
planned by the sisters, and held in the house of Simon the 
leper, perhaps because it would contain larger numbers. 

It is not difficult to imagine the scene. The village in the 
hollow of Olivet, nestling amid its olive-trees and oleanders. 
The long-drawn shadows flung by the sun now sinking on the 
further side of the hill. The rustic, roomy house, perhaps not 
more than one-storey in height, and covered by creepers. The 
spacious apartment, with its low tables, surrounded by the 
couches on which reclined the guests. The simple provision of 
bread and wine and herbs and freshly-picked fruit. The 
company, variously composed—Jews from Jerusalem, some 
reclining, others standing as spectators ; while peasants crowd 





220 Anointed for Gis Burial. 


around the door. The Master sits among his apostles. John, 
with love and fire; Peter, dove and rock; James, the just ; 
Nathanael, the guileless ; Judas, the man of Kerioth ; Simon, 
whose flesh had come like that of a little child ; Lazarus, fresh 
from the world of spirits ; Martha, intent on hospitable cares ; 
Mary, absorbed with her self-sacrificing love ; and above all, 
the Lord Himself in the place of honour, with the shadow 
of the cross already gathering over his noble face. 

As the meal drew to a close, Mary passed to the back of the 
Saviour’s couch, carrying an alabaster vase of costly ointment ; 
this she poured upon his feet, and then, according to Matthew 
and Mark, upon his head. Judas scowled as he saw the act of 
love, and talked of waste; but ES smiled, and spoke of 
everlasting remembrance. 


I. MAry.—The love of Christ falling on her heart was 
reflected back to Him ; as the light of the sun shines back on 
itself from the moon. Not that she ever allowed herself to 
think about her love to Him ; she lived out of sight of what she 
felt in the all-absorbing thought of what He was. Of this, 
at least, she was sure, that ever since she had sat at his feet, the 
Scriptures, the feasts, and the world, were all new to her. 
And could she ever forget that He had summoned her brother 
from the grave? There was no doubt the strong pure love 
of her heart to Jesus, the man; but shining through this, 
as light through air, was the devout reverence of the believer to 
the Saviour, of the servant to the Lord. 

Twice during his early life our Lord was anointed by a 
woman. In the first instance, by one who had trodden dark 
and evil paths ; in the second, by this pure saint. How quick 
of growth is love, whenever it takes root! How ingenious in its 
inventiveness ! How regardless of cost! Such love must show 
itself. It pines for expression. It must go forth in offices of 
love for the beloved. Love approves itself by deeds. Not by 
feelings—they are like bubbles which children blow. Not by 
words—they are like down which floats away on the wind. 
But, as the Lord said, “He that hath my commandments, and 
keepeth them, he it is that loveth Me.” 


The best love gives tts best.—In the words of Jesus, quoted by 


Lobe’s Gifts. 221 


the evangelist Mark, z¢ does what ct can. It ransacks the house 
of its choicest stores, and hastens to bestow them on the object 
of its attachment. It is not content with giving what it must— 
the fixed tribute, the specific proportion; it rejoices to give 
special love-tokens of all that is in possession. And it is on this 
principle that the Lord accepts our gifts. Whatever is given, 
He at once turns to what is left, and apprises the offering, rather 
by what remains behind, than by itself. He hardly notices the 
munificent gift of gold, because He knows the small proportion 
it bears to the abundance from which it is taken. He welcomes 
the farthing, because He knows that it is the widow’s all. 

I remember once, at the close of an unusually impressive 
missionary meeting, that I was led to propose to the gathered 
crowds of Christian people that we should present our Lord 
with some special article on which we set great store ; not with 
any thought of merit, but altogether as a token of the deep 
personal love we bore Him. It is the custom of friends to 
make presents to each other: how much more should we some- 
times take the opportunity of giving our Lord that which we 
prize, and which it will cost us something to renounce ; though 
we forget the sacrifice in the glad love which finds at last an 
adequate expression. In response to this appeal many there 
and then gave jewels and ornaments and costly articles, which 
realized a handsome sum for the Master’s cause. We called 
them alabaster boxes of very precious ointment ; and it was 
sweet to give them. And amongst the letters received after- 
wards was one from a widow, who said that she had long withheld 
her assent to her daughter becoming a missionary, because she 
felt that she could not part with her; but that under the 
constraint of the love of Christ she would stand out no longer, 
but gave her to Him as her priceless offering. 

Love justifies itself in the eye of love-—Some that sat at table, 
and one of them especially, thought that Mary would have 
shown her love better if she had sold the alabaster-box for 
three-hundred pence, and given the proceeds to the poor. But 
the Master said it was a good work, good because of the love 
which prompted it. It is, of course, right to help the poor, 
to build churches, to subsidise missionary societies. We must 
compensate for our lack of personal service by giving the 


222 Anointed for His Burial. 


results of our labours. But we have no right to criticise a love 
that expresses itself in some other form—in a psalm, a picture, 
an act of strange devotion. To our utilitarian brains ours may 
seem the best method of expressing our love. There is 
something to show for it. But the love of the other may 
be deeper and more delicate, because eager to give the beloved 
one all the rapture of personal enjoyment; and there is an 
element of unselfish devotion too, purged from the alloy of the 
desire to see one’s gift embodied in some lasting expression. 

I have met somewhere with this parable. There were two 
men, Christians, the one of whom expressed his love for 
the Master in acts that left little permanent record among men, 
but which glowed with the fire of enthusiastic devotion. 
Amongst other things, he built a church in a lonely place 
in which he spent vast sums on architecture, music, beauty 


of decoration. But his friend rebuked him. ‘‘ What,” said he, 


“will you. sing psalms when the poor of Christ’s flock are 
perishing? and build churches when oppression has-to be 
exposed, evil attacked, foul dwellings cleansed? will you devote 
yourself to questions of taste when there is so much to be done 
amid the squalid quarters of the poor? If you really love 
Christ do something practical.” And the other meekly answered 
that he did all for the love of Christ ; but, feeling rebuked, he 
went forth to labour amongst the poor ; however, he had no gift 
for it, and failed. And the Master called both to his side, 
saying to the one that had rebuked his brother, “ Rebuke him 
not ; he loves Me net less than thou ; and it is sweet to Me to 
have love expressed in such a way as that it must be meant for 
Me alone, altogether apart from any benefit it may confer on 
others.” 

There are so many mixed motives which enter into our 
beneficence. We dike to feel that we have done something ; 
that we have built a little bit into the fabric of God’s kingdom ; 
that we have contributed to the well-being of our fellows. And 


these are all laudable and worthy aims. But by how much they 


are prominent in our minds, by so much do they detract from 
the simplicity and purity of our expressions towards Christ. 
Let us not leave these undone ; but let us supplement them by 
taking opportunities as they occur of presenting Christ with 


: 


Lobe Rindles Lote. 223 


that which only He knows about, and is the direct personal 
gift of our affection. It is possible to combine love to Jesus 
with beneficence to the poor. But if a choice must be made 
the personal love that does all it can for Him is better than the 
love that is divided between the Master and the beneficent 
results of its gifts. 

The love of contemplation will sometimes break out in the 
most herotc acts.—Martha was apt to chide her sister for doing 
so little in the house. She could not understand a love which 
seemed so utterly unpractical. She did not realize that her 
sister was being led to apprehend truths of which she had 
no idea ; and that probably she was the only one in the world 


_ who had really entered into the heart of the Lord’s teaching 


about his approaching death. The busy house-wife little 
dreamt that her younger sister would presently perform a deed 
of rare and deep significance; which should refresh that 
beloved heart amid the agonies of crucifixion, even as it left a 
fragrance on the sacred body, of which all the coarse handling 
of the next few days could not deprive it. 

As she heard the Master speak of his approaching end Mary 
grasped the whole situation. She saw that she could not be 
there to perform the last offices of a woman’s love. She 
bethought herself of this ingenious method of anticipating his 
burying. She resolved that, whatever the indignities offered to 
that dear form, it should have as royal an anointing as a king’s. 
And Jesus read the meaning of the deed, and put into words the 
unexpressed eloquence of her soul : “ Let her alone ; against the 
day of my burying hath she kept this.” 

And love kindles love-—Not even Judas would have called 
this act waste, could he have seen the love it has kindled and 
the acts to which it has led. It has been spoken of in all 
the world for a memorial of her. The Lord’s prevision has 
been exactly verified. His Gospel’has been preached in all the 
world, and this woman’s deed has been proclaimed with it, 
stirring the hearts of men and women beneath every sky. No 
noble act is ever lost. It carries in it the seeds of self-propaga- 
tion. It sows itself, as wind-wafted-seeds will find a lodgment 
in crannies of the rocks, and interstices of walls. It is found 
after many days in the heroic purpose and generous act of those 


224 Anointed for His Burial. 


who have been inspired by its spirit. Yield yourself to God ; 
let the Spirit of God suggest your method of service: it may be 
quite different from anything to which others are called ; it may 
even draw down adverse criticism and censure ; but if it is for 
Him, whether it be an act ora gift, it is enough—do it. He will. 
shield you, and reward you with a smile, and put the precious 
treasure among His choice possessions. Shall an earthly 
sovereign have a cabinet filled with choice gifts from her 
subjects, and shall not Christ treasure the love-tokens of his 
closer friends? The poor you have always with you; do not 
through familiarity neglect Him, but do Him good. 


II. JuDAs.—What a contrast between his face and Mary’s! 
Hers—open, pure, tender, now and again flushed with an 
exquisite glow from the soul behind. His—dark, hard, for- 
bidding. As the sun draws forth the foetid miasma of the pool, 
so did this act of Mary’s excite his angriest feelings of hatred, 
though he cleverly cloked them under solicitude for the poor. 
That very night, he who now hagegled over three-hundred 
pence, would be selling his Lord for thirty pieces of silver! 
But his true character was not yet discovered. 

We can well imagine that Mary felt an instinctive shudder 
pass through her whenever Judas came near. _ Women are 
shrewd judges of character. The dove knows when the hawk is 
hovering over her. We can imagine that after Jesus and his 
disciples had gone forth on any morning from that home, how 
Mary would say : “I cannot endure that Judas ; I do not know 
what it is, but he never comes near me without making me 
shudder; and I am sure that he dislikes me in his heart 
as much as I do him.” “Hush,” Martha would answer, “ you 
know the Master trusts him with the bag, and he is held in high 
honour among them for his goodness to the poor.” “ Well,” 
would the younger sister reply, “it may be so ; but I am certain 
that he is not what he seems.” 

Ah, how often will a man adopt sanctimonious phraseology to 
hide his real self, and will talk of the poor, and Christ, and 
religion, not that he cares for any of these things, but because 
he desires to add to his own estate or position! JVot that he 


©ur Master. 938 


cares might be written on the life of many a hypocrite. He 
comes to church ; not that he cares, but to secure admittance 
to good society. He professes to be a Christian ; not that he 
cares, but to blind people to his deeds: He gives away money } 
hot that he cares, but to win name and fame. And the man 
who does not care is hardening himself by every act of 
hypocrisy, until he can sell his Lord. 


Il]. THE MASTER. He shielded her.—“ Let her alone. Why 
trouble ye her?” I see her timid look to Him, when those 
rough words were spoken. Will He sympathize with them? 
And He cast over her the mantle of his instant protection. 
Whenever you are molested or assailed, look to Him, shelter in 
Him, hide in his cleft side ; and you will hear Him say, “ Touch 
not mine anointed.” 

He approved her work.He called it good. It is very 
wonderful that He should think of aught which is wrought 
by human hands as good; but He looks beneath to the love 
that inspires and prompts. If He shall speak so of any of our 
. poor work, what a heaven it will be! It has been full of failure ; 
the promised crops have failed ; our hopes have been dashed 
with repeated disappointment ; and men have either not noticed 
or turned away with disdain. But if his verdict is good, we 
shall be more than repaid. 

He interpreted her inner purpose—No one would have 
guessed what she meant by that gracious act ; but He knew, 
and vindicated her. Yes, and so it must ever be. He reads 
our motives; He sees what we put into any act; He under- 
stands what we hardly dare to say ; and before the universe He 
will some day give us credit for it all. 

What a Master is ours! Oh for crowns for his brow, for 
alabaster boxes for his person, for tongues to tell his love! 
Let us anew dedicate ourselves, our lives, our substance, our all 
to Him ; so that the perfume of the sacrifice may fill the homes 
where we dwell, and the shrines where we worship and work, 
and the hearts and lives of others. 


XXXIIL. 
Falling into the Ground to Die. 


“Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a corn of wheat fall into the 
ground and die, it abideth alone; but if it die, it bringeth forth much 
fruit.’’—JOHN xii. 24. 


HE far East sent representatives to the cradle of the 
Son of Man ; the far West sent them to his cross. 
Both hemispheres and all races of men find their 
centre and meeting-place in Jesus Christ. It is 
important to bear in mind that these seekers for 
Christ, whose pathetic entreaty, “ Sir, we would see 

Jesus |” so deeply stirred the Master’s heart, were not simply 

Greek-speaking Jews; but were genuine Greeks, children of 

the race which, next to the Roman and the Hebrew, has left 

the deepest impression on our modern life. 

They were probably in the habit of frequenting the Jewish | 
feasts ; either for purposes of trade, or because they found in 
the literature and worship of the chosen people some truer 
satisfaction for the instinctive cravings of their religious natures 
than could be supplied in the land of their birth. And as the 
land was ringing with the name and deeds of Jesus, it was 
natural that they should want to see Him for themselves. 

They made their application in the first instance to Philip ; 
perhaps because, as his name indicates, he had Grecian con- 
nections, or was even of Grecian origin. Philip called in the 
counsel and advice of his friend and companion, Andrew ; and 
the two together told the Master of the interesting inquiry, 
eliciting, in answer, one of the profoundest statements that ever 
fell from those gracious lips. It is as if the Lord saw in their 
application a foreshadowing of the advent of a great multitude, 
which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and 





L 


Christ Glorified. 227 


people, and tongues, who should be led to seek Him ; though 
He realized also the tremendous cost to Himself, by which 
alone He would be able to attract them, and hold them, and 
satisfy the infinite cravings of their hearts. It is of that cost 
that we are now chiefly to think. 


1. DEATH THE WAY TO GLORIFICATION.—“ The hour is 
come that the Son of Man should be glorified.” How much 
this glorification meant to the Master! It was not for Him- 
self ; but that He might be the better able to bring a revenue 
of glory to his Father. Thus He prayed: “Father, glorify thy 
Son, that thy Son aiso may glorify Thee.” 

What majestic stages there are in the glorification of the 
Holy Trinity! In the first instance, the Father raises the Son 
from the dead, and gives Him glory ; and then raises Him to 
his own right hand, investing Him in his human nature with 
the glory He had with Him before the foundation of the world. 
Then, when Jesus is glorified, the Holy Spirit is given ; and He 
glorifies the Lord by taking of those things which are his, and 
revealing them to his own. Moreover, in addition to this, He 
repeats them in their hearts, so that the Lord is glorified in 
them. And thus, as the Son is glorified—in the first place by 
the Father, and in the second by the Spirit, and in the third by 
the unity and spirituality of his Church—He gathers up the 
triple ray and flashes it, in one strong and direct beam, back on 
his Father; and thus the passion of his heart is realized 
(Jehn xvii. 5-10 ; vil. 39 ; xvi. 14 ; xvii. 1). 

But at the threshold of all stands the glorification of Jesus 
through death. It was his constant habit to connect the two. 
The Christ must suffer ere He could enter into his glory. As 
Judas went out to do the fatal deed of treachery, the Master 
said: “The hour is come that the Son of Man should be 
glorified.” And so here the search of the Greeks reminds Him 
of his approaching,end, and this of his glory. 

The death of Jesus could not add to his intrinsic glory. 
What could be added to that character in which Man and God 
met in perfect balance, as the pure air of the mountains is 
penetrated and saturated by the clear and blessed light of 


228 Falling into the Ground to Die. 


morning? But the death of Jesus could and did promote his 
glorification—that is, it opened up to the view of men and 
angels qualities of his character and attributes of his being 
which had else remained for ever concealed. The prism cannot 
add to the glory of the sun by a single ray ; but it can glorify 
each beam of light, which it breaks into a sevenfold band of 
colour, revealing its hidden glory in a mystery of beauty. The 
death of the seed in the ground does not add a single property 
of fruitfulness or beauty which was not there before ; but it 
liberates them, and gives them room to break into manifest- 
ation. 

And perhaps there is a sense in which each of us must learn 
to die daily, that the true intrinsic excellence of the character 
of Jesus may be revealed in us. It is there in germ and 
essence ; but it awaits death to set free its hidden powers. Let 
us not be surprised, therefore, if we have to pass through death, 
and in dying are compelled to manifest traits and qualities 
which else had been hidden and concealed. The death of 
December must precede the colours of May and the fruits of 
October. 


I]. DEATH THE CURE OF LONELINESS.— Except a corn of 
wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone.” It would 
seem as if the very heart of God yearned for society. In perfect 
blessedness He had been all-sufficient for Himself; but there 
was within Him a love which could find no expression or satis- 
faction apart from beings on which it could rest. Love is 
almost inconceivable unless there be objects on which to expend 
and for which to sacrifice itself. Did not this underlie that 
Divine resolve, “ Let us make man”? 

But it was not enough simply to make objects for love. They 
must be attached to the Infinite Lover by strong and enduring 
bands—they must be led to love ; there must be reciprocity in 
affection, and blessedness in mutual tenderness. If a man and 
woman do not love, there will be unutterable loneliness in the 
marriage-bond itself. It were not enough, then, for God to 
create; He must attract, and attach, and bind, to Himself. 
But to do this involves something more than an act of power 3 


Fruitinlness. 229 


it will demand self-sacrifice, self-giving, self-abandonment, on 
his part—all that is set forth in the metaphor of falling into the 
ground to die. God can only cease to be alone when He not 
_ only loves, but is loved. And He can only be loved with the 

one love that can satisfy Him, because it yields all, when He 
has first given all. Therefore, He gave his only-begotten Son ; 
and in giving Himself Jesus has made it impossible that God 
should ever be alone again ; because self-giving, such as his, 
will ever excite the love, and gratitude, and devotion, of human 
hearts through all ages. 

There are many lonely people about the world who complain 
of desolate and solitary lives. They account for their condition 
by supposing it due to the failure of relatives through death or 
intervening distance; but, indeed, it is rather attributable to 
the fact that they have never fallen into the ground to die, 
that they have always consulted their own ease and well-being, 
and have never learnt that the cure of loneliness comes through 
the sowing of oneself in a grave of daily self-sacrifice. The 
corn of wheat must fall into the ground and die, and it will 
abide no longer alone. 

III. DEATH THE WAY TO FRUITFULNESS.—“ But if it die, 
it beareth much fruit.” What vision was that which rose 
before the mind of Christ when He heard of those Gentiles 
and spoke of fruit? As to the first man in Paradise the fruit 
of the tree was pleasant to the eyes, so to the second Man the 
fruit of the tree of the cross was, above all things, fair and 
seductive. 

It included the bride, his wife ; it included the great multitude 
which no man can number; it included all those deeds of 
heroism and graces of self-denial to which the story of his 

cross has given rise as it has sped from land to land ; it included 

harvests of saved souls which shall golden the furrows of eternal 
ages. All this was possible only because He dared to die. 
“Without shedding of blood there is no remission.” His death 
was needed to put away sin; to reveal the love of God; to 
abolish the curse ; and to open the kingdom of Heaven to all 
believers. 


230 Falling into the Ground to Die. 


There are many who sigh for fruitfulness, that have never 
yet learnt the deep lesson of the cross of Christ. We can never 
die in quite the sense in which He died; not by us can there 
be substitution, or sacrifice, or expiation; and yet there is a 
sense in which we must drink deeply into the meaning of his 
death if we would be really fruitful. If we would save others, 
we cannot save ourselves. If we would help men, we must 
be content to be helpless. If we would receive grafts of the | 
wild olive, we must be content to bear the gash of the pruning 
knife. If we would fill the world with-a sweet savour of the 
precious ointment, we must be content to be broken boxes. The 
most fruitful boughs are those from which the foliage and shoots 
are cut away with unsparing hand, that the sap may accumu- 
late in the swelling clusters. 


IV. DEATH THE GATE TO LIFE.—“ He that loveth his life 
shall lose it, and he that hateth his life shall keep it unto life 
eternal.” Our Lord deliberately chose death, because He knew, 
first, that He could not be holden by it; and, secondly, that 
it was only through the grave that He could reach the resur- 
rection life and the ascension glory. Therefore, it was that He 
went down into the valley of death, singing as He went, “Thou 
wilt not leave my soul in Hades, neither wilt Thou suffer thine 
Holy One to see corruption.” 


There is also a deep truth for us all in these marvellous | 
words which He repeated on three occasions, as if He would 
work them into the very texture of our hearts. Not that we 
are to make death for ourselves, or constantly fling ourselves 
away into deep, dark furrows at the impulse of our own choice ; 
but that we should be on the alert not to avoid, but to take 
any opportunity that God gives us, of going into the land 
of Moriah, to any of the mountains of which He may tell 
us. Dare to look up into the face of God, O ye who long 
for the richer, deeper life; and tell Him that you will not 
choose your path, but that you are willing to follow Him through 
_ death, if that is the only portal of life; and then wait for 
Him to teach you each step that must be taken through the. 


Ghe Antidote to Pain. 231 


deepening shadows which lie between you and the more 
abundant life, which is your true heritage ! 

Death can never be pleasant to the flesh. The knife is 
sharp, the fire burns, the cup is bitter, heart and flesh fail ; 
and it sometimes seems as if we must relinquish the effort to 
keep the girded loin and the undaunted attitude. We learn 
how Abraham felt as for those three weary days he knew that 
each step was carrying him deeper into the gloom. We cry, 
“Let this cup pass from me.” Falling into the ground to die is 
no pastime to the little corns of wheat. 

But He who has gone through death Himself knows every 
turn of the valley and every ford in the river. He cannot make 
a mistake ; nor will He take us by a rougher path than needs 
be. See how his footprints, nail-pierced, have trodden and 
retredden the way with the many that He has brought hither 
and brought through. He would not have brought you by this 
path unless He had known that you were strong enough to 
bear it; or that He was strong enough to carry you, if the 
worst should come to the worst. And so, since He is there, do 
not fail to say his name a hundred times a day, if need be, 
repeating it as the antidote to pain: “Jesus! Jesus ! Jesus!” 

There are times in such experiences when his voice is very 
distinctly heard, reassuring the soul of a promise. At other 
times it seems impossible to detect his voice. But then He 
infuses strength into our nature in a subtler, tenderer way ; and 
instead of strengthening us by his words, He becomes Himself 
the strength of our heart and our portion for ever. 

Our true attitude is the uncompromising surrender of our 
will to his will ; not trying to effect any great changes in our 
emotional or mental life, but willing his will, completely and 
always, and asking Him to work in us, to will and to do of his 
own good pleasure. Let us not court death, or seek to inflict 
death, or worry as to whether we are dying properly. Let us 
roll the whole responsibility on Him, and trust Him up to the 
hilt. His will is our weal. 

All along the line of life we must be prepared to erect altars 
on which we may yield to God in sacrifice, habits, associa- 
tions, fascinations, which He has revealed as alien to our true 


232 Falling into the Ground to Die. 


well-being. The soul that dares to live this life will find streams 
flowing from every smitten rock ; honey in the carcase of every 
slain lion ; fair winds (as in the old Greek story) following on 
the offering of every Iphigenia. I saw a beautiful device once— 
a hollow cross, filled with flowers which fell out as the cross 
was carried. Shoulder your cross, child of God! After the 
first step there will be a shower of flowers. 

So it must be ever. Day out of night ; spring out of winter ; 
flowers out of frost; joy out of sorrow; fruitfulness out of 
pruning ; Olivet out of Gethsemane; the Ascension out of 
Calvary ; life out of death ; and the Christ that is to be out 
of the pangs of a travailing creation. 


No.e.a ay 
Ghe Troubled Saviour. 


‘“ Now is my soul troubled ; and what shall I say? Father, save Me from 
this hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour,”—JouN xii. 27. 


x 
Sr N these words the Son of Man lays bare his soul. 
There is no question of the resolute spirit, one with 
Deity itself in the purpose of redemption ; but only 
wh a question of the soul, with its sympathetic influence 
ele, 0 the flesh. Never for a moment could the blessed 

45 Lord swerve from his cherished determination to 
undo the havoc wrought. by Satan in, His own fair world. But 
as He contemplated the awful cost of agony which must first 
be met by Him, it seemed as if his human nature could never 
hold out. 

In the garden of Gethsemane this awful agony reached its 
climax. The anguish there anticipated and borne so oppressed 
his holy, yet weak human nature, that it uttered itself in strong 
cryings and tears ; “and the overflowed soul might have given 
way to an internal death before the external death of the body, 
had He not received a strengthening accession of Divine 
power, in answer to prayer.” As Luther says, “A beam may be 
tested beyond, its strength, and may threaten to give way 
because of the weakness of its nature, not because of anything 
wanting in itself.” 

This scene is an anticipation of Gethsemane ; the penumbra 
of the great eclipse. The question of the Greeks had led 
the Saviour’s thoughts to his death and burial, reminding Him 
that He must fall into the ground to die, before He could bear 
fruit. He saw, too, the baptism of suffering unto death through 
which each of his servants must pass, and in which He would 
die many times again, in sympathy, though not, of course, as 





234 The Troubled Sabiour. 


Mediator. And as the whole dread aggregate of sorrow arose 
before his vision, He cried, “ Now is my soul troubled.” 

There is a human side in this scene, which is all that we can 
understand ; but which may help some of us. We cannot 
launch out into the great deep ; but we may wade in the shal- 
lows. The humblest Levite in the temple may learn something 
from the evident anguish of the Great High-Priest, and the way 
He bore it ; though he may not be able to gauge the pressure of 
that anguish through every part of his wondrous nature, 
capable of depths equal to its ascents, of downsittings propor- 
tionate to its uprisings. 


I. THE TROUBLED SOUL.—We cannot be troubled as He 
was. Onus can never rest the weight of the world’s sin, nor 
even of our own. For us there can never be that lonely resis- 
tance to the onset of all the powers of darkness ; or the hiding 
of the Father’s face; or the unutterable woe of being made 
a curse. And yet, who of us does not sometimes taste of 
trouble beneath which the heart threatens to break down in 
helpless collapse ? 

When the love that had filled our life with music is suddenly 
silenced, or passes on to fill other spheres with its song ; when 
the sun that had flooded our room with light goes off it, and the 
cold night settles down ; when we have to tear out of our lives 
some evil thing, which had entwined itself about them—as 
the octopus about the body of the swimmer—and to do it with 
the anointed head and washed face ; when, at the call of duty, 
which is the call of God, we have to turn our faces away from 
some radiant rapture, which had long enticed us forward, in 
order to take a lonelier, rougher path ; when we are misunder- 
stood and misinterpreted, by our dearest, misrepresented and 
maligned ; when we see lover and friend stand afar off with 
veiled faces; when we are perplexed and baffled at God’s 
dealings ; when we are called to suffer through the vices and 
sorrows of those whom we love as ourselves, while we can do 
nothing to relieve or save them: then we know what it is to 


say with Jesus, though in thinner tones, “Now is my soul | 
troubled.” 


Bis Resort, and ours. 235 


‘Abraham said it as he trod step by step the path which 
seemed all too short to Mount Moriah, and knew that the hand 
which had so often rested in the curls of the darling of his old 
age must presently strike the knife into his heart. Job said it 
when, pelted by the accusations of his foes, afflicted with a 
loathsome disease, perplexed at the dealings of God which 
confounded all his philosophy, he wished that he had never 
been born. David said it when he awoke to perceive how, by 
his grievous sin, he had shaken the fabric of his kingdom, and 
put into the lips of God’s foes a reproach which they have never 
ceased to use. Jeremiah said it, weeping over the disastrous 
suicide of his nation. The lovers of Jesus said it as they saw 
Him deliberately court death, and as.they cowered together 
through the day which followed his decease. And these are 
but samples of myriads more. Indeed, it is questionable if any 
life reaches its prime, or unfolds all its beauty, unless there 
have been some dark hours in which cries of pain have borne 
witness to the troubled soul. 


II. THE RESORT OF THE TROUBLED SOUL—“ Father !” 
When the soul is smitten by a huge wave of anguish, it shivers 
from stem to stern, and for a moment questions with itself as to 
what it shall say : “ Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I 
say?” At such times let us beware lest we speak unadvisedly. 
There is a deliberateness about speech which aggravates the 
inner temper. Repress the utterance, and you will often miti- 
gate the passion of feeling which boils turbulently below. 
There was no fear of our Lord speaking the wrong word, but 
there is every fear of our doing so; and when once it is uttered, 
it stamps itself indelibly not only on ourselves, but on the minds 
and hearts of others, to go on breeding evil for all coming 
time. 

But there is one word which can never be unfitting: “ Father.” 
Once before, our Lord had hidden Himself there, when face to 
face with the mystery of Divine Providence, which reveals 
to babes what it hides from the wise and prudent. “Even so, 
Father!” an expression which might be rendered, “Yes, 
Father!” Here, again, in this dark hour, He murmurs that 


. 


236 The Troubled Sabiour. 


dear name over and over, to hush and quiet his troubled soul. 
And in the garden He repeated it again and again: “O my 
Father !”-“ Abba, Father !” 


There are times when the soul knows by sure tokens the 
presence and love of God. It cannot give reasons why ; it is 
satisfied to know it ; as a child lying beneath its mother’s smiles 
knows that she loves it, and as a shivering invalid brought into 
the sun knows that it is warm. But it is not always so ; shadows 
fling themselves on the landscape. Clouds marshal themselves 
in the sky. We can no longer live by sight. Then we are 
tempted to think that we are deserted indeed ; and as we yield 
to this impression, we begin to fall as into a bottomless pit 
of despondency. 


At such times, there is no medicine which will so certainly ~ 
restore the tone of the soul, as to look up and compel yourself 
to say “Father.” To say it when you do not feel it; to say it 
in the teeth of every appearance to the contrary ; to say it again 
and again, till presently the bruised heart begins slowly to feel 
that it is infinitely loved, and is being led each step by a love 
compared with which the strongest love it ever felt is as a glow- 
worm’s sparkle compared with the sun at noon. 


There is no pain which the thought of the Divine Fatherhood 
will not assuage. But what shall they do who cannot avail 
themselves of its consolations—or will not? To suffer at the 
whim of an adverse fate ; to be the sport of circumstances and 
things ; to be unable to find a hand reached out in the dark ; to 
miss the Father; to look up and not be able to realize that 
a Person is shaping the life-course—this must be suffering 
so acute as to test the power of endurance to breaking. 


None have the right to call God: “ Father” after this inner 
sense, save those who have been born into his family through 


_ the regenerating grace of the Holy Spirit. Only to those who 


believe does He give the right to become sons of God. Only 
those who are led by the Spirit of God may enjoy that Spirit of 
adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father! But where this 
right has been conceded, there is the further privilege of count- 
ing on the Divine Fatherhood in all time of our tribulation, in 


Yd 


“SE it be possible.” 237 


all time of our wealth, in the hour of death, and in the Day of 
Judgment. 

But, beside this appeal to and belief in the Father’s heart, 
there is the further solace of willing his will. We may not 
delight in it; but we can will it. We may not understand it ; 
but we can choose it. It is simply marvellous what rest comes 
into both heart and life when once the soul dares to look into 
the Father’s face, and cry, I want nothing outside the enclosure 
of thy choice for me. To walk, as it were, right away from the 
dear circle of our own preference into the circle of his Fatherly 
will ; to dare to abide in the cleft of that Rock; to do it while 
the flesh rebels and friendly voices remonstrate—there’ is 
nothing like this to cure the heartache. Then the pain begins 
to assuage; the evil one finding himself discredited ceases 
to annoy; the judgment is cleared of silt which had spoilt 
its crystalline beauty; and life begins to assume something 
of its old buoyancy, enriched and deepened and purified by the 
~ ordeal through which it has come. 


III. THE PETITIONS OF THE TROUBLED SOUL.—It is the 
~ human nature of Jesus which speaks first. Save Me from this 
hour. There is something here of the same spirit as afterwards 
cried, “If it be possible, let this cup pass from Me.” So terrible 
was it to become the Substitute for human sin, that it seemed 
as if all that was merely human in Him could not possibly 
endure. 

It brings our Master very near to us. Often in the process 
of fitting us for higher service, or in the prosecution of his plans 
for ourselves and others, God brings us to a point where all 
our own courage and strength collapse. . We feel as if we 
cannot go on another inch. Dazzling as the prospect is beyond, 
we despair of ever wading through the deep waters that lie 
between. Granted that the welcome shouts to the conqueror 
are worth a hell of pain, yet how is one to get through that 
fiery lava-stream which seethes right before the feet? At such 
times the soul is tempted to say, Save me from this hour ; lead 
me by an easier path ; let me forego the prize, if only I may 
miss the conflict. 


238 be Troubled Sabionr. 


How good and wise it is of our God not to answer such 
prayers! .He hears them, and ponders them, and replies to 
their spirit. Not for one moment, because He loves us too 
well, will He allow us to miss the great purpose of blessing that 
He has in view ; but He draws near to our trembling, shrinking 
nature, and pours in such marvellous strength as we had never 
dreamed of. We find ourselves calm, self-possessed, restful, 
almost joyous, in circumstances which, as we had considered 
them from a distance, had seemed utterly intolerable. Amid 
a fiery current of pain we are so vividly conscious of the 
presence of the Son of Man, that we are actually reluctant 
to leave it. In the deprivation of all that men prize we actually 
enumerate our unsearchable satisfaction and wealth. And so 
we bless’ God for that from which we had asked to be saved. 
There are thousands of believers who can verify these state- 
ments from their own experience. 

As we consider these facts we are driven to cancel all thought 
about ourselves, and to turn to God with the cry, Father, 
glorify thy name /- We have before seen how this desire was 
ever uppermost with the Son of Man. He would do and. suffer 
anything with that in view. From heaven He engages to 
answer any prayer which tallies with that supreme ambition of 
his being. Happy shall we be if it is the supreme ambition 
of ours also. ‘ 

“Father, glorify thy name. I will not seek my own comfort 
or deliverance, I simply dare not; but I am willing, in thy 
strength, and because I love Thee so, to suffer anything, if only 
thy glory may be promoted, so that men may think better of — 
Thee, because of what they see in me.” What a battle-cry is 
this—Father, glorify thy name! How it must thrill the hosts 
of heaven, as they see some dauntless soul descending into 
death, with these words upon the lips. How it must strike 
amazement and panic into the hosts of hell ! Sczevola held his 
hand in the flame till it was burnt to ashes, to show the stuff 
of which Romans were made ; and here is the spirit of all God’s 
saints. To ignore the shrinking flesh, to trample it in the dust, 
to nail it to the cross; to follow the path, clearly pointed by 
the will of God; to charge into the valley of death, whilst 


“Father, Glorify thy Mame!” 239 


destruction is belched from the cannon’s mouth, “here is the 
patience and the faith of the saints.” 

Then came a voice from the clear April sky. It seemed like 
thunder to the awestruck crowds who heard the noise but 
could not detect the sense, as the beasts who hear the noise of 
our speech, but to whom it is perfectly unintelligible. It well 
gathered up the results of his life and death: of the former it 
said, J have glorified it; of the second it said, aud will glorify 
zt again. The revenue of glory accruing to God from this 
small planet is vastly greater than when Jesus became incar- 

_nate; and it is yet to gather till a very storm of hallelujahs 
breaks in thundering waves of praise around the sapphire 
throne. 

Let us gird up our loins, my brothers, to take the way God 
leads us, though the brake is thorny, and the path almost im- 
passable ; let us never cease to cry, especially when we must 
speak to vent our anguish, “ Father, glorify thy name”; let us 

~ call thus out to one another through the darkness, till the gloom 
becomes vocal with many voices, encouraging the pilgrim host: 
and then as the morning breaks we shall find ourselves at the 
margin of the sea of glass, crying, with the redeemed host, 
“Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto Him that 
sitteth on the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever !” 


XXXV. 
Ghe World and its Prince. 


“‘ Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world 
be cast out.”—JOHN xii. 31. 





HE Lord was still in the current of thought about his 
approaching death, which had been suggested by 
the inquiry of the Greeks. He is speaking from 
the standpoint of his cross, and as if He were | 
already crucified. 

What a strange new rendering He gives to the 
appearances of that day! It would seem as if He were 
standing at the bar of the world for judgment ; receiving its 
verdict from the lips of Caiaphas, representing its religion ; and 
of Pilate, representing its government: that verdict being 
registered in the heading of his cross, which was written in 
Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. And it would seem also as if He 
were being cast out of the world, as the king’s son was cast out 
of the vineyard and slain by the wicked husbandmen ; and that 
this were the decisive crisis in his existence, and not in his 
only, but also in that of the few who owned Him as Master. 

But none of these things were really so. The world, not He, 
was being judged. It was standing before Him for his verdict ; 
not He before the world for its judgment. Caiaphas and 
Pilate, and all the course of this world whom they represented, 
were passing in long procession before his judgment throne, 
and were being manifested and judged. And as for the casting 
out—that was the precise penalty being meted out to the Prince 
of the World, who wrought beneath those scenes of hate, and 
treachery, and blood. He, not Christ, was being cast out ; 
cast out potentially, though perhaps the fulness of his sentence 


e 


A subtle influence. 241 


has not been meted out to him in actual suffering. Little as 
they guessed it, the day of Calvary and its cross was the crisis 
and turning-point of the history of earth and hell, of men and 
devils ; and settled for evermore the question of supremacy 
between darkness and light, death and life, hate and love. 


I. THE WORLD.—The Lord gave a new meaning to this 
word. We use it of our planet, or of the populations of men 
that cover its surface. He used it for the spirit of human 
society ; for the course and trend of its thinkings and activities. 
Take any section, however small, of the great world of men, 
and carefully study it, and you will discover the presence of an 
indefinable spirit which sways all hearts, and influences all 
lives. It is difficult to say what it is. It is something in the air. 
Men call it fashion, or the spirit of the age. But whatever it is, 
it determines their pleasures, their opinions, their method of 
life, and their very dress. This is what our Lord meant when 
He spoke of the world. And it is probable that the world of 
one age is as nearly as possible the world of all the ages. 
There is nothing new under the sun. 

The majority of men born into this world are so familiar with 
this subtle influence that they yield to and grow up in it, from 
the earliest moments of consciousness ; and are unaware of the 
strength of the current by which they are being carried along. 
It is only when we are no longer of the world, because chosen 
out of it, and identified with Christ, that we learn how masterful 
the spirit of worldliness can be—imperious in compelling obedi- 
ence ; haughty if disobeyed ; virulent and deadly in its hate. 

This world-spirit met our Lord in full force. At first it 
sought to fascinate Him with its charm, and by its witchery to 
beguile Him from the rough path that He had chosen. The 
crowds thronged his footsteps. The leaders of religious thought 
were found in his audiences, and invited Him to their homes. 
The people proposed to make Him king by acclamation. And 
all the land seemed to lie at his feet. 

Then, as its soft fascination failed, the world turned to fight 
against Him, and oppose ‘his every step. Where flowers had 


strewn his pathway, jagged stones lay thick. Where pleasant 
Q 


242 The World and its Prince. 


voices had uttered their flatteries, the air was full of murmurs_ 
and threats. Where smiles had shed their sunbeams, there 
frowns and averted faces lined his path downward into the 
valley of shadows. In his own words we have the results of his 
experience : “If the world hate you, ye know that it hated Me 
before it hated you.” 

But in either case our Lord overcame the world. Its bland- 
ishments did not divert Him from his chosen path, and neither 
did its frowns. It did its utmost and failed ; and as He stood 
at the foot of his cross, whither He had come, notwithstanding 
all, He raised the shout of victory, “I have overcome the 
world !” (xvi. 33). | 

When He died, the world was judged. Its inner motive 
was unveiled. There could be no longer any doubt as to its 
true meaning and character. It had come into collision with 
the Eternal God, representing the life of heaven ; and had flung 
itself against Him in frantic opposition. In condemning Him 
it had condemned itself; and henceforth none of those who 
loved Him and the Father that sent Him, could love it or ally 
themselves with it. The citizens of Edinburgh hooted Mary 
Queen of Scots, because she wedded Bothwell, the murderer of 
her first husband, Darnley : and shall not they be convicted of 
falsehood and treachery who profess to love the Son of God, 
but in their hearts love the world which cast Him out? Take 
heart, all ye whom the world knows not ! it is fair to presume 
that you have been chosen out of the world and called to be the 
sons of God. And as for you, who are entangled in its current 
and enamoured of its lusts, take heed lest you be proved to 
have neither part nor lot with Him! (xvii. 14, 15, 16; 1 John 
il. 15, 16). 


I]. THE PRINCE OF THIS WORLD.—There is no doubt as to 
who is indicated by this significant phrase. Frequently Satan, 
the arch-enemy of man, is thus referred to by our Lord ; as for 
instance when He said : “The prince of this world cometh, and 
hath nothing in Me.” And when in the Temptation the devil 
showed Him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of 
time, and said : “All this power will I give thee, and the glory 


Spiritual Conflict. 243 


of them, for that is delivered unto me,” the Lord did not 
challenge his statement and charge him with falsehood, but by 
his silence apparently acquiesced in the proud boast. 

What does it mean? Are we to believe, as some tell us, that 
in primeval ages, before sin and death had entered the fair 
universe, he who is now a fallen spirit, but then a bright arch- 
angel, was the appointed ruler and vicegerent of our world, 
which flashed with undimmed beauty in the bright sisterhood of 
worlds ; and that when he lost his first estate, he nevertheless 
retained his supremacy, bringing desolation and evil on all that 
is connected with the world he rules? It may be so. It is not 
impossible that the prime object which underlies the divine 
scheme of redemption is to cast him out of the position which 
he has usurped, and to Lring our world again under the benign 
sway of heaven. “For this purpose the Son of God was mani- 
fested, that He might destroy the works of the devil.” 

But the task must have been one of tremendous difficulty. 
Of course the evil one could not be cast out simply by the 
exercise of such omnipotence as made the worlds ; because the 
sphere of conflict was not the material, but the spiritual. And 
the conditions of the conflict were greatly aggravated by the 
fact that Satan had misled our race to love and trust him. 
Thus it befel that God had not only to dispossess him of a 
power which he was no longer competent to wield ; but to do 
so in the face of the sworn fealty and allegiance rendered him 
by the children of the human race. 

The world of which we have been speaking is the stratagem 
by which the devil holds the souls of men in thrall. He does 
not obtrude himself, as that would alarm them and defeat his 
purpose ; but he conceals himself beneath the course of this 
world, with which he is identified by the Apostle (Eph. ii. 2). 
The world is to Satan what the web is to the spider, the bait to 
the angler, the lure to the fowler. Very specious and attractive 
were the appearances and the religious professions of the 
world ; but Christ tore the veil from it and revealed its true 
nature, so that we might be no longer cajoled by its appear- 
ances. 

But it behoved God to do more than expose the hollowness 


244 The World and its Prince. 


of the world ; it was needful that He should assume our nature, 
so as to meet and vanquish the devil on his chosen battle- 
ground, and in the race that he had seduced. This is the clue 
to the Incarnation. This explains the conflict which raged so 
fiercely throughout the Lord’s brief early ministry. This throws 
light on the extraordinary way in which the devil was permitted 
to possess the bodies of men, like so many garrisoned castles. 
This may cast a light also on much of the agony through which 
our Lord passed ; the evidence of conflict with a hidden foe, as 
the beach is strewn with wreckage after a night of storm. 

Mark the point which had to be decided. I suppose the 
devil never doubted for a moment that God was stronger than 
he ; but it had to be settled in actual conflict whether God were 
strong enough to expel him from men who accepted and loved 
his rule, and whether man could ever be made strong enough 
to withstand and vanquish him. Was the devil to be for ever 
supreme over man ; or could man ever become supreme over 
the devil, his hosts, and the world through which he wrought? 

Wonderful promises gem the pages of Holy Writ, to the 
effect that man would some day be more than the devil’s match. 
The earliest promise foreshadowed this; when speaking of 
the woman’s Seed, God said, “It shall bruise thy head.” The 
psalmist celebrated this blessed reversal of what threatened to be 
perpetual, when he assured the man who dwelt in God’s secret 
place that He should tread on the lion and adder, and trample 
the young lion and the dragon beneath his feet (Psalm xci. 13). 
Our Lord foresaw the downfall of Satan as lightning from 
heaven ; and promised to give his disciples power to tread on 
serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy 
(Luke x. 19). The Apostle assured his converts that the 
God of Peace would shortly bruise Satan under their feet 
(Rom. xvi. 20). 

And all these strange predictions were more than realized in 
the Cross, the Resurrection, and the Ascension of the Son of 
God. In his death He destroyed him that had the power of 
death—that is, the devil. From the gtave He came bearing at 
his girdle the keys of Hades. And at his Ascension his 
triumph was consummated. Comparing Eph. i. 21 with vi. 12; 


Gbe Conquering Sabiour. 245 


in the latter of which the same expressions are used of evil 
spirits that are used in the former of the powers above which 
Christ was raised, it is fair to infer that his Ascension was 
resisted by the re-gathering of the broken squadrons of evil for 
one last assault, but in vain. 

It was not wonderful that God should go to God—that the 
Son should hasten to the Father: and if this had been all, the 
devil would probably never have sought to stay it. But the 
matter in dispute then, which was to be laid at rest for ever, 
was, whether our race should be supreme; whether devils 
should be put beneath the feet of redeemed men ; whether our 
nature should pass regnant and victorious to the heart of the 
Throne, into the rare air of which no created thing had ever 
dared to intrude. 

And this is what the Lord’s Ascension established for all 
time. In the grave, the Son of God took human nature into 
indissoluble union with Himself ; more completely, as it appears 
to me, than even in his Incarnation. In this He took on Him 
the nature of man; in that He took the nature of man into 
Himself, and from the brow of Olivet bore it upward to the 
Throne. If angel-hosts came to greet Him, they were doomed 
to fall back, as He reached the furthest bounds where their 
created natures could follow. But as for the human nature 
which He had made one with Himself, He took that with Him 
into the very focus of the majesty of God. This, then, is the 
marvellous result—that our nature is supreme in Him ; over all 
other natures, celestial and terrestrial, whether they be thrones, 
or dominions, principalities, or powers. 

It is very wonderful. We are told that our earth is utterly 
insignificant amid the myriads of the stars, and our race as the 
animalculz, whole kingdoms of which exist in a single drop of 
water. But bigness is not greatness, nor smallness insignifi- 
cance. And it has pleased God to select our planet as the 
nursery of the seed-royal, whose nature is shared by his Son 
for ever. 

In his Ascension our Lord showed that He had acquired as 
man the power to overthrow and cast out the devil. As a 
matter of fact, it is probable that he was cast out from the 


246 Ghe World and its Prince. 


presence-chamber of God, where he had accused Job, and the 
high priest Joshua, and others of the saints. He was cast out 
into the heavenly places, where he is still prince of the power of 
the air, until Christ descends thither, with his Church. He 
shall then be cast out into the earth with great wrath, knowing 
that his hour has come ; and he shall afterwards be cast down 
into the bottomless pit, and finally into the lake of fire. The 
Lord’s death and ascension did potentially that which He has 
been realizing actually ever since. 

This is a fertile subject for holy meditation and for practical 
help ; because if the Lord has cast Satan out of his strong- 
holds, He will be able to cast him out also from every soul of 
man that offers itself to Him, appealing for deliverance. 

Take heart, O child of God, tempted and tried ; your Lord is 
more than a match for all the power of evil! “ Greater is He 
that is in you than he that is in the world.” Let Him effect 
your emancipation, and chase your foe from all his strong- 
holds within, until he be utterly cast out, and you entirely 
delivered. 


Ps 


| SOR 
Ghe Grue Light of God's Children. 


““Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you: for he 
that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth. While ye have 
light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light.”’ 

JOHN xii. 35, 36. 


HE life of the Lord Jesus was bathed through and 
through with the Light of God. He was Light, 
because God is Light ; and God filled Him as the 
light fills the pure transparent air. It was enough 
for Him that God should shine through his being, 
as through a transparent medium ; nothing being 

added or subtracted froin the intensity and glory of his rays. 

To believe on Him was to believe on God. To see Him was to 

see God. To hear Him speak was to hear what the Father 

had said to Him, and was saying to men through Him (44, 

45, 49). 

Light is so beautiful, so pure, so gladdening, so gentle in its 
all-pervasiveness, so mysterious in its sevenfold web of colour ! 
What better could set forth the nature of Him who is the express 
image of God’s Person ; and, therefore, the beam of his glory ! 
And in this, as the element of our being, we were meant to 
spend our lives, having no part dark ; but saturated with the 
radiant inshining of Him who gathers up in Himself, after a 
spiritual fashion, all those qualities which naturally we ascribe 
to light. There are, however, three injunctions here to which 
we must conform, if we would know the blessedness to which 
our Lord refers as being possible to us. 





I. BELIEVE IN THE LIGHT.—There is no moment, no duty, 
no trial in life, in which the Lord Jesus is not present. You 
may not see Him ; but, nevertheless, He is there. No furnace, 


> 
248 Ghe True Light of God's Children. 


but the Son of Man treads upon the glowing embers. No 
storm, but the Master walks over the turbulent billows. No isle 
of banishment, but the Lord is near the lonely exile. It may be 
that we do not see Him, or hear his voice ; but we must 
believe. We must dare to believe on the strength of his own 
assurances, and in spite of all appearances to the contrary. 
Did He not say, “Lo! I am with you alway”? 

It is much when men begin to study the acts and promises of 
Christ as indicating his character. This is what we all do at 
the outset with every new friendship which comes into our life. 
We are not quite certain of our new-found acquaintance, and 
we eagerly question each trait and indication of what He is. 
But after awhile we have formed our mental conception, and 
are no longer on the alert. We have passed behind the actions 
to the character, and we rest there. We are not always looking 
to find Him out ; sight is exchanged for faith. 

So we must not only believe that Christ is in all, but we must 
go on to believe that He is light; that in all the bitter and 
painful experiences of life He is always love, joy, peace, long- 
suffering, gentleness, and goodness ; and that He is conducting 
us surely and safely into the truest, gladdest, and most perfect 
life. This, surely, is something at least of the meaning con- 
tained in the words, “ Believe in the light.” 


II. OBEY THE LIGHT. .Walk in obedience to tts laws (35).— 
What a true word Mary spoke at Cana, when she said to the 
servants, “ Whatsoever He saith unto you, do it”! She must 
have learnt that lesson out of those long, quiet, blessed years at 
Nazareth. Often she had been unable to understand some 
deep word of his, and had been compelled to content herself 
with just doing some obvious duty to which He pointed ; and 
as she did it, all became clear. She knew that there was no 
such way of understanding Him, as by rendering Him literal 
obedience ; and she passed on the results of her experience to 
us all. And how often has this taken place since! We have 
eagerly thought and read about the Master, trying to penetrate 
into the deep mystery of his nature, but baffled and rebuffed ; 
but when we have set ourselves to obey some simple injunction, 


, 


Obedience. 249 


and to do the duty which lay next to us, all our doubts have 
dispersed, and being willing to do his will we have known of 
the doctrine. Men would never know what the forces of 
Nature can do for them except by setting themselves to obey 
them. And it is so in relation to Christ and the laws of his 
spiritual realm. 


All over the world men are asking how they may come to 
know Christ ; and there is but one answer: “ Believe that He 
loves you ; that He is prompting you by his good Spirit ; that 
He is breathing through every yearning and perception of the 
better life. Dare to obey all these ; follow them whither they 
point ; walk in the light which streams forth from them, and 
which really has its origin and fount in Him; and you will 
come to know the Light, and to be changed into its image.” 


The light of Christ is always distinguishable because it 
means the next duty, the deepest impression of what is right, 
the clearest conviction of the will of God. It may be that even 
now, as you read these lines, there is some duty you shirk ; 
some cross you refuse to lift ; somé act from which you flinch. 
You have no doubt about it. And though you may not have 
directly associated it with Him, yet you cannot doubt that if 
you did it He would be pleased. It is useless to try to know 
Him until that nearest act of obedience is wrought ; but directly 
it is, He will become clearer than any words could portray. 
“Walk while ye have the light”; so you will know the light 
and become light in the Lord. 

How different is this teaching from that of the world around ! 
There we are bidden to know, before we dare to entrust our 
lives to any leader or commander, whatever be his fair speeches 
and promises ; but Christ bids us obey the first glimmer of 
light breaking on us through the words of a friend, or the 
summons of Inspiration, or the promptings of the Spirit ; and 
He undertakes that if we do, we shall not walk in darkness, but 
shall know whither we go, and shall have the Light of Life. 


Disobedience like scales veils Christ from us ; whilst obedi- 
ence leads us into his very presence. The judgment always 
becomes just, and the vision clear, when we deny ourselves, and 


250 he Crue Light of God's Children. 


set ourselves to follow whatsoever things are true, just pure, 
and of good report. 


III]. BECOME CHILDREN OF LIGHT (36).—It is wonderful 
how soon we become like what we love and pursue. Love 
appropriates and fixes the tones and gestures and thoughts of 
the one that is loved. As the fish resemble the bottom on 
which they lie, and as the Arctic hares change with the colour 
of their world, so do hearts and lives take on the complexion of 
the people and things which predominate and preponderate in 
their daily experience. 

So let it be in your relation to the Lord Jesus, who indeed is 
the true Light of souls, “lightening every man that cometh into 
the world.” Think of Him. Imitate Him. Ask continually 
what He would wish. Saturate your mind with his words and 
teaching. Live up to his will so far as you know it. Obey 
Him to the uttermost. And there will come a growing resem- 
blance between you and Him. You will be transformed, as you 
behold, into his likeness. Men, as they come into contact with 
you, will be constrained to admit that his character has become 
transfused with yours, and to acknowledge you as a child of the 
light. 

Oh to descend into the world each morning as sunbeams 
from the fount of day !—bearing with us something of the 
beauty of the world from which we come; shedding joy and 
blessedness on dark hearts ; and living lives as transparent, as 
beautiful, as unobtrusive, and as helpful in our measure as his 
was, from whom we have received all we have and are. 

But let us remember that if we refuse the solicitations and 
promptings of his Spirit, our hearts will become hard, and our 
eyes blind. There are some mentioned in this paragraph who 
believed in Him but would not confess Him, and loved the 
praise of men more than the praise of God. How could such 
men enter into the fulness of his blessed light? Was it not 
inevitable that it should become dim ? ~ i 

Live up to all you know, and you will know more and 
resemble Him more perfectly ; and when kings die, and nations 
rock to ruin, and all nature is out of joint, you will see the King 


Obe Wan to Glory. os 


seated on his throne amid the worship of the Seraphim, and . 
you will begin to live with his Life, to reflect his Light, and to 
love with his Love. And the day of those blessed experiences 
shall never wane, or be overcast by the gathering twilight, but 
shall glow with magnificent splendour; suns glimmering far 
beneath as the flash of fire-flies ; the raptures of earth remem- 
bered as the pastimes of childish joy ; whilst through eternal 
ages we shall follow the Lamb deeper into the heart of his own 
ineffable bliss—in Him, with Him, like Him, for ever ! 





GHTS COMMUNITY 
NORMAL HEI spb 


METHODIST EPISCOPAL CH ; 
MANSFIELD AT ADAMS 


THEOLOGy Ly 
% BRA 
CLAREMONT, ¢ at 


o. tien aN 

















BS2615 .M39 


41892 
8. (Frederick Brotherton), 18 
Weyer fe a Tight of men : expositions 





Meyer, Frederick Brotherton, 1847-1929. 

The life and light of men : expositions of 
John I.-XII. / by F.B. Meyer. -- Author's ed. 
New York : Revell, (18927) 

eID. 3 19cm. 


1. Bible. N.T. John I-XII--Commentaries. 


Le Title. 





© CCSC/mmb 


“es 
Y 
YY 
Up 


Z 





