BT 

2ol 


CAVEN    LIBRARY 

KNOX  COLLEGE 

TORONTO 


/? 


MILDMAY  LIBRARY.    No.  2. 
THE 


EXALTED   CHRIST. 


our  Sfcentificatfon  witb  1btm 
in  1bls  Bjaltation, 


ADDRESSES  AND  BIBLE  READINGS 

DELIVERED  AT  MILDMAY  CONFERENCE. 


REV.    F.    B.    MEYER,    B.A. 
SSJiti)  a  prelate 

BY 

J.    E.    MATHIESON,   ESQ. 


LONDON : 
JOHN  GEORGE  WHEELER,  88,  MILDMAY  PARK,  N. 

WALTER  G.  WHEELER  &  CO.,  PATERNOSTER  Row,  E.G. 


CAVfc*    LIBRARY 

(CNOX  COLLEGE 


68417 


PREFACE. 


BEFORE  our  honoured  brother,  Mr.  F.  B. 
Meyer,  held  a  pastorate  in  London  he  was 
a  welcome  speaker  in  some  of  our  Mildmay 
Conferences.  Nor  has  he  ceased  to  bring 
thither  "acceptable  words,"  both  in  public 
addresses  and  in  Bible  Headings.  The 
following  pages  contain  the  substance  of 
some  of  the  spiritual  instruction  from  the 
heart  and  lips  of  our  friend  and  fellow- 
helper;  and  we  believe  the  reader  will  be 
able  to  say,  "That  which  was  written  was 
upright,  even  words  of  truth."  (Eccles. 
xii.  10.)  I  have  much  pleasure  in  com 
mending  these  readings,  which  aim  at 
glorifying  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

J.  E.   MATHIESON. 


INTRODUCTOKY  WORDS. 


I  YIELD  to  the  persuasion  of  my  friend,  the 
publisher,  for  the  publication  of  these  Addresses 
and  Bible  Readings,  delivered  in  succeeding 
years  at  the  Mildmay  Conference,  though,  as 
I  review  them,  they  seem  very  like  the  five 
barley  loaves  and  two  small  fish  of  the  fisher-lad. 

Indulgence  must  also  be  asked  for  the  style, 
which  is  rather  more  ragged  than  I  like,  because 
the  Addresses  were  taken  down  by  the  short 
hand  writer  as  I  spoke  them.  They  are  neither 
silver  nor  gold,  but  such  as  I  have. 

Mildmay  has  too  large  a  claim  on  those  of  us 
who  love  evangelical  truth  and  consecrated  work 
to  be  allowed  to  ask  twice  for  any  help  that  we 
can  give;  and  it  is  a  real  gratification  to  be 
able,  through  this  little  volume,  to  do  anything 
for  the  funds  of  her  great  institutions. 


/? 


"Father,  I  will  that  they  also,  whom  Thou  hast  given 
Me,  be  with  Me  where  I  am ;  that  they  may  behold  My 
glory  which  Thou  hast  given  Me."— JOHN  xvii.  24. 


CONTENTS. 


CHRIST,  THE  KEY  TO  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT         .  9 
"THE  LOVE  OF  CHRIST,  WHICH  PASSETH  KNOW 
LEDGE"         .               .               ...  27 
"THE  ETERNAL  PURPOSE  WHICH  HE  PURPOSED 

IN  CHRIST  JESUS  OUR  LORD"    .            .        .  45 

"THE  SECOND  MAN,  THE  LORD"      .            .        .  61 

THE  CAPTAIN  OF  OUR  SALVATION    .  79 


OUR  IDENTIFICATION  WITH  CHRIST. 


ONE  with  Christ  in  crucifixion ! 

One,  beneath  the  law  we  died  ; 
Death's  just  claim  for  ever  settled, 

One  with  Jesus  crucified. 
Planted  in  His  grave  of  sorrow, 

Quickened  into  life  anew, 
Lo !  a  resurrection  morrow 

Dawns  upon  our  raptured  view. 

One  with  Him  in  living  service, 

Where  the  Master  goes  we  go : 
One  with  Him  in  dark  temptation, 

One  in  sorrow,  one  in  woe. 
Not  a  pang  can  touch  the  member, 

But  the  vital  Head  must  feel : 
One  with  Him  we  sigh  and  suffer, 

Till  His  gracious  hand  shall  heal. 

One  with  Him  in  coming  glory ! 

If  we  suffer  we  shall  reign : 
Where  He  is  there  we  shall  follow, 

With  Him  ever  to  remain. 
Called  and  chosen,  washed  and  faithful, 

We  shall  walk  with  Him  in  white : 
With  Him  now  in  death  and  darkness, 

With  Him  soon  in  cloudless  light. 

WILLIAM  LUFF. 


CHEIST,  THE  KEY 
TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT. 


"As  the  Author,  so  also  the  subject  of  the  whole  Bible  is 
one.  '  The  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy.'  The 
testimony  of  Jesus  is  in  like  manner  the  spirit  of  every 
portion  of  Holy  Scripture.  Whatever  the  letter  may  be, 
whether  it  be  Patriarchal  narrative,  or  Mosaic  type,  or 
Prophetic  poetry,  or  Evangelical  parable,  or  Apostolical 
argument,  or  Apocalyptic  vision,  it  bears  to  Jesus.  He  is 
the  First  and  Last ;  the  '  Lamb  without  blemish  and  without 
spot,  who  verily  was  fore-ordained  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world ' ;  the  seed  of  the  woman ;  the  seed  of  Abraham ; 
the  Son  of  David ;  the  Priest,  the  Sacrifice,  the  Branch,  the 
Shepherd,  the  King;  the  Alpha  and  Omega;  the  encyclo 
paedia  of  Eevelation." 

DEAN  MCNEILE. 


"  The  great  drift  of  the  Old  Testament  prophecy  is  '  the 
sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the  glory  that  should  follow.' 
(1  Peter  i.  11.)  Of  course  the  prophets  foretold  a  great  many 
other  things,  but  the  two  great  outstanding  topics  of  the  Old 
Testament  Scripture  undoubtedly  are  these.  In  the  mind  of 
the  living  God,  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  these 
were  the  great  themes— the  only  great  themes,  as  it  were,  to 
occupy  the  minds  and  hearts  of  those  inspired." 

J.  E.  MATHIESON. 


Cfirfet, 
tfce  lug  to  t&e  $tti  Cesttamoit 


HEADING. 


"  And  I  wept  much,  because  no  man  was  found  worthy  to 
open  and  to  read  the  Book,  neither  to  look  thereon.  And 
one  of  the  elders  said  unto  me,  Weep  not :  behold,  the 
Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  Root  of  David,  hath  pre 
vailed  to  open  the  Book,  and  to  loose  the  seven  seals 
thereof.  And  I  beheld,  and,  lo,  in  the  midst  of  the  throne 
and  of  the  four  beasts,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  elders, 
stood  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain,  having  seven  horns 
and  seven  eyes,  which  are  the  seven  Spirits  of  God  sent 
forth  into  all  the  earth."— REV.  v.  4-6. 

You  will  notice  the  three  paradoxes  of  this 
scripture.  He  looked  for  a  Lion  and  beheld  a 
Lamb ;  for  the  root  of  David,  and  lo,  one  who 
was  the  offspring  of  David ;  for  Him  that  had 
overcome,  and  lo,  one  who  had  apparently  failed. 
But  you  will  note  that  the  scene  may  be  taken  as 
an  illustration  of  the  way  in  which  our  Blessed 
Lord  took  the  sealed  Book  of  the  Old  Testa 
ment  and  broke  the  seals  of  it  to  His  disciples 


12  CHRIST,    THE  KEY 

by  the  Holy  Ghost.  In  the  centre  of  Rome 
there  was  a  milestone  on  which  all  the  roads  of 
the  known  world  converged;  and  we  believe 
that  there  is  a  path,  a  road,  in  every  book  and 
from  every  chapter  of  the  Bible,  converging 
upon  Jesus  Christ.  Not  only  is  this  the  case  in 
the  Books  of  the  New  Testament,  but  in  those 
also  of  the  Old. 

Let  us  for  a  moment  turn  to  Matthew  i.,  and 
give  due  importance  to  that  white  sheet,  which 
in  our  Bibles  intervenes  between  the  Old  and 
the  New.  Because  these  two  Books  are  bound 
together,  we  sometimes  forget  that  a  lapse  of 
four  hundred  years  is  represented  by  that  page, 
vet  we  are  certain  that  the  Jews  possessed  the 

«/ 

Old  Testament,  in  the  Greek  form,  two  hundred 
years  B.C.  Now,  in  the  Old  that  lies  on  one 
side  of  the  valley,  and  in  the  New  that  lies  on 
the  other  side  of  the  valley,  Jesus  Christ  is  All. 
In  the  Old  Testament,  Jesus  Christ  is  latent; 
in  the  New,  He  is  patent.  In  the  Old,  the 
reference  to  Him  is  implicit ;  in  the  New,  it  is 
explicit.  In  the  Old,  we  have  foresight ;  in  the 
New,  insight.  The  early  Church  did  not  attempt 
to  argue  for  the  facts  of  our  Saviour's  life,  death, 
and  resurrection.  They  were  acknowledged  for 
three  hundred  years  after  Christ  left  our  world. 


TO    THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.  13 


The  one  effort  of  the  early  Church  was  to  show 
that  the  life  and  the  work  of  Jesus  Christ  were 
the  Eosetta  stone  which  opened  the  hieroglyphics 
of  the  Old  Testament  Scripture.  It  has  been 
said  that  there  are  some  333  predictions  and 
references  alluded  to  in  the  New  Testament  from 
the  Old.  The  Old  threads  the  New,  as  the 
warp  the  woof.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  on  His 
resurrection,  Luke  xxiv.  27,  set  Himself  to  show 
this  connection.  "  And  beginning  at  Moses  and 
all  the  prophets,  He  expounded  unto  them  in  all 
the  scriptures  the  things  concerning  Himself." 
"In  all  the  scriptures."  In  other  words,  the 
glory  of  Jesus  shines  on  the  pages  of  the  Old 
Testament,  as  the  light  of  God  on  the  face  of 
Moses.  Only  to  many  it  is  hidden.  But  your 
study  of  the  Old  Testament  will  be  futile  indeed, 
unless  you  have  learned  in  every  veiled  type  and 
symbol,  in  every  history  and  character,  as  well 
as  in  the  words  of  prediction,  to  find  your  Lord. 
When  you  turn  to  the  Lord,  the  veil  is  taken 
away. 

Let  us  consider  the  perpetual  reference,  on 
the  part  of  the  early  Church,  to  this  teaching 
about  our  Lord  in  the  Old  Testament.  We  will 
turn  to  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  chapter  ii.  In 
St.  Peter's  sermon,  out  of  twenty-two  verses  in 


14  CHRIST,    THE  KEY 


our  version,  eleven  are  Old  Testament  quotations. 
I  am  not  sure  that  congregations  in  these  days 
would  stand  that  proportion  of  scripture  quota 
tion  in  our  sermons;  but  you  will  notice  that 
the  sermon  which  the  Holy  Ghost  used  so  con 
spicuously  that  thousands  were  converted,  was 
largely  a  mosaic  of  scripture;  from  which  we 
may  gather  why  the  Holy  Ghost  does  not  own 
many  of  our  modern  sermons.  He  seeks  in 
them  for  something  He  can  use.  If  we  can 
once  learn  to  use  the  Word  of  God,  that  is  the 
sword  which  He  can  wield.  In  the  third 
chapter,  in  St.  Peter's  second  sermon,  there  are 
five  references  to  the  prophets — in  the  18th, 
21st,  22nd,  24th,  and  25th  verses.  He  cannot 
open  his  mouth  before  the  Sanhedrim  (chapter 
iv.  7)  without  quoting  the  Old  Testament ;  and 
in  the  25th  verse,  as  soon  as  the  disciples  get 
together,  they  quote  for  their  encouragement  the 
Word  of  God.  The  seventh  chapter  of  the 
Acts  is  one  connected  series  of  scripture  reference. 
And  again,  in  the  tenth  chapter,  the  sermon 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  used  to  introduce  the 
gospel  to  the  Gentiles,  was  full  of  Scriptural 
quotation.  In  St.  Paul's  first  recorded  sermon 
(Acts,  chap,  xiii.)  you  will  notice  distinct  refer 
ences  to  scripture  in  the  22nd,  27th,  29th, 


TO    THE    OLD    TESTAMENT.  15 

32nd,  33rd,  34th,  35th,  and  his  closing  words 
in  the  41st  verse.  So  that  again,  if  you  will 
count  the  number  of  words  in  that  sermon,  you 
will  find  fully  half  of  them  are  Old  Testament 
quotations;  throughout  he  is  endeavouring  to 
make  the  people  see  the  correspondence  between 
the  Man  of  Nazareth  and  of  Calvary  with  that 
wonderful  portraiture  in  the  Old  Testament. 
Will  you  turn  next  to  chapter  xvii.  3,  where 
you  learn  that  just  so  soon  as  St.  Paul  reached 
Thessalonica,  for  three  Sabbath  days  he  reasoned 
with  them  in  the  scriptures,  opening  and  alleging 
that  it  behoved  the  Christ  to  suffer  and  to  rise 
again  from  the  dead,  and  "  that  this  Jesus  whom 
I  proclaim  unto  you  is  the  Messiah  foretold — the 
promised  Christ."  And  then  if  you  go  to  chap, 
xviii.  28,  the  characteristic  of  the  golden  tongue 
of  Apollos  was  that  he  powerfully  confuted  the 
Jews,  and  publicly  shewed  by  the  scriptures  that 
Jesus  was  the  Christ.  You  have  it  again  in 
chapter  xxvi.  27.  When  St.  Paul  found  him 
self  in  the  presence  of  a  Jewish  Judge,  he  said, 
"King  Agrippa,  believest  thou  the  prophets?  I 
know  that  thou  believest."  And  then  lastly,  in 
chapter  xxviii.  23,  we  are  told  that  he  ex 
pounded  to  the  Jews  in  Rome,  testifying  to  the 
Kingdom  of  God,  and  persuading  them  concern- 


1 6  CHRIST,    THE  KEV 

ing  Jesus,  both  from  the  Law  of  Moses  and 
from  the  Prophets,  from  morning  till  evening. 

There  are  two  things  to  be  noticed  here.  The 
first,  of  course,  in  our  own  reading  of  the  Word 
of  God  to  find  Christ  in  the  Old  Testament; 
and  secondly,  in  dealing  with  young  men  and 
young  women  who  are  troubled  with  modern 
doubt,  and  who  are  eagerly  demanding  all 
manner  of  books  and  helps  by  which  to  combat 
it.  Let  us  shew  them  that  the  Bible  is  its  own 
best  witness,  and  that  probably  the  most  con 
clusive  proof  of  the  truth  of  scripture  is  this 
wonderful  correspondence  between  the  prophecy 
of  the  Old  and  the  portraiture  of  the  New. 

Because  the  field  is  so  vast,  I  am  compelled 
to  take  a  specimen  to  illustrate  what  I  am  say 
ing,  and  limit  our  consideration  to  the  paradoxes 
of  the  Old  Testament.  Now,  a  paradox  is  a 
sentence  which  consists  of  two  separate  state 
ments,  each  of  which  is  true,  considered  in 
itself,  but  which  appear  contradictory  when  laid 
side  by  side ;  but  they  are  combined  and  har 
monised  by  some  deeper  truth  that  lies  beneath. 
For  instance,  it  is  a  paradox  that,  on  the  one 
hand,  we  are  saved  by  the  grace  of  God,  and 
on  the  other  hand,  that  it  is  necessary  for  every 
soul  to  act  for  itself,  and  to  flee  for  refuge — to 


TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.  17 

take  hold  of  Christ.  It  is  the  old  controversy 
between  election  and  free-will.  But  these  two 
statements  are,  doubtless,  consistent  if  we  could 
get  the  deeper  truths  which  harmonise  them, 
and  which  at  present  are  veiled  from  our  sight. 
So  it  is  with  the  paradoxes  of  the  Old  Testa 
ment.  There  were  a  number  of  apparently 
contradictory  statements  which  awaited  the  ful 
ness  of  time  when  Jesus  Christ  appeared ;  but, 
as  God's  deeper  truth  was  manifested,  it  became 
obvious  that  they  were  in  harmony. 

Let  us  look  for  a  moment  at  some  of  them. 
Take  our  Lord's  own  paradox  in  Matt.  xxii.  42. 
There  our  Lord  turns  the  tables  upon  His  inter 
rogators.  "While  the  Pharisees  were  gathered 
together,  Jesus  asked  them  a  question,  saying, 
What  think  ye  of  Christ?  whose  son  is  He1? 
They  say  unto  Him,  the  Son  of  David."  This 
was  the  ordinary  appellation  for  the  Messiah. 
Thus  the  blind  man  had  called  out,  "Jesus, 
Thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy."  And  He  said 
to  them,  "How  then  doth  David  in  the  Spirit 
call  Him  Lord  1 "  quoting  Psalm  ex.  How  could 
the  same  being  be  at  one  and  the  same  time 
David's  son  and  David's  Lord  1 

There  are  three  sorts  of  paradox — the  paradox 
in  prediction,  the  paradox  in  type,  and  the 
B 


1 8  CHRIST,    THE  KEY 

paradox  in  history.  First,  the  paradox  in  pre 
diction.  Let  us  consider  two  or  three  instances. 
Take  two  psalms,  the  xxii.  and  the  xlv.  Psalm 
xxii.  has  been  called  by  an  illustrious  com 
mentator  the  "  Psalm  of  Sobs,"  because  it  is  so 
full  of  the  sighing  and  broken  heart  of  Jesus. 
It  seems  to  me  that  probably  (if  I  may  dare  to 
say  it)  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  quoting  this, 
verse  by  verse,  to  Himself  as  He  was  slowly 
dying  on  the  cross.  Look  at  the  6th  verse,  "  I 
am  a  worm  "  ;  look  at  the  12th  verse,  "  compassed 
me";  look  at  the  15th  verse,  "athirst";  look 
at  the  16th  verse,  "compassed  and  pierced"; 
look  at  the  18th  verse,  "stripped."  It  is  very 
remarkable  that  the  death  thus  foreshadowed 
could  only  be  the  death  of  the  cross,  and  very 
wonderful  that  it  should  have  been  predicted  of 
Jesus  Christ,  since  to  the  Jewish  mind  it  was  so 
utterly  repugnant.  But  turn  now  to  Psalm  xlv., 
the  Psalm  of  the  Bridegroom.  In  the  2nd  verse 
He  who  had  been  as  a  worm  is  said  to  be 
"fairer  than  the  children  of  men";  He  who 
had  been  surrounded  by  enemies,  in  the  3rd 
verse  is  a  "conqueror";  He  who  had  been 
athirst,  in  the  2nd  verse  has  "  grace  poured  into 
His  lips  " ;  He  who  in  the  16th  verse  had  been 
pierced,  in  the  6th  verse  is  "on  a  throne"; 


TO   THE   OLD    TESTAMENT.  19 

and  He  who  in  the  former  Psalm  had  been 
stripped  of  His  garments,  in  the  8th  verse  is 
"  clad  in  royal  robes."  How  puzzling  to  a  Jew. 
Must  he  not  have  wondered  how  Psalms  xxii.  and 
xlv.  could  be  true  of  the  same  Messiah  t  And  yet 
the  close  of  those  two  Psalms  distinctly  points 
the  reference  to  Him.  Take  another  chapter  in 
which  these  paradoxes  occur  very  numerously, 
Isaiah  liii.  A  friend  of  mine  has  noticed  that 
Isaiah  liii.  comes  just  in  the  very  middle  of  the 
sixty-six  chapters  of  Messianic  predictions  with 
which  the  Book  of  Isaiah  closes.  Now  take 
this  cluster  of  paradoxes.  In  the  8th  verse  He 
is  "cut  off,"  in  the  10th  verse  He  "prolongs 
His  days."  In  the  second  verse  He  is  "a  root 
out  of  a  dry  ground  "  (there  is  no  seed  from  it), 
but  in  the  10th  verse  "  He  sees  His  seed  and  is 
satisfied."  In  the  9th  verse  He  makes  "His 
grave  with  the  wicked,"  and  in  the  12th  verse 
He  divides  "a  portion  with  the  great."  In  the 
12th  verse  He  is  "numbered  with  the  trans 
gressors,"  but  in  the  same  verse  He  makes 
"intercession  for  the  trangressors."  In  the 
12th  verse  He  "pours  out  His  soul  unto  death," 
in  the  10th  verse  the  "pleasure  of  the  Lord 
prospers  in  His  hand."  Do  you  wonder  that 
the  Jews  have  invented  two  Messiahs  in  order 


20  CHRIST,    THE  KEY 

to  satisfy  that  wonderful  chapter?  So  much 
for  paradox  in  prediction. 

Turn  for  a  moment  to  the  paradox  in  type. 
He  was  the  pigeon  whose  neck  was  wrung,  and 
its  blood  shed  over  the  flowing  water ;  and  He 
was  the  pigeon  flung  up  into  the  air,  and  wing 
ing  its  way  to  its  native  woods — the  type  of 
resurrection.  He  was  the  goat  that  fell  beneath 
the  stab  of  the  priest,  and  the  goat  that  went 
into  the  lonely  land,  bearing  the  guilt  of  the 
people.  He  was  the  victim  and  the  priest. 

With  regard  to  the  paradox  in  history — He 
was  Elijah  sweeping  up  in  the  ascension  car, 
and  Elisha  completing  a  milder  ministry.  He 
was  David  the  great  conqueror,  and  Solomon 
the  man  of  peace.  He  was  Moses  the  law 
giver nay,  a  greater  than  Moses — and  he  was 

Aaron  the  priest,  and  Joshua  the  forerunner. 
He  was  Adam  the  father,  for  He  was  the  second 
Adam,  and  the  figure  of  Him  that  was  to  come ; 
but  He  was  also  the  son  Abel,  though  His 
blood  speaks  better  things  than  that  of  Abel, 
and  puts  away  sin.  He  was  Noah,  who  built 
the  ark  and  swam  the  flood,  and  He  was  the 
Ark  that  bore  him  across.  He  was  the  Joshua 
that  led  the  people  into  the  promised  land,  and 
He  Himself  is  the  promised  land.  So  that 


TO    THE   OLD    TESTAMENT. 


beneath  all  these  paradoxes,  with  which  the 
Old  Testament  is  so  full,  we  must  implicitly 
find  our  blessed  Lord  Jesus  as  the  only  inter 
pretation  of  what  is  contradictory.  Is  this  not 
true  of  all  perplexity  and  anxiety — of  all  that 
seems  so  contradictory  in  your  life  and  mine — 
that  underneath  all  these  dealings  of  God  there 
is  the  one  loving  purpose  in  Jesus  Christ  our 
Saviour.  Whenever  there  is  a  veil,  whether  on 
human  life,  or  in  regard  to  the  mysteries  of 
Scripture,  so  soon  as  we  turn  to  the  Lord 
it  is  removed.  As  Jesus  Christ  underlay  the 
Old  Testament,  full  of  grace  and  truth,  it  was 
necessary  for  those  who  lived  after  His  time,  by 
faith  to  extract  from  the  Old  Testament  that 
which  He  was.  Just  as  it  is  necessary  for  us  in 
these  days,  who  know  that  He  underlies  the 
New  Testament,  by  faith  to  extract  all  the  grace 
and  all  the  blessing  that  await  us  there. 

Turn  for  a  moment  to  the  2nd  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians.  In  chapter  iii.  the  apostle  imagines 
he  is  challenged  for  letters  of  commendation, 
which  he  refuses,  "  because  "  in  the  third  verse 
he  says,  "You  are  my  epistles,  you  are  my 
commendatory  letters;  upon  your  hearts  the 
Holy  Scripture  has  engraved  the  character  of 
Jesus  " ;  and  then  he  draws  a  contrast  which  I 


22  CHRIST,    THE  KRY 


pray  you  to  notice.  In  the  seventh  verse  and 
onward,  he  suggests  a  parallel  between  the  face 
of  Moses,  upon  which  there  was  a  veil,  and  the 
veiled  glory  of  Christ  in  the  Old  Testament. 
He  describes  the  Jews  as  sitting  in  their  syna 
gogues  with  their  veiled  faces,  as  though  the 
veil  had  fallen  from  Moses'  face  on  theirs,  and 
is  fearful  lest  the  same  veil  might  hide  from  his 
converts  the  glories  of  the  Lord.  In  the  four 
teenth  and  fifteenth  verses  he  says,  "  Until  this 
day  remaineth  the  same  veil  untaken  away  in 
the  reading  of  the  Old  Testament,  which  veil  is 
done  away  in  Christ.  But  even  unto  this  day, 
when  Moses  is  read,  the  veil  is  upon  their 
hearts."  When  the  people  turn  unto  the  Lord, 
the  veil  will  be  taken  away.  First  let  us  lay 
aside  the  veil;  then  receive  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord;  and  then  with  unveiled  face  beholding 
in  a  mirror,  or  reflecting  as  a  mirror,  the  glory 
of  the  Lord,  we  shall  be  changed.  The  Old 
Testament  did  not  profit  them  because  of  the 
veil,  because  they  did  not  realise  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  because  they  did  not  adequately 
reflect. 

These  are  the  three  lessons  for  ourselves  here 
to-day.  (1)  Christ  is  in  the  New,  as  He  was 
and  is  in  the  Old.  Up  till  now,  perhaps,  with 


TO    THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.  23 

some  of  us,  our  Bible  study  has  not  profited. 
We  have  not  seen  Jesus  in  the  Old  or  in  the 
New;  and,  therefore,  to-day  let  us  meet  the 
solemn  challenge,  Is  there  any  veil  upon  our 
face  1  There  was  a  time  when,  in  the  Holy  of 
Holies,  the  veil  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top 
to  the  bottom.  Has  there  ever  been,  in  your 
life  and  mine,  a  rending  of  that  veil?  Has 
there  ever  been  a  time  when  your  spirit  and 
your  soul  have  been,  so  to  speak,  thrown  into 
one,  and  your  individuality  overshadowed  and 
penetrated  by  the  Shekinah  glow  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  ?  Has  there  ever  been  a  moment  in  your 
life  when  there  was  the  sudden  rending  in  twain 
from  the  top  to  the  bottom  of  some  prejudice, 
of  some  uncharity,  of  some  inconsistency  in 
heart  or  life  1  Oh !  what  wonder,  if  there  be 
such  a  veil,  that  up  till  now  the  Word  of  God 
has  been  a  veiled  Book — that  you  have  not  seen 
Christ  in  it!  And  whatever  it  may  be,  I 
pray  you  get  alone  by  yourselves  before  God 
Almighty,  and  ask  that  this  veil — whatever  has 
come  between  you  and  the  perfect  vision  of 
Christ  in  his  Word — may  be  rent  in  twain,  and 
that  you  may  see  eye  to  eye. 

(2)  But  next,  there  must  be  the  reception  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.     It  was  by  the  Holy  Ghost 


24  CHRIST,    THE  KEY 

that  the  prophets  wrote,  and  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
that  the  apostles  were  directed  to  understand 
what  the  Holy  Ghost  meant ;  and  there  must  be 
on  the  part  of  all  of  us  the  constant  reception 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  who  wrote  the  Word,  and 
who  will  reveal  Jesus  in  that  Word.  It  is  by 
the  Spirit  that  we  know  the  Lord  all  along  the 
line  of  our  life.  You  will  find  that  if  you  live 
near  God,  there  will  be  a  constantly  fresh 
reception — a  constantly  enlarging  reception  of 
the  Holy  Ghost — and  in  proportion  as  you  get 
this,  He  will  open  up  to  you  the  Old  and  the 
New  Testament  alike — Jesus  Christ  and  His 
glory.  Have  you  received  the  Holy  Ghost  1 
Have  we  received  the  Holy  Ghost  definitely 
into  our  life,  as  a  spirit  of  revelation  *(  And  do 
you,  whenever  you  open  the  Word  of  God, 
meekly  bow  your  heads  and  say,  "  Oh  !  Spirit  of 
God,  shew  me  the  face  of  Christ  here  "  1 

(3)  And  then,  lastly,  in  order  to  appreciate 
Christ  in  the  Old  or  New  Testament,  there 
must  be  reflection.  People  go  away  from  our 
Conventions  and  Conferences  with  their  note 
books,  and  say  to  themselves,  "  I  have  got  it  all 
here";  and  they  think  that  because  they  have 
recorded  the  words  of  the  speaker  they  have  got 
the  truth ;  whereas,  in  point  of  fact,  they 


TO   THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.  25 


have  only  got  so  much  truth  as  they  are 
obeying  and  living  in  their  lives.  Those  are 
not  blessed  who  hear,  but  blessed  who  do— 
"that  man  shall  be  blessed  in  his  deeds." 
And  if  you  really  want  to  see  Jesus  in  the 
Bible,  you  must  go  and  live  Jesus  in  your 
daily  life.  When  you  have  seen  some  sweet 
trait  of  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the 
Word,  you  must  ask  that  by  the  grace  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  you  may  reflect  it  amongst  men.  I 
want  just  to  say  a  thing  here  that  has  been 
of  extreme  help  to  me.  So  often  in  one's 
life,  one  waits  to  feel  impelled  in  a  certain 
Christ -like  direction;  and  if  the  impulse 
does  not  come,  one  is  disposed  to  post 
pone  action.  But  we  have  no  right  to  wait 
to  feel  in  the  mood  to  act  in  such  and  such 
a  way ;  rather,  by  the  force  of  our  will,  obeying 
the  impulse  of  the  Holy  Ghost  who  wills  in  us, 
it  is  our  duty  to  do,  or  to  attempt  to  do,  what 
we  know  we  should  do ;  and  as  we  do  it, 
we  shall  find  ourselves  able  to  do  it ;  so  that, 
what  we  did  merely  by  the  force  of  our  will,  we 
shall  do  ultimately  by  the  choice  of  our  heart. 
Thus  if  you  will  begin  to  live  Christ  up  to 
the  small  limit  of  your  knowledge,  and  because 
you  ought,  you  will  be  transfigured  by  reflecting 


26  CHRIST,    THE  KEY. 


Christ,  you  will  be  changed  into  the  likeness  of 
Christ.  In  other  words,  transfiguration  does 
not  only  come  to  the  man  who,  with  rapt 
attention,  beholds  the  glory  of  God  in  Jesus, 
but  to  the  man  who  day  by  day  is  trying  to 
translate  Jesus  into  his  daily  life,  and  repeat 
Jesus  in  thought,  word,  and  deed.  If  you 
would  be  a  Bible  yourself,  you  would  under 
stand  the  Bible.  If  you  would  pass  on  what 
you  have  found,  the  Bible  would  get  richer  and 
deeper  to  your  soul.  So  with  the  rent  veil, 
with  the  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with 
the  daily  endeavour  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
to  live  Christ,  we  shall  ever  find  in  this  Word 
the  Christ  who  is  in  our  heart.  We  shall 
see  His  face  looking  out  from  Old  Testament 
and  from  New,  and  we  shall  realise  that  the 
whole  Book  is  like  His  seamless  robe,  "woven 
from  the  top^throughout." 


"THE   LOVE   OF   CHKIST, 
WHICH   PASSETH   KNOWLEDGE.' 


1  KINGS  VI.  20. 

"Is  not  the  love  of  Jesus  the  Holy  of  Holies  unto  millions 
of  souls  ?  Is  not  the  love  of  Jesus  the  inner  sanctuary  into 
which  now,  as  the  veil  is  rent,  we  are  permitted  as  priests  to 
enter?  We  stand  upon  a  pavement  which  is  redemption 
ground,  and  that  ground  is  laid,  every  stone  of  it,  in  the  love 
of  Jesus.  We  stand  between  walls  of  providence  and  grace, 
and  whether  it  be  the  providence  of  His  Hand,  or  the  grace  of 
His  Spirit,  in  either  case  we  are  surrounded  by  the  love  of 
Jesus.  We  stand  under  a  canopy  which  is  bright  with  glory, 
and  full  of  mercy.  It  is  a  very  heaven  of  heavens  to  us,  but 
it  is  a  heaven  of  love,  the  heaven  of  the  love  of  Jesus. 
Whether,  therefore,  we  look  up,  we  look  into  the  love  of 
Jesus,  or  whether  we  look  down,  we  look  down  into  the  love 
of  Jesus,  or  whether  we  look  at  the  right  hand,  it  is  to  the 
love  of  Jesus,  or  whether  we  look  to  the  left  hand,  it  is  to  the 
love  of  Jesus.  The  Oracle  is  one  full  of  love  in  breadth  and 
length  and  depth  and  height." 

REV.  j.  B.  FIGGIS. 


'Ctjc  3loi)c  of  Cfcrttt, 
ftnotolrtigc." 

ASIANS  iii.  19. 


"Having  In  lovo  foreordained  us."  (R.V.)  "  Quiokonod 
together  with  Christ."  "Christ  also  hath  loved  us,  and 
hath  given  Himself  for  us,  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice 
to  God."  "  Christ  loved  the  Church,  and  gave  Himself  for 
it."  Km.  i.  5  ;  ii.  5  ;  v.  2,  25. 

WHAT  the  Song  of  Solomon  is  to  the  Old  Testa- 
ment,  that  the  Epistle  to  tlio  Kphesians  is  to  the 
New.  It  is  tho  fragrant  lovo  letter  of  God 
l,o  His  children,  and  one  of  tho  key-words  of  1,1  IP. 
episllo  is  tho  word  love.  Tho  apostle  had  not 
gone  far  into  the  epistle  before,  in  UK-  lirsi. 
chapter  and  tho  sixth  verso,  he  spoaks  of 
"  tho  Beloved."  That  is  the  position  in  which 
our  Saviour  stands  to  His  Father,  lint  in 
four  other  places  he  discriminates  tho  various 
shinies  of  the  love  of  Christ  to  ns,  for  we 
speak  now  of  "the  love  of  Christ  that  pusseth 


30  "THE  LOVE   OF  CHRIST, 

knowledge."     In  the  first  chapter   and  in  the 
fifth  verse,  adopting  for  a  moment  the  possible 
rendering  of  the  margin  of  the  Revised  Version, 
we   have   the   love   of  Christ  shown  to  us  in 
foreordination.     In    the    second    chapter    and 
in  the  fifth  verse,  the  love  of  Christ  is  shown  in 
His    identification    with    us.     In    the    fifth 
chapter    and   second   verse   the  love  of  Christ 
is  shown  in  His  bloodshedding,  and  in   that 
same   fifth   chapter  and  twenty-fifth  verse  the 
love   of   Christ  is  shown  as  the   Bridegroom 
and  Husband  of  the  soul.     The  love  that  is 
deathless  as  His  own  love ;  the  love  that  dared 
to  stand   together  with  us  before  the  gaze  of 
all   worlds;  the   love   that   stooped   to   redeem 
us    by  the    gift    of    blood ;  and    the    love    to 
which  the  strongest,  deepest  love  that  ever  man 
had  to  woman  is  as  the  glowworm  torch  com 
pared  to  the  sun  in  its  meridian  strength.     I 
want  to  focus  my  text.     It  will  be  of  very  little 
service   to   thee   to   have   a   vague   intellectual 
knowledge  of  that   love.     I   would   that   thou 
shouldst    hear    the    Bridegroom    say   to    thee, 
"  I  love  thee."     Oh  that  there  may  be  a  definite 
apprehension  on  the  part  of  all ! 

There  is   as  much  love  for  each  as  though 
there  were  no  other  being  in  heaven  or  upon 


WHICH  PASSETH  KNOWLEDGE."       31 

earth  to  share  the  love  of  Christ.  "  Thou  art  as 
much  His  care  as  if  beside  nor  man  nor  angel 
lived  in  heaven  or  earth."  It  is  not  at  all 
wonderful,  therefore,  to  be  told  in  the  text  that 
the  love  of  Christ  passeth  knowledge,  or,  as 
I  suppose  the  Greek  might  be  rendered,  passeth 
limit.  It  is  illimitable.  The  love  of  Christ 
to  thee,  and  me,  and  each,  is  illimitable. 
The  whole  wealth  of  Christ's  heart,  the  in 
finite  wealth  of  Christ's  infinite  heart,  is  thine 
to-day  as  though  the  sun  should  shine  to 
light  one  firefly,  or  the  Amazon  flow  to  water 
the  roots  of  one  daisy.  Jesus  Christ,  who  com 
bines  the  sympathy  and  tenderness  of  man  with 
the  infinite  capacity  of  God,  loves  the  lowly, 
weary,  sinning,  worthless  soul  with  all  His 
force  and  gentleness  and  strength.  It  passes 
knowledge,  and  yet  we  may  know  it.  That 
is  the  divine  paradox.  A  paradox  states  a  truth 
antithetically.  We  can  know  each  antithesis. 
But  there  is  a  deeper  truth  beneath.  I  can 
not  touch  that  deeper  truth,  but  only  the 
antithesis.  First,  that  the  love  of  Christ  passeth 
knowledge  ;  and,  second,  that  we  may  yet  know 
it. 

First,  it  passeth  knowledge.     We  would  be 
prepared   to  believe  it  because  God  is  always 


32  "THE  LOVE   OF  CHRIST, 

passing  out  of  knowledge.  I  once  heard  a 
scientific  man  say  that  he  felt  himself  to  be 
living  in  a  garden,  and,  from  the  place  where 
he  stood,  pathways  opened  up  and  out  right 
and  left  and  all  round ;  but  whichever  path 
way  he  took,  after  going  some  few  steps,  the 
pathway  was  lost  in  the  moorland  waste, 
and  his  progress  was  barred  by  the  notice, 
"Further  progress  is  impossible."  If  that  be 
the  confession  of  a  man  of  science,  how  much 
more  shall  it  be  true  of  us  who  to-day  are 
standing  in  a  very  paradise  of  love,  whilst 
all  around  us  pathways  lead  forth  to  the  love 
of  Creation,  or  the  love  of  Providence,  or 
the  love  of  our  Eedemption,  or  the  love  of 
our  f  oreordination  and  election  *?  But  which 
ever  path  we  take,  and  begin  to  explore  the 
love  of  God,  we  shall  discover  that  His  love, 
like  all  the  rest  of  His  attributes,  will  soon 
leave  us  behind,  and  we  shall  find  ourselves 
face  to  face  with  the  limitation  of  our  ignorance, 
because  this  love  passeth  knowledge.  Is  it 
not  well  that  it  should  1  Do  you  not  think 
that  the  sublimity  of  nature  comes  from  infinite 
distance  and  infinite  depth  1  What  is  it  which 
at  night  gives  to  the  upward  view  that  sense 
of  magnificence  1  Is  it  not  the  thought  of 


WHICH  PASSE TH  KNOWLEDGE."       33 

illimitable  space?  Why  do  your  children  love 
to  get  down  to  the  seaside1?  Is  it  not  the 
sense  of  space  and  distance  to  the  far  horizon 
line  *?  So  it  is  with  the  glaciers  blue  with 
depth.  There  is  a  sense  of  grandeur  in  being 
loved  with  a  love  like  this.  You  may  dive 
into  it  with  no  fear  of  collision,  deeper,  deeper 
always,  yet  it  is  ever  beyond  you.  Now  let 
us  just  take  three  or  four  texts  to  show  why 
we  cannot  know  this  love. 

Romans  viii.  39  tells  us  that  the  love  of 
God  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  Do  not  think  because 
it  is  a  man  who  loves  you  that  you  have  lost 
anything  of  the  fulness  of  the  love  of  God, 
for  the  love  of  God  is  in  Christ,  and  therefore, 
of  course,  the  love  of  Christ  must  be  the 
vehicle  of  God's.  One  can  hardly  go  further. 
It  seems  too  wonderful  to  believe  that  all 
God's  love  is  in  Christ,  and  in  Christ  that 
it  might  be  tempered  and  toned  before  it 
encountered  the  delicate  organism  of  our 
natures.  As  the  sun  may  not  strike  on  the 
babe's  eye  save  through  the  undulations  of 
the  ether,  so  the  great  love  of  the  infinite 
God  would  be  our  destruction  did  it  not  come 
through  the  nature  of  Him  who  loved  the 
children,  who  wept  over  the  city,  and  who 
c 


34  "THE  LOVE   OF  CHRIST, 

allowed  the  woman  to  wet  His  feet  with  her 
tears.  But  you  must  not  think  that  you  lose 
anything  of  the  love  of  God  because  it  comes 
through  Christ. 

Take  yet  another  text — John  xiii.  1 — "  Hav 
ing  loved  His  own  which  were  in  the  world, 
our  Lord  loved  them  to  the  end."  Too  often 
that  word  is  taken  to  mean  that  He  loved 
them  to  the  end  of  His  mortal  career,  surely 
altogether  inadequate.  I  prefer  the  Revised 
Version,  that  says,  "  He  loved  them  unto  the 
uttermost."  As  much  as  to  say  that  He  loved 
them  to  the  uttermost  possibility  of  love,  that 
there  was  nothing  in  the  conception  of  love 
which  the  love  of  Jesus  left  unexhausted  or 
unexplored. 

Take  another  text — John  xv.  9 — "Even  as 
the  Father  hath  loved  Me,  I  also  have  loved 
you."  Do  you  want  to  know  how  much  Jesus 
loves  you  ?  Ah  !  soul,  before  thou  canst  master 
that  arithmetic  thou  must  learn  another  mode 
of  computation.  Tell  me  first  the  love  of 
God  the  Father  to  His  Son,  and  I  will  tell 
thee  the  love  of  the  Son  to  thee.  Dost  thou 
wonder  at  the  love  of  Jesus,  sinful,  weak, 
ignorant  man?  Dost  thou  wonder  that  it 
passeth  knowledge? 


WHICH  PASSETH  KNOWLEDGE."        35 

Or  take  one  thought  more  from  Ephesians  ii. 
7.  In  this  marvellous  epistle  we  are  told  that 
God  the  Father,  who  loves  us  in  Christ,  is 
going  to  make  His  love  to  us  a  specimen  of 
love  through  all  the  ages.  There  are  two 
things  which  God  is  going  to  show  to  the 
principalities  and  the  powers  of  other  worlds ; 
the  one  is  in  the  second  chapter  and  the 
seventh  verse,  "The  exceeding  riches  of  His 
grace  and  of  His  kindness,"  and  the  other  is 
in  the  third  chapter  and  in  the  tenth  verse, 
"  His  manifold  wisdom."  Do  you  wonder  then 
that  it  passeth  knowledge  ? 

We  may  gain  one  more  suggestion  from  the 
expression  saints.  Each  saint  can  only  see  his 
side  of  it.  If  you  ascend  Snowdon,  you  go  up 
from  Capel-curig  or  Llanberis  or  Beddgellert, 
and  will  only  see  one  slope.  In  order  to  form 
a  true  conception  of  Snowdon  three  travellers 
must  start  each  by  a  separate  route,  from 
Llanberis  the  one,  Capel-curig  the  other,  and 
Beddgellert  the  third,  and  only  when  the  three 
meet  on  the  summit  will  they  know  the  whole 
of  the  mountain's  grandeur.  So  the  Baptist 
must  come  from  his  side,  and  the  Congrega- 
tionalist  from  his  side,  and  the  Presbyterian 
from  his,  and  the  Church  of  England  man 


"THE  LOVE   OF  CHRIST, 


from  his,  and  it  is  only  when  all  the  saints 
meet  together,  and  each  has  caught  his  own 
angle-view  of  the  love  of  Christ,  that  the 
Church  will  understand  the  whole.  It  is 
because  our  powers  are  so  limited  that  we 
cannot  take  it  in.  And  yet  there  is  one  other 
thought  suggested  by  saint.  We  are  not  holy 
enough.  We  must  be  saints  to  know  the  love 
of  Christ,  and  the  more  saintly  we  are  the 
more  we  shall  know,  because  anything  which 
is  not  perfectly  saint-like  casts  a  blur  upon 
the  mirror  and  dims  it.  I  would  we  might 
be  quiet  a  minute,  and  each  say  to  himself 
and  herself,  "It  is  not  simply  a  feeling  of 
complacency,  it  is  love.  If  it  were  com 
placency  God  would  only  like  me  when  I  am 
good.  But  He  loves  me.  It  is  not  benevo 
lence,  that  is  only  a  kind  feeling.  It  is  better 
than  this.  God  who  fills  everything  loves  me 
in  Christ  with  a  love  that  passeth  knowledge." 
You  may  not  feel  it,  but  you  must  believe  it. 
You  may  have  no  responsive  motion,  but  that 
does  not  alter  it.  The  earth  may  wrap  itself 
in  clouds,  but  that  does  not  affect  the  sunshine ; 
and  that  you  feel  weary,  depressed,  sin-stricken, 
almost  helpless,  does  not  alter  or  affect  the  fact 
that  the  whole  of  Deity  is  pouring  out  its  tides 


WHICH  PASSETH  KNOWLEDGE"       37 

towards  you  through  the  channel  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Is  not  that  enough  to  banish  loneli 
ness,  depression,  and  the  fear  of  ultimately 
being  cast  away  1  It  is  impossible  that  God 
should  ever  let  one  go  upon  whom  He  has  set 
His  love.  The  illimitable  love  of  Christ  to  the 
soul  has  sometimes  so  engrossed  and  over 
powered  holy  men  that  they  have  been  beside 
themselves.  I  was  reading  of  Flavel,  who  on 
one  occasion  was  travelling  by  himself  through 
the  country  on  horseback.  He  tells  us  that 
he  became  suddenly  conscious  of  a  very  sweet 
and  powerful  sense  of  God's  personal  love  to 
him,  so  much  so  that  he  became  oblivious  to 
the  road,  the  country,  and  all  that  was  happen 
ing.  He  says,  "I  did  verily  think  that  as  I 
stood  there — for  his  horse  had  come  to  a  stand 
— that  if  I  were  in  heaven  I  could  hardly 
hope  to  have  more  blessedness  than  I  then 
enjoyed."  A  passer-by  startled  him,  and  he 
found  his  way  to  the  inn  where  he  was  to 
spend  the  night,  but  he  said  that  all  that  night 
his  consciousness  of  being  loved  by  God  swept 
over  him  wave  on  wave,  and  he  could  not 
sleep ;  only  he  adds,  "  I  was  more  rested  than 
I  had  been  by  many  nights  of  sleep,  and  I  saw 
in  my  soul  things  I  had  not  known."  May  it 


38  "THE  LOVE   OF  CHRIST, 

not  be  that  God  is  wanting  to  say  as  much  to 
some  of  us,  but  we  are  so  busy,  so  hurried, 
and  so  monopolised  by  little  things  that  we 
let  the  great  stream  pass  by,  indifferent  to  the 
murmur  of  its  waves. 

Though  God's  love  passeth  knowledge,  yet 
we  may  know  it.  It  is  conceivable  that  a 
settler  should  receive  many  acres,  and  even 
square  miles,  of  territory  of  which  he  knows 
but  little  in  its  whole  expanse;  but  he  may 
know  something  of  the  character  of  the  soil  in 
the  few  acres  which  he  first  enclosed  and  culti 
vated.  Cannot  you  see  him  arriving  there? 
Settlers'  waggons  pass  through  Chicago  by  the 
hundred  a  week  to  the  Far  West.  A  man 
will  take  his  wife  and  his  children,  his  farm 
implements  and  a  few  household  utensils,  and 
travel  to  the  unoccupied  lands.  He  will  finally 
come  upon  his  new  estate.  Selecting  some 
corner  of  it,  he  will  erect  a  shanty  to  shelter 
himself  and  his  dear  ones;  and  when  he  has 
done  all  he  can  in  a  few  weeks  of  labour,  he 
says  to  his  wife,  "Wife,  I  am  going  to  survey 
our  property."  He  climbs  some  mountain,  and 
looks  far  away  to  the  horizon,  or  the  flashing 
waters  of  lake  and  river,  and  all  is  his.  How 
little  he  knows  of  the  wealth  of  his  estate. 


WHICH  PASSETH  KNOWLEDGE."       39 

But  presently  he  goes  back  and  says,  "Wife, 
we  shall  be  old  and  grey  before  we  know  all 
that  we  possess  in  this  place.  But  we  will 
begin  to  cultivate  the  little  plot  round  our 
house,  and  every  year  put  the  fence  further 
back,  bringing  the  limit  of  our  experience  ever 
nearer  that  of  possession."  So,  men  and  women, 
we  are  settlers  upon  the  continent  of  the  love  of 
God.  We  only  know  a  little  of  its  coastline, 
we  fringe  its  shores;  but  what  the  wealth  of 
that  continent  is  we  shall  never  know,  for  it 
has  no  limit,  no  bound,  no  end.  Let  us,  how 
ever,  follow  on  to  know  and  enjoy  this  wonderful 
love. 

We  should  know  it  first  as  a  matter  of 
doctrine.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  increase  our 
knowledge  of  the  love  of  God  by  the  reverent 
study  of  His  word.  I  have  not  much  faith  in 
a  man  who  discounts  doctrine.  What  the  bones 
are  to  the  body,  doctrine  is  to  the  fabric  of  the 
moral  and  spiritual  life.  What  law  is  to  the 
material  universe,  doctrine  is  to  the  spiritual. 
Get  an  intelligent  knowledge  of  doctrine,  the 
doctrines  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  hold  them 
fast.  If  you  have  time  additional  to  that  you 
give  to  the  Bible,  study  strong  books,  books 
that  will  give  you  true  conceptions  of  the  love 


40  "THE  LOVE   OF  CHRIST, 

of  God,  and  the  lines  on  which  it  runs,  and 
the  laws  which  it  has  followed  and  will  follow. 
We  need  to  know  the  love  of  God  doctrinally. 
Secondly,  we  should  know  the  love  of  God  by 
meditation.  I  was  reading  of  one  called  Isaac 
Andrews,  of  whom  Dr.  Calamy  writes.  He 
was  a  devoted  minister  in  the  North  of  England. 
He  wrote  a  book  called  Looking  unto  Jesus, 
which  is  very  sweet  and  fragrant.  It  is  said 
that  he  was  in  the  habit  of  preaching  eleven 
months  in  the  year,  and  spending  the  twelfth 
in  a  little  hut  in  the  woods,  that  he  might  have 
uninterrupted  leisure  for  meditating  upon  the 
love  of  God  to  him.  Do  you  not  remember 
what  Rutherford  said  when  he  was  put  into 
prison]  "  My  enemies  thought  that  they 
would  put  me  in  prison ;  but  they  have  put 
me  into  the  King's  banqueting-house,  and  the 
banner  of  His  love  has  been  unfurled  over  my 
head." 

Thirdly,  we  should  know  the  love  of  Christ 
experimentally;  that  is,  we  should  sit  down 
and  ask  for  the  Spirit  of  discernment  to  see 
the  thread  of  love  running  through  the  beads 
of  our  life.  "Whoso  is  wise  will  observe  these 
things,  even  they  shall  understand  the  loving- 
kindness  of  the  Lord."  If  you  read  that  psalm 


WHICH  PASSETH  KNOWLEDGE."       41 

you  will  find  there  is  an  account  of  storm,  of  a 
march  through  an  arid  waste,  and  of  five  more 
different  episodes,  many  of  them  fraught  with 
pain,  and  at  the  end  of  it  the  psalmist  has  what 
you  may  call  the  audacity  to  say,  "If  a  man 
wants  it  he  will  find  the  loving-kindness  of  the 
Lord  in  the  storm,  in  the  wilderness,  and  even 
in  the  prison-house."  Let  us  therefore  sit  down 
and  let  that  thought  permeate  the  heart.  Have 
your  pencil,  if  you  will,  and  begin  to  put  down 
all  the  manifestations  in  your  life  of  God's  love 
to  you,  and  methinks  the  more  you  write,  like 
Bunyan's  Pilgrim's  Progress,  the  more  it  will 
grow  on  you,  and  you  will  fill  one  sheet  of 
paper  and  want  another,  and  then  another  and 
another.  I  would  like  a  man  who  is  dis 
appointed,  whose  heart  is  full  of  depression 
and  desolateness,  to  try  my  recipe,  to  put  down 
in  order  the  manifestations  of  Christ's  love,  the 
sin  which  has  been  forgiven,  the  iniquity  par 
doned,  the  waywardness  and  wickedness  with 
which  He  has  borne.  Oh,  man,  come  sum  it 
up,  and  I  think  you  will  throw  down  your 
pencil  when  you  are  but  half  way  through  the 
enumeration,  and  cry,  it  passe th  knowledge. 
Lastly  sympathetically,  i.e.,  by  sympathy. 
Kepler,  the  great  astronomer,  who  laid  the 


42  "THE  LOVE    OF  CHRIST, 

foundation  of  much  of  our  knowledge  of  the 
stars,  one  day  exclaimed,  after  spending  hours 
in  surveying  the  heavens,  "  I  have  been  thinking 
over  again  the  earliest  thoughts  of  the  Creator," 
and  surely  every  time  a  man  sacrifices  himself, 
or  takes  up  the  cross  for  another  he  is  thinking 
over  again  the  earliest,  deepest  thought  of  the 
love  of  Christ.  Have  you  not  often  felt  as 
though  God  kept  training  you1?  When  you 
first  loved  that  twin-soul,  now  your  husband  or 
your  wife,  did  you  not  one  day  say  to  yourself, 
"  I  love,  and  from  my  own  heart  learn  what  love 
is  "  1  So  in  that  first  attraction  to  another  you 
woke  up  to  a  new  realm  and  cried,  "Why  I 
suppose  that  Jesus  Christ's  love  to  me  is  some 
thing  like  this,  only  infinite."  The  quality 
is  the  same,  though  not  the  quantity.  Every 
time  you  do  a  gentle  act  for  another  who  does 
not  deserve  it,  every  time  you  lay  down  your 
life  to  save  others,  every  time  you  endure  shame 
and  spitting  and  scorn  to  rescue  lost  women  and 
lost  men,  in  the  glow  of  your  human  interest, 
and  amidst  disappointment  and  rebuff  you  say, 
"Well,  thank  God,  I  am  seeing  deeper  than 
ever  I  saw  before  into  what  Jesus  has  been 
feeling  for  me."  Abraham  learnt  more  of  the 
love  of  God  the  day  he  was  led  up  Mount 


WHICH  PASSETH  KNOWLEDGE."       43 

Moriah  than  anything  else  could  have  taught 
him. 

Perhaps  there  are  men  and  women  who  have 
been  hearing  all  this,  and  who  are  saying, 
"Well,  well,  my  life  has  been  so  dreary,  so 
perplexed,  that  I  cannot  think  God  loves  me." 
I  pray  you  remember  a  text  which  says  that 
"  we  must  know  and  believe  the  love."  Stand 
ing  upon  the  granite  block  of  redemption  and 
providence,  and  the  blessings  which  have  come 
to  our  life,  we  must  dare  to  face  the  inexplicable, 
the  dark,  and  the  mysterious;  and  reason  that 
the  pathway  of  love  lies  through  these  also,  and 
when  we  have  traversed  them  we  shall  look 
back  on  a  trail  of  light.  The  love  of  God  has 
never  once  failed  me,  and  though  I  cannot  see 
it,  or  how  that  trouble  which  menaces  me  is 
consistent  with  it,  it  is  only  the  text  over  again, 
"The  love  of  God  passeth  knowledge."  You 
cannot  know  it,  you  cannot  tell  its  great  and 
devious  track.  "His  footsteps  are  in  the  sea, 
and  His  path  in  the  mighty  waters."  You 
cannot  always  follow  Him,  but  you  may  always 
believe  that  there  is  love,  though  it  passeth 
knowledge. 

We  need  a  baptism  of  love  to-day.  We  all 
need  it.  Many  are  leading  such  a  miserable 


44  "THE  LOVE   OF  CHRIST:' 

life  of  repression;  they  are  ever  flying  to 
jealousy  and  hatred  and  ill-will  and  suspicion 
and  dislike.  Of  course  we  do  not  admit  these 
things,  and  yet  they  incessantly  torment  us  and 
follow  our  footsteps,  as  the  dog  which  we  meant 
to  leave  at  home,  but  which  follows  us.  And 
in  so  far  as  they  are  permitted  in  heart  or 
life  they  exclude  the  consciousness  of  our 
Saviour's  infinite  love.  Let  us  absolutely  and 
for  ever  put  away  all  these — wrath,  anger, 
malice,  ill-will,  and  all  uncharitableness.  Let 
us  reckon  that  such  have  neither  part  nor  lot 
in  our  new  resurrection-life.  Let  us  give  up 
our  ill-will  about  each  and  all  who  may  have 
injured  us,  or  at  least  tell  Christ  that  we  are 
willing  to  be  channels  through  which  His  love 
may  flow  to  them.  And  when  this  is  so,  and 
in  no  part  of  our  heart  there  is  cherished  aught 
that  is  inconsistent  with  perfect  love,  we  shall 
not  only  understand  as  never  before  the  un 
searchable  love  of  Christ,  but  we  shall  be  able 
to  claim  a  baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who 
sheds  abroad  the  love  of  God  in  willing, 
obedient,  and  believing  souls. 


"THE   ETEENAL  PUEPOSE 

WHICH  HE  PUEPOSED  IN  CHEIST 

JESUS   OUE   LOED." 


"Lord  Tennyson  has  sung— 

'  I  doubt  not  through  the  ages  ona  Increasing  purpose  runs, 
And  the  thoughts  of  men  are  widened  with  the  process  of 
the  suns.' 

The  thoughts  of  men  may  be  widened,  but  the  thoughts 
of  the  Lord  are  not  widened  by  the  process  of  the  suns.  He 
has  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  hid  all  things  in  Christ. 
His  will  is  in  Himself— that  wonderful  will  of  God,  that 
blessed  will  of  God,  that  mysterious  will  of  God,  His  own 
purpose  which  shall  stand.  And  it  is  that  Christ  may  have 
the  pre-eminence,  and  be  exalted.  Let  our  little  purposes 
and  plans  be  all  lost  sight  of,  and  merged  and  brought  into 
captivity  and  to  obedience  to  Him  'who  worketh  all  things 
after  the  counsel  of  His  own  will,  according  to  the  eternal 
purpose  which  He  purposed  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.' " 

SIR  ARTHUR  BLACKWOOD,  K.C.B. 
(Last  words  at  Mildmay.) 


" 


Clje  eternal  purpose 
>e  purposed  in  Cftrtet 
cur  torn/' 


BIBLE   READING. 


"That  in  all  things  He  might  have  the  pre-eminence."  "  That 
in  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times  He  might  gather 
together  in  one  all  things  in  Christ,  both  which  are  in 
heaven,  and  which  are  on  earth."  "That  in  the  ages  to 
come  He  might  shew  the  exceeding  riches  of  His  grace, 
in  His  kindness  toward  us  through  Christ  Jesus."— COL.  i. 
18  ;  EPH.  i.  10 ;  ii.  7. 

I  TAKE  as  my  starting-point  for  this  Bible  talk 
the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  the  third  chapter 
and  the  llth  verse  (R.V.)  :  "According  to  the 
eternal  purpose  which  He  purposed  in  Christ 
Jesus  our  Lord,  in  whom  we  have  boldness  and 
access  in  confidence  through  our  faith  in  Him  " 
or  "  through  the  faith  of  Him." 

We  are  thankful  to  know  that  our  Father 
has  a  purpose,   and   that   that   purpose   is  en- 


48  "  THE  ETERNAL  PURPOSE 


sphered  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  so  that,  as 
John  puts  it  in  the  book  of  Revelation,  there 
is  a  book  which,  though  sealed  with  seven  seals, 
is  delivered  to  the  Lamb  that  He  may  open  it 
seal  by  seal.  The  ultimate  end  of  our  Father's 
purpose,  so  far  as  we  can  discern  it  by  the  light 
of  revelation,  is  disclosed  to  us  in  the  1st 
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  in  the  15th  chapter, 
in  the  24th  verse  (R.V.),  "Then  cometh  the 
end,  when  He  shall  deliver  up  the  kingdom  to 
God,  even  the  Father,  when  He  shall  have 
abolished  all  rule  and  all  authority  and  power." 
The  kingdom  which  God  gave  to  man  in 
paradise  was  niched  from  man  by  man's  great 
foe,  the  devil,  and  though  God  had  made  man 
to  be  the  king,  the  vicegerent  over  the  earth, 
the  crown  was  torn  from  his  brow  and  his 
dominion  trampled  under  foot.  And  for  long 
it  seemed  as  if  Satan  were  to  continue  to 
hold  the  empire  which  he  had  unrighteously 
obtained ;  but  at  last  the  Son  of  man  appeared — 
and  in  the  temptation  of  the  wilderness,  in  the 
garden  of  Gethsemane,  on  the  cross,  and  upon 
the  Easter  morning  He  showed  that  God  in 
man  was  stronger  than  the  sovereignty  of  the 
devil,  and  that  comparatively  speaking  the 
empire  of  Satan  over  men,  over  the  earth,  and 


IN  CHRIST  JESUS  OUR  LORD."         49 

the  material  elements  was  to  be  a  thing  of  a 
short  duration.  This  wonderful  Saviour  of 
ours  has  already  defeated  Satan,  and  broken 
his  power;  and  as  the  ages  go  on,  the  meaning 
of  that  conquest  and  victory  is  becoming  more 
apparent.  Our  Lord  is  putting  down,  one  by 
one,  the  great  foes  of  man.  The  last  enemy 
shall  yet  be  destroyed.  And  when  Jesus 
Christ  has  asserted  His  supremacy  over  the 
entire  domain  of  human  life,  of  man,  and  of 
the  earth,  then  He  shall  deliver  up  the  king 
dom  to  God  even  the  Father.  It  is  certain 
that  there  is  an  infinite  beauty  in  thinking 
and  in  knowing  that  the  consummation  of  all 
things  is  to  be  in  the  kingdom  of  our  Father 
God.  But  though  that  be  the  ultimate  out 
working  of  God's  purpose  in  Christ,  I  am 
very  anxious  not  to  lose  myself  or  my  time 
in  these  generalities,  however  sublime  they  be, 
because  when  you  go  from  this  Conference 
you  will  need  to  have  for  your  own  life  words 
that  will  empower  you  to  live  and  work  for 
God. 

The   eternal   purpose   of    God,    which   must 

certainly  include  us  all,   must   be  claimed   by 

a.  living  faith.     This  comes  out  clearly  in  the 

text,  which  we  will  read  again.     In  the  epistle 

D 


50  "  THE  El^ERNAL  PURPOSE 


to  the  Ephesians,  the  3rd  chapter,  you  find 
it  written,  "According  to  the  eternal  purpose 
which  he  purposed  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  : 
in  whom  we  have  boldness  and  access  in  confi 
dence,  in  faith."  Now  why,  in  the  same 
sentence,  does  the  apostle  join  the  outworking 
of  God's  eternal  purpose  with  our  access  to 
Him  in  boldness  and  confidence  ?  Is  it  not 
remarkable,  when  you  consider  it,  that  the 
apostle  turns  from  the  vast  extent  of  the 
purpose  of  God  to  consider  the  small  circle 
of  human  life  1  It  is  as  wonderful  a  com 
parison  as  to  compare  the  orbit  of  the  earth 
with  the  circle  of  a  gnat's  eye.  Why  does  the 
apostle  turn  from  the  general  to  the  particular, 
from  the  vast  sweep  of  God's  purpose  to  our 
little  life  1  Well,  partly  because  God's  purpose 
will  only  be  fulfilled  through  individuals,  and 
partly  for  another  reason,  to  which  I  desire  to 
bring  you. 

I  want  you  to  see,  in  fact,  that  the  purpose 
of  God,  whilst  it  is  secure  of  being  fulfilled, 
yet  waits  for  you  to  claim  it.  Claim  its  realiza 
tion  by  a  daily  faith,  and  you  will  find  how 
real  and  easy  faith  becomes  when  it  is  based 
upon  the  eternal  purpose  of  God  concerning 
you.  I  do  not  wonder  that  some  people 


IN  CHRIST  fESUS  OUR  LORD"         51 


complain  that  they  are  unable  to  believe ;  it 
is  because  they  do  not  apprehend  God's 
purpose ;  but  directly  you  apprehend  God's 
purpose  you  have  access  with  boldness  and 
confidence  to  claim  it. 

Now  let  us  see  how  this  works  out.  Take, 
for  instance,  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians; 
and  first,  as  concerns  the  Blamelessness  of 
our  Character.  Is  there  one  here  that  does 
not  want  to  live  the  blameless  life  1  Do  you 
not  sigh  often  again  for  the  lily  of  a  blameless, 
spotless  character?  Is  there  a  single  soul  that 
has  seen  the  King  who  does  not  sigh  over 
the  impure  lip1?  Is  there  one  who  has  ever 
thought  of  the  pellucid  water  of  life  without 
desiring  to  be  a  pure  vessel,  so  as  not  to 
contaminate  it  when  passed  to  another  1  You 
long  to  be  holy  and  without  blame,  and  yet 
very  often  it  seems  like  the  vision  of  a  night 
that  mocks  you,  or  like  a  mirage  upon  the 
desert  sand,  that  dies  away  when  it  is 
approached. 

But  turn  to  Ephesians  i.  4.  (R.V.)  He 
chose  us  in  Christ  "  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world,  that  we  should  be  holy  and  without 
blemish  before  Him."  The  apostle  takes  us 
back  to  the  eternal  ages  before  a  seraph  flamed, 


THE  ETERNAL   PURPOSE 


before  a  cherub  loved,  before  the  heavens  or 
the  earth  were  made.  You  who  believe  in 
Christ  were  chosen  in  Him;  that  is,  God 
chose  Christ  and  all  who  shall  have  affinity 
to  Him — that  affinity  being  shown  by  their 
faith.  And  God  chose  such,  you  amongst 
their  number  if  you  believe  in  Christ,  that 
you  should  be  holy  and  without  blemish. 
Oh,  weary  heart,  travel  back  to  the  origin 
of  the  river,  away  in  the  heart  of  those 
eternal  ages,  and  see  how  it  has  been  flowing 
down  through  them  to  bear  you  upon  its  broad 
bosom  into  a  blameless  life;  and  when  you 
have  once  understood  that  God's  election  means 
that  you  should  be  holy  and  without  blame, 
then  remember  that  your  faith  may  come  into 
the  very  presence  of  God  with  boldness  and 
confidence,  to  claim  that  His  election  shall  be 
made  a  living  fact  in  your  experience. 

Secondly,  work  out  that  same  thought  with 
regard  to  the  Consciousness  of  Sonship.  In 
Ephesians  i.  5  you  are  told  that  you  have  been 
predestinated  unto  the  adoption  of  sons.  Some 
of  you  may  not  have  the  joy  of  assurance. 
You  do  not  realise  yourselves  to  be  sons  and 
daughters  of  God.  You  have  not  got  the 
peace  of  conscious  acceptance,  and  yet  you 


IN  CHRIST  JESUS  OUR  LORD."         53 

cling  to  Christ.  But,  remember,  since  you  have 
been  foreordained  unto  the  adoption  of  sons, 
you  have  therefore  a  perfect  right  to  go  into 
the  presence  of  God  and  claim  that  the  Spirit 
of  adoption  should  witness  with  your  spirit 
that  you  are  a  child  of  God. 

Consider  a  third  illustration— With  regard  to 
the  Sympathy  of  Jesus.  In  Ephesians  i.  10, 
you  are  told— and  I  use  the  Greek  word  here 
—  that  it  is  God's  purpose  to  head  up  all 
things  in  Christ,  that  He  may  be  the  apex, 
the  climax,  the  Head  of  all  things  and  of 
all  men  who  believe.  Perhaps  you  have  been 
longing  fervently  for  sympathy,  but  just  so  soon 
as  you  see  God  has  constituted  Jesus  Christ 
as  your  Head,  forthwith,  by  a  living  faith,  you 
will  claim  that  all  that  the  head  is  to  the 
body  Jesus  will  be  to  you.  You  will  claim 
that  as  the  head  sympathises  with  bodily  pain, 
so  you  may  be  conscious  of  the  sympathy  of 
Jesus;  and  as  the  head  impels  the  members 
to  obey,  so  your  life  shall  yield  fealty  to 
Christ. 

Fourthly,  with  regard  to  Possession  by 
Christ  and  the  Infilling  by  the  Spirit.  You 
long  for  a  Pentecost.  You  know  that  the 
blessing  of  Pentecost  was  that  men  were  filled 


54  "THE  ETERNAL  PURPOSE 

with  the  Spirit.  If  ever  a  man  has  longed  to 
be  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God  it  is  you. 
You  have  heard  of  happy  souls  who,  by  the 
grace  of  God,  have  stood  beneath  the  open 
heavens,  and  the  dove  has  flown  to  their 
hearts  and  the  voice  of  God  has  declared  them 
His  beloved  children,  but  with  all  your  nights 
of  prayer  and  days  of  fasting  you  have  never 
yet  realised  what  it  was  to  be  infilled  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  and  possessed  of  God.  Yet 
if  you  look  at  that  text  you  will  see — and  I 
use  the  Revised  Version — in  Ephesians  i.  11, 
"  In  Him  we  were  made  an  inheritance."  Now 
an  inheritance  is  that  which  you  occupy  and 
possess.  If  it  is  a  house,  you  live  in  it;  if 
it  is  an  estate,  you  cultivate  it,  and  you  leave 
no  single  acre  uncared  for.  So  that  God's 
eternal  purpose  was  that  you  should  be  His 
estate,  His  house ;  that  you  should  be  filled  by 
Himself,  as  the  waters  fill  the  ocean  bed.  The 
Holy  Ghost  at  Pentecost  was  given  to  you  because 
you  were  represented  in  Christ  in  His  ascension, 
and  if  you  were  wise  you  would  now  claim 
Him  from  the  presence  of  your  Father.  You  need 
not  plead  with  Him.  You  need  not  spend  a 
day  or  a  night  of  prayer,  but  take  the  purpose 
of  God  in  your  hand,  and  go  to  Him  and  say, 


IN  CHRIST  fESUS  OUR  LORD."         55 

"My  Father,  I  find  it  is  Thy  purpose  that 
I,  Thy  child,  should  become  Thine  estate.  I 
am  like  very  poor  land,  therefore  put  all  into 
me  that  Thou  wouldst  take  out,  I  am  not 
a  tenantable  house,  but  put  me  in  repair. 
Come  and  live  in  me,  0  God,  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  let  there  be  no  cranny  or  corner 
of  my  life  unfilled."  Plead  the  purpose  of 
God  about  yourself,  and  you  will  plead  with 
confidence  and  boldness. 

Take  a  fifth  illustration,  as  it  concerns  Our 
daily  Walk.     Take  Ephesians  ii.  10.     Is  there 
a  soul  that  does  not  want  to  do  the  best  work 
possible?      How   may   we   do   it1?      The    text 
begins  by  saying  that  "we  are  His  workman 
ship."     In  the  Greek  word  it  is  "  We  are  God's 
poem,"  as  if  God  were  a  poet,  and  He  were 
making  one  great  poem — the  church — and  just 
as  in  some  of  Browning's  poetry  the  conception 
is  obscure,  and  it  takes  two  or  three  readings 
before   we   can   understand    the    rhythm,    the 
measure,  the  meaning,  so  we  may  have  to  wait 
before   we   see   God's   thought   in  the  church. 
But  there  is  a   rhythm  and  a  majesty  and  a 
beauty  in  it :  somehow  we  rhyme,  somehow  each 
one  contributes  to  the  cadence.      We  are  God's 
poem. 


56  "THE  ETERNAL  PURPOSE 

But  we  have  been  "  created  in  Christ."  You 
were  created  a  new  creature  at  the  cross  when 
first  you  found  Christ.  Ah,  yes ;  but  you  were 
created  in  Christ  Jesus  ages  before  that,  when 
in  the  purpose  of  God,  you  were  created  in 
Christ  unto  good  works. 

In  that  far  away  eternity,  God  also  sketched 
out  the  path  of  your  good  works.     He  prepared 
the  good  works  for  you  to  walk  in.       "  Created 
in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works   which  God 
before  prepared  that  we  should  walk  in  them." 
Every  path  begins  at  the  Cross  and  ends  at  the 
Golden   Gate.       But   they   intersect— they   are 
devious,   or  lonesome.      Now  there  is  a  bit  of 
sward  or  moss,  a  stretch  alongside  a  river ;  just 
now  a  steep  climb  up  the  hill  Difficulty,  and 
presently   the   Delectable    Mountains   and   the 
land  of  Beulah.      But  whatever  path  you  are 
treading,  believe  that  you  were  created  in  Christ 
Jesus  unto  good  works,  which  God  before  pre 
pared  for  you  to  walk  in.      And  if  you  were 
wise,  you  would  not  scheme  this  or  the  other, 
and    say,    "I    will    do    this    in    imitation    of 
another,"   or,   "I   will   work   out   a  new   plan 
which    I   have    devised,"   but    every   day   you 
would  walk  with  God,  and  as  you  opened  your 
eyes    to    consciousness   you    would    cry,    "My 


IN  CHRIST  JESUS  OUR  LORD."         57 

God,  I  want  to  walk  with  Thee  to-day  in  the 
good  works  which  Thou  hast  prepared  for  me 
to  occupy." 

When  once  we  see  that  there  is  a  purpose  of 
God  in  our  life  it  makes  prayer  so  easy !  We 
have  access  with  boldness  and  confidence  upon 
the  groundwork  of  God's  purpose  for  us.  "Do 
as  Thou  hast  said." 

Notice  those  last  words  of  the  passage,  "Bold 
ness  and  confidence  through  faith."  People  do  not 
seem  to  understand  the  difference  between  pray 
ing  and  believing.  Our  lives  are  full  of  prayer  ; 
but,  alas  !  there  is  too  little  of  this  faith.  What 
is  faith  ?  Well,  you  may  put  it  thus  :  Faith  is 
the  power  to  claim  that  God's  purpose  shall  be 
realized,  and  the  power  to  take  the  grace  that 
shall  enable  you  to  realize  it.  Oh,  Christian 
people,  have  not  some  of  us  made  a  terrible 
mistake,  in  always  praying  as  if  God  were  unwill 
ing  to  give,  spending  days  and  nights  in  agony, 
as  if  to  wring  from  God  some  boon  from  His 
reluctant  hand,  when,  in  point  of  fact,  our  God 
is  like  the  sea  that  seethes  all  down  a  line  of 
wall,  hungry  to  find  the  aperture  through  which 
to  pour  itself  into  lough  or  loch  1  We  forget  that 
the  very  desire  for  God  has  been  implanted  by 
God,  and  that  He  is  not  likely  to  disappoint 


58  "THE  ETERNAL  PURPOSE 

the  desire,  the  appetite,  which  He  Himself  has 
created.  We  forget  that  all  around  in  Nature 
there  is  an  abundant  supply  of  food  before  the 
babe  or  the  insect  or  the  fish  or  the  young  lion 
requires  it.  And  so  our  appetite  or  desire  is 
but  the  reflection  flung  upon  the  clear  waters  of 
our  heart  from  the  purpose  of  God  which  is 
hanging  over  us.  We  need  therefore  to  under 
stand  more  clearly  the  purpose  of  God  for  us,  and 
then  there  will  be  a  definiteness  and  a  meaning 
and  a  reality  in  our  prayer  which  will  make  our 
prayer-time  full  of  a  new  interest.  A  man  said 
to  me  the  other  day  when  I  was  talking  like  this, 
"  But,  sir,  if  we  were  to  begin  to  pray  like  that, 
would  it  not  make  our  times  of  prayer  much 
shorter,  and  limit  the  hours  that  we  spend 
before  God  \ "  I  replied,  "  Certainly  not.  We 
might  ask  for  fewer  things,  and  ask  more 
definitely ;  but  we  should  have  to  spend  quite 
as  long  within  our  prayer-closet,  because  our 
hearts  would  be  overflowing  with  gratitude  and 
thanksgiving  and  adoration,  and  with  the  ex 
pressions  of  our  love." 

I  leave  this  with  you.  God  has  a  purpose  for 
everyone  of  us.  God's  eternal  purpose  is  to  do 
the  best  for  you  that  He  can.  God  has  put  you 
just  where  you  are,  because  there  you  have  the 


IN  CHRIST  JESUS  OUR  LORD."         59 

best  chance  of  realizing  His  purpose.  His  pur 
pose  is  contained  in  promise.  Hence,  if  you 
get  the  promises  of  God  you  get  the  purposes  of 
God.  Get  then  back  to  God's  purpose.  Deal 
with  Him  about  the  things  that  He  Himself  has 
purposed  and  pledged.  Do  not  pray  for  them 
as  if  He  were  unwilling  to  grant  them ;  but  go 
into  His  presence  with  boldness  and  confidence, 
and  say,  "  My  Father,  Thou  hast  said  this  or 
that  of  me,  for  I  am  in  Christ,  and  I  do  now 
claim  as  Thy  child,  standing  in  Him,  that  Thou 
shouldst  do  this  or  the  other  for  me."  And 
when  you  have  definitely  asked,  believe  that 
God  will  be  as  good  as  His  promise,  arise  from 
your  knees,  and  go  down  to  your  daily  warfare 
or  work,  and  as  you  go  down,  keep  saying  to 
yourself,  "  Glory  be  to  God.  I  do  not  feel ;  I 
have  no  rapture ;  I  have  no  consciousness  of 
reception  ;  but  I  know  that  God  has  done  what 
I  claimed,  because  He  has  said  that  He  would, 
and  I  am  going  along  my  path  reckoning  that 
He  is  faithful."  You  will  find  that  at  that 
moment  when  you  claimed  you  took  in  a  cargo 
which  will  stand  you  in  good  stead  on  your 
voyage,  and  that  when  you  come  to  your  duties, 
your  difficulties,  or  your  trials,  there  will  be  a 
consciousness  of  power,  of  contentment,  and  of 


60  THE  ETERNAL  PURPOSE. 


wealth  which  you  had  not  known  before.  Thus 
believe  in  the  eternal  purpose  of  God,  and  go 
into  His  presence  with  boldness  and  confidence 
by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ. 

Ml  life  is  part  of  a  Divine  Ptan.—A.s  a  mother  desires 
the  best  possible  for  her  babes,  bending  over  the 
cradle  which  each  occupies  in  turn,  so  does  God  desire 
to  do  His  best  for  us  all.  He  hates  nothing  that  He 
has  made;  but  has  a  fair  ideal  for  each,  which  He 
desires  to  accomplish  in  us  with  perfect  love.  But 
there  is  no  way  of  transferring  it  to  our  actual  expe 
rience,  except  by  the  touch  of  His  Spirit  within,  and 
the  education  of  our  circumstances  without. 

God  does  not  show  us  the  whole  plan  of  our  life  at  a 
burst,  but  unfolds  it  to  us  bit  by  bit.  At  the  end  of 
our  life  the  disjointed  pieces  will  suddenly  come 
together,  and  we  shall  see  the  symmetry  and  beauty 
of  the  Divine  thought.  Then  we  shall  be  satisfied. 
In  the  meantime  let  us  believe  that  God's  love  and 
wisdom  are  doing  the  very  best  for  us. 


THE   SECOND   MAN,  THE   LORD." 


"How  manifold  is  the  character  of  Christ!  No  one 
metaphor  can  set  forth  all  His  beauty.  Creation  has  to  be 
ransacked  for  metaphors  to  unfold  the  mysteries  of  loveli 
ness  and  power  which  lie  hid  within  Him,  waiting  to  be 
unfurled:— 

'The  whole  creation  can  afford 
But  some  faint  shadow  of  my  Lord ; 
Nature,  to  make  His  beauties  known, 
Must  mingle  colours  not  her  own.' 

"In  all  men  there  is  a  fatal  incompleteness.  One  quality 
seems  to  have  grown  rich  at  the  expense  of  others.  The  soil 
of  their  soul  has  given  all  its  nutriment  to  some  exquisite 
flower  or  fruit  of  the  Christian  character ;  but  just  in  propor 
tion  as  it  has  poured  itself  in  one  direction,  it  has  been 
drained  away  in  others.  Have  you  not  often  wished  to  take 
the  characteristic  qualities  from  the  men  in  whom  they  are 
strongest,  and  put  them  all  together  into  one  nature,  making 
one  complete  man  out  of  the  many  broken  bits,  one  chord  of 
the  many  single  notes,  one  ray  of  the  many  colours  ?  But 
this  that  you  would  wish  to  do  is  done  in  Him— in  whom  the 
faith  of  Abraham,  the  meekness  of  Moses,  the  patience  of 
Job,  the  strength  of  Daniel,  the  love  of  the  apostle  John, 
blend  in  one  complete  symmetrical  whole." 

"THE  FUTURE  TENSES  OF  THE  BLESSED  LIFE." 


' 


Mm, 
fcorto." 


"  Above  the  firmament  was  the  likeness  of  a  throne." 
"  Upon  the  likeness  of  the  throne  was  the  likeness  of  a 
Man."  "  In  the  midst  of  the  throne  stood  a  Lamb." 
"There  was  a  rainbow  round  about  the  throne."— 
EZEK.  i.  26 ;  REV.  v.  6,  iv.  3. 

THE  subject  which  we  have  to  consider  throws 
us  more  than  usually  back  upon  that  Divine 
Spirit  by  whom  alone  our  blessed  Lord  can 
be  glorified  in  our  midst.  The  subject  is  so 
stupendous  in  its  sublimity,  and  so  touching 
in  its  grace,  that  no  mortal  lips  can  do  it  justice. 
But  while  we  stand  in  His  presence,  and  behold 
His  face,  we  may  expect  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
reveal  to  us  those  deep  things  which  are  as 
strong  and  sweet  as  they  are  deep. 

In  the  thought  of  the  eternal  God  our  Father 
the  whole  human  race  is  summed  up  in  two 
men ;  for  we  read  in  the  inspired  Word  that  the 


64       "  THE  SECOND  MAN,    THE  LORD." 

"second  man"  was  the  Lord  from  heaven.  For 
the  first  man  we  must  traverse  the  glades  of 
Eden,  and  find  him  there  unfallen,  in  com 
munion  with  his  Creator,  and  fulfilling  all  the 
conditions  of  a  perfected  creation.  That  is 
God's  original  thought  for  man.  On  passing 
through  the  gate  guarded  by  the  flaming  sword, 
we  discover  him  cursed  with  travail,  fruitless 
toil,  disease  and  death.  And  we  cannot  for 
get  that,  in  virtue  of  our  natural  birth,  we  have 
inherited  these  conditions,  and  carry  with  us 
always  an  hereditary  tendency  or  bias  towards 
the  evil  which  wrecked  and  marred  his  life ;  to 
say  nothing  of  the  guilt  accruing  from  a  broken 
law. 

We  scan  in  vain  the  succeeding  ages  of  man 
kind,  to  find  one  able  to  undo  the  fatal  tragedy 
of  Eden,  until,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  we 
encounter  Him,  around  whom  our  thoughts  re 
volve  to-day,  and  who,  whilst  He  was  the 
Son  of  God,  was  the  Son  of  man,  the  second 
Adam,  one  with  us  in  all  the  conditions  of 
our  life,  sin  excepted. 

I  present  you  with  three  pictures.  It  is 
the  Passover  at  Jerusalem.  The  vast  central 
square  before  the  Koman  governor's  abode  is 
filled  with  crowds  rent  with  fanaticism,  which 


"  THE  SECOND  MAN,    THE  LORD."      65 

Pilate  is  striving  to  quell.  It  is  clear  that  he,  a 
shrewd  observer  of  human  nature,  had  found 
something  in  this  unwonted  prisoner  to  arrest 
his  attention,  else  he  had  never  cried  before 
them  all,  "Behold  the  Man."  There  were 
converging  elements  in  His  appearance  and 
bearing  which  singled  Him  out  as  a  man 
amongst  men.  Though  He  were  suffering,  and 
of  that  suffering  there  could  be  no  doubt,  for 
there  was  every  trace  of  it  in  His  pallid  face 
and  bloodstained  garments,  yet  there  was  no 
trace  of  ignominy  or  shame,  but  the  outshining 
of  a  nobility  that  could  not  but  arrest  eyes 
unprejudiced  by  hate.  His  innocence  was 
attested  by  the  witness  of  those  who  knew  Him 
best ;  yet  there  was  no  weakness  in  it ;  and  though 
it  was  evident  that  this  Man  had  done  nothing 
amiss,  He  bore  Himself  with  such  a  strange 
strength,  that  the  representative  of  an  imperial 
race  felt  himself  the  weaker.  Moreover,  He 
was  the  centre  of  a  strange  conflict — on  the 
one  hand,  of  the  love  and  adoration  of  His 
followers,  and  of  those  who  had  shared  His 
help;  on  the  other,  of  the  execrations  and 
malignity  of  His  foes;  whilst  nature  herself 
seemed  to  sympathize  with  the  wondrous  scene, 
and  stood  aghast  to  gaze  on  the  spectacle.  And 

B 


66      "  THE  SECOND  MAN,    THE  LORD" 

as  we  to-day  review  that  story  we  are  con 
strained  to  feel  that  the  Lord  Jesus  identified 
Himself  with  man  in  his  sorrow  and  shame  and 
the  consequences  of  his  guilt,  was  planted  with 
man  in  the  likeness  of  his  death,  touching  him 
at  his  lowest,  that  He  might  lift  him  with  Him 
self  to  heights  that  Adam  and  Eve  in  Eden 
could  never  have  scaled.  There  could  not  have 
been  an  ascension  of  our  race  to  the  throne, 
if  there  had  not  been  this  previous  descent 
to  the  death  of  the  cross. 

Now  for  the  second  picture.  It  is  the  early 
morning.  The  villagers  have  not  commenced  to 
bring  into  Jerusalem  the  produce  of  their  fields. 
A  little  group  have  gathered  not  far  from  the 
beloved  Bethany ;  surely  a  message  will  be  sent 
to  call  for  the  two  sisters  and  the  brother  to 
join  the  little  group  that  gathers  around  One, 
who  is  not  less  man  now  that  He  has  taken  to 
Himself  His  body  of  glory  than  He  was  when 
we  saw  Him  in  the  hall  of  Pilate.  With  out 
spread  hands  He  blessed  them,  and  as  He 
blessed  was  parted  from  them,  and  began  to 
ascend  towards  His  home,  as  if  the  attraction  of 
its  blue  depths  were  stronger  than  that  of  the 
earth.  The  Church  has  always  put  special 
emphasis  upon  the  atonement  and  resurrection 


"THE  SECOND  MAN,   THE  LORD:'      67 

of  our  Lord,  but  I  am  not  sure  that  it  has 
always  apprehended  the  marvel  of  that  scene 
upon  which  we  are  gazing  as  we  stand  on 
Olivet  together.  See  how  He  climbs  those 
upper  steeps,  as  if  the  inherent  buoyancy  of 
His  nature  spurned  the  lower  earth.  Mark 
how  yonder  cloud  waits,  like  a  veil,  through 
which  He  passes,  irradiated  with  morning  light. 
Now  let  us  follow  Him  in  His  upward  progress. 
In  Eph.  i.  21  the  apostle  gives  us  a  clue  to 
what  succeeded.  He  tells  us  that  our  blessed 
Lord  was  raised  by  the  power  of  the  Father 
to  sit  at  His  own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly 
places,  far  above  all  rule  and  authority,  and 
power,  and  dominion,  and  every  name  that  is 
named,  not  only  in  this  world,  but  also  in  that 
which  is  to  come.  From  a  comparison  with 
other  passages,  especially  that  in  the  last  chapter 
of  the  same  epistle  (vi.  12),  it  seems  very  likely 
that  these  principalities  and  powers,  through 
which  our  Lord  passed,  were  evil  and  fallen 
spirits,  who  may  even  have  striven  to  obstruct 
His  passage,  making  one  great  last  stand  against 
Him.  But  whether  that  were  so  or  not,  it  is 
clear  that  through  the  ranks  of  spirits,  whatever 
they  were,  He  passed.  They  fell  right  and  left 
to  yield  Him  passage,  and  so  He  came  at  last  to 


68      "THE  SECOND  MAN,    THE  LORD." 


those  confines  where  the  holiest  spirits  could  no 
longer  accompany  Him,  for  no  created  thing 
had  ever  breathed  or  could  breathe  the  rare 
atmosphere  into  which  He  entered,  and  no 
created  thing  had  ever  gone  where  He  took 
our  human  nature.  This  is  a  marvel  at  which 
heaven  itself  has  never  ceased  to  be  astounded. 
There  was  no  wonder  that  the  Son  of  God 
should  go  back  to  God.  But  the  wonder  was 
that  He  took  our  nature  with  Him,  and  that 
He  has  borne  our  humanity  where  no  created 
thing  had  ever  gone  before,  until  He  sat  down 
as  a  man  at  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of 
God.  "  For  verily  not  of  angels  doth  He  take 
hold,  but  He  taketh  hold  of  the  seed  of 
Abraham."  It  is  marvellous  to  think  that 
the  first-born  sons  of  light  are  not  bound  so 
closely  to  God  as  men  are,  since  God  has 
taken  our  human  nature  into  such  intimate 
fellowship  with  Himself.  "Upon  the  likeness 
of  the  throne  was  a  likeness  as  the  appearance 
of  a  man  upon  it  above." 

There  is  a  third  picture.  We  look  through 
heaven's  open  door  and  see  a  throne  excelling 
in  beauty  the  lustre  of  earth's  most  precious 
jewels.  We  hear  at  first  the  chant  of  angels 
and  elders;  and  after  a  while  a  strong  angel 


"THE  SECOND  MAN,   THE  LORD."      69 

with  a  loud  voice,  asking  for  one  able  to  open 
the  scroll  of  divine  decrees,  lying  in  the  right 
hand  of  the  Supreme.  No  voice  seems  able  to 
answer  that  challenge,  and  our  tears  flow  only 
to  stay  when  eager  expectancy  is  excited  as  to 
who  can  assume  so  high  an  office.  But  as  we 
wait  with  intense  and  eager  yearnings,  there 
appears  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  not  a  lion, 
but  a  lamb ;  not  a  conqueror  who  had  prevailed, 
but  one  who  bore  the  marks  of  having  been 
slain ;  not  an  archangel,  but  a  man.  Ah ! 
marvellous  spectacle  !  to  behold  a  man  in  such 
a  position,  our  brother,  bone  of  our  bone,  flesh 
of  our  flesh;  and  Joseph's  brethren,  as  they 
stood  amid  the  hucksters  who  had  come  to  buy 
corn,  could  not  have  been  more  amazed  when 
they  discerned,  beneath  the  strange  garb  of  the 
Egyptian  governor,  their  own  brother,  who  said, 
"  It  is  I,  Joseph,"  than  we  are,  when  we  stand 
before  the  throne,  to  hear  the  man's  voice  come 
from  it,  saying,  "  I  am  Jesus,  your  brother." 

Now,  just  let  us  notice  that  the  throne  of 
God  means  holiness,  majesty,  power,  and  judg 
ment.  It  means  majesty,  divine  majesty;  and 
the  fact  that  Jesus  Christ  is  in  the  heart  of 
the  throne  as  a  man  indicates,  of  course,  His 
divine  nature,  His  Deity.  It  seems  necessary 


70      "THE  SECOND  MAN,   THE  LORD." 

to  emphasize  the  distinction  between  divinity 
and  Deity.  We  are  not  content  to  speak  simply 
of  His  divinity.  We  emphasize  and  accentuate 
our  belief  in  His  Deity.  And  we  cannot  under 
stand  the  mental  constitution  of  those  who  think 
highly  of  Jesus  Christ  as  a  man,  as  a  teacher, 
as  a  philanthropist,  but  do  not  bow  the  knee 
before  Him,  or  confess  that  He  is  God.  We 
cannot  understand  it.  To  us  it  seems  clear  that 
He  must  be  either  one  of  three  things.  We 
must  either  count  Him  impostor,  fanatic,  or 
Christ  the  Son  of  God.  He  cannot  be  an 
impostor,  for  all  His  influence  through  the  ages 
has  been  in  favour  of  holy  truth;  and  it  is 
incredible  to  suppose  that  the  temple  of  truth 
could  be  founded  upon  the  sands  of  falsehood. 
Equally  impossible  it  is  for  us  to  think  of  Him 
as  fanatic,  for  if  ever  there  was  a  time  when 
fanaticism,  had  it  dwelt  in  His  breast,  would 
have  declared  itself,  it  was  at  that  moment 
when  the  people  came  around  Him  to  make 
Him  king,  and  when  it  seemed  as  if  a  brief 
rush  would  have  carried  him  to  the  palace 
of  the  Caesars ;  but  with  a  divine  restraint  He 
withheld  His  followers,  and  quietly  climbed 
the  mountain,  that  from  its  height  He  might 
hold  fellowship  with  His  Father,  and  see  the 


"THE  SECOND  MAN,   THE  LORD?      ^l 

outposts  of  His  home  in  the  quiet  stars. 
Equally  impossible  therefore  is  it  to  think  of 
Him  as  fanatic ;  and  we,  with  all  His  church, 
must  to-day  bow  the  knee,  and  feel  that  His 
earthly  life  only  prepared  us  to  accept  it  as 
a  blessed  literal  fact,  that  He  who  walked  our 
world  in  the  guise  of  human  flesh  was  very 
God  of  very  God.  God  the  Father  crowned 
His  own  assertion  of  oneness  with  Himself  by 
the  resurrection;  and  now  in  the  throne  of 
God,  as  He  is  crowned  there  and  enthroned, 
we  feel  that  God's  own  witness  to  His  Deity 
and  essential  Godhead  is  incontestable.  "  The 
second  man  is  the  Lord  from  heaven." 

The  throne  also  speaks  of  holiness.  The 
throne  of  the  Holy  God !  As  we  stand  before 
it  to-day,  we  might  well  dread  it,  if  it  were 
not  for  the  rainbow  that  encircles  it.  Pliny 
says  of  the  rainbow  that  where  its  arch  rests 
there  the  flowers  smell  sweeter.  Aristotle  says 
that  the  rainbow  is  a  great  breeder  of  honey 
dew.  And  it  was  the  old  legend,  as  perhaps 
you  know,  that  there  were  pots  of  gold  to  be 
found  by  digging  where  the  rainbow  arch 
impinged.  And  surely  to-day  the  flowers  of 
our  graces  will  be  sweeter,  more  perfume  will 
fill  the  air,  and  we  shall  be  able  to  dig  out 


72      "  THE  SECOND  MAN,   THE  LORD." 

gold  of  Ophir,  whilst  we  consider  this  great 
sight,  that  our  nature  which  has  been  so 
associated  with  sin  is  represented  on  the  throne, 
and  that  around  the  throne — around  it,  for  we 
only  see  half  rainbows  in  this  world,  the 
perfect  circle  is  reserved  for  heaven— around 
the  throne  is  a  rainbow  like  the  emerald.  The 
emerald  is  deep  and  lovely  green,  as  if  the 
sardius  and  the  jacinth  and  the  more  angry 
colours  of  the  rainbow  had  been  taken  out, 
and  only  the  mild  glow  of  love  were  left.  "  In 
sight  like  unto  an  emerald." 

The  rainbow  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful 
objects  in  nature.  No  painter  can  adequately 
depict  it.  If  you  were  to  take  piles  of  Oriental 
jewels  and  build  them  together,  you  could  not 
compose  so  fair  a  sight  as  this  which  God,  the 
Master-artist,  has  painted  on  the  canvas  of  the 
black  cloud  with  the  pencils  of  light.  Oh,  how 
exquisitely  beautiful!  but  to  Noah  how  much 
it  meant !  It  meant  that  God  had  entered  into 
covenant  with  him,  not  because  he  was  good, 
for  he  was  weak  and  liable  to  sensual  excess,  to 
which  we  know  that  once,  at  least,  he  yielded. 
He  was  indeed  a  preacher  of  righteousness, 
though  liable  to  be  swept  by  the  passions  and 
storms  that  have  ravaged  all  human  hearts  save 


"  THE  SECOND  MAN,    THE  LORD:'      73 

one  j  but  he  knew  that  for  no  goodness  of  his, 
for  no  desert  of  his,  the  eternal  God  had  entered 
into  covenant  with  him,  and  had  bound  Himself 
never  to  let  loose  from  its  leash  the  flood  of 
waters.  If  ever  the  rain  began  to  fall,  or  the 
tides  poured  in  upon  the  land,  he  looked  at  the 
bow  and  was  satisfied.  Thus,  to-day  we  look 
up,  and  there,  upon  the  back  of  the  retreating 
storm,  we  see  that  rainbow,  and  we  think  of  the 
dark  cloud  that  spent  itself  on  Calvary,  and  has 
retreated,  so  that  we  are  for  ever  to  the  wind 
ward  of  the  storm.  The  storm  has  passed  over. 
It  has  passed,  and  the  rainbow  of  God's  cove 
nant  speaks  of  His  mercy.  And  we  may  dare 
to  come  to  that  throne  and  stand  before  it,  not 
because  we  are  good,  not  because  we  have 
attained  to  any  stage  of  perfection,  not  because 
of  our  resolutions  or  prayers  or  tears,  but 
because  in  the  eternal  council-chamber  the 
blessed  Trinity  entered  into  a  compact,  and  God 
the  Father  covenanted  with  God  the  Son  that 
He  should  stand  the  surety  for  us,  so  that 
because  of  what  He  should  be  and  suffer  and 
do,  our  sins  should  be  remembered  against  us 
no  more  for  ever. 

There    may   be  some    burdened   consciences, 
those  who  have  been  overtaken  with  the  gust 


74      "THE  SECOND  MAN,   THE  LORD." 

of  passion,  and  rolled  deep  in  the  mire  of 
despondency;  some  who  are  tormented  with 
the  accusations  of  Satan,  who  tells  them  that 
for  them,  at  least,  there  can  be  no  certain  for 
giveness.  Let  such  look  to  the  throne  to-day. 
Let  them  see  that  rainbow,  and  let  them  hear 
the  voice  of  God,  who  says,  "This  is  as  the 
waters  of  Noah  unto  Me,  for  as  I  have  sworn 
that  the  waters  of  Noah  shall  no  more  go  over 
the  earth,  so  have  I  sworn  that  I  will  not  be 
wroth  with  thee  or  rebuke  thee ;  for  the  moun 
tains  may  depart  and  the  hills  be  removed,  but 
the  covenant  of  My  peace  shall  not  be  removed, 
saith  the  Lord  that  hath  mercy  on  thee." 

Once  more.  That  throne  speaks  of  rule.  In 
the  very  first  chapter  of  Genesis  man  was  made 
to  rule ;  and  we  have  been  accustomed  to  speak 
about  ourselves  as  an  imperial  race ;  but,  ah ! 
who  of  us  can  boast  of  our  rule?  We  look 
back  upon  our  own  lives,  and  see  that,  so  far 
from  being  able  to  rule  creation,  we  have  not 
been  able  to  rule  ourselves ;  and  man  is  like 
some  dethroned  monarch,  the  crown  rolled  from 
his  brow,  and  the  sceptre  torn  from  his  hand. 
Alas !  we  might  imagine  the  heart  like  another 
paradise,  and  its  various  passions  standing  as 
the  wild  beasts  stood  before  Adam  to  receive 


"THE  SECOND  MAN,   THE  LORD."      75 

their  names.  But  in  our  history  our  heart  has 
been  full  of  evil  beasts  and  things  which  have 
taken  the  empire  from  us.  The  biographies  of 
the  best  men  might  well  be  termed,  like  Augus 
tine's,  "Confessions."  And  history  is  full  of 
the  story  of  riot  and  war  and  wild  passion. 
The  chosen  emblems  of  human  life  are  Laocoon 
struggling  ineffectually  with  the  serpent,  Sisy 
phus  rolling  the  stone  up  the  hill  from  which  it 
is  ever  returning,  Hamlet,  for  whom  "the  hue 
of  resolution  is  sicklied  over  by  the  pale  cast  of 
thought."  We  see  not  yet  all  things  put  under 
man.  What  then,  are  the  great  assertions  of 
the  Psalmist  (Psalm  viii.)  vain?  Was  it  for 
nothing  that  the  Creator  gave  man  the  sole 
right  to  have  dominion  over  the  works  of  His 
hands?  (Genesis  i.  26.)  No,  these  visions  of 
rule  are  all  to  be  realized  abundantly.  Indeed, 
they  are  being  realized.  Our  representative,  the 
second  Adam,  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  sits  at  the 
right  hand  of  power.  In  His  earthly  life  His 
supremacy  was  acknowledged  by  fish  and  storms, 
by  nature  and  providence,  by  men  and  devils ; 
and  in  His  resurrection,  all  authority  is  given  to 
Him  in  heaven  and  on  earth.  They  who  are 
one  with  Him  share  it.  He  makes  them  kings 
and  priests,  He  gives  them  power  over  all  the 


76      "THE  SECOND  MAN,   THE  LORD." 

power  of  the  enemy.  Nothing  can  by  any 
means  hurt  them;  they  tread  on  lions  and 
scorpions ;  they  take  up  deadly  things  unharmed. 
What  part  of  Christ's  body  are  you  1  You  may 
not  dare  to  think  of  yourself  as  in  His  head,  or 
heart,  or  lips,  or  hands,  but  you  are  at  least  in 
His  feet,  and  if  you  are  but  there  you  are  above 
the  devil,  because  all  enemies  are  under  His 
feet.  Oh,  you  who  are  one  with  the  living 
Saviour,  united  to  His  mystical  body  by  a 
living  faith,  dare  to  appropriate  this  wondrous 
spiritual  power,  which  is  stored  in  Him  as  in 
some  spiritual  dynamic  battery,  and  use  it  for 
the  great  needs  of  men,  as  well  as  for  the  right 
ordering  of  the  empire  of  your  inner  life  !  "  We 
are  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  that 
loved  us."  We  are  the  young  brothers  of  the 
King,  and  are  called  to  exercise  something  of 
His  power  and  rule. 

The  throne  also  speaks  of  judgment.  "The 
Father  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath  committed  all 
judgment  unto  the  Son."  This  was  the  crown 
ing  announcement  in  the  address  of  the  apostle 
on  Mars'  Hill.  "He  will  judge  the  world  by  a 
Man,  whom  He  hath  ordained."  (E.V.  Acts 
xvii.  31.)  We  need  for  our  judge  one  able  to 
detect,  with  the  unerring  glance  of  omniscience, 


"THE  SECOND  MAN,   THE  LORD"      77 

the  secret  workings  of  our  hearts,  the  conditions 
of  our  lives,  the  various  influences  that  have 
tended  to  mar  or  make  us ;  but  we  need  One 
who  has  the  tenderness,  the  sympathy,  the  pity, 
the  fellow-feeling  of  man — and  all  these  elements 
are  combined  in  Him  who  is  Son  of  God, 
and  made  of  a  woman,  our  Brother  Man,  who 
is  also  the  great  God.  What  can  we  do  else 
than  prostrate  ourselves  and  adore  Him,  who 
has  gone  from  the  low  pit  of  our  nature  in 
which  He  was  hewn,  to  the  highest  throne  of 
the  universe ;  has  opened  to  our  race  a  destiny 
which  it  could  never  have  attained  in  an  un 
tainted  Paradise ;  and  will  still  lead  us  forward 
into  the  golden  ages  that  are  yet  to  be,  when 
the  fabric  of  this  material  universe,  in  which 
we  were  reared,  has  been  wrapt  together  by  His 
hands,  as  an  old  and  worn-out  robe.  To  Him 
be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen. 


THE  CAPTAIN  OF  OUR  SALVATION. 


" '  What  shall  I  do,  Lord?'  (Acts  xxii.  10.)  Before  it  was, 
What  should  I  like  to  do  ?  or  simply,  What  shall  I  do  ?  But 
when  the  Spirit  of  God  takes  possession,  all  is  changed.  It 
is  no  longer,  What  shall  /  choose  ?  but  '  What  shall  I  do, 
Lord?'  In  conversion  there  is  the  yielding  up  of  the  inde 
pendent  human  will  to  the  guidance  of  God,  and  from  that 
day  forward  to  the  end  of  the  Christian's  life  it  must  be  the 
same  thing.  When  the  heart  is  true,  the  surrender  of  its 
own  likings  is  always  emphatic  and  manifest.  The  question, 
'Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do?'  is  constantly  asked, 
for  the  will  of  God  has  become  the  pole-star  of  the  new  life. 

'My  disciples,  My  brethren,  My  friends, 

Can  ye  dare  to  follow  Me  ? 
Then  wherever  the  Master  dwelleth, 

There  shall  the  servant  be.' " 

MRS.  PENNEFATHER. 


Cfic  Captain  of  our 
Palliation. 


"And  it  came  to  pass,  when  Joshua  was  by  Jerioho,  that  he 
lifted  up  his  eyes  and  looked,  and,  behold,  there  stood 
a  man  over  against  him  with  his  sword  drawn  in  his  hand : 
and  Joshua  went  unto  him,  and  said  unto  him,  '  Art  thou 
for  us  or  for  our  adversaries  ? '  And  he  said,  '  Nay ;  but  as 
captain  of  the  host  of  the  LORD  am  I  now  come.'  And 
Joshua  fell  on  his  face  to  the  earth,  and  did  worship,  and 
said  unto  Him,  '  What  saith  my  Lord  unto  His  servant  ? ' " 

JOSHUA  v.  13,  14. 

JOSHUA  was  by  Jericho;  behind  him  lay  the 
river  of  Jordan,  the  stream  whose  waters  were 
now  hidden  from  view ;  beneath  him  were  the 
host  of  his  people  resting  from  their  toil  and 
travel;  before  him,  and,  I  think,  probably  in 
the  moonlight,  lay  Jericho,  five  miles  in  advance, 
almost  hidden  in  its  groves  of  palm  trees,  and 
right  in  the  path  by  which  the  hosts  of  Israel 
must  make  their  way  into  Canaan.  There  was 
no  swerving  to  right  or  left.  They  must  capture 
it,  or  fall  back  in  defeat.  It  was  a  season  of 
F 


82     THE  CAPTAIN  OF  OUR  SALVATION. 

much  heart-searching  for  the  great  leader  of 
Israel.  He  knew  how  the  chosen  people  had 
repeatedly  turned  against  God  in  the  desert. 
He  looked  at  the  city  before  him,  knowing  its 
great  walls,  how  straitly  it  was  shut  up,  how 
mightily  armed,  how  full  of  soldiers,  and  do  you 
not  think  his  heart  for  a  moment  misgave  him  ? 
As  he  stood  there  reconnoitring,  walking  to  and 
fro,  somewhat  disconsolate,  "  there  stood  a  man 
over  against  him,  with  his  sword  drawn  in  his 
hand." 

Now  I  do  not  know  what  your  Jericho  may 
be.  It  may  be  somebody  at  home  whose 
temperament  chafes  you;  it  may  be  some  class 
of  rough,  unruly  boys  and  girls;  it  may  be 
a  district  or  parish  hard  to  work;  it  may  be 
some  frowning  bastion  of  the  devil's  building; 
it  may  be  your  own  flesh,  some  secret  temptation. 
I  cannot  enumerate  all,  but  before  everyone 
surely  frowns  some  Jericho.  Yet  there  is  never 
a  Jericho  without  One  with  the  drawn  sword 
outside  it,  though  too  often  we  fail  to  lift  up 
our  eyes  to  see  Him. 

Now  Joshua's  heart  was  bold,  he  was  con 
fident  in  God,  and,  therefore,  after  discovering 
this  mysterious  being,  he  challenged  him.  Who 
art  thou?  Spectre  or  reality?  Foe  or  friend? 


THE  CAPTAIN  OF  OUR  SALVATION.     83 

For  us  or  against  us?  Israelite  or  heathen? 
And  in  reply  came  the  answer,  which  revealed 
that,  in  addition  to  the  host  of  Israel  beneath, 
and  the  host  of  the  enemy  in  front,  there  was 
a  third  host,  whose  serried  ranks  covered  the 
country  around,  unseen  by  mortal  eye,  but  real 
and  present,  "Nay,  but  as  captain  of  the  host 
of  the  LORD  am  I  now  come."  This  I  will 
lead  into  the  fight,  and  by  it  overcome  Canaan, 
in  order  to  give  it  to  you.  "As  captain  of  the 
LORD'S  host  am  I  come."  There  is  no  doubt 
who  this  wondrous  Being  was ;  He  was  neither 
man  nor  angel,  for,  had  He  been  either, 
He  would  have  refused  the  homage  Joshua 
offered.  Paul  forbade  the  Lystrians  to  worship 
a  man  like  themselves.  The  angel  of  the 
Apocalypse  forbade  the  apostle  to  worship  him. 
But  He  who  now  stood  before  Joshua  thought 
it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  for  He 
was  God.  The  Angel  of  Jehovah,  the  Com 
mander  and  Captain  of  the  host  of  God. 

Now  let  us  take  this  word,  A/^yos,  and 
follow  it  out,  especially  in  the  New  Testament. 
Isaiah  tells  us  of  the  coming  of  a  Prince — the 
Prince  of  Peace.  Daniel  tells  us  that  the 
Messiah  was  to  be  a  Prince.  Coming  to  Heb. 
ii.  10  we  learn  something  more  about  His  story. 


84     THE  CAPTAIN  OF  OUR  SALVATION. 

There  we  are  told  that  "it  became  Him,  for 
whom  are  all  things,  and  by  whom  are  all 
things,  in  bringing  many  sons  unto  glory,  to 
make  the  Captain  of  their  salvation  perfect 
through  sufferings."  When  we  ask  what  was  the 
mysterious  lesson  our  Captain  learned  in  the 
days  of  His  flesh,  we  turn  to  chapter  v.  8, 
where  we  are  told,  "Though  He  were  a  Son, 
yet  learned  He  obedience  through  the  things 
which  He  suffered."  So  that  before  He  became 
our  Commander  and  Captain,  He  learned  how  to 
obey.  The  keynote  of  His  life  here  was  that 
He  came  to  keep  the  Father's  commandments. 
His  autobiography  is  prefaced  in  the  spirit  of 
prophecy  with  the  words,  "Lo,  I  come  to  do 
Thy  will,  0  God,"  and  as  its  "finis"  we  have 
the  words,  "It  became  Him  ...  to  make  the 
Captain  of  their  salvation  perfect  through  suffer 
ing,"  or  the  words,  "He  became  obedient  unto 
death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross."  Because 
He  was  under  authority,  He  is  able  to  say  to 
His  servants,  "  Do  this,"  and  they  do  it. 

Again,  in  chapter  xii.  2,  we  are  told  that 
we  must  run  our  race,  looking  alway  unto  Jesus, 
the  Author,  Prince,  Captain  of  our  faith.  He 
is  not  merely  Author,  in  the  sense  of  having 
created  faith,  and  left  it  for  us  to  use,  but 


THE  CAPTAIN  OF  OUR  SALVATION.     85 

because  He  is  Himself  the  Leader,  as  well  as  the 
object  of  faith,  for  all  faithful  hearts.  We 
learn  from  this  that  He  is  our  brother-man; 
He,  as  our  Captain,  has  trodden  our  world,  and 
has  shown  His  brotherhood,  not  simply  by  tears, 
by  hunger,  by  thirst  and  weariness,  and  even 
by  death,  but  also  because  He  has  lived  the 
human  life  of  trust  in  God  as  His  brethren  do. 
And  from  the  same  verse  we  learn  certain  con 
ditions  in  which  His  trust  was  put  under  great 
strain.  "  He  endured  the  cross,"  that  is,  He 
stood  steadfast  beneath  it,  and  in  full  knowledge 
of  its  bitterness  and  woe.  It  is  a  great  comfort 
to  soldiers  in  the  hour  of  battle  to  know  that 
their  captain  has  been  under  fire  before.  So 
we  rejoice  to  know  that  our  great  Captain  has 
Himself  known  thirty-three  years  of  human 
life,  and  all  the  while  He  anticipated  the  cross, 
had  the  shadow  of  it  on  His  soul,  and  was 
resolved  to  endure  it.  "  Lo,  I  come  to  do  Thy 
will."  As  men  travelling  in  Switzerland  may 
see  and  admire  the  lowland  hills,  but  will 
despise  and  forget  them  when,  by-and-bye,  a 
puff  of  wind  disperses  the  mists,  and  reveals 
the  snow-capped  Alps  behind  the  lower  range, 
so  Jesus  endured  the  cross  for  the  joy  set 
before  Him,  and  the  glory  behind  it. 


86     THE  CAPTAIN  OF  OUR  SALVATION. 

And  once  more,  in  Acts  v.  31,  we  are  told, 
"  Him  hath  God  exalted  with  His  right  hand  to 
be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour."  Stand  with  me 
for  a  moment  on  that  dew-besprinkled  sward  on 
Olivet,  and  see  His  outstretched  hands,  and 
hear  His  parting  blessing,  as  He  begins  to  rise. 
We  cannot  discern  it,  but  the  right  hand  of 
God  is  there  lifting  Him.  Mark  as  He  ascends 
how  that  cloud  becomes  like  a  fiery  chariot, 
bathed  in  the  rays  of  the  morning  sun,  whilst 
He  passes  above  and  beyond  it.  Think  of  the 
blessed  contrast.  Here  rejected,  there  welcomed ; 
here,  a  few  peasant  companions,  there,  an  in 
numerable  company  of  adoring  angels ;  here,  a 
whispered,  feeble  farewell,  there,  a  multitudinous 
and  praiseful  salutation.  Behold  Him  passing 
up  and  on,  through  all  heaven,  beyond  all  the 
ranks  and  orders  of  heavenly  beings,  and  taking 
our  nature  where  no  created  thing  had  ever 
gone  before — to  the  very  throne  of  the  Eternal. 
God  has  exalted  Him  Prince  and  Saviour. 

These  steps  were  foreshadowed  in  prophecy. 
He  came,  as  our  Captain,  to  learn  obedience 
by  suffering;  put  to  death  by  the  Jews,  going 
down  into  the  grave,  rising  from  the  dead, 
ascended  and  seated  at  the  right  hand  of  God 
a  Prince  and  a  Saviour.  The  mistake  countless 


THE  CAPTAIN  OF  OUR  SALVATION.     87 

Christians  make  is,  that  they  reverse  God's  order, 
and  begin  by  owning  Him  as  Saviour,  and  then 
at  some  time  or  other  take  Him  as  their  Prince 
and  Head.  But  God  has  laid  down  His  invari 
able  order ;  first  Prince,  then  Saviour.  Accept 
it.  Enthrone  Him  in  your  hearts,  there  is  none 
mightier,  and  He  will  save  you  from  the  power 
of  sin.  Such  is  our  Prince  and  Commander. 
Such  is  He  who  is  come  as  Captain  of  the 
Lord's  host. 

What  then  should  be  our  attitude  towards 
Himl  Humility,  that  of  course.  "Joshua  fell  on 
his  face."  The  man  who  to-morrow  would  lead  the 
assault  against  Jericho,  in  this  moment  of  privacy 
is  on  his  face.  And  you  will  never  be  able  to 
stand  in  the  breach  and  lead  the  Lord's  host, 
unless  you  have  times  when  you  fall  on  your 
face  humbly  before  God.  True  holiness,  true 
strength,  is  learned  in  humility.  The  man  who 
knows  most  of  God  thinks  least  of  self.  You 
may  gauge  the  depth  and  intensity  of  a  man's 
nearness  to  God  by  his  lowliness,  prostrate 
before  God.  What  is  your  attitude1?  Does 
the  holiness  you  dream  of  make  you  proud, 
and  cause  you  to  lift  up  your  head  ?  Abraham, 
in  God's  presence  confessed  himself  "but  dust 
and  ashes."  (Gen.  xviii.  27.)  Isaiah,  seeing  the 


88     THE  CAPTAIN  OF  OUR  SALVATION. 

King  in  His  beauty,  said,  "Woe  is  me  ...  I 
am  a  man  of  unclean  lips."  Simon  prayed, 
"  Lord,  depart  from  me,  for  I  am  a  sinful  man." 

John,  the  beloved  John,  in  Patmos,  seeing 
the  King,  "fell  at  His  feet  as  one  dead."  If 
you  have  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  in  His  purity,  majesty,  and  glory,  you 
too  will  have  fallen  in  the  dust  before  Him. 

But,  moreover,  we  must  worship,  we  must 
learn  to  worship  as  Joshua  did.  He  asked,  "  What 
saith  my  Lord  to  His  servant  1 "  And  what  was 
the  reply  1  "  Loose  thy  shoe  from  off  thy  foot : 
for  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  is  holy."  A 
little  thing.  Yes ;  but  to  an  Oriental  it  implied 
deeper  worship  than  before.  There  are  times, 
it  seems  to  me,  when  we  ask,  "What  next?" 
And  we  are  not  bidden  to  do  some  great  deed, 
but  to  worship  more  intensely,  to  get  deeper 
down,  to  be  more  absorbed  in  adoration,  to 
assume  the  attitude  in  which  we  may  read 
God's  deepest  lessons.  Do  we  worship  enough  1 
In  worship  such  as  this  we  do  not  necessarily 
pray,  or  even  praise,  or  confess  sin;  this  is  a 
worship  in  which  the  whole  being  lies  prone, 
emptied,  adoring  at  the  feet  of  God.  He  thinks 
more  of  this  spirit  of  worship  than  even  of  our 
running  to  do  His  errands.  We  will  serve  and 


THE  CAPTAIN  OF  OUR  SALVATION.     89 

fight  better  when  we  have  been  on  our  face 
before  the  King. 

So  our  attitude  must  be  that  of  humility  and 
worship;  but  my  third,  and  main,  and  last  point 
is  obedience.  "  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  do  1 " 
"  What  saith  my  Lord  unto  His  servant  ? " 
Every  Christian  is  chosen  to  be  a  soldier.  The 
moment  life  begins  the  fight  begins.  As  soon  as 
the  new  life  is  born  within  us,  we  are  conscious 
of  conflict.  The  spawn  of  the  salmon  has  to 
fight  a  hundred  foes  to  reach  the  sea.  Directly 
you  pass  the  cross,  you  must  go  to  the  House 
Beautiful  to  be  armed  for  the  fight.  We  are 
soldiers;  and  what  is  the  primal  duty  of  a 
soldier?  To  obey.  You  think  it  is  to  fight, 
to  be  strong  and  courageous  in  battle.  These 
are  good  qualities :  but  they  avail  not  without 
obedience.  Is  not  the  Church  of  to-day  in  the 
state  of  Israel,  when,  in  the  time  of  the  Judges, 
it  is  said,  "  Every  man  did  that  which  was  right 
in  his  own  eyes"?  Why?  Because  there  was 
no  king.  Must  we  not  confess  we  have  given 
Christ  much  trouble  ?  Oh  that  we  could  learn 
to  do  as  we  are  told !  Would  that  henceforth 
we  could  look  up  and  see  the  Great  Captain 
standing  over  us,  and  say,  "What  saith  my 
Captain  to  His  servants?"  Does  not  Christ 


go     THE  CAPTAIN  OF  OUR  SALVATION. 

demand  such  obedience  ?  Does  He  not  deserve 
iU  By  His  bloody  sweat,  and  cross,  and  passion 
hath  He  not  surely  purchased  us  and  secured  the 
right  to  obedience,  the  right  to  hold  us  as  His 
slaves  to  do  His  will  ?  Because  He  has  chosen 
us  to  be  His  soldiers,  because  we  have  chosen 
Him  to  be  our  Captain,  ought  we  not  to  give 
Him  our  hearts'  allegiance  ? 

There  must  come  in  the  life  of  every  true 
Christian  a  moment,  it  may  be  the  moment  of 
conversion,  or  some  subsequent  moment,  when 
the  Christian  heart  deliberately  elects  to  obey 
Christ,  come  what  may.  Many  Christians  live 
in  a  divided  state  :  doing  what  He  bids  them 
now,  and  forbearing  presently.  They  pick  and 
choose,  what  they  will  and  what  they  won't. 
This  is  borne  in  on  them  and  they  do  it;  that 
is  not  borne  in  on  them  and  they  leave  it.  They 
are  in  the  drifting  state — anarchy  shall  I  call 
it?  —  in  which  they  suit  themselves  how  far 
and  how  much  they  obey.  But  there  must 
come  a  time  when  this  indecision  reaches  an 
end,  when  they  quietly  kneel  before  their 
Captain,  and  choose  and  elect  in  the  very 
depths  of  their  being  to  obey  Him  in  everything. 
Have  you  done  it  ?  I  charge  you  to  do  it  now. 
Enter  into  the  silence  of  your  own  spirit, 


THE  CAPTAIN  OF  OUR  SALVATION.     91 

and  say  to  Him,  "From  this  solemn  hour,  0 

Christ,  my  Captain,  I  definitely  choose,  in  Thine 

own  strength,  to  obey  Thee  utterly,  and  entirely, 

and  for  ever."     When  this  is  done,  Christ  will 

put  into  your  life  some  little  test,  as  small,  it 

may  be,  as  that  He  put  into  the  life  of  Joshua. 

See,  Joshua  is  on  his  face,  he  is  ready  to  do 

anything  and  everything  the  Captain  bids  him, 

but  the   command  is  a  very  little  thing.     In 

that    sublime   moment   there   is    an    ocean    of 

mystery  and  wonder  pouring  its  tides  into  his 

heart ;  but  there  comes  from  this  august  Being 

such  a  small  command,  "Take  thy  shoe  from 

off   thy  foot."     Might   not   Joshua   have   said 

at  such  a  time,  "  Is  there  not  a  command  more 

worthy  of  me  and  of  Thee?    Some  great  action, 

which  shall  be  a  perpetual  memento  1  Some  city 

to  take,  some  battle  to  fight,  some  warriors  to 

overthrow T      Only   this?      Only   this?      The 

Master  seems  to  say,  "I  only  ask  this  of  you; 

if   you  will   not   do  such  a  little  thing,  what 

pledge  have  I  of  your  submission  and  obedience 

in  doing  this  and  that  1 "     He  that  is  faithful  in 

the   very   little   is   faithful   in   the   great,  and 

Jericho  shall  fall  before  him. 

"  Loose  ! "     Do  you  hear  the  voice  ?     Loose  ! 
loose !    loose !      Loose   that   practice   of    years' 


92     THE  CAPTAIN  OF  OUR  SALVATION. 


standing  in  your  business  which  your  conscience 
condemns.  Loose  that  unholy  friendship  which 
is  sapping,  ruining  your  better  life.  Loose  that 
habit,  that  unbelief,  that  practice  of  secret  sin. 
Christ  does  not  ask  a  great  thing,  it  is  only  a 
very  little  one.  Will  you  not  do  it?  If  you 
will  not,  the  teaching  of  this  story  will  be  largely 
lost  upon  you.  But  if  you  dare  to  do  that,  I 
cannot  tell  the  blessing  which  will  come  into 
your  soul.  Only  beware  of  one  thing  in  all 
this  dealing  with  conscience.  It  is  a  great  and 
glorious  step  to  exercise  ourselves  to  have  a  good 
conscience  void  of  offence  toward  God  and  man  : 
but  be  very  careful  to  distinguish  between 
various  sorts  of  conscience.  For  instance,  the 
unenlightened  conscience  is  the  snare  of  many 
who  are  weak,  because  untaught.  The  only 
way  to  deal  with  a  conscience  like  that  is  to 
bring  it  under  the  power  of  God's  Spirit.  Then 
there  is  the  over-scrupulous  conscience;  the 
trouble  about  which  is,  that  it  is  concerned 
mainly  with  ourselves,  and  the  mint  and  cum 
min  of  observances,  rather  than  with  the  will 
of  God  in  Christ.  Beware  of  these,  and  seek 
to  have  a  good  conscience,  a  purged  conscience ; 
enlightened  by  the  truth,  rilled  with  the  Spirit, 
washed  with  the  blood,  and  accustomed  to  exer- 


THE  CAPTAIN  OF  OUR  SALVATION.     93 


else  itself  in  daily  discipline.  Let  us  so  live  that 
there  may  be  nothing  between  our  Saviour  and 
ourselves  which  is  not  instantly  translated  into 
obedience.  When  that  is  so,  Jericho  will  fall, 
and  not  till  then. 

"  Joshua  did  so,"  he  took  his  shoes  from  off 
his  feet  and  worshipped.  After  that  he  went 
back  to  the  host,  and  presently  he  was  bidden 
by  God  to  lead  it  against  the  walls  of  Jericho. 
The  host  of  Israel  gathered  itself  and  marched 
to  those  mighty  ramparts  which  stood  against 
them  stoutly,  but  fell  before  them  and  their 
invisible  allies.  Then  the  way  into  the  bright 
land  of  promise  was  opened.  Do  you  want  the 
land  of  promise,  the  rest,  the  victory,  the  holy 
ecstasy  and  joy,  where  you  may  sit  satisfied 
under  the  vine  and  fig  tree,  none  daring  to 
make  you  afraid,  the  land  and  life  of  blessed 
promise  *?  Do  you  want  it  ^  Then  I  say,  Wait 
on  your  face  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  your  Captain 
and  Commander,  till  He  tells  you  what  He 
would  have  you  do,  and  do  it.  Do  not  invent 
something;  do  not  get  flurried,  nervous  and 
fearful.  Learn  to  wait  only  and  patiently  for 
God.  Then  will  be  borne  in  on  your  soul  a 
command  which  when  obeyed  shall  flood  your 
soul  with  exceeding  blessedness  and  rest.  So 
may  it  be  for  Christ's  sake.  Amen. 


THE   MILDMAY   LIBRARY. 

YOL.  I. 


THE  PROPHET  PRIEST. 

By  the  REV.  ANDREW  MURRAY. 
WITH  PORTRAIT. 

Cloth,  Is.;  Bevelled  Boards,  Gilt  Edges,  Is.  6d. 


THE  REDEEMER'S  RETURN, 

And  the  Coming  Kingdom. 
By  the   REV.   H.   LINDSAY  YOUNG. 

Cloth,  Is.;  Limp,  9d.;   Paper   6d. 


THE 

CHURCH  OF  THE  FIRSTBORN: 

A  Few  Thoughts  on  Christian  Unity. 
By  the  Late  Rev.  WILLIAM  PENNEFATHEE,  B.A. 

New  Edition,  Revised,  Cloth,  Is. 

LONDON : 
JOHN  GEORGE  WHEELER,  88,  MILDMAY  PARK,  N. 


THE 

MILDMAY  HELPERS'  UNION. 


ITS    OBJECTS. 

1.  To  interest  more  in  the  Lord's  work  carried 
on  in  connection  with  Mildmay. 

2.  To  increase  the  number  of   those  who  are 
already  praying  for  the  Work  and  the  Workers. 

3.  To  place  it  within  the  power  of  many  to  help 
by  making  the  subscriptions  small. 

4.  To  provide  garments  that  can  be  sold  for  the 
benefit  of  the  Work  or  given  to  the  deserving  poor 
in  the  Mildmay  Missions. 


RULES. 

1.  Each  Working  Helper  to  subscribe  at  least  I/ 
per  year,  and  to  give  two  garments. 

2.  Each  Honorary  Helper  (Lady  or  Gentleman) 
to  subscribe  at  least  2/6  per  year. 


All  subscriptions  and  garments  to  be  sent  to  Miss  WOOD, 
Deaconess  House,  Mildmay  Park,  London,  N, 


**  CHOICE    BOOKLETS.  ** 

Price  2d.  each  ;  Six  for  I/-  post-free. 

Chimes  for  Morn  and  Eve. 
Morning  Joy  and  Evening  Blessing. 
Echoes  of  Song  for  Morn  and  Eve, 
Light  on  the  Daily  Path. 

Each  containing  a  Text  and  Verse  for  each  morning 

and  evening  in  the  month.     Tastefully  printed 

in  Chocolate,  with  Leatherette  Covers. 


g>ebenteent&  (^bening,       (SPECIMEN.) 


upon  1§£  laorci, 

PSALM  lv.  22. 
EAR  not  a  single  care  thyself, 

One  is  too  much  for  thee  ; 
The  work  is  Mine,  and  Mine  alone, 
Thy  work  is—  REST  IN  ME. 


UNIFORM  WITH  THE  ABOVE. 

Price  2d.  each ;  Six  for  I/-  post-free. 

Peace,  Perfect  Peace,  and  other  Poems. 
Leaning  on  Jesus,  and  other  Poems. 
What  will  please  Jesus  ?  and  other  Poems 

LONDON : 
JOHN  GEORGE  WHEELER,  88,  MILDMAY  PARK,  N. 


* 

1HOX  COLLEGE 

TORONTO 


KNOX  COLLEGE  LIBRARY 


