School of Theology at Claremont 


| 











ye “ 
oe 
ae 


. 


ee 
‘7 al 


’ 

















oa rile: nae 
tone ial ee 


Sy 


Vie: . 
ee P 


a, : : Tos Favs SF 
Ea 


oe js. 


ha = S rs MOPS ae ge ae 
a ae Pe bat woe = ere tee ? 
— pes tre! ere Tene 4 ee = 








nF, RY 
a) oe ¢e 

id 

i) b 


<p 
¢) 


THE 


PEOPLE'S NEW TESTAMENT 


THE COMMON AND REVISED VERSIONS, WITH REFERENCES 
AND COLORED MAPS. 


WITH 


EXPLANATORY NOTES 


BY 


B. W. JOHNSON, 


AUTHOR OF “A VISION OF THE AGES,” 


“COMMENTARY ON JOHN,” 
“INTERNATIONAL LESSON COMMENTARY,” ETC. 


VOLUME II. 
THE EPISTLES AND REVELATION. 


ero LOULS: 
CHRISTIAN PUBLISHING COMPANY. 
1891. 


THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
— CALIFORNIA 


COPYRIGHTED BY 
CuristiaAn Pusiisuina Company, 
1891, 





BREE AGE: 


An interval of eighteen months has passed since the first volume of 
the People’s Testament, covering the ground of the historical books, was 
placed in the hands of the public. The favor with which it was received, 
the testimonials of the helpfulness afforded, and the successive editions 
which have been rapidly called for, have shown that the author has, at 
least in a measure, been enabled, by the Divine blessing, to supply a need 
of the lovers of the Word. Encouraged by the cordial reception of the 
initial volume, he has been stimulated to still greater effort to prepare a 
concluding volume, which would be a worthy companion of the first, and 
worthy of the public who have so generously approved his former work. 
To this end, that he might better equip himself by a study of the sacred 
localities, he made a journey to the East and personally visited most of 
the localities named in the New Testament, but especially those which are 
identified with the earthly life of the Savior, and the evangelical labors 
of Paul the Apostle. His studies of the scenes of Bible facts, of the 
seats of New Testament churches, of the natural features, the people and 
the customs of the Bible lands, have made many things clear which were 
obscured in his mind before, and he hopes that he has gathered some fruit 
which will be enjoyed by the readers of this volume. 

One difficulty has constantly presented itself to the writer. Often there 
are allusions to customs of that age, both Jewish and Gentile, with which 
the world is not familiar now, and unless these are explained the meaning 
of the text is not apparent. Often also the argument of an epistle is 
elliptical, closely condensed, and difficult of comprehension by a reader 
who lives eighteen centuries and six thousand miles distant from the time 
and place where the argument was written. It has often been found diffi- 
cult to combine the brevity required by the limits of the volume, with the 
clearness of explanation indispensable in a work intended for the com- 
mon reader. The author cannot hope that he has always been entirely 
successful in his efforts to combine brevity and clearness, but he begs to 
assure the reader that he has spared no reasonable effort to so express 
himself that the meaning of the sacred text will be understood. While 
he is deeply sensible of the Seay which will, no doubt, be appar- 


AC) v1 


4 PREFACE. 





ent here and there, he has been so impressed with his responsibility in a 
work like this, that its pages will always speakto him of long investiga- 
tions, prayerful and earnest study, of long continued toil, and of arduous, 
but at the same time, delightful labors. 

It will be found that, as in the parallel portions of the Gospels, the first 
volume was condensed by making one explanation suffice, and referring 
the reader from the passage before him to the parallel passage upon 
which comments had been given; so also in this volume, where a passage 
occurs in more than one epistle, one explanation only is given, and the 
reader is referred. to that place where it occurs. The nature of the Book 
of Revelation is such that no interpretation at all can be given without 
taking considerable space, and hence less brevity has been here used than 
elsewhere in the New Testament. It is believed that the explanations 
and interpretations of this wonderful portion are given with sufficient 
fulness to give the reader a very clear idea of the meaning of this book 
of New Testament prophecy. A laborious study of this little understood 
and much discussed book, made anew with reference to this work, has 
not led the author to modify sensibly the views which he expressed ten 
years since in A Vision of the Ages. 

It would be a difficult task to suitably acknowledge the authors whose 
labors have assisted him in his work. He has consulted with advantage 
Meyer, Olshausen, the Bible Commentary, the Popular Commentary, 
Alford, Godet, Lange, Schaff, the older Commentaries of Whitley, Mat- 
thew Henry and Barnes, the various ‘‘ Lives and Letters of St. Paul,” 
the Church Histories of the first century, etc. Whatever may be thought 
of the gleanings in this volume they have been gathered from rich and 
abundant sources. If it shall help the reader to a better understanding 
- of the Divine Word, point men to the Lamb of God, comfort saints, and 
help them onward in the heavenward way, the author will feel that he 
has secured the object for which it has been written. 


A SUMMARY OF THE EPISTLES. 


The Epistles differ in their nature from any other portion of the Scriptures. They 
are a series of letters to the newly planted churches of the first century, or to individual 
church members, written, with possibly two or three exceptions, by apostles. These 
letters are twenty-one in number. I give a list of them with the number of chapters in 
each in the following table. 





UEVOMINATE pe oe 2 rete sPe ais 57s, s\e' sce 1G Clrapters- si Litugig scm. <teaitervaiele cao ects oie 3 Chapters. 
MeECorimbhians! castes cies sce ss we 16 Hy PhwWemon cesses. aes sete. 1 ob 
MES Comin Giada. ntact reise «sso 13 + TELE DEC Wl sierercrorncieetsisie shee erie 13 <i 
Galati amis ies ee eA vee lense Susie 6 fe JANE Bray ys Cheese ol etnieets Ubstorttore 5 i 
Jy a eversihs) Vie oan SOO CAA a Oeec 6 ee Ls Ober. aoraowea cts acy sieeepreets 5 Me 
I latdbhay oeWa\6r coeacs See arl GORnOr 4 x 1 ES MEO ceaaan howd OOhRCs cA 3 
@OlOSSIAIIS 5 ccs face ne sets 4 Hf LEO, oso oc8 6 midseason eras 5 He 
PD, Phessalonians. 2. ..0¢..005 5 i AM ordre) We vases es ed eck AEE oes if ue 
II. Thessalonians............ 3 ce SD) Seed once anc eho ck eaO OR PICIaO aft fe 
eed ano tiyer cea ecrisis selec «4s 6 ue JG Bie ielayernitistarers ores: w'eleve wiateiee ult ce 
Jig ABnanel tie Ser poe aoGnar 4 ee 


Tur AuTHors—The writers of these Letters were Peter, James, John, Jude and Paul. 
Other of the apostles may have written, but if so, their productions have not come 
down to us. 

Tur Purpose.—These Letters were written, some to particular congregations of 
believers; some to the church at large, and others to individuals; to encourage, reprove, 
correct false teaching, and give special instruction in doctrine and practical duties. 

Tar Source.—The authors of the Epistles all being apostles or inspired evangelists 
were under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, and all their utterances, as apostles, were 
by divine dictation. 

CLASSIFICATION.—The Epistles may be classified as follows: 

1. The Pauline Epistles, or those written by the Apostle Paul. These may again 
be subdivided into: 

(1) The Doctrinal, addressed to special churches—Romans, Corinthians, Galatians, 
Philippians, Colossians, Thessalonians and Hebrews. 

(2) Pastoral, addressed to the evangelists, Timothy and Titus. 

(3) Special, addressed to an individual—Philemon. 

2. General Epistles, addressed to the church at large. These are, (1) One of 
James; (2) Two of Peter; (3) Three of wy (4) One of Jude. 





INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLES OF PAUL. 





A BRIEF SKETCH OF THE LIFE OF PAUL. 


Much more than half of the Scriptural text in this volume is from the pen of Paul 
the Apostle, the great Evangelist of the Gentile world, and it is fitting that a brief view 
of the life and work of one who fills so large a space in the sacred record should be 
given as a general introduction to the thirteen Pauline Epistles. 

The diligent student of Acts of the Apostles is already acquainted with the sources 
of most of his public history. The statements in the Epistles from his own pen furnish 
almost all the remaining data which we possess. Had the great men of God, who set to 
work the forces which wrought the religious revolution of the world, suspected how 
great a place they were to fill in history, and how eager future ages would be to learn 
the details of their lives and the trials of their work, perhaps they would have left on 
record something more than the meager hints which are all that we possess. 

We are informed concerning the place of the birth of Saul of Tarsus, and of his 
tribe and religious training, but we do not know the date of his birth. Ashe wasa ‘‘young 
man’’ at the time of the death of Stephen, but old enough to have an official position, 
he must have been between thirty and forty years old. Hence, it is held that he could 
not have been born earlier than A. D. 7. Tarsus, the place of his birth, is situated a 
short distance from the bay of Cilicia, on the river Cydnus, within plain view of the 
snow-covered heights of the Cilician Taurus. The city was capital of a province, a 
‘free city,” a center of Greek culture only less renowned at that period than Athens 
and Alexandria, was the seat of a considerable Jewish colony and of a synagogue. 
The father of Saul had in some unexplained way, either by purchase, inheritance, or by 
his services, secured the Roman citizenship, so that Paul was a Roman, ‘¢free born.” 
The family belonged to the Tribe of Benjamin, which probably explains why the son 
received the name of the Benjaminite king, were Pharisees of the strictest type, and 
the son was trained in the rigid notions and practices of that sect. 

His education was completed, as the son of orthodox and. prosperous Hebrews 
should have been, at Jerusalem. At what time the young Saul went to the Holy City of 
his race, whether he had returned a second time when we first meet with him on the 
death of Stephen, or whether he had in Tarsus taken a course in Grecian literature, are 
matters of pure conjecture. The facts known are that he had a thorough knowledge of 
the Greek, that he quoted the Greek poets with the familiarity and correctness of a 
cultured Greek, that he showed an intimate acquaintance with Greek philosophy, and 
that he entered the school of the renowned Gamaliel, the grandson of Hillel, and was 
“brought up at his feet.” This language, compared with what we know of the custom 
of the Rabbinical schools, implies that he must have spent three or four years, at least, 
under the great Master of the Law in Jerusalem. 

It is in the persecution which began with the death of Stephen that he first appears 
in history. In some respects there is a complete contrast between Saul of Tarsus and 
Paul the Apostle. One is the unconverted J: a the other is the consecrated Christian. 


8 INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLES OF PAUL. 








The first is a deadly enemy of Christ and of Christianity, a pitiless and tireless perse- 
cutor, but at the same time a devout, conscientious, but mistaken man. His hatred of 
Christians was due to the fact that he believed them enemies of God and of religion. 
Blinded by his unquestioning zeal for Judaism, for the time a bigot filled with rage, he 
spread havoc among the saints and became the terror of the church. “ Consenting to 
the death of Stephen,” whatever that may mean, acting as the accomplice of those who 
stoned him, seizing and imprisoning others, at last he was sent with the commission of 
the Sanhedrim to stop the progress of the new faith in the great city of Damascus. On 
the way, near the city, the persecutor underwent a wonderful transformation. Three 
accounts have been given of this remarkable change; two by Paul himself, and one by 
the historian of Acts. The essential facts are that the Lord himself appeared to the 
conscientious but mistaken zealot, that the honest persecutor surrendered as soon as he 
saw his mistake, that the Lord appeared to him that he might be a witness, and at once 
called him to an apostleship as the missionary to the Gentile world. He was led blind 
into Damascus, received his sight after three days, and was baptized by a disciple, and 
shortly after began his work. After spending a considerable period in Arabia (Gal. 
1:17), possibly in study and preparation for his great mission, he returned to Damascus, 
where he at once experienced the bitterness of persecution (2 Cor. 11: 32), but escaped 
- to Jerusalem, where he found himself an object of suspicion to the church on account 
of his former persecuting fame. Vouched for by Barnabas, he met Peter (Gal. 1: 18), 
but tarried only fifteen days, and then departed to Tarsus to escape the plots of the 
infuriated Jews. There is silence concerning several years of his history, but he was 
evidently not idle, and the “‘churches of Cilicia,” spoken of soon after, were, no 
doubt, planted at this time. After this interval, at the request of his old friend Barna- 
bas, he returned to Antioch, to enter upon the career of missionary activity which 
distinguished the rest of his life. 

The historian Luke names three great missionary tours in which he was engaged. 
About A. D. 45, he and Barnabas were set apart by the church at Antioch, under the 
direction of the Holy Spirit, and at once set out. During this tour he traveled the 
island of Cyprus its entire length, planting churches, and then landed at Perga on the 
mainland, a city of Asia Minor, where they were deserted hy John Mark, who had 
hitherto accompanied them. Laboring at Antioch in Pisidia, Lystra, Derbe, Iconium, 
with great success, they stirred up the enmity of the Jews, and these tireless enemies 
stirred up the populace at Lystra, so that Paul was stoned until supposed to be dead. 
Returning they visited the churches planted, and finally returned to Antioch. 

Next, about A. D. 50, Paul and Barnabas attended the council at Jerusalem, 
brought about by the efforts of Judaizing teachers to compel Gentile converts to accept 
Judaism. Of this conflict we will find many traces in the Epistles of Paul. The next 
year, without Barnabas, attended by Silas, and a part of the time by other companions, 
he started on his second missionary journey, visiting churches previously founded in 
Syria and Cilicia, and planting new ones in Phrygia and Galatia. At Troas, on the coast 
of the gean Sea, at the call of a heavenly vision, the missionaries crossed over into 
Europe, and planted their first church on European soil at Philippi, “a chief city of 
Macedonia,”’’ where they also were scourged and imprisoned, but honorably discharged. 
when the magistrates found out they were Roman citizens. “Then churches were plant- 
ed at Thessalonica, Berea, Athens, and at the great commercial metropolis of Corinth, 
where Paul remained at this time for a year and a half. In the year 54, probably, Paul 
returned to Antioch, by way of Ephesus, Ceesarea and Jerusalem. 


INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLES OF PAUL. g 








The same year the great Apostle began his third missionary journey. Starting from 
Antioch he went to Ephesus, which he had before visited. He now remained about 
three years and planted a great church in this metropolis of western Asia. At last, on 
account of the disturbance caused by Demetrius and his fellow-craftsmen, he left and 
continued his journey to Macedonia and to Corinth. From thence he started in the 
following spring to Jerusalem, meeting the elders of the Ephesian church at Miletus. 
Arriving in Jerusalem, he was assaulted in the temple by a mob, rescued by a Roman 
officer, removed to Caesarea, where he was imprisoned for two years, and where he 
appealed to Cesar, as a Roman had aright todo. It was on the way to Rome that he 
was shipwrecked on the Island of Malta and remained three months. In the spring of 
A.D. 61, he landed at Puteoli, in Italy, and from thence proceeded to Rome. Here we 
have a view of him for two years as a military prisoner, in his own hired house, engaged 
in teaching, and there the history of Acts leaves him. There is good reason for believing 
that he was released in A. D. 63, visited Antioch, Ephesus, Nicopolis, and possibly 
Philippi, Corinth and Spain. _It was after this release that the Pastoral Epistles were 
written, the last, Second Timothy, being written after he had again been confined at 
Rome and shortly before his death. It was somewhere about A. D. 66-68 that his busy 
career ended, and that he received the crown of martyrdom in Rome. 

The details I have given are enough to show how laborious, and how full of 
suffering was his eventful life. Yet we know that the history of Acts only touches 
upon his hardships, sufferings and sacrifices. Compelled, in his Second Letter to the 
church at Corinth, in self-defense, to speak of his labors, he says: ‘In labors more 
abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths oft. Of the 
Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with rods, once yt 
was stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a day and a night I have been in the deep; in 
journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils of mine own 
countrymen, in perils of the heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in 
perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren; in weariness and painfulness, in 
watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness.’’ The 
world had never before seen an example of one who gave up so much, voluntarily 
accepted such trials and sorrows, and so consecrated himself to a work in behalf of 
mankind. The transformation of Saul of Tarsus the Persecutor, into Paul the Apostle, 
is a miracle not less wonderful than the resurrection of the Lord. Dr. Baur, the most 
learned of German rationalists, confessed at the end of his life, that no rational 
explanation can be given of the transformation of Paul from ‘‘a most vehement 
adversary into the most resolute herald of Christianity,’ and that he felt constrained to 


call it a miracle. 
CHRONOLOGY. 


Some of the dates in the life of Paul can be fixed with certainty, and others are 
only approximate. The following are accepted by the best authorities. 


Conyersion......... eee OOD RO EOD A OOOO OOO A.D. 37. 
First Visit to Jerusalem after Conversion...........+- EG EADS 
Second Visit to Jerusalem, ........-++eeeee eee eeeeeee 44, 
Beginning of First Missionary Journey.....-.--.----- 45, 
Council at Jerusalem (third Visit).......--+++..++-0+- eo: 
Second Missionary Journey Begun........-+--+++ St Ee eee le, 


Fourth Visit to Jerusalem.............eeeeee cere eens 54. 


10 INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLES OF PAUL. 








Third Missionary Journey Begun..................... A.D. 54. 
Fifth and Last Visit to Jerusalem.................... ss 58. 
Imprisonment atyGcesatearcn. sce eaten ee 58-60. 
VO VA CORO INOMO a veerish aici e ener eee ene Rete ce 60.618 
First Imprisonment at Rome............... Sat msc POy: ae 61-63. 
Release from Imprisonment........... ....--+0<e.:¢ oe 63. 
Second Imprisonment. Date Uncertain, from......... ee 65 to 67. 
Martyrdom. i eae CS eae ara “65 to 68. 


ORDER OF THE EPISTLES. 


The Epistles of Paul are not arranged in the New Testament in the order in which 
they were written. The following table gives their chronological order, and the 
approximate date at which each was written. I give the general results reached by 
scholars, but omit the reasons from lack of space: 

1 Thessalonians. Written at Corinth. 5 : : Between A. D. 52 and 54. 
2 Thessalonians. « us ee sees ae 


Galatians. *¢ probably at Ephesus, or in Macedonia. “ 56 or 57. 
1 Corinthians. oe ce se 8 i 3 COG 

2 Corinthians. ‘¢ in Macedonia. : : c F aaa Sie 
Romans. cb at Corinth. av eD , é c FES: 
Colossians. es at Rome. A : : : ; oS O2e 
Ephesians. ce ub : : : 3 ; : {6 62), 
Philemon. Ge eG ¢ ; : . a ‘ SOO. 
Philippians. ts 6 A : 2 4 se SEG 2 
Hebrews. «in Italy, probably at Rome. About “ 65. 

1 Timothy. ‘¢ probably in Macedonia. ‘ as “66-67. 
‘Titus. Ags ge * “ a a “66-67. 
2 Timothy. ee in his Prison at Rome. 3 % ES ‘* 66-68. 


These were all written in the Greek language, the common language of the educated 
world in the first century, and indeed the language of church literature for three cen- 
turies. Its general diffusion all over the East enabled Christians everywhere to read 
and understand writings in that tongue. Paul was no doubt acquainted with it from 
childhood, preached in it everywhere, and wrote it with the force and fluency of a 
native Greek. 


INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS. 


The depth of thought, logical reasoning, and profound comprehension of the divine 
government shown in this Epistle have always been recognized. Luther says, ‘‘It is 
the chief part of the New Testament.” Meyer, that it is ‘‘the grandest, boldest, most 
complete composition of Paul.” Godet terms it ‘ the cathedral of the Christian faith.” 
That it should be what Coleridge says, *‘ the most profound work in existence,’’ is not 
wonderful when we bear in mind that it was written by the greatest of the apostles, in 
the full vigor of his manhood, at the height of his activity, and addressed to the church 
of the great imperial city which was the center of influence and power for the whole 
world. In this mighty capital, under the shadow of the palace of the Czsars, in some 
unknown way, a congregation of believers had been gathered. It is certain that long 
before any apostle had set foot in Italy churches had been formed in Puteoli and in 
Rome (Acts 28:14, 15). Possibly the ‘‘strangers from Rome,”’ who listened to Peter 
on the day of Pentecost, had carried back the Gospel, and had formed the nucleus; but 
it is probable that the constant influx of strangers from all portions of the empire had 
carried many of the converts made around the Eastern Mediterranean to the great 
political center of the world. The greetings of the last chapter of this Epistle show 
that Paul had many acquaintances among the number, and the names seem to imply 
that most of them were Greeks. Indeed, while there was a Jewish element in the 
church, it can hardly be doubted that the majority of the believers were of Gentile 
origin. Various passages in the Epistles, such as 1: 5-7; 11: 18, 25, 28; 14:13; 15; 15, 
16, give indications of a Gentile preponderance. 

The occasion of writing was the desire of the apostle to labor in the great city, a 
desire which had thus far been hindered, and the opportunity was furnished by the 
departure of Phoebe from Corinth for Rome. Still firm in his purpose to see and preach 
in Rome, a letter to the church would tend to prepare the way. As they had never 
been visited by an apostle, and as at that time there was no New Testament in exist- 
ence to which they could go for instruction, it is not strange that there should be an 
imperfect comprehension, on the part of many, of great principles of Christian doctrine, 
and there was doubtless need that the relations of Jew and Gentile, and of the Law and 
the Gospel, should be set forth with all possible clearness. The great theme of the 
Epistle is set forth in chap. 1: 16,17: ‘‘The Gospel is the Power of God unto Salva- 
tion to every one that believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.” The great 
doctrine is that salvation is not through the Law by works of the Law, but through the 
Gospel accepted by Faith. The righteousness of God, the righteousness which brings 
justification in the sight of God, does not come from legal works, but comes from God 
who gives this righteousness to those who believe upon and accept his Son. This great 
doctrinal theme is discussed with many illustrations and in various phases through 
chapters 1-11, and in chapters 12-14 the apostle passes to exhortations and practical 
applications, while the sixteenth and last chapter is devoted to salutations of various 
saints in Rome known to the apostle. Fora fuller analysis, I must refer the reader to 
the headings which accompany the pea 


12 INTRODUCTION TO ROMANS. 





As to the date and place of composition, there is hardly room to doubt that it was: 
written at Corinth, during the three months’ stay in Achaia (Greece), which is men- 
tioned in Acts 20:3. According to Rom. 15: 25, at the time of writing, he was about to 
proceed to Jerusalem with offerings for the poor saints, made by the churches of Mace- 
donia and Achaia. At Corinth, the largest city of Achaia, he directed such collections 
tobe made. Phoebe, who is commended in 16: 1, lived at Cenchrez, the eastern harbor 
of Corinth. Four of the seven persons named in Rom. 16: 21-23, as being with him, 
Timotheus, Sosipater, Jason and Gaius, can be shown from other sources, either to have 
lived at Corinth, or to have been there at that time. From these facts, and other cir- 
cumstaaces, it seems clear that it was written at Corinth in the spring of A. D. 58. 

We have only space to add that even the most radical rationalistic criticism has 
always admitted that this Epistle has for its author the Apostle Paul. The testimony of 
the ancient church is unanimous; Renan has no doubt of its genuineness, and even Dr. 
Baur, of the Tubingen school of critics, admits that it is one of the Epistles which must 
be ascribed to the authorship of the great Apostle to the Gentiles. While not the first 
in order of time, for the two Epistles to the Thessalonians, that to the Galatians, and the 
two to the Corinthians, were written before it, it probably has the precedence in 
importance over all the Epistles of the New Testament. 


THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE 


ROMANS. 


CHAPTER I. 


Introduction. The Morals of Paganism. 


‘SUMMARY.—Paul’s Salutation to the Church at Rome. His Deep Interest 
in its Welfare. His Confidence in the Gospel. It the Power of God. | 


The Argument Begun in Verse 18. The Sins of the Gentile World. REVISED VERSION. 
The Gentile World under Condemnation. CHAPTER I. 
1 Paul, a servant. of Jesus Christ,* called’ éo be} ,Faul 4 servant of Jesus 1 
an apostle, separated* unto the gospel of God, apostle, separated unto 
2 (Which he had promised afore by his prophets he ee eal atone ty ne ‘4 
in the holy scriptures, ) prophets in the holy scrip- 


tures, concerning his Son, 3 


3 Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who was born of the seed 
. . . a 
which was made? of the seed of David according to | flesh: who was declared to 4 


the flesh, be the Son of God with 

3 . power, according to the 

4 And declared? éo be the Son of God with power, | spirit of holiness, by the 

7 SHAT = resurrection 5 

according to the Spirit? of holiness, by the resur-| even Jesus Christ our Lord, 
rection from the dead: through whom we re- 5 


- ceived grace and apostle- 
5 By whom we have received grace and apostle- 





@ Acts 27:23. bActs9:15;1Cor.1:1. ¢ MN ae d Psa. 89:36. e Acts 13:33,384; Rev. 1:18. 
eb. 9:14. 








1-7. Paul. Instead of subscribing a name at the end of a letter, the custom then was to introduce 
it atthe beginning. See other Epistles of Paul; also Acts 23:26. Forasketch of Paul, see Introduc- 
tion; also notes in Vol. I. on Acts 13:9, Called to be an apostle. ‘“‘To be” is not in the original. 
Paul simply states that he is “‘a called apostle,” not one appointed by men, but called by Jesus Christ. 
He was called when he “saw the Lord,” an essential to apostleship. See notes 1 Cor. 9:1; also Acts 
26:16, His setting apart at Antioch (Acts 13: 2) was not his call, but it came direct from Jesus Christ. 
As some Judaizing teachers tried to destroy his apostolic authority, he found it necessary on several 
oceasions to show that his commission was directly from the Lord. Separated. Set apart to the work 
of the gospel. Christ set him apart, and his whole life was consecrated to his divine glory. 2. Which 
he promised afore, etc. This gospel was no innovation, but a fulfillment of God’s long-cherished 
plans, and had been promised through the prophets of the Old Testament. Indeed the Old Testament 
is a system of types, Shadows and promises pointing forward to the coming of Christ. “Of him have all 
the prophets borne witness.” 8. Concerning his Son. The Son of God is the very center of the 
gospel, and the promises are all concerning him. Born of the seed of David. The two natures 
combined in the Son, according to the flesh, are pointed out in this and the next verse. As to his 
human body, he was a descendant of David, his mother being of David’s lineage. 4. But declared 
+o be the Son of God. Though in human form he was demonstrated to be divine by power, such 
power as he displayed in mighty miracles, and especially by the greater miracle of his own resurrection 
from the dead. According to the spirit of holiness. It must be noted that this is a contrast with 
according to the flesh in verse 3, and hence must refer to our Lord’s holy nature, The body was 
descended from Dayid, but the pure, holy life was demonstrated to be divine. One was a human 
nature; the other was a divine nature. This nature is spoken of as “‘the spirit of holiness,” because it is 
contrasted with sinful flesh. 5, Through aarery Through Jesus Christ, who is the subject spoken 


14 ROMANS. 


ship, for obedience* to the faith among all nations, 
for his name; 

6 Among whom are ye also the called of Jesus 
Christ: 

7 To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called? 
to be saints: Grace® to you, and peace, from God 
our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. 

8 First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for 
you all, that your faith’ is spoken of throughout 
the whole world. 

9 For God is my witness, whom® I serve with my 
spirit in the gospel of his Son, that without ceas- 


rGh, I. 


Ls 


ship, unto obedience of 
faith among all the na- 
tions, for his name’s sake: 
among whom are ye also, 6 
called to be Jesus Christ’s: 
to all that are in Rome, 7 
beloved of God, called to 
be saints: Grace to you 
and peace from God our 
Father and the Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

First, I thank my God 8 
through Jesus Christ for 
you all, that your faith 
is proclaimed throughout 
the whole world. For God 9 
is my witness, whom I 
serve in my spirit in the 
gospel of his Son, how un- 
ceasingly I make mention 


ing’ I make mention of you always in my prayers; | of you, always in my pray- 


: . ki st, if by 10 

10 Making request, if by any means now at length | ty moan acy at ton, 

I might have a prosperous journey by the will’ of Teer ee 
God to come unto you. you. For I long to see you, 11 


that I may impart unto you 





11 For I long to see you, that I! may impart unto 





61 Cor. 1:2; 1 Thes. 4:7. ¢1Cor. 1:33 2 Pet. 1:2. d@ Rom. 16:19. e Acts. 27:23. 
1 Thes. 3:10. g Jas. 4:15. h Rom. 15:23,32. ¢ Rom. 15:29, 


eee eee 


of. We have received. Paul refers to himself, and perhaps to the other apostles. Grace. The 
grace, the favor and mercy of heaven granted to all saints. Apostleship. All saints were not apos- 
tles, but one must be a saint to be an apostle. Without the general grace he could not haye the special 
gift of apostleship. For obedience to the faith. The apostleship was given in order to lead all 
nations to obedience to the faith. The faith is a synonym for the gospel. Observe that it isa system 
of obedience. In the apostolic age there were no recognized believers but obedient believers. 
6. Among whom are ye also called. From among “all nations” (verse 5). The members of the 
church at Rome, though partly Jews, were mostly Gentiles. They had heard the gospel call, had 
obeyed it, and were now “the called of Jesus Christ.” In the next yerse they are said to be “called to 
be saints.” '7. Toall that arein Rome. To all Christians in Rome. The letter is addressed to the 
church in the great imperial city. Rome was the capital of the world, the home of Nero, the emperor, 
the largest city on the earth, supposed to contain about two millions of inhabitants. Saints. All 
Christians were called saints by the New Testament writers. Any one consecrated to a holy life is a 
saint. Grace to you and peace. This is the ordinary New Testament Christian salutation. Itis the 
expression of a prayer that God the Father and our Lord may bestow favor and peace upon them. The 
Father is the source, and our Lord Jesus Christ the mediator and procurer of these blessings. It is 
_ plain that Paul was not a Unitarian. 

Let it be noted that this section, written, as admitted by skeptical critics, less than thirty years after 
the crucifixion, by Paul, to a body of believers ata distance from Judea, affirms the main facts of the 
Gospels: 1. That Jesus was the Son of God. 2. That he took upon himself our nature. 3, That he dis- 
played divine power. 4, That he was raised from the dead. 5. That men are saved by the obedience of 
the faith. 

8-15. First, I thank God. The first thing he wishes to speak of is thankfulness for a fact he is 
about to state, viz., their faith is spoken of throughout the world. The church at Rome was as 
“a city set on a hill.” From every country where the gospel was planted people were constantly going 
to and returning from Rome, and hence the fact of there being a church in the great capital would be 
known everywhere. 9. For. This introduces a reason for his thankfulness. He feels so deep an 
interest in the cause of Christ in that great center that he prays for them daily. Serve with my 
spirit. Not an outward service, but of the whole heart, soul and life,in the gospel to which he is 
consecrated. The spirit is the highest part of a man’s nature, and service with the Spirit is the highest 
service. Make mention of you always. So, too, of the Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians and 
Thessalonians. See Eph. 1:15; Phil. 1: 3; Col. 1:3;1 Thess. 1:2. Such statements show the deep solic- 
itude of the apostle for the saints. 10. Making request. One of his petitions was that God might 
permit him to visit the church at Rome. While at Ephesus he had said (Acts 19: 21), “I must also see 
Rome.” His prayers were to be granted, but not in the way that he now expected. When he went to 
Rome it was as “the prisoner of the Lord.” 11. I long to see you. He had a Special reason for 


@ Rom. 16:29; Acts 6:7. 
F 


Ch. I.] ROMANS. 


15 





at some spiritual gift, to the end ye may be estab- 
ished; 

12 That is, that I may be comforted together with 
you, by the mutual? faith both of you and me. 

13 Now I would not have you ignorant, brethren, 
that oftentimes I purposed to come unto you, (but 
was let hitherto,) that I might have some fruit 
among you also, even as among other Gentiles. 

14 I am debtor both to the Greeks and to the 
Barbarians, both to the wise and to the unwise. 

15 So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach 
the gospel to you that are at Rome also. 

16 ForI am not ashamed® of the gospel of Christ: 


for it is the power? of God unto salvation to every, 


one that believeth;® to the Jew‘ first, and also to 
the Greek. 
17 For therein? is the righteousness of God re- 





a2Pet.1:1, 61Cor. 9:16. ¢ Mark 8:38; 2 Tim. 1:8. 


g Rom. 3:21,25. 








d Jer. 28:29; 1 Cor. 1:18. 


some spiritual gift, to the 
end ye may be established ; 
that is, that I with you 
may be comforted in you, 
each of us by the other’s 
faith, both yours and 
mine. And I would not 
have you ignorant, breth- 
ren, that oftentimes I pur- 
posed to come unto you 
(and was hindered hither- 
to), that I might have some 
fruit in you also, even as 
in the rest of the Gentiles. 
Tam debtor both to Greeks 
and to Barbarians, both to 
the wise and to the foolish. 
So, as much as in meis, 1 
am ready to preach the 
gospel to you also that are 
in Rome. For I am not 
ashamed of the gospel: for 
it is the power of God 
unto salvation to every 
one that believeth; to the 
Jew first, and also to the 
Greek. For therein is re- 
vealed a righteousness of 





e Mark 16:16. f Acts 3:26. 


13. 


14 


15 





visiting Rome. No apostle had ever visited the city. None of the spiritual gifts which were conferred 
by the imposition of apostolic hands had been conferred in Rome. If any of the brethren enjoyed them, 
as Rom. 12:6 seems to imply, they have received them elsewhere, and he desires to impart them there. 
Spiritual gift is used in the sense ofa supernatural gift. See 1Cor.12:1,4. Itis a gift conferred by 
the Spirit. Elsewhere the phrase “spiritual gifts” refers to extraordinary gifts. There is no recorded 
instance in the New Testament of any one working miracles who was not an apostle, or who had not. 
received the gift through the imposition of apostolic hands. To the end. All these gifts of the Spirit. 
were imparted fora purpose. The purpose in the mind of Paul was that they might be established3 
that saints might be strengthened and the cause of Christ made stronger. The agent would be the Holy 
Spirit; Paul the instrument. 12. That is. Such a result would minister to the mutual comfort of 
Pauland the church. If they are established, he will be comforted in them. The idea is that his faith 
will be acomfort and strength to them, and he will be encouraged and strengthened by their faith. 
Thus they will be mutual helpers. How different the humble apostolic style of address from that of a 
Roman bishop! 18. Oftentimes I have purposed to come to you. See Acts 19: 21, Thus far he 
had been hindered. He desired to visit Rome to do the Lord’s work. He had planted Gentile churches 
in many cities. He wished to have some fruit in the greatest Gentile city in the world, as well as 
elsewhere. 14. Lamadebtor. He owed it, or was under obligation to preach the gospel both to 
the Greeks, and to the barbarians. The Greeks called other people but themselves barbarians, 
but in the apostolic age the Romans were excepted. The cultured Greeks and the proud Romans looked 
with contempt on all other races. Paul is a debtor to both, and must give them the gospel. Hence he 
is so anxious to labor at Rome. Both to wise and unwise. Here the division into two classes turns 
on knowledge, instead of race. His meaning is that the gospel must be offered to every class. 
15. Ready to preach in Rome also. Where, in the great world center, were found all classes,. 
Greeks and barbarians, wise and unwise. 

16,17. ForIam not ashamed of the gospel. Hence he is ready to preach it in Rome, in the 
very citadel of heathen pride and power. If there was any place where one would be ashamed of a 
crucified Savior that place was Rome in the reign of Nero. The gospel. God’s plan of salvation in 
Christ. Its three great facts are the death, burial, and the resurrection of Christ (1 Cor. 15:1-4), For. 
He now states why he is not ashamed ofthe gospel. It isthe power of Godunto salvation. The gos- 
pelis God’s only appointed means ofsalvation. The name of Jesus Christ “is the only name . whereby 
we must be saved.” All God’s saving power is manifested through the gospel. To every one that. 
believeth. The great fundamental facts (see above) must be believed, in order to the enjoyment of 
this saving power. They are embraced in the proposition that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God. The 
gospel does not save unconditionally. Belief is a condition. To the Jew first. The first to enjoy this 
saving power were Jews. To them the gospel was first offered. But it is offered to the Greek also, on 
the same conditions. 1'7. For therein. In the gospel. It reveals the righteousness of God. 


16 ROMANS. 


vealed from faith to faith: as it is written, The? 
just shall live by faith. 


[Ch. I. 
tA aa ee i oi le ie Ue lie os ae 


God by faith unto faith: as 
it is written, But the right- 
eous shall live by faith, 


18 For the wrath” of God is revealed from heay- Pit a) of le 
en against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of against all | ungodliness 
men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness; mciowho hem Aue 

19 Because that which may be known of God is ie date ate eee o 
manifest in them: for God* hath shewed 7é unto | known of God is manifest 
th in them; for God manifest- 

em. ed it unto them. For the 20 


20 For the invisible things of him from the crea- 
tion of the world are clearly seen, being understood 
by the things® that are made, even his eternal power 
and Godhead; so that they are without excuse: 

21 Because that, when they knew God, they glo- 
rified him not as God, neither were thankful, but 
became vain® in their imaginations, and their fool- 
ish heart was darkened. 


invisible things of him 
since the creation of the 
world are clearly seen, be- 
ing perceived through the 
things that are made, even 
his everlasting power and 
divinity; that they may be 
without excuse: because 
that, knowing God, the 

glorified him not as God, 
neither gave thanks; but 
became vain in their rea- 
sonings, and their sense- 


21 


less heart was darkened. 


22 Professing themselves to be wise, they be- probessiag themectne 10°00 











came fools, be wise, they became 
: fools, and changed the 23 
23 And changed the glory of the uncorruptible | giory of the incorruptible 
a Hab. 2:4. b Eph, 5:6. ¢John1:9. dPsa.19:1. eJer. 2:5. Eph. 4:17,18. J der. 8:8,9. 








This might mean (1) God’s personal righteousness; (2) arighteousness acceptable to God, or, (3) a 
righteousness bestowed by God. The last is its sense in the Epistle to the Romans. The obedient 
believer in Christ is forgiven and clothed with Christ’s righteousness. See chap. 3: 21-25. From faith 
tofaith. This clause has caused much discussion. The generally received view is thus stated by Dr. 
Schaff: “This righteousness is revealed from faith, or through means of faith, in order to produce faith 
in others.” It is revealed to us by believing (faith), and the duty of the believer is to extend the gospel, 
or to extend the faith. “Believing,” says Dr. Schaff, “includes knowledge and belief, assent and 
surrender, appropriation and application.” As it is written. Hab. 2:4. The Old Testament had 
predicted this system of righteousness by faith, for the prophet had said, The just shall live by faith. 
The just. Those who have been forgiven and justified by the gospel. 

18-32. For. Now follows a declaration of the world’s unrighteousness, of the wrath of God against 
unrighteousness, and hence the need of the righteousness of God through the gospel received by faith 
in order to salvation. The ‘‘for’”’ introduces an argument which shows that.Christ’s gospel is the world’s 
only hope. The wrath of God. His displeasure. Isrevealed. Not only by the declarations of the 
Holy Scriptures, and his jadgments, but by nature’s teachings, and by the human conscience. Ungod- 
lliness. Irreligiousness. This is the fountain of unrighteousness. Hold the truth in unright- 
eousness. There is a measure of truth revealed to every man. See next verse. Many refuse to profit 
by the light they have, and love the darkness ratherthan the light. All who do not liye up to the knowl- 
edge they possess, who do worse than they know, hold the truth in unrighteousness. They obstruct 
the truth, rather than let it have free scope. 19. Because. Here he begins to show why God’s wrath 
is manifest. They are inexcusable because “that which may be known of God is manifest in them.” 
The next verse shows what may be known of God by all. 20. The invisible things of God. His 
attributes. Are clearly seen. Are manifested by his works. Nature speaks of nature’s God. His 
eternal power and divinity. The attributes are especially shown in his works. The earth and the 
heavenly bodies are effects which must be due to eternal power and divinity. So that they are 
without excuse. No excuse is left for worshiping helpless idols. 21. When they knew God. 
Had the knowledge shown in yerse 20. They turned from their knowledge, did not glorify the invisible 
Creator, yielded neither adoration nor gratitude. Became vain in their imaginations, Thoughts 
or reasonings. When men turn willfully from truth, they will run to the extremes of error, The world 
(the pagan world) yielded to idle fancies, and were involved in deeper darkness. He who shuts out the 
light will finally be unable to bearit. Wain. Empty, useless. See Deut. 32: 21. 22. Became fools. 
The Greeks and Roman heathen boasted of their wisdom and held the rest of the world in contempt, 
but at the same time their idolatry showed their utter folly. 28. GChanged the glory of the uncor- 
ruptible God. Turning from the glorious revelation of God in nature, they showed that they were 
fools by making an image, like man, or lower animals, and calling itagod. Man. The Greeks made 


Ch. I1.] ROMANS. 


God into an image* made like to corruptible man, 
and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping 
things. 

24 Wherefore God also gave them? up to unclean- 
ness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dis- 
honour their own bodies between themselves: 

25 Who changed the truth of God® into a he, and 
worshipped and served the creature more than the 
Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen. 

26 For this cause God gave them up unto vile 
affections: for’ even their women did change the 
natural use into that which is against nature: 

27 And likewise also the men, leaving the natur- 
al use of the woman, burned in their lust one to- 
ward another; men with men working that which 
is unseemly, and receiving in themselves that recom- 
pence of their error which was meet. 

28 And even as they did not like to retain God in 
their knowledge, God gave them over to a repro- 
bate mind, to do those things which are not con- 
venient: 

29 Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornica- 
tion, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full 
of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity; whis- 
perers, 

30 Backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, 
boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to 
parents, 


17 


God for the likeness of an 
image of corruptible man, 
and of birds, and fourfoot- 
ed beasts, and creeping 
things. 
Wherefore God _ gave 24 
them up in the lusts of 
their hearts unto unclean- 


ness, that their bodies 
should be dishonoured 
among themselves: for 25 


that they exchanged the 
truth of God for a lie, and 
worshipped and served the 
creature rather than the 
Creator, who is blessed 
forever. Amen. 

For this cause God gave 
them up unto vile pas- 
sions: for their women 
changed the natural use 
into that which is against 
nature: and likewise also 
the men, leaving the nat- 
ural use of the women, 
.burned in their lust one 
toward another, men with 
men working unseemli- 
ness, and receiving in 
themselves that recom- 
pense of their error which 
was due. 

And even as they re- 
fused to have God in their 
knowledge, God gave them 
up unto a reprobate mind, 
to do those things which 
are not fitting ; being filled 29 
with all unrighteousness, 
wickedness, covetousness, 
maliciousness; full of en- 
vy, murder, strife, de- 
ceit, malignity; whisper- 


26 


27 


28 





ers, backbiters, hateful to 
God, insolent, haughty, 
boastful, inventors of evil 
things, disobedient to par- 








» Isa. 40:18,26: Ezek. 8:10. 6 Psa. 81:12; 2 Thes. 2:11. c Amos 2:4. d Eph. 5:12; Jude 10. 





their gods like men. Many statues still exist that were taken from old Greek or Roman temples. 
Birds. The Egyptians worshiped birds, quadrupeds, and reptiles. 24. Wherefore. Having chosen 
folly, God gave them up to the consequences of their folly, and there followed an awful moral degrada- 
tion which is now described. Their false religion was no check upon their lusts. They engaged in the 
lowest and most disgusting lusts. Language cannot describe the pollution of the Gentile world, when 
Paul wrote, as revealed by the pagan writers of that period. 25. Who changed the truth of God 
into alie. By giving up the worship of the great unseen God to worship an idol; a creature, rather 
than the Creator. At first, idols were probably designed as only representations, but they finally 
became objects of worship. Just so, the images in Roman Catholic churches were intended at first as 
helps in worship, but have become to great multitudes really idols. 26. For this cause. Because 
of the apostasy just described. God gave them up. Abandoned them to their own course, and thus it 
was shown to what depths men will fall without God. To vile passions. Vile, shameless, sensual 
indulgence, such as cannot now be named. The sodomy referred to here was common in the first cen- 
tury among the Romans, and is often spoken of without a sense of shame by their writers. It was pro- 
hibited neither by religion nor law, and was acknowledged without shame. 28. God gave them 
over to areprobate mind. A thought is repeated here that has already been hinted, and is often 
taught in the Scriptures. The man who turns from the truth will be allowed to have his way, will fall 
deeper and deeper into error, and will reap all the evil consequences of loving darkness rather than 
light. Those who hate the truth are “siven over” to a reprobate mind. A reprobate mind is one rejected 
of God. Which are not convenient. Not decent, or honorable. 29- Being filled. The charac- 
teristics of those given over to a reprobate mind are now described. Whisperers. Secret slan- 
derers. 80. Haters of God. ‘Hateful to God,” in the Revision. Hateful, because so polluted with 





18 ROMANS. us ond 
31 Without understanding, covenant-breakers, ee ar 
without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful: | without natural affection; 
32 Who, knowing the judgment of God, that | unmerciful: who, knowing 22: 
they which commit such things are worthy of death, they which praetice ‘such 
P 4 hings are Wor oO eath, 
not only do the same, but have pleasure in them | y¢¢ Sniy ao the same, but 
that do them also consent with them 
5 that practice them. 
CHAPTER II. : 
9 
The Sinfulness of the Jews; Their Need of the Gospel. 
SuMMARY.—He who Condemns Others Condemns Himself. God’s Judg- 
ments According to Truth; without Respect of Persons or Race. 
Having the Law does not Justify without Obedience to the Law. 
The Jews Condemned by their own Law. Circumcision Cannot Save. 
The True Circumcision that of the Heart. CHAPTER It. 
1 Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whoso-| Wherefore thou art with- 1 
. dé Bry 5 out excuse, O man, whoso- 
ever thou art that judgest: for wherein? thou judg- | ever thou art that judgest: 
est another, thou condemnest thyself; forthou that | or eet eondsmsest 
judgest doest the same things. thyself ; for thou that judg- 
‘ - | est dost practice the same 
2 But we are sure that the judgment of God is| things. And we know that 2 
i ° i j ite the judgment of God is ac- 
according to truth against them which commit such | (ediP'to trath against 
things. them ea’ ene sneh ‘ 
; : ° things. n reckones 
3 And thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest| thou this, O man, who 
ic i judgest them that practice 
them which do such things, and doest the same, | Jif itines and doest the 
that thou shalt escape the judgment of God? same, that thou shalt, es. 
. . s e ment Oo oa: 
4 Or despisest thou the riches” of his goodness, | Grdespisest thou therich- 4 


and forbearance,° and long-suffering; not" knowing 
that the goodness of God leadeth® thee to repent- 
ance? 








es of his goodness and 
forbearance and long-suf- 
fering, not knowing that 
the goodness of God lead- 
eth thee to repentance? 





a2Sam. 12:6,7. 6Rom. 9:23. cIsa. 63:7. dJohn4:2. eIsa. 30:18. 





sin. 31. Without understanding. Senseless, foolish. 82. Who knowing the judgment of God. 
The ordinance or decree of God condemning such sinners. That ordinance is next stated. It is that 
those who do such deeds are worthy of death. The heathen moralists admitted this. Yet in spite of 
this knowledge they not only continued in their vile sins, but took pleasure in them. No deeper degree 
of depravity can be found than when men ¢all evil good, and cherish it. This dark picture of heathen 
vices, from verse 18 to 32, is not overdrawn. It is fully confirmed by such heathen writers as Tacitus, 
Horace, Seneca and Juyenal. The conclusion, from these facts, is that all such guilty persons are under 
condemnation. 

1-16. Therefore thou art inexcusable. Paul has just shown that the Gentiles are great sin- 
ners, and are without excuse before God (1:32). The Jew, however, would pronounce that conclusion 
just, but would excuse himself. Hence Paul makes the application to them also. Whosoever thou - 
art. Verse 17 below shows that the Jews are in the apostle’s mind. Besides, the Jews, filled with 
spiritual pride, were greatly given to judging others. Another. The Greek says “the other;’ the 
other division of the world, the Gentiles. Thou condemnest thyself. Because he practices the 
very things he condemns in others. 2. The judgment of God is according to truth. According « 
to the facts, to character. God does not show partiality. All guilty persons are under condemnation 
alike, whether Jew or Gentile. 3. Thinkest thou. It seems to us strange folly for the Jew to 
» regard Gentile sinners under condemnation, but fancy that he might do the same things, and yet . 
escape the judgment of God. Still this error is not confined to the Jews. Many a sinner persuades 
himself that his own sins, the very sins he condemns in others, will go unpunished. 4. Or despisest 
thouP Dost thou go further still, and not only expect to escape God’s wrath for sin, but dost thou 
eyen abuse his love? The riches. The overflowing abundance. Long-suffering. Shown in long= 
bearing with the sinner. Leadeth thee to repentance. The purpose of God’s goodness and for- 
bearance is not to encourage sin, but to appeal to man’s better nature, give him further opportunity, . 


Chall.) ROMANS. 





5 But, after thy hardness and impenitent heart, 
treasurest® up unto thyself wrath against the day 
of wrath and revelation” of the righteous judgment 
of God; 

6 Who will render to every man according to his 
deeds: . 

7 To them who, by patient continuance in well- 
doing, seek for glory, and honour, and immortality, 
eternal life; 

8 But unto them that are contentious,4 and do® 
not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, in- 
dignation and wrath, 

9 Tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of 
man that doeth evil; of the Jew first, and also of 
the Gentile: 

10 But glory,* honour, and peace, to every man 
that worketh good; to the Jew first, and also to the 
Gentile: 





-19 





but after thy hardness and 5 
impenitent heart treasur- 
est up for thyself wrath in 
the day of wrath and revye- 
lation of the righteous 
judgment of God; who will 6 
render to every man ac- 
cording to his works: to 7 
them that by patience in 
well-doing seek for glory 
and honour and incorrup- 
tion, eternal life: but unto 8 
them that are factious, and 
obey not the truth, but 
obey unrighteousness,shall 
be wrath and indignation, 
tribulation and anguish, 9 
upon every soul of man 
that worketh evil, of the 
Jew first, and also of the 
Greek; but glory and hon- 
our and peace to every 
man that worketh good, to 
the Jew first, and also to 
the Greek: for there is no 11 
respect of persons with 
God. For as many as have 12 
sinned without law shall 
also perish without law: 


10 


11 For’ there is no respect of persons with God. 
12 For as many as have sinned without law, shall 











c Prov. 24:12; Matt. 16:27; Rev. 20:12. @1 Tim. 6:3, 4. 
gDeut. 10:17; 2 Chron. 19:7; Gal, 6:7, 8; 1Pet. 1:17. 


a Deut. 32:34. 6 Eccl. 12314. e2 Thes.1: 8. 


Fi Pet, V7. 








and lead him to repentance. 5. But. Instead of being led to repentance by God’s mercy, the sinner 
has abused it with a hard and impenitent heart, and thus has aggravated his sin. Treasured up 
. . . wrath. By continuing in sin he has made his guilt and condemnation greater. Against the 
day of wrath. The day, surely to come, when God’s judgments will be inflicted. Revelation of 
the righteous judgment. This will only be fully revealed at the day of judgment. That day is 
meant. 6. Who will render. Sinners escape punishment for a time, and hence think they will 
escape altogether, but God will render, at the final day of judgment, to every man according to his 
works, whether he be sinner or saint, Jew or Gentile. 7. To them. First, the apostle speaks of the 
reward that shall be given to those that live holy lives. By patient continuance. No one can 
please God who only lives a holy life at times. The Christian life is not spasmodic. There must be 
constant effort, patient perseverance, a constant seeking. Luke 8: 15, in the parable of the sower, says 
the good ground represents those “who have the Word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.” 
Seek. Future salvation is thus described as an object of pursuit. It is “glory,” because a glorious 
life; “honor,” because it is areward. Immortality. This is rendered by the Revision, ‘‘Incorrup- 
tion;” it is not subject to decay. Eternal life. This sums up what God bestows on those who seek 
glory, etc., by “a patient continuance in well doing.” 8. Butuntothem, God rewards the righteous 
according to their works as described in verse 7; so also the wicked, as this verse describes. Conten- 
tions. Who seek their own way, instead of God’s way, and contend against God. Do not obey the 
truth. God’s law is truth. Sinners fight against God and “obey not the truth, but obey unrighteous- 
ness.” This verse describes the character of the wicked. The next verse declares God’s judgment 
upon them. 9. Tribulation and anguish. God, the righteous ruler, is displeased and indignant, 
and hence sends the sore punishment of “tribulation and anguish.” ‘One refers to the external weight 
of affliction; the other to the inward sense of that weight.” Upon every soul. Upon every evil doer, 
whether Jew or Gentile. Of the Jew first. The Jew stood first in opportunity (1: 16); hence is first 
in responsibility. The Greek. The whole Gentile world is meant, as in 1: 16; the great race whose 
culture had spread over the world being taken as the representative of all but the Jews. The emphatic 
thought is that the Jew, as well as the Gentile, shall be rendered unto according to his works. 
10. Glory, honor, peace. The blessed reward of those who work good, in contrast with him that 
“worketh evil,” is presented in these terms. See notes onverse7. Peace. Full content. He whose 
cup of blessing is full enjoys peace in its fullest sense. 11. There is no respect of persons. 
Greek, as well as Jew, if he works good, shall have the same blessed rewards. Compare Acts 10: 34, 35. 
God is impartial in the blessings conferred, as well as in his punishments. 12. Foras many as 
have sinned without law. As many as shall be found in sin, at the judgment, without a special rev- 


20 ROMANS. 


[Ch. II. 





also perish without law; and as many as have sin- 
ned in the law, shall be judged by the law. 

13 (For? not the hearers of the law are just be- 
fore God, but the doers of the law shall be justi- 
fied. 

14 For when the Gentiles, which have not the 
law, do by nature the things contained in the law, 
these, having not the law, are a law unto them- 
selves: 

15 Which shew the work of the law written in 
their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, 
and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else 
excusing one another, ) 

16 Inthe day when God shall judge the secrets° 
of men by Jesus Christ, according to my gospel.4 


and as many as have sin- 
ned under law shall be 
judged by law; for not the 13 
hearers of a law are just 
before God, but the doers * 
of a law shall be justified: 
for when Gentiles which 14 
have no law do by nature 
the things of the law, 
these, having no law, are 
alaw unto themselves; in 
that they shew the work of 
the law written in their 
hearts, their conscience 
bearing witness therewith, 
and their thoughts one 
with another accusing or 
else excusing them: in the 
day when God shall judge 
the secrets of men, accord- 
ing to my gospel, by Jesus 
Christ. 

But if thou bearest the 
name of a Jew, and restest 


15 


16 


17 


upon the law, and gloriest 





17 Behold, thou’ art called a Jew, and restest in 
the law, and makest thy boast of God, : 


61Cor. 11:14. 











a Jas. 1:22, 25. c Luke 8:17. d Rom. 16: 25. e Rom. 2:28. 





elation of the law of God. While the Mosaic law is in the mind of the apostle, the statement is general. 
The principle is one of universal application. Those have sinned who have not lived up to their light. 
Shall perish without law. They shall be judged and condemned without reference to the stand- 
ards of revealed law. Law, in this verse, has no article in the Greek. When so used it means law in 
general. When, as occurs so often in Romans, it has the Greek definite article before it, the Mosaic law 
ismeant. Observe that the Revision omits the article (the) in this verse. As many as have sinned 
underlaw. Undera revelation of God’s will. These shall be judged by it, and condemned for diso- 
bedience to its commands. 18. For not the hearers of thelaw. Not ithe law, but a law, as in the 
Revision. The possession of a revelation will not save, but obedience to it. While a general statement 
is made, Paul has his eye upon the Jews. Their law could not make them righteous unless it was 
obeyed. Justified. Accounted righteous; not held to be guilty. 14. When Gentiles, which have 
no law. No revelation, such as the Jews had. They had a law of nature (1: 18, 32). Do by nature 
the things of the law. Paul has shown how the general principle that God “will render to every 
man according to his works” applies to the Jews; they will be judged by law, and only law-doers will 
be justified. He now shows that the same principle applies to the Gentiles. They have no revealed 
and written law like the Jews, but in case Gentiles, without it, should keep the things contained in the 
law, the moral principles of the law of Moses, they are alaw unto themselves. Their consciences 
and moral sense are alaw. The apostle does not say that this was the rule among the Gentiles, but 
applies the principle to the very rare instances of Gentiles of pure character. 15. Which shew. 
Such Gentiles, not having the law, are a law to themselves, for they show forth in their lives that the 
essential principles of the law are written in their hearts. Not only do their outward acts testify, 
but their consciences, which condemn or approve their own acts, or those of others. That is, their 
consciences testify as to distinctions between right and wrong, They have amoral sense. 16. Inthe 
day. These principles of judgment shall prevail in the day when God shall judge the world. The 
secrets of men. Men’s lives are often hidden from their fellow-men, but at the judgment every 
secret shall be made manifest. He now adds that this judgment, which all are ready to admit, will be 
through Jesus Christ. He shall be the Judge; and it will be according to the gospel which Paul 
preached. The gospel will save or condemn men. By the words of Christ shall men be judged. 

17-24. Behold, thou art called aJew. Already, in the argument of verses 1-16, Paul has shown 
that all men, Jew or Gentile, will be judged according to their deeds, whether they have the law or not. 
Now he applies the argument directly to the Jew, in order to show his need of the gospel as well as the 
Gentile. Verses 17-20 state what the Jew claimed for himself. Called a Jew. To him the word 
“Jew” had a meaning much like “Christian” to us. It meant to him one of God’s people. Rested 
upon law. There is no article before law in the Greek. The Jew had law, in this case the law, for his 
foundation. Makest thy boast of God. Boasted of God’s favor to his race. 18. Knowest his 
will. As revealed in the Old Testament Scriptures in the hands of the Jews. Approvest the things 
that are more excellent. Instructed in the law the Jew approved by word its excellent moral prin- 


Ch. II.] ROMANS. 


21 





18 And knowest* Ais will, and approvest” the 
things that are more excellent, being instructed out 
of the law; 

19 And art confident that thou thyself art a guide 
of the blind, a light of them which are in darkness, 

20 An instructor of the foolish, a teacher of 
babes, which hast the forme of knowledge and of 


in God, and knowest his 18 


will, and approvest the 
things that are excellent, 
being instructed out of the 


law, and art confident that 19 


thou thyself art a guide of 
the blind, a light of them 


that are in darkness, a 20 


corrector of the foolish, a 
teacher of babes, having in 
the law the form of knowl- 


« edge and of the truth; thou 21 
the truth In the law. F therefore that teachest an- 
21 Thou* therefore which teachest another, | ier sien e tat oreache 
teachest thou not thyself? thou that preachest a| esta man should not steal, | 
man should not steal, dost thou steal? PEreeF a GAw ChE oe 
y i+ | commit adultery, dost thou 
22 Thou that sayest a man should not commit ceruritactiiecr ented 
adultery, dost thou commit adultery? thou that ab- abhorrest idols, dost thou | 
horrest idols, dost thou commit sacrilege? Gloziest iu inelaw tavode ts 
23 Thou that makest thy boast of the law, | bY ttansgression of the 
4 : aw  dishonourest thou 
through breaking the law dishonourest thou God? God? For the name of God 24 
24 Kor the name of God is blasphemed among] Gentilds because of you, 
even as itis written. For 26 


the Gentiles through you, as it is written.° 

25 For circumcision verily profiteth, if thou keep 
the law: but? if thou be a breaker of the law, thy 
circumcision is made uncircumcision. 


circumcision indeed profit- 
eth, if thou be a doer of 
the law: but if thou bea 
transgressor of the law, 
thy circumcision is be- 











a Psa. 147: 19,20. bPhi.1:10. ¢2Tim.1:13;3:5. d Matt. 23:3, &. e Gal. 5:3. f Eze. 36: 20,23. 








ciples. 19. A guide tothe blind. It was God’s purpose that in choosing Israel the Israelites should 
become teachers of the truth; but their sin was that while they boasted of this privilege they failed 
to do their duty. Such a boast as this was current among the Jews of Paul’s time. He heaps phrase on 
phrase to exalt their claims, in order to show in what follows how far short their lives fell of their pro- 
fessions. 20. Which hast the form of knowledge. In the law they had the form, the pattern, of 
knowledge and of the truth. The truth in its fulness came with Jesus Christ (John 1:17), but the law 
was the pattern, the typical form, of this truth. 21. Thou that teachest another. Having just 
described the proud claims of the Jews, he next inqaires how their practice corresponds. He who 
teaches others how to live, does he teach himself how to live? Dost thou stealP Some of the essen- 
tial principles of the law which the Jew is supposed to teach to others. The decalogue forbade steal- 
ing, but the Jews were already proverbial for their tricky methods of trade. 22. Commit adultery. 
In spite of the strictness of their decalogue and moral code, the lax divorce practices of the Jews per- 
mitted adultery (Matt. 19: 8,9), and the Talmud says that some of the most celebrated rabbins were 
guilty of the same sin. See also John 4. Thou that abhorrest idols. The question that follows 
has caused much discussion. The best rendering is, Dost thou rob temples? or, Are you a temple 
robber? Schaff suggests that the meaning is as follows: ‘Dost thou abhor idols, according to thy law, 
and yet engage in traffic whereby thou makest gain off the temples where this idol worship is prac- 
ticed?”? Macknight says that the reference 1s to robbing the temple at Jerusalem of what was due it, 
I think not. The apostle refers to practices which dishonor God among the Gentiles. 23. Dishonor- 
est thou God? The first part of this verse is a summary of the claims of the Jew as given in verses 
17-20; the last is a decisive answer, in an interrogative form, of the four reproachful questions just 
asked. Through the whole passage privilege and practice are contrasted. 24. For the name of 
God. The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles on account of the vices of the Jews. They 
make the religion which God has revealed contemptible among the heathen. They judged their religion 
by their scandalous conduct. Outsiders always judge a religion by the conduct of its votaries. As it 
is written. In Isa. 52:5 is found the passage to which Paul refers. 

25-29. For circumcision verily profiteth, The Jew was wont to fall back on his circumcision, 
as some still do on some outward ordinance. His answer to Paul is, Are we not the circumcised? Are 
not the circumcised the people of the covenant? He replies: “I admit that circumcision availeth, if one 
keeps law. The outward observance profits if one bea law-doer; that 1s, complies with its moral com- 


mandments. But if he fails to do so, his circumcision is as worthless as though he were uncircum- 


22 ROMANS. 


26 Therefore, if* the uncircumcision keep the 
righteousness of the law, shall not his uncircumcis- 
ion be counted for circumcision? 

27 And shall not uncircumcision which is by na- 
ture, if it fulfil the law, judge” thee, who by the let- 
ter and circumcision dost transgress the law? 

28 For he® is not a Jew which is one outwardly; 
neither 7s that circumcision which is outward in the 
flesh: 

29 But he zs a Jew which is one inwardly; and 
circumcision és that of the heart,‘ in the spirit, and 
not in the letter; whose praise® 7s not of men, but 





(Ch. III. 


come uncircumcision. 
therefore the uncircum- 
cision keep the ordinances 
of the law, shall not his 
uncircumcision be reckon- 


ed for circumcision? and 27 


shall not the uncircumcis- 
ion which is by nature, if 
it fulfil the law, judge 
thee, who with the letter 
and circumcision art a 
transgressor of the law? 


For he is not a Jew, which 28 


is one outwardly; neither 
is that circumcision, which 


is outward in the flesh: but 29 


he is a Jew, which is one 
inwardly; and circumcis- 
ion is that of the heart, in 
the spirit, not in the let- 


If 26 


of God. 





ter; whose praise is not of 
men, but of God. 


CHAPTER III. 
The Condemnation of Israel. 


SUMMARY.—The Special Privileges of Israel. ‘The Special Claim of the 
Jew. God’s Faithfulness Shown in Keeping his Covenant with the 
Children of Faith. No Difference between Jew and Gentile. By the 
Law no Flesh Justified. Justification to the Believer in Christ. 


1 What advantage then hath the Jew? or what 
profit zs there of circumcision? 


CHAPTER Iil. 


What advantage then 1 
hath the Jew? or what is 
the profit of circumcision? 





a Acts 10: 34,35. 6 Matt. 12:41,42. ¢ Chron. 9:6,7; Matt. 3:9; Jno. 8:39; Gal. 6:15; 


10:16; 30:6; Jer.4:4; Phi. 3:3; Col. 2:11. e2 Cor. 10:18. 


Rev. 2:9. d Deut. 








cised.” The effect of habitual transgression is to annul the covenant. 26. The converse of this is 
also true. If the Jewish law-breaker can annul his circumcision thus, then if the uncireumcision 
(the Gentiles) keep the righteousness of the law, his uncircumcised state will not be counted 
against him. He supposes the possible case of a Gentile who might render such an obedience to the 
moral precepts of the law as a pious Jew could render, and argues that his uncircumcision would not 
make his obedience less acceptable. Circumcision is not, then, the thing that the Gentile needs, but 
righteousness. The disobedient Jew virtually becomes a Gentile, and the obedient Gentile virtually 
becomes a Jew. 2'7. Uncircumcision whichis by nature. The Gentiles, who are of uncircum- 
cised races. If such an one keeps the essential principles of the law, his obedience is a rebuke to the 
Jewish transgressor who has covenanted to keep the law. 28. For he is not a Jew. He is nota 
Jew, in the religious sense of one of God’s chosen people, who is one outwardly alone. Neither is 
that circumcision, the true circumcision, that which makes one a member of God’s covenanted 
church, ‘which is outward in the flesh.” 29. But heis a Jew, such a Jew as just described, who is 
one inwardly, whose heart is given to God; and circumcision is that of the heart. Circum- 
cision of the heart is a figurative expression for inward purity, as old as the Book of Deuteronomy. See* 
Deut. 10: 16, and 30:6; also Jer. 9: 26. This circumcision is not an outward mark in the flesh of the 
body, but isin the spirit. The spirit of man is under the influence of the Spirit. Not in the letter. 
Not literal. Whose praise isnot of men. The Jew, as we have seen, made his boasts, and praised 
his privileges, but though the true Jew, such as Paul describes, shall be ill-spoken of by men, he shall 
have praise of God. The whole section shows that religious privileges, resulting from birth, the 
revelation of God’s will, ritual observances and knowledge, increase the guilt of those whose morality 
does not correspond. The Jews, especially the Pharisees, were very eager for the praise of men, but 
the true Jew, the real child of Abraham by faith, will have what is infinitely better, the praise of God. 
1-4. What advantage then hath the JewP In the second chapter Paul has shown that the 
Jews as well as the Gentiles are included under sin, and that the possession of the law and the rite of 
circumcision were of no avail unless the law was kept faithfully. In this chapter the Jew is supposed 
to object to this conclusion; his objections are presented, and answered. The first is, “What advantage 
is it then to the Jew to have the law and the rite of circumcision at all, if all, both Jew and Gentile, 
will be judged on the same principles in the judgment day?”? The second verse gives the answer. 


Ch. I1.] ROMANS. 23 





. | 
2 Much every way: chiefly, because that unto | Much every way: first of 2 
. all, tha y were : 
them* were committed the oracles of God. oe ee tee anetosiot O69: 
8 For what if some” did not believe? shall their | For, what if some were 3 


without faith? shall their 


unbelief make the faith of God without effect? want of faith make ot 
° non ere e faithiul- 
4 God forbid: yea, let God be true, but every | ness of God? God forbid: 4 


1 . 1+ 4 : c ; yea, let God be found true, 
man a liar; as it is written,* That thou mightest: ber (ee oman a lar: as it 


justified in thy sayings, and mightest overcome | is written, 
1 th +4 d d That thou mightest be 
when ou art juaged. justified in thy words, 


: i | 1 _| And mightest prevail 
5 But if our unrighteousness commend the right SOMES betas Nar 


eousness of God, what shall we say? Js God un- putt emeD: arightoons- 5 
° at our 1 o 
righteous who taketh vengeance? (I speak as @| ness oeendein the 
man) pe eh ace | oF 4 God. 

: : A what shall we say? Is Go 
6 God forbid: for then how‘ shall God judge the/ unrighteous who visiteth 
: 9 with wrath? (Ispeak af- 
world? ter the manner of men.) 


Day 4 God forbid: for then how 6 
7 For if the truth of God hath more abounded | 30%) Goa judge the world? 


roy i is glory, why yet am L also | But if the truth of God 7 
through my lie Ay his 8 Ys yy through my lie abounded 
judged as a sinner: unto his glory, why am I 

/ 2 : _| also still judged as a sin- 
8 And not rather, (as we be slanderously re-| 289 Set ee enot (as we 8 


ported, and as some afirm that we say.) Let us* do be slanderously reported, 
: : es a 1 

evil, that good may come? whose damnation is just..| say), Let us do evil, that 
good may come? whose 
condemnation is just. 








a Deut. 4: 7,8. b Rom. 10:16; Heb. 4:2. cPsa. 51:4. dJob. 8:3. e Rom. 6:1, 15. 








2, Much every way- The Jew had great advantages. He had greater light, more knowledge, better 
privileges, higher honors. The greatest advantage was that they had the oracles of God, the Holy 
Scriptures, and hence the promises which revealed a Messiah of mankind. This was not the only 
advantage, but the first. 3. What if some did not believe P In this verse the Jew raises a second 
objection. God has made a promise to Abraham to be a God to him and to his seed in all generations. 
«Shall God’s faithfulness be made of none effect, his promise be broken, because a great part of Israel 
does not believe upon the promised Seed of Abraham, who was to bless all nations?” 4. God forbid. 
The Greek means, literally, “Not so.”? It does not follow that God is unfaithful, because he rejects 
unbelieving Israel, for his covenant with Israel and his promise to Abraham were conditional. Let 
God be true, but every man a liar. Thatis, Let us believe all men to haye broken their word, 
rather than God his. As it is written. Psalm 51: 4, One of the penitential psalms, in which David 
mourns over his ow sins. God’s sayings, his threatenings, are justified by his judgments. They were 
in the case of David. They were also in the rejection of the Jewish nation, in spite of the promise, 
when it had rejected the Holy One of Israel. 
5-9. But if our unrighteousness commendeth the righteousness of God, ete. Here is 
presented the Jews’ third objection to the conclusion that Israel is under judgment forsin. Paul has 
just shown that God’s righteousness is shown forth in condemning the Jews for their unbelief. “But,” 
says the Jew, “if our unrighteousness demonstrates God’s faithfulness, when he condemns us for 
unbelief, is it right that we should be punished? Our sin gives occasion for God’s holiness to be shown 
forth. Why, then, should we be punished for furnishing such an occasion? Speaking after the manner 
of men, is not God unrighteous, when he sends wrath on our nation for its unbelief 2 6. God forbid. 
Rather, “By no means.” How shall God judge the world? How, if no sin is punished which God 
turns to some good purpose, shall he judge all men according to their deeds? 7 Why yet am I ois 
judged as a sinner? Here the Jew is supposed to repeat the last objection in another form. ‘God s 
truth 1s shown by our lie, His threatenings are demonstrated to be absolutely true by his rejection of 
the Jewish nation. If our lie, our false life, has thus shown forth his glory, why should we be indi- 
vidually condemned?” 8. Let us do evil that good may come. The apostle replies to this eit 
ment with a reductio ad absurdum. This amounts to saying, “Do evil mak good may come, an. 
abominable doctrine, slanderously charged upon Paul by enemies, would justify every iniquity. This 
doctrine, so strongly condemned, has been taught by the Jesuits. Whose damnation is just. All 


24 ROMANS. 


9 What then? are we better than they? No, in no 
wise: for we have before proved both Jews and 
Gentiles, that they are all under sin: 

10 As it is written,? There is none righteous, no, 
not one: 

11 There is none that understandeth, there is 
none that seeketh after God. 

12 They are all gone out of the way, they are to- 
gether become unprofitable; there is none that do- 
eth good, no, not one. 

13 Their throat? 7san open sepulchre; with their 
tongues they have used deceit; the poison® of asps 
zs under their lips: 

14 Whose mouth? zs full of cursing and bitter- 
ness: 

15 Their feet® ave swift to shed blood: 

16 Destruction and misery are in their ways: 

17 And the way of peace have they not known: 

18 There‘ is no fear of God before their eyes. 

19 Now we know, that what things soever the 
law saith, it saith to them who are under the law; 
that every mouth® may be stopped, and all the 
world may become guilty before God. 

20 Therefore® by the deeds of the law there shall 
no flesh be justified in his sight: for by the law zs 
the knowledge of sin. 








[Ch. III. 


What then? are we in 9 
worse case than they? No, 
in no wise: for we before 
laid to the charge both of 
Jews and Greeks, that 
they are all under sin: as 10 
it is written, 

There is none righteous, 

no, not one; 

There is none that un- 11 
derstandeth, 

There is none that seek- 
eth after God; 

They have all turned 12 
aside,they are together 
become unprofitable ; 

There is none that doeth 
good, no, not so much 
as one: 

Their throat is an open 13 
sepulchre ; 

With their tongues they 
have used deceit: 

The poison of asps is un- 
der their lips: 

Whose mouth is full of 14 
cursing and  bitter- 
ness: 

Their feet are swift to 15 
shed blood; 

Destruction and misery 16 
are in their ways; 

And the way of peace 17 
have they not known: 
There is no fear of God 18 

before their eyes. 

Now we know that what 19 
things soever the law 
saith, it speaketh to them 
that are under the law; 
that every mouth may be 
stopped, and all the world 
may be brought under the 
judgment of God: because 
by the works of the law 
shall no flesh be justified 
in his sight: for through 
the law cometh the knowl- 


is) 


0 





@ Psa. 14:58. 6 Psa. 5:9. ¢ Psa. 140:3. d@Psa.10:7. elsa. 59:7,8. f Psa. 36:1. g Psa. 107: 42. h Psa. 143 :2, 





who teach such doctrine are justly condemned._9. Are we better 
judged as well as Gentiles, are not we Jews, haying the oracles 


than theyP If Jews shall be 
of God, better than they, and hence 


likely to be justified? The Jew is still supposed to be speaking. To this Paul replies, In no wise, for 
he had already shown (chapters 1 and 2) that both Jews and Gentiles were sinners before God, 


10-18. Asitis written. 
his statement. None righteous. None absolutely free from sin. 
God. <A general statement of the sinfulness of Jew as well as Gentile. 
Not one absolutely good. According to the flesh all tended to evil. 
sepulchre. Thus far the statements have been general. 


Psalms 14: 1-3 and 53: 1-3. Paul quotes the Jewish Scriptures to confirm 
11. 


None that seeketh after 


12. None that doeth good. 
13. 
Now we come to particulars. 


Their throat is an open. 
If the grave is 


opened, corruption is manifest. So corruption comes from the throats of men when they speak. The 


poison of asps. The venom of falsehood, as deadly as the deadly serpent. 
swift to shed blood. To carry their owners ona mission of murder. 


15. Their feet are 
18. There is no fear of 


God, etc. David, in the psalms quoted, has affirmed in the strongest possible language, the universal 


sinfulness. The Jews accepted David’s words as in 
Gentiles ; hence all are included under sin, : 


pired. These words included Jews as well as 


19-26. Whatsoever the law saith, etc. The law of Moses was written for the Jews especially, 
and whatsoever it saith, it saith to those under it, to the Jews; just as the United States law is 


addressed to the people of the United States, 


That every mouth may be stopped. It has just 
been seen that even the mouth of the Jew is stopped, since “none are ri 


all the world, Jew as well as Gentile, are guilty before God. 20. The 
law shall no flesh be justified. Since all are found to be sinners 


ghteous, no, not one 3” hence 


refore, by the deeds of the 


law-breakers, none can be 


counted sinless; or, in other words, justified. Works of the law. In the Greek this reads, Works of 


ROMANS. 





Ch. II.] 25 
21 But now the righteousness of God without) edge of sin. But now 21 


the law is manifested, being witnessed by the law? 
and the prophets; 

22 Even the righteousness of God, which is by 
faith” of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them 
that believe; for there is no difference: 

23 For all? have sinned, and come short of the 
glory of God; 

24 Being justified freely by his grace, through 
the redemption that is in Christ Jesus: 

25 Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation 
through faith in his blood, to declare his righteous- 
ness for the remission of sins that are past, through 
the forbearance of God; 

26 To declare, J say, at this time his righteous- 
ness; that he’ might be just, and the justifier of 
him which believeth in Jesus. 

27 Where és boasting then? It is excluded. By 
what law? Nay; but by the law of faith. 

28 Therefore we conclude, that® a man is justified 
by faith without the deeds of the law. 





apart from the law a right- 
eousness of God hath been 
manifested,being witness- 
ed by the law and the 
prophets; even the right- 22: 
eousness of God through 
faith in Jesus Christ unto 
all them that believe; for 
there is no distinction; for 23 
all have sinned, and fall 
short of the glory of God; 
being justified freely by 24 
his grace through the re- 
demption that is in Christ 
Jesus: whom God set forth 25. 
tobe apropitiation,through 
faith, by his blood, toshew 
his righteousness, because 
of the passing over of the 
sins done aforetime, in the 
forbearance of God; for 
the shewing, J say, of his 
righteousness at this pres- 
ent season: that he might 
himself be just, and the 
justifier of him that hath 


faith in Jesus. Where 27 
then is the glorying? Itis 
excluded. By what man- 


ner of law? of works? 
Nay: but by a law of faith. 
We reckon therefore that 
aman is justified by faith 
apart from the works of 


28: 





a Acts 26:22. bRom.5:1. ¢Ezek7:20. d Acts 13:38, 39. 


e Rom. 3: 20, 22; 8:33; Gal. 2: 16. 





law. The statement is general, and of course would include the law of Moses. For by the law is the 
knowledge of sin. Again the article is not found in the Greek before law. Law, generally, when 
once known, reveals to us that we are transgressors. The sayage steals as a legitimate pursuit, but 
when once he hears the law, ‘Thou shalt not steal,” his sin is revealed. 21. The righteousness of 
God without the law (Greek, without law) is manifested. A righteousness that does not spring 
from perfect obedience to law (without law), is predicted both by the law of Moses and the prophets of 
Israel. 22. Eventhe righteousness .. . by faith of Jesus Christ. The Gospel, wherein. 
“we are justified by faith, and have peace with God through Jesus Christ.” All were guilty under the 
law, but the law and prophets pointed to forgiveness in Christ. Unto allthem that believe. There: 
is justification for every sincere believer, whether Jew or Gentile, for there is no difference between 
them, but not for the unbelieving impenitent. 23. For all have sinned. This has been already 
shown. And come short of the glory of God. Wickliffe says, ‘“‘Have need of the glory of God.” 
I believe this suggests the idea. Man was made originally in the image of God. He was then sinless. 
No sinner is in the Divine image. All have sinned, and to have the divine likeness restored, need to 
have their sins blotted out. Until this is done they come short of the glory of God. 24. Being justi- 
fied freely by his grace. All who believe upon Jesus Christ have their sins thus blotted out, being 
freely, as a divine gift, justified (that is, counted just, or sinless) by grace, through the redemption. 
thatisin Christ Jesus. Christ redeems the sinner who puts his trust in him, His blood pays the 
debt that the sinner owes to justice. Since Christ, the sinless One, has suffered for sin, God will accept 
his suffering for the debt of those who love and trust in him. 25. Whom God hath set forth to be 
a propitiation. Christ was publicly shown forth as a MERCY SEAT (a Propitiatory). As God of old 
met Israel at the mercy seat when the blood of the atonement was offered, so Christ on the Cross 1s our 
mercy seat. There we meet God who comes to us then in tender mercy, to declare his righteous- 
ness, to show it to us, in bestowing righteousness upon us in forgiving our past sins. This system of 
forgiveness, or righteousness through the cross of Christ, is the righteousness without law predicted by 
the Law and the Prophets. 26. That he might be just. Can God be just, and yet justify the sin- 
ner? Only, because justice was fully satisfied when the sinless Christ died, not for himself, but for his 
people. The believer in Christ Jesus, trusting in him, baptized into Christ, into his death, 1s in Christ, 
and Christ hath paid the penalty for all who are found in him (Rom. 8:1). 

27-31. Whereis boasting thenP If we are justified, not by our own righteous works, not by the 
law of Moses, but as a free gift of God through a law of faith, where is the ground for Jew or Gentile to 
boast? 28. Therefore. The conclusion of the line of argument is now reached, No man is justified 


‘26 ROMANS. 





29 Is he the God of the Jews only? zs he not also 
of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also: 

30 Seeing zt 7s one God which* shall justify the 
circumcision by faith, and uncircumcision through 


[Ch-LY. 


the law. Oris God the God 
of Jews only? is he not the 
God of Gentiles also? Yea, 
of Gentiles also: if so be 
that God is one, and he 
shall justify the cireum- 


29 


30 


cision by faith, and the 
uncircumcision through 
faith. Do we then make 
the law of none effect 
through faith? God for- 
Dee nay, we establish the 
aw. 


faith. 
31 Do we then make void the law through? faith? 
God forbid: yea, we establish the law. 


CHAPTER IV. 


Abraham Justified While Still a Gentile. 
‘SSUMMARY.—Abraham not Justified by Works, but by Faith. His Faith 

Reckoned for Righteousness, David Describes the same Blessedness. 

This Blessedness of Forgiveness for Gentile as well as Jew. Abra- 

ham Counted Righteous Before He Was Circumcised. The Promise 

of a Redeemer and of a Land Made to Abraham Before He Was Cir- 
cumcised. The Greatness of Abraham’s Faith. To All, Whether 

Jew or Gentile, Righteousness will be Imputed, Who have Abraham’s 

Faith. 

1 What shall we then say that Abraham, our 
‘father® as pertaining to the flesh, hath found? 

2 For if Abraham were justified by works, he 
hath whereof to glory, but not® before God. 

3 For what saith the scripture?? Abraham 
believed God, and it was counted unto him for 
righteousness. 

4 Now to him that worketh* is the reward not 


reckoned of grace, but of debt. 


31 





CHAPTER IV. 


What then shall we say 1 
that Abraham, our fore- 
father according to the 
flesh, hath found? For if 2 
Abraham was justified by 
works, he hath whereof to 
glory ; but not toward God. 
For what saith the scrip 3 
ture? And Abraham be- 
lieved God, and it was 
reckoned unto him for 
righteousness. Nowto him 4 
that worketh, the reward 
is not reckoned as of 








@ Gal. 3:8, 28. 6 Heb, 10:15, 16. cMatt.3:9, d Rom. 3:27; 1Cor.1:29. e Gen. 15:6. J Rom. 11:6. 





by works of law (no article im the Greek), but by faith, the faith that brings into loving obedience to 
Christ. 29. Is he the God of the Jews only? If God is the God of all nations, it ought to be 
regarded a reasonable thing that he would justify through faith Gentiles as wellas Jews. 30. As there 
is one God there is one plan of justification, The circumcision, the Jews, are justified by faith, a 
faith not in God, whom they already acknowledged, but a faith in Christ, God manifest in the flesh. In 
the same way the uncircumcision, the Gentile world, are justified through the faith. The Gospel 
is meant by the faith (the article is found in the Greek). The salvation of both is by faith in Christ cru- 
ecified. S81. Do we then make void the lawP Do we make it useless through the faith; i. e., 
through the Gospel? (the article 1s found before faith in the Greek). We establish the law. Rather, 
law (the article is not found in the Greek), Laws confirmed and rendered sacred, when its just de- 
mands are met by the suffering of the Son of God himself. 

The word justify, which Paul uses so frequently, should be clearly apprehended. To be justified is to 
be counted righteous, or guiltless, before God. He who has one sin recorded against him is not jus- 
tified. He whose sins are all blotted out is justified. The sinner who believes upon Jesus Christ, clings 
to the mercy seat by an obedient, trusting faith, and finds mercy through Christ’s redeeming blood, is 
Justified. As no man could keep the law perfectly, no man could be justified by the works of the law. 
As we obtain God’s mercy, the righteousness God bestows in Christ, by faith in Christ Jesus, so we are 
‘justified by a faith that leads us to Christ. 


1-5. WhatshallwesaythenP Paul, having shown that faith is the essential principle of justi- 
fication, now inquires concerning Abraham's faith and justification, Abraham, our father. “Our 
forefather according to the flesh,” in the Revision. The ancestor of the Jewish race. Hath found. 
'The thought is, Hath he found justification by works, or by faith? 2. Hath whereof to glory. 
If Abraham was justified by his own righteous works, he would have ground for glorying in himself 
‘3. What saith the ScriptureP The passage quoted is found in Genesis 15: 6, and is quoted three 
times in the New Testament—here, in Gal. 3: 6, and in James 2: 23. God promised an heir to Abraham, 


Ch. IV.] ROMANS. 


27 


sc ee 
grace, but as of debt. But 


5 But to him that worketh not, but believeth on 
him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith* is counted 
for righteousness. 

6 Even as David also describeth the blessedness 
of the man unto whom God imputeth righteous- 
ness without works, 

7 Saying,” Blessed are they whose iniquities are 
forgiven, and whose sins are covered. 

8 Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not 
impute sin. 

9 Cometh this blessedness then upon the circum- 
cision only, or upon the uncircumcision also? for 
we say that faith was reckoned to Abraham for 
righteousness. 

10 How was it then reckoned? when he was in 
circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in cir- 
cumcision, but in uncircumcision. 

11 And? he received the sign of circumcision, a 
seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had 
yet being uncircumcised ; that he might be the 
father® of all them that believe, though they be not 
circumcised; that righteousness might be imputed 
unto them also: 


a Hab.2:4. b Psa. 32:1,2. ¢Gen. 17:10, 11. 





to him that worketh not, 
but believeth on him that 


5 


justifieth the ungodly, his ‘ 


faith is reckoned for right- 
eousness. Even as David 
also pronounceth blessing 
upon the man, unto whom 
God reckoneth righteous- 
ness apart from works, 
saying, 

Blessed are they whose 
iniquities are forgiven, 

And whose sims are Cov- 
ered. 

Blessed is the man to 
whom the Lord will 
not reckon sin. 

Is this blessing then pro- 
nounced upon the circum- 
cision, or upon the uncir- 
cumcision also? for we say, 
To Abraham his faith was 


|reckoned for righteous- 


ness. How then was it 
reckoned? when he was in 
circumcision, or in uncir- 
cumcision? Not in circum- 
cision, but in uncircumcis- 
ion: and he received the 
sign of circumcision, a seal 
of the righteousness of the 
faith which he had while 
he was in uncircumcision: 
that he might be the fath- 
er of all them that believe, 
though they be in uncir- 
cumcision, that righteous- 
ness might be reckoned 


dULukel9 9. 





and, although it seemed contrary to nature, he believed the promise. 


11 


His faith in the promise was 


reckoned as righteousness. It was the ground of his acceptance with God. His faith was a trust- 


ing faith, which contained in it the element of obedience. 


No other faith justifies (see James 2: 23). 


4. Tohimthat worketh. Who earns wages asaservant. To that one a reward is not of grace, a 


free gift, but a debt. 
to him that worketh not. 


If one has rendered himself righteous by his works, this is true of him. 5. But 
Does not trust to his works for acceptance with God. But believeth, 


etc. Trusts in the mercy of him who justifies sinners who come to him penitent and believing. His 


faith, etc. 


6-8. David also. Paul has shown that Abraham’s justification was t 
as describing a justification which is not due to our own right- 
as that of Abraham, the father of their race, and David, the 
The quotation is from Psalm 32:1, 2. David himself 

%, Blessed are they. The class described as 
counted righteous because their sins are blotted out. 


through works. He next cites David 
eousness, but to God’s mercy. Such names 
great king, would be authoritative with the Jews. 

had been a great sinner, and had been forgiven. 
plessed are those whose sins are forgiven, 
8. Blessed is the man to 


forgiveness? Shall it be Jews 


shall enjoy this blessing of 


whom the Lord will not impute sin. 


It is made the ground of his acceptance withGod. By faith he clings to Christ, the Savior. 
hrough faith, rather than 


This is another form of the 
thought of verse 7. One whose sins have been forgiven will not find them imputed to him at judgment. 
We obtain this blessedness by a faith in Christ which leads us to accept the gospel. 

9-12. Cometh this plessedness upon the circumcision only. The next question is, Who 


only, or shall the uncircumcision, the 


Gentiles, enjoy it? Abraham’s faith was counted for righteousness ; will this be true of all, both Jews 
and Gentiles? 10. How was it then reckoned? To settle the question, whether this blessedness 


applies to Gentiles as well as Jews, 


it was said of him, “His faith was counted for righteousness.” 


the inquiry is made whether Abraham was a Jew or Gentile when 
He was not circumcised for at least 


fourteen years after this statement was made of him. Compare Gen. 15:6 with Gen. 17:25. He was 


then justified, without circumcision, while yet a Gentile. 


cision. 


proof. The covenant is made before the seal is annexed. Circumcision 


The outward mark in the flesh. A seal. A seal is often appen 


11. He received the sign of circum- 
ded to a legal document as a 
was not the covenant, but an 


outward mark of a covenant that before existed. The righteousness, of which it was a seal, had been 


acknowledged many years before. 


That he might be the father of allthem that believe. Both 


28 ROMANS. 

12 And the father of circumcision to them who 
are not of the circumcision only, but who also walk 
in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham, 
which he had being yet uncircumcised. 

13 For the promise, that* he should be the heir 
of the world, was not to Abraham, or to his seed, 
through the law, but through the righteousness of 
faith. 

14 For if® they which are of the law de heirs, 
faith is made void, and the promise made of none 
effect. 

15 Because the law* worketh wrath; for where 
no law is, there 7s no transgression. 

16 Therefore z¢ ¢s of faith, that it might be by 
grace; to the end the promise might be sure to all 
the seed: not to that only which is of the law, but 
to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who 
is the father of us all, 

17 (As it is written, I have made thee a father 
of many nations,) before him whom he believed, 


[Ch. Iv. 
Sos a ee ee 


unto them; and the father 12 


of circumcision to them 
who not only are of the 
circumcision, but who also 
walk in the steps of that 
faith of our father Abra- 
ham which he had in 
uncircumc¢cision. For not 
through the law was the 
promise to Abraham or to 
his seed, that he should be 
heir of the world, but 
through the righteousness 
of faith, For if they which 
are of the law be heirs, 
faith is made void, and the 
promise is made of none 
effect: for the law worketh 
wrath ; but where there is 
no law, neither is there 
transgression. For this 
cause it is of faith, that 7 
may be according to grace; 
to the end that the prom- 
ise may be sure to all the 
seed; not to that only 
which is of the law, but to 
that also which is of the 
faith of Abraham, who is 
the father of us all (as it 
is written, A father of 
many nations have I made 
thee) before him whom he 
believed, even God, who 


14 


15 


16 


quickeneth the dead, and 
calleth the things that are 
not, as though they were. 


even God, who quickeneth the dead, -and calleth 
those® things which be not as though they were: 


bEph. 2:1, 5. 








a@ Gen. 17:4. c1 Cor. 1:28; 1 Pet. 2:10. 





Jews and Gentiles, circumcised and uncircumcised. The righteous, uncircumcised Abraham belonged 
to the latter class, 12. The father of circumcision. Of the circumcision described in chap, 2:29, 
Abraham is the ‘‘great father,” the father, not of the circumcision only, but of all who have such 
faith as he had before he was circumcised. When Abraham was “counted righteous through faith,’* 
there was no difference between Jew and Gentile. Christianity, by its revelation of “righteousness 
through faith,” leads back to the same condition. 

18-15. For the promise. The reference is to the substance of various promises to Abraham for 
himself and his seed. See Gen. 12:7; 13:14; 15:18. Was not... through the law. Was not 
through law, the article being wanting in the Greek.. No body of law had been given. The Mosaic law 
was given many years afterward. The law of circumcision had not been enacted. It was through the 
righteousness of faith, not of law, or works of law, that Abraham secured the promises. 14, For 
if they which are of the law (of law, the article wanting) are heirs. If keeping law makes men 
heirs, then faith is void. It sets aside God’s plan of “counting faith as righteousness,” and destroys 
the promise which depends on faith. 15. Because the law worketh wrath. The law threatens 
punishment to all who break its enactments, and since none keep it perfectly, it works punishment fo 
all. Whereas, if no law had been given, there could be no transgression of its demands, : 

16-22. Therefore it is of faith. The inheritance promised to Abraham and his seed. It comes 
through faith, and hence is a free gift (of grace). That it might be sure. It could not be sure if it 
had to be secured by the righteousness that is of law, since none can keep the law perfectly. But all 
can secure it through faith. To all the seed. To all children of Abraham, whether those of the 
law, the Jews, or those of the faith of Abraham, who become his children by exercising his faith, 
whether Jew or Gentile. See Gal. 3:7. 17. As it is written. Gen. 17:5. A father of many 
nations. The name of the patriarch was changed from Abram (a father) to Abraham (father of a 
multitude). Before him whom he believed. This is to be joined with verse 16, “who 1s the father 
ofusall ... before . . . God.” Who quickeneth the dead. Abraham had to believe that 
the Divine power, which can give life to the dead, would give new life to his aged body and that of 
Sarah. 18. Who against hope. Though an old man, and his wife an aged woman, far beyond the 
time of child-bearing, he yet believed the promise that he would have a numerous offspring, 
19. Being not weak in faith. Strong in faith, though weak in body. His own body now dead. 
Its vital powers exhausted. But God could quicken the dead, and he had the promise of God. 20. He 


Ch. V.] ROMANS. 


29 


ae ee ee a 


18 Who against hope believed in hope that he 
might become the father of many nations, accord- 
ing to that which was spoken,? So shall thy seed be. 

19 And being not weak in faith, he considered 
not his own body now dead, when he was about an 
hundred years old, neither yet the deadness” of 
Sarah’s womb: 

20 He staggered not at the promise of God 
through unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving 
glory to God; 

91 And being fully persuaded, that what he had 
promised he was able* also to perform. 

92 And therefore it was imputed to him for 
righteousness. ; 

23 Now,’ it was not written for his sake alone, 
that it was imputed to him; 

24 But for us® also, to whom it shall be imputed, 
if we believe on him that raised up Jesus our 
Lord from the dead; 

25 Who was delivered? for our offences, and was 
raised" again for our justification. 


CHAPTER V. 


Reconciliation Through Christ. 
SUMMARY.—Justification by Faith. Peace, Hope and Joy. Christ Died 
for the Ungodly. His Surpassing Love. Death Through Adam’s 
Sin. Life Through Christ’s Righteousness. Law and Grace. 
-1 Therefore, being justified by faith, we have 
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: 





b Heb. 11:11. c¢ Gen. 18: 14; Luke 1:37, 45; Heb. 11:19. 


a Gen. 15:5. 
, f Mark 16:16. 


2:39. 





d Rom. 15:4; 1Cor. 10:11. 
gIsa. 53:5,6; 2 Cor. 5:21; Heb. 9:28; Pet. 2:24; Rev. 1:5. 


Who in hope believed 18 
against hope, to the end 
that he might become a 
father of many nations, 
according to that which 
had been spoken, So shall 
thy seed be. And without 19 
being weakened in faith 
he considered his own 
body now as good as dead 
(he being about a hundred 
years old), and the dead- 
ness of Sarah’s womb: yea, 20 
score unto the promise 
of God, he wavered not 
through unbelief, but wax- 
ed strong through faith, 
giving glory to God, and 21 
being fully assured that 
what he had promised, he 
was able also to perform. 
Wherefore also it was 22 


|yeckoned unto him for 


righteousness. Now it was 23 
not written for his sake 
alone, that it was reckoned 
unto him; but for our sake 24 
also, unto whom it shall be 
reckoned, who believe on 
him that raised Jesus our 
Lord from the dead, who 25 
was delivered up for our 
trespasses, and was raised 
for our justification. 


CHAPTER V. 


Being therefore justified 1 
by faith, let us have peace 
with God through our 





e Acts 
h1 Cor. 15:175 


1 Pet. 1:21. dIsa. 82:17; Eph. 2: 14; Col. 1: 20. 


staggered not. He accepted the promise with unfaltering faith. 21. Being fully persuaded. 
He was certain that God not only could, but would do what he promised. 22. Therefore it was 


imputed, etc. 
and acts upon God’s promises. 
23-25. Now it was not written for his sake alone. 


example of God’s plan of justification, 24. For us also. If we believe our faith shall save us, 
The same God who quickened Abraham’s body, as good as dead, raised 
“He died for us;” “was made sin for 


He was to be “‘cut off, but not for himself.” Raised again for our justification. The resur- 


him that raised up Jesus. 
up our Lord. 25. Who was delivered for our offences. 


a8," 


The faith that secures God’s righteousness is a faith that does not falter, but accepts 


But in order that we might have an 


On 


rection of Christ was his own justification against the condemnation of the world. In his justification, 


all for whom he died, who have laid hold on him by faith and are found i 
in that their sins are forgiven. Without the resurrection, the sepulcher 0 


all our hopes. This is beautifully symbolized in baptism. 


n him, are justified with him, 
f Carist would be the grave of 
«We are buried py baptism into death,” his 


death, “planted in the likeness of his death,” figuratively die with him. We are also ‘planted in the 


likeness of his resurrection.” 
1-5. Therefore being justified by faith. 


We rise with him, ‘new creatures,” justified by his resurrection. 
Paul has just shown that men are counted righteous 


before God, not through obedience to the law, but through faith in Christ. Not law, but faith justifies. 
The faith that justifies is (1) a faith lin Christ; (2) a faith of the heart (Rom. 10: 9) which brings the 


whole life into obedience (Rom.1:5). Peace with God. 
When our rebellion ceases and we are forgiven we are at peace. This 


While sinners, we are rebels against God. 
blessed peace with God, which 


30 ROMANS. 


(Ch. V.. 





2 By whom? also we have access by faith into 
this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice” in hope of 
the glory of God. 

3 And not only so, but we glory® in tribulations 
also: knowing that tribulation worketh patience; 

i‘ 4 And patience, experience; and experience, 
ope: 

5 And hope? maketh not ashamed; because the 
love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the 


Lord Jesus Christ ;through 2 
whom also we have had 
our access by faith into 
this grace wherein we 
stand; and let us rejoice 
in hope of the glory of 
God. And not only so, but 3 
let us also rejoice in our 
tribulations: knowing chat 
tribulation worketh pa- 
tience; and peer pro- 4 
bation; an probation, 
hope: and hope putteth 5. 
not to shame; because the 
love of God hath been 


shed abroad in our hearts 
through the Holy Ghost 
which was given unto us. 
For while we were yet 6. 
weak, in due season Christ 
died forthe ungodly. For 7 
scarcely for a Tighieons 
man will one die: for per- 
adventure for the good 
man some one would even 
dare to die. But God com- 8 
mendeth his own love to- 
ward us, in that, while we 
were yet sinners, Christ 
died for us. Much more 9 
then, being now justified 
by his blood, shall we be 
saved from the wrath of 
God through him. For if, 10 
while we were enemies, 
we were reconciled to God 


Holy Ghost,® which is given unto us. 

6 For when we were yet without strength, in duet 
time Christ died forthe ungodly. 

7 For scarcely for a righteous man will one die; 
yet peradventure for a good man some would even 
dare to die. 

8 But God commendeth his love toward us, in 
that, while* we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. 

9 Much more then, being now justified by his 
blood", we shall be saved from! wrath through him. 

10 For if, when we were enemies, we were recon- 








aJno. 14:6. 6 Heb.3:6. ¢ Matt. 5:11,12. d Phil. 1:20. eHph. 1:13,14. Gal. 4:4. 


8:18; 1Jno. 3:16. AHeb.9:14, 22. ¢1Thes. 1: 10. 


g Jno. 15: 18; 1 Pet. 





brings peace to the soul, is through Jesus Christ. 2. By whom also we have access by faith 
into this grace. Two things are essential before one can enter into the state of peace (“grace’’): 
(1) Christ, our Mediator; (2) a living faith in him. Having entered into this covenant relation, we can 
rejoice in hope of enjoying the glory of Godin heaven. 3. We glory in tribulations also. The 
peace of Christ is so sweet, and the hope of the saint so glorious, that the Christian can even exult in 
present sufferings, since he has assurance that even these minister to his eternal joy. Various steps of 
progress are named here in order. Affliction works out patience, and patience secures approval. 
Such is probably the meaning of the word rendered in the Common Version ‘“ experience.” So 
Macknight and Schaff render it. Patient endurance of affliction secures the divine approval. 
4. Experience, hope. The sense of the divine approval fills the soul with hope. 5. And hope 
maketh not ashamed. A hope disappointed would fill with shame, but that we will not be put to 
shame is shown by the fact that the love of God is shed abroad, diffused in our hearts, by means 
of his Spirit givenus. This may mean that our hearts are filled with the love of God; or it may mean 
that our hearts are conscious of the love of God. What follows seems to point to the second meaning. 
6-11. For when we were without strength. Were powerless to save ourselyes. In due 
time. In God’s own chosen time. Christ died for the ungodly. For sinners. He came to save, 
not the righteous, but to ‘‘saye his people from their sins.” 7. Scarcely for a righteous man will 
one die. The great love of Jesus is now set forth. If “searcely for a righteous man will one die,” 
who would die for the ungodly? Yet peradventure. One might die fora good man. The world has 
had instances of those who would die for their friends. The “righteous” man is one who is regarded 
just; the good man is beneyolent. 8. But God commendeth his love. His love is not like human 
love. Christ died, not for friends, but for enemies. It was while we were yet sinners, that he 
died for us. 9. Much more then. The argument is: If while we were yet sinners God loved us so 
well that Christ died for us, much more now shall we, having been justified, freed from sin, by his 
blood, be saved from the displeasure of God. By his blood. By dying for us. The keynote is “Christ 
died for us.” 10. Forif .. . we were reconciled. As sinners, we are the enemies of God, 
rebels, under his divine displeasure. Through the gospel of the Crucified Redeemer, we obtain peace 
with God. We turn to him, and are reconciled to him, obtaining forgiveness through faith. God is not 
reconciled to us, but we to him. His love ever shines, and is shown in his gospel. He is ever ready to 
pardon, and when we cease our rebellion, and come to him, through Christ, for mercy, he receives us.. 


Ch. V.] ROMANS. 


ciled to God by the death of his Son; much* more, 
being reconciled, we shall be saved by” his life. 

11 And not only so, but we also joy® in God, 
through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have 
now received the atonement. , 

12 Wherefore, as? by one man sin entered into 
the world, and death by sin; and so death passed 
upon all men, for that all have sinned: 

“13 (For until the law sin was in the world: but 
sin is not® imputed when there is no law. 

14 Nevertheless death reignedt from Adam _ to 
Moses, even over them that had not sinned after 
the similitude of Adam’s transgression, who is the® 
figure of him that was to come. 

15 But not as the offence, so also és the free gift. 
For if through the offence of one many be dead ; 
much more the grace" of God, and the gift by 





a Rom. 8:32. bJno.14:19. c Hab. 3:18. d Gen. 3: 6, 19. 


e Rom. 4: 15; 
15: 22, 45. 


h Eph. 2: 8. 





31 


hy ee." 


through the death of his 
Son, much more, being 
reconciled, shall we be 
saved by his life; and not 
only so, but we also re- 
joice in God through our 
Lord Jesus Christ, through 
whom we have now re- 
ceived the reconciliation. 

Therefore, as through 
one man sin entered into 
the world, and death 
through sin; and so death 
passed unto all men, for 
that all sinned:—for until 
the law sin was in the 
world: but sin is not im- 
puted when there is no 
law. Nevertheless death 
reigned from Adam until 
Moses, even over them 
that had not sinned after 
the likeness of Adam’s 
transgression, who 1s a 
figure of him that was to 
come. But not as the tres- 
pass, so also is the free 
gift. For if by the trespass 
of the one the many died, 
much more did the grace 
of God, and the gift by the 





1Jno. 3:4. fHeb 9: 27. 





Shall be saved by his life. He 
incomplete. 
shall rise with him (1 Cor. 15: 22). 


g1Cor. 


13 


14 


15. 


who gave his blood for our reconciliation, will not leave his work 
He died, has risen and ascended on high, and he will not leave us in the grave, but we 
11. We also joy in God. The ground of rejoicing is the recon- 


ciliation with God which has been effected through Jesus Christ. Atonement, in Common Version, 
is rendered, as it should be, in the Revision, “reconciliation.” The same Greek word is found in verses 


10 and il. 
of the divine plan, 
made to the 
(4) Reconciliation. Our acceptance of 
(5) Forgiveness of sin, or justification. 
(7) Our glorification in heayen. 
12-14. Wherefore. 


Christ. 
Our sins are blotted out. 


The thought is the same as that of verse 1, when “‘peace with God” is spoken of. The steps 
as shown in these verses, are (1) The death of Christ for us. (2) The satisfaction thus. 
demands of justice. (3) The propitiation, or God’s acceptance of Christ’s sacrifice for us. 
““We love God because he first loved us’’ (1 John 4: 19). 
(6) Our redemption from the grave. 


The section which now follows is one of the most difficult in the Bible to- 


explain clearly in the compass of a few words. It opens up one of the profoundest questions of 


theology. The “wherefore” 


refers to the reconciliation (atonement) of Christ spoken of in verse 11. 


Christ’s work of atonement and the effect of Adam’s sin are contrasted. As by one man’s sin. By 


the sin of Adam. 
sin. Death was led in by sin. 
stood in the midst of the garden.” 
sin. For that all have sinned. 


Thus sin entered into the world. The world of mankind is meant. 
Had there been no sin, there had been no death. “The tree of life 
So death passed upon all men. As the result of one man’s 
The personal sins of responsible persons are not now spoken of, 


Death by 


put all the race sinned in Adam, its representative, infants, idiots, andall. Hence all die. 18. For 


until the law. Paul now shows 
imputed. Yet sin must have been in the 


that all must have sinned in Adam, Until law is given sin is not 
world from the time of Adam until the law of Moses, because 


death, which is due to sin, reigned. The prevalence of death proved the existence of sin. 14. Death 


reigned from Adam to Moses. 
although law had not come; (2) and those over 
(3) Unconscious infants could not have sinned against natural law. 
had sinned in Adam. 


figure of him that was to come. 


None could escape his universal dominion. 


He reigned, (1) 
whom he reigned had not repeated Adam’s sin. 
Hence the inference is that all 
Hence, again, Adam is a representative man, a representative of all the race, a 
A type of Christ, likewise a representative of all the race. 


Through the one all have sinned; through the other all are made righteous, as far as the sin in Adam is 


involved. 


15-19. But not as the offence, so also is the free gift. While Adam is a type of Christ, there: 


isagreat difference. One kills, the other makes alive. 


“Tf through the sin of the one the many (the 


world of mankind) died,” through the gracious gift of God, through one man, Jesus Christ, life has: 


32 ROMANS. 


[Ch. V. 





grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, hath 
abounded unto many*. 

16 And not as zt was by one that sinned, so és the 
gift: for the judgment was by one to condemna- 
tion; but the free gift 7s of many” offences unto 
justification, 

17 For if by one man’s offence death reigned by 
one; much more they which receive abundance® of 
grace, and of the gift? of righteousness, shall reign 
in life by one, Jesus Christ. ) 

18 Therefore, as by the offence of one judgment 
came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the 
righteousness of one the free gift came upon all® men 
unto justification of life. 

19 For as by one man’s disobedience many were 
made sinners; so by the obedience of one shall 
many be made righteous. 

20 Moreover,’ the law entered, that the offence 
might abound: but where sin abounded, grace did 
much more’ abound: 

21 That as sin hath reigned unto death, even so 
might grace® reign through righteousness unto eter- 
nal life by Jesus Christ our Lord. 


asa. 63:11; Matt. 20:28; 26:28; 1Jno.2:2. 
J Rom. 7:8; Jno.15:22; Gal. 3:19. 





6Isa.1:18. c¢Jno. 10:10. 





grace of the one man, Je- 
sus Christ, abound unto 
the many, And not as 
through one that sinned, 
so is the gift: for the judg- 
ment came of one unto 
condemnation, but the free 
gift came of many tres- 
passes unto justification, 
For if, by the trespass of 
the one, death reigned 
through the one; much 
more shall they that re- 
ceive the abundance of 
grace and of the gift of 
righteousness reign in life 
through the one, even Je- 
sus Christ. So then as 
through one trespass the 
judgment came unto all 
men to condemnation; 
even so through one act of 
righteousness the free gift 
came unto all men to justi- 
fication of life. For as 
through the one man’s dis- 
obedience the many were 
made sinners; even 
through the obedience of 
the one shall the many be 
made righteous. And the 
law came in beside, 
that the trespass might 
abound; but where sin 
abounded, grace did 
abound more exceedingly: 
that, as sin reigned in 
death, even so might grace 





d@ Rom. 6; 23. eJno. 12:32. 


g Jno. 10:10; 1 Tim.1:14. AJohn 1:17. 





16 


sO- 


been given to the many. All will be raised at the last day. 16. And not as through one that 


sinned, so is the gift. A second difference between Adam and Christ is pointed out. 


of Adam caused condemnation to be sent on Adam and all his race, 


One offence 
All have been under death. But 


the free gift, through Jesus Christ, not only pardons the connection of our race with Adam’s sin, but 


provides a way for the pardon of many offences, 
sin of Adam destroyed all, but the atonement of Jesus Christ 
sins. 17. Forif by one man’s offence. The superabounding 
As aresult of Adam’s one offence, death reigned over men, 


all our offences, so as to secure justification. 


One 
provides conditions for forgiveness of all 
grace of Christ is still further shown. 
So, on the other hand, those who accept 


‘Christ’s grace, and enjoy his righteousness, shall, through him, reign in life. The life spoken of is the 


resurrection from the grave, and the privilege, 
the gospel. 18. Therefore as by the offence of one. 
sentence of death on all our race. 
free gift came upon all to the justification of life. This 
brought for all men all that had been lost by Adam’s sin, 


resurrected from the dead. 
(3) Therefore all infants and irresponsible persons are now sinless, 
are freed from Adam’s sin, and have no personal sins of their own; 


not the guarantee, of eternal lif 


e that is offered through 
By Adam’s offence, which brought the 
Even so by the righteousness of one. Jesus Christ. The 
passage shows that Christ’s death 
Adam’s sin brought (1) Natural death. 
(2) Spiritual death to all who continued in sin. Christ’s death brings (1) Life for all, All shall be 
(2) Therefore it brings the full pardon of the sin of our race in Adam. 
(4) It brings eternal life to all who 


and (5) it brings the opportunity of 


forgiveness of personal sins through the gospel, and hence, of securing eternal life. 19. For as by 


one man’s disobedience. By Adam’s disobedience, 
by the obedience of one, 
penalty for Adam’s sin is blotted out for the whole race. 
be just tified. Hence all infants are sinless. 
for those who haye personally sinned. 

20, 21. Moreover law entered. Not the law, but law. 


all disobeyed and were counted Sinners. So 
all are counted obedient, and hence, righteous. That is, all inherited 
All who have not personal sins are held to 


The basis of infant baptism is removed. Baptism is 


The reference is not only to the law of 


Moses, but to all divine law, the law written on the hearts of the Gentiles. The effect of its entrance 


was that offences abounded. Law was continually broken. 
but to the personal sins of each man, Grace did much 


The reference here is not to Adam’s sin, 
more abound. The grace of the gospel 


offers a free pardon to all who have broken law if they will come to God through Christ. 21. That 


Ch. Vi] ROMANS. 


CHAPTER VI. 
Dying and Living with Christ. 
SUMMARY.—Death by Sin. Burial with Christ. Rising to a New Life. 

Those Dead not under the Dominion of Sin. Hence, Consecrated 

to a New Life. Once the Servants of Sin, but after Baptism the Ser- 

vants of Jesus Christ. The Wages of Sin. The Gift of God. 

1 What shall we say then? Shall? we continue in 
sin, that grace may abound? 

2 God forbid. How shall we, that are dead” to 
sin, live any longer therein? 

3 Know ye not, that so many of us as were bap- 
tized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into® his 
death? 

' 4 Therefore we are buried’ with him by baptism 
into death: that like® as Christ was raised up from 
the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we 





33 


reign through righteous- 
ness unto eternal life 
through Jesus Christ our 
Lord. 


CHAPTER VI. 


What shall we say then? 1 


Shall we continue in sin 
that grace may abound? 


God forbid. We whodied 2 


to sin, how shall we any 


longer live therein? Orare 3 


ye ignorant that all we 
who were baptized into 
Christ Jesus were baptiz- 
ed into his death? 
were buried therefore with 
him through baptism into 
death: that hke as Christ 
was raised from the dead 
through the glory of the 
Father, so we also might 


We 4 


\ 


walk in newness of life. 
For if we have become 5 
united with him by the - 
likeness of his death, we 
shall be also by the likeness 


also should walk in newness of life. 

5 For if we have been planted together in the 
likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness 
of his resurrection: 





aRom.3:8. 8Col.3:3; 1 Pet. 2:24. ¢1Cor. 15:29. dCol.2:12; 1Pet.3:21. e Rom. 8:11; 2Cor. 18:4. 





as sin hath reigned. Hence, with this gracious gospel of mercy for every penitent believer, even as 
sin once reigned and caused universal death, so might grace reign. All might accept the gospel, 
and enjoy the divine favor, and thus secure eternal life through Jesus Christ. The scope of God’s plan 
of salvation is wide enough for all. If there are those who are unsaved, it is because they will not 
come to Christ that they might have life. 

1, 2. Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? In the last chapter the apostle has 
shown that the existence of sin called out the grace of God in forgiveness. Now the objection is 
raised; If that is so, why not continue in sin so that God’s grace would the more abound? 2. God 
forbid. The answer is emphatic. The thought is abhorrent, and the thing impossible from the very 
nature of the Christian life. The Christian life begins with a death to sin. How shall we, that are 
dead to sin, live any longer thereinP The Revision says, Who died to sin. This is correct. The 
Greek verb is in the past tense. A fact is referred to that oceurred in the past. Death is a separation. 
When we seyered our relation with sin, we died to it. If we have cut loose from it, how can we con- 
tinue in it? 

3-5. So many of us as were baptized into Christ, etc. The fact that every follower of Christ 
had died to sin is shown by his baptism, All its symbolism points to death. To be baptized into Christ 
means to enter into a vital union with him, so as to be found in him. “For as many of you as have been 
baptized into Christ have put on Christ’? (Gal. 3: 27). But this baptism into Christ implies death, for it 
is a baptism into the death of Christ. That the subjects of baptism are partakers of his death is shown 
by the form of baptism. It is a burial. 4. We were buried (Revision) through baptism into 
death. The argument is that a burial implies death. Baptism is a burial, therefore its subject has 
died. As Christ died through sin, we die to sin; as the Crucified Christ was buried, we who have died 
to sin through the gospel are buried with him. As death and burial separate from the natural life, so 
death to sin and burial into Christ should completely sever our relation to sin. That like as Christ 
was raised up from the dead. The glorious power of the Father lifted up Christ from the tomb. 
So we, too, rise from the watery burial, with death and burial between us and the old life of sin, in 
order to walk in newness of life. “This passage cannot be understood unless it is borne in mind 
that the primitive baptism was by immersion.’’— Conybeare and Howson. “That the custom of baptism 
by immersion is alluded to is generally admitted, but the emersion is as significant as the immersion.”’— 
Dr. Philip Schaff. “It seems to us very probable that the apostle alludes to the external form of the 
baptismal rite in the primitive church.”—Godet. ‘The apostle alludes to the ancient manner of bap- 
tizing by immersion.”—John Wesley. 5. For if we have been planted in the likeness of his 
death. As the seed, planted, buried out of sight, rises again in a new life, so we are planted in the 


34 ROMANS. 


6 Knowing this, that our old man is crucified 





with him, that the body* of sin might be destroyed, . 


that henceforth we should not serve sin. 

7 For” he that is dead is freed from sin. 

8 Now, if we be dead with Christ, we believe that 
we shall also live with him: 

9 Knowing that Christ,° being raised from the 
dead, dieth no more; death hath no more dominion 
over him. 

10 For in that he died, he died? unto sin once; 
but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God. 

11 Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead® 
indeed unto sin, but alivet unto God through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. 

12 Let® not sin therefore reign in your mortal 


cGhy Aol. 


of his resurrection; know- 6 


ing this, that our old man 
was crucified with him,that 
the body of sin might be 
done away, that so we 
should no longer be in 
bondage to sin;for hethat 7 
hath died is justified from 
sin, 
Christ, we believe that we 
shall also live with him; 
knowing that Christ being 9 
raised from thedead dieth © 
no more; death no more 
hath dominion over him. 
For the death that he died, 
he died unto sin once: but 
the life that he liveth, he 
liveth unto God. Even so 
reckon ye also yourselves 
to be dead unto sin, but 
alive “unto God in Christ 
Jesus. 

Let not sin therefore 
reign in your mortal body, 


10 


1L 


12: 


But if we died with 8 | 


that ye should obey the 
lusts thereof: neither pre- 
sent your members unto 
sin as instruments of un- 
righteousness ; but present 
yourselves unto God, as 
alive from the dead, and 
your members as instru- 
ments of righteousness 
unto God. For sin shall 
not have dominion over 
you: for ye are not under 
law, but under grace. 


9:28. e¢ Rom. 6:2. Gal. 2: 19. 
@Rom. 12:1. j Micah 7: 19. 


body, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof: 

13 Neither yield ye your members? as instruments 
of unrighteousness unto sin: but yield! yourselves 
unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, and 
your members as instruments of righteousness unto 
God. 

14 For sin shall not have! dominion over you: for 
ye are not under the law, but under grace. 


1% 


14 











aGal. 5:18. 61Pet.4:1. ¢Rev.1:18. d Heb. 


ACol. 3: 5. 


g Psa. 19: 13; 119: 133. 





likeness of Christ’s death when we are buried in baptism, and rise in the likeness of his resurrection,. 
when we are lifted out of the water, and are found henceforth to live a new life. Compare Col. 2: 12: 
“Buried by baptism, wherein ye are also risen with him.” 

6-14. Knowing this, that our old man was crucified with him. The cross of Christ slew our 
old sinful nature. The gospel was the power that moved us to trample it down, separate from it, and. 
cling to Christ. When this old nature was crucified, we died to sin. Compare Eph. 4; 22; Col. 3: 9. 
That the body of sin. Sin is conceived of as a living power, with an organism, reigning over us. 
through our bodily members. Our death to sin destroys this dominion. 7. For he that is dead is. 
freed from sin. When a slave died he was freed from his master’s service; so when one has died to. 
sin, he is no longer the slave of sin, and is freed from his service. His power over the bodily members 
should be destroyed. 8. Now if we be dead with Christ, etc. This fact has been established, 
We have been baptized into his death, and are partakers of it. Then, having died with him, we who: 
have risen with him from the symbolical burial to a new life, shall also live with him. 9. This is. 
certain because, Christ being raised from the dead, dieth no more. He now lives eternally, and. 
we who are in him, having shared his death, must share his eternal life. 10. He died unto sin. 
once. Once for all. It laid hands on him and slew him, but henceforth it has nought to do with him. 
He liveth unto God. Here on earth his godly life was troubled by the contradiction of sinners, but. 
now he lives in holy union with God. 11. Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead, etc. 
So the Christian, buried and risen with Christ, must be like Christ in life, dead to sin, but living a godly 
life through Christ. 12. Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body. This must not be,, 
and cannot be, if we are really dead to sin, The body may be mortal, and subject to death, but it must. 
not be subject to sin. 18. Neither yield ye your members. The organs and appetites of the 
body must not be turned over to sin to use as instruments of unrighteousness. These have all been 
consecrated to God, by our rising to a new life, and we, as alive with the divine life, living to God, 
should use them all as instruments of righteousness; %.€.,aS means of glorifying him and doing 
his will. 14. For sin shall not have dominion over you. Hence, has no right to the use of our’ 
bodily members. We are dead tosin. Are not under the law, but under grace. Paul has shown 
that law revealed sin. Where law exists, and the sinful nature remains, sin will continually manifest. 
itself. But we are under grace. Our sins were forgiven on the ground that we have died to sin, beem 


Ch. VI.] ROMANS. 





35 





15 What then? shall we sin, because we are not 
under the law, but under grace? God forbid. 

16 Know ye not, that to whom ye? yield yourselves 
servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye 
obey; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience 

‘unto righteousness? 

17 But God be thanked, that ye were the servants 
of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart that form” 
of doctrine which was delivered you. 

18 Being then made free® from sin, ye became 
the servants of righteousness. 

19 I speak after the manner of men, because of 
the infirmity of your flesh: for as ye have yielded 
your members servants to uncleanness, and to iniq- 
uity unto iniquity; even so now yield your members 
servants to righteousness unto holiness. 

20 For when ye were the servants? of sin, ye were 
free from righteousness. 

21 What fruit® had ye then in those things 
whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end?’ of those 
things zs death. 

22 But now, being made free from sin, and 


| 
1 What then, shall we sin, 15 


because we are not under 
law, but under grace? God 
forbid. Know ye not, that 16 
to whom ye present your- 
selves as servants unto 
obedience, his servants ye 
are whom ye obey ; wheth- 
er of sin unto death, or of 
obedience unto righteous- 
ness? But thanks be to 
God, that, whereas ye were 
servants of sin, ye became 
obedient from the heart to 
that form of teaching 
whereunto ye were deliv- 
ered; and being made free 18 
from sin, ye became ser- 
vants of righteousness. I 19 
speak after the manner of 
men because of theinfirm- 

ity of your flesh: for as ye 
presented your members 

as servants to uncleanness 
and to initjuity unto iniq- 
uity, even so now present 
your members as servants 

to righteousness unto 
sanctification. For when 20 
ye were servants of sin, ye 
were free in regard of 
righteousness. What fruit 21° 
then had ye at that time in 
the things whereof ye are 
now ashamed? for the end 

of those things is death. 


17 











a Jonah 8:34; 2Pet.2:19. 62Tim.1:13. cJno. 8:32. d@Rom6:16. eRom.7:5. f Rom. 1:32; Jas. 1: 15. 





buried and risen with Christ. Hence, unless we trample all this under foot, there is no room for the 
dominion of sin, 

15-28. Shall we sin, because we are not under law, but under graceP This is the old 
question referred to in verse 1, The caviller in Paul’s time, as well as in our time, objected that grace, 
forgiveness of sin, was an encouragement to sin. Paul shows, with much emphasis, that this is a false 
charge, since grace, forgiveness, implied that the sinner had died to sin. It is those who have been 
freed from the dominion of sin who are delivered from its penalties. 16. Know ye not? Thisis 
utterly impossible, as they will see if they will remember one principle. His servants ye are 
whom ye obey. If we obey sin, we are sin’s servants, under his reign, and will receive, not grace, 
but sin’s wages, which is death; or, on the other hand, if we obey Christ, we are his servants, and enjoy 
his righteousness. None enjoy this blessedness but those who turn from sin and obey Christ. 17. But 
God be thanked. Not that they had been sinners, but that, having been sinners, they had become 
obedient to Christ. Obeyed from the heart. No outward obedience is of the slightest value unless 
the heart turns to God. The form of doctrine. Macknight paraphrases this: “I thank God, that 
although you were formerly the slaves of sin, ye have willingly obeyed the mould of doctrine into 
which ye were cast at baptism.” Others, Chrysostom for example, says it refers ‘to Christian teaching 
as a type of holy living.” The nature of Paul’s argument, and the fact that it is founded on the signifi- 
cance of baptism, makes Macknight’s explanatzon probable. 18. Being made free from sin. 
When we.died to sin, and were buried into Christ (verse 3). Hence, being no longer sin’s servants, we 
become servants of righteousness. 19. I speak after the manner of men. Use figures taken 
from human relations, those of master and slave. At that time slavery existed everywhere. Because 
of the infirmity of your flesh. Because of infirmity of understanding due tothe flesh. For as. 
As they had been servants of sin in its various forms, uncleanness, iniquity unto iniquity (work- 
ing out iniquity), so now being freed from that service, let them serve righteousness unto holiness, 
with the result of showing forth holy lives. 20. Were free from righteousness. While servants 
of sin they did not serve righteousness at all. 21. What fruit had ye thenP Men ought to seri- 
ously ask this question. What fruit do the shameful practices of sin bring us? Only shame and death. 
The end is death. That is, the inevitable outcome, eternal death. 22, But now being made 
free from sin. Now being freed from the bondage of sin, sin should not be served at all, because 
they have become servants of God. He has the right to their full service. The fruit borne should 


36 ROMANS. (Ch. VII. 


; l : 
become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto | But now being made free 22 





holiness, and the end everlasting life. shetioey oe unt aoa 
23 For* the wages of sin is death; but the gift? of 
God és eternal life® through Jesus Christ our Lord. 


CHAPTER VII. 


Deliverance from Bondage. 

SUMMARY.—Death Releases from the Power of the Law. This Illustrat- 
ed by Marriage. But We are Dead to the Law. It Slew Christ and 
We Have Died with Him. We are also Dead to Sin. While the Law 
Reveals Sin It is Holy. The Struggle of the Carnal Nature Under the 
Law. The Deliverance Through Jesus Christ. 

1 Know ye not, brethren, (for I speak to them 
that know the law,) how that the law hath domin- 
ion over a man as long as he liveth? 

2 For? the woman which hath an husband is 
bound by the law to her husband so long as he liv- 
eth; but if the husband be dead, she is loosed from 
the law of her husband. 

3 So then if, while* her husband liveth, she be 
married to another man, she shall be called an 
adulteress: but if her husband be dead, she is free 
from that law; so that she is no adulteress, though 
she be married to another man. 

4 Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become 
dead to the lawt by the body of Christ; that ye 
should be married to another, even to him who is 
raised from the dead, that we should bring forth 
fruit® unto God: 

5 For when we were in® the flesh, the motions of 
sin, which were by the law, did work in our mem- 
bers to bring forth fruit! unto death. 


@ Gen. 2:17. 





6 Rom. 6:17, 21. cl Pet.1:4. &1Cor. 7:39, 


8:8,9. 7d@Rom. 6: 





be holiness, holy lives. The end everlasting life. 





vants to God, ye have your 
fruit unto sanctification, 
and the end eternal life. 


For the wages of sin is 23 


death; but the free gift of 
Godis eternal life in Christ 
Jesus our Lord, 


CHAPTER VII. 


Or are ye_ ignorant, 1 
brethren (for I speak to 
men that know the law), 
how that the law hath do- 
minion over a man for so 
long time as he liveth? 
For the woman that hath 2 
a husband is bound by 
law to the husband while 
he liveth; but if the hus- 
band die, she is discharg- 
ed from the law of the 
husband. Sothen if, while 3 
the husband liveth, she be 
joined to another man,she 
shall be called an adulter- 
ess: but if the husband 
die, she is free from the 
law, so thatsheis no adul- 
teress, though she be join- 
edto anotherman. Where- 4 
fore, my brethren, ye also 
were made dead to the 
law through the body of 
Christ; that ye should be 
joined to another, even to 
him who was raised from 
the dead, that we might 
bring forth fruit unto God. 
For when we were in the 5 
flesh, the sinful passions, 
which were through the 
law, wrought in our mem- ° 
bers to bring forth fruit 





qMlatte\by 82 Ff Col. 2:11. gGal. 5:22. hk Rom. 


The result of the service of sin is death 


(verse 21); but that of the service of God is everlasting life. 23. For the wages of sin. Sinisa 


master of his servants and pays wages. 


The wages is death, one of the saddest, but profoundest 


truths of the world. But the gift of God. God gives to those who turn from sin, life eternal. Itis 
his gracious gift, conditioned on refusing to be the servant of sin longer, and is through Christ. 

1-4. Ispeak to them who know thelaw. Not the law, but law; know the powers of law. .The 
argument of the Jews was that the law of Moses was of perpetual obligation, but they knew that death 


released a man from its power. 
husband. This principle of law is shown from the marriage relation. 
the marriage covenant is not binding. 


It reigned only over the living. 2. For a woman who hath a 
Death severs it, and after it 
A woman can marry again without com 


mitting adultery. 


4. Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are dead to the law. This principle, under the figure 6f 


marriage, is applied to those church members who were once under the law of Moses, 
related to it as a wife to a husband. But in chapter VI. it has been shown that all dis 


iad died, been buried, and risen with him (verses 2-5); hence, having died, they had been released from 


the law. As new creatures, they could, as those freed from the marriage to law, 
Christians are so united to Christ, living by vital anion wi 


another, even Christ. 


in him, that whatever was done to him is said to have been done to them in his person, or through his 


body. The church is spiritually the Body of Christ. 
5, 6. 


For when in the flesh. When we were in an unconverted condition, under the influence of 


They were then 
ciples of Christ 


be espoused to 
th him, being found 


Ch. VIL] ROMANS. 


37 





6 But now we are delivered from the law, that 
being dead wherein we were held; that we should 
serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness 
of the letter. 

7 What shall we say then? Js the law sin? God 
forbid. Nay, I had not*® known sin but by the law; 
for I had not known lust, except the law had said,” 
Thou shalt not covet. 

8 But sin, taking occasion by the commandment, 
wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. For 
without the law sin was dead. 

9 For I was alive without the law once; but 
when the commandment came, sin revived, and I 
died. j 

10 And the commandment, which was ordained 
to life,° I found ¢o be unto death. 

11 For sin, taking occasion by the command- 
ment, deceived me, and by it slew me. 

12 Wherefore the law’ zs holy, and the com- 
mandment holy, and just, and good. 





a Rom. 3:20. 6 Ex. 20:17. ¢ Ezek. 20: 11. 








unto death. But now we 
have been discharged from 
the law, having died to 
that wherein we were 
holden; so that we serve 
in newness of the spirit, 
and not in oldness of the 
letter. 

What shall we say then? 
Is the law sin? God for- 
bid. Howbeit, I had not 
known sin, except through 
the law: for t had not 
known coveting, except 
the law had said, Thou 
shalt not covet: but sin, 
finding occasion, wrought 
in me through the com- 
mandment all manner of 
coveting: for apart from 
the law sin is dead. And 
I was alive apart from the 
law once: but when the 
commandment came, sin 
revived, and I died; and 
the commandment, which 
was unto life, this I found 
to be unto death: for sin, 
finding occasion, through 
the commandment beguil- 
ed me, and through it slew 
me. So that the law is 
holy, and the commmand- 
ment holy, and righteous, 





d Psa. 19: 7-9. 





our carnal nature. 
of sins. 


6 


gf 
10 


il 


12 


The insufficiency of law to deliver us from its power is now shown. The motions 
The sinful passions. Which were by the law. How the law set in motion these sinful 


passions is set forth in verses 7 and 8. See notes onthem. Did work in our members. Seized the 
control of our bodily organs, and thus made us so sin as to be subject to the penalty of death. See 


6:21; also James 1:15. 6. But now we have been 
died in Christ (6: 2-4), 
in the newness of the spirit. 
It is a spiritual service ; “God must be worshiped in spirit and truth.” 


nant is “written in the hearts” (Heb. 8: 10) ; hence it is not a bondage, but a free, willing service. 


7-12. Is the law sinP Inverse5 Paul intimates that the law was the 


mean that the law was in itself sinful? This thought he indignantly repels. 
the law brought to his knowledge his own sinful nature, Paul 


sin but by the law. The restraints of 


occasion of sin. 


delivered from thelaw. By death. Having 
we are released from the dominion of the law. See verse 1. So that we serve 
This service of Christ is the new service of those living new lives. 
God’s law under the new cove- 


Does he 
Nay, I had not known 


describes his own experiences when seeking the righteousness of the law, and thus describes those of 


human nature. The experiences here 


The experiences are those of Saul of Tarsus; not those of Paul the apostle. 


lust. Greedy desire for the possessions of others. 


given are his own, but what he says is applicable to all men. 
For I had not known 
All eyil desire is embraced. 8. But sin, taking 


occasion by the commandment. Strange a psychological fact as it is, it is nevertheless true that 


to the carnal nature what is forbidden 
desired the forbidden fruit had it not 


seems especially desirable. Adam and Eve would hardly have 
been forbidden. When sinful man’s freedom is limited, he rages 


against the limitation. One of Ingersoll’s pleas against the Divine government is that it is a limitation 


of freedom. Concupiscence. Evil 
law. There is no article before law. 
would be lifeless. 
whenever it is restrained. 9. For 


desire. For apart from the law sin is dead. Apart from 

If there was no law to be broken, sin would be quiescent, and 
The restraint of law makes it spring into vigorous life. Our carnal nature rebels 
Iwas alive once without the law. Without law. It would 


be much better if the translators would omit the article where Paul did not use it. Paul was alive, that 


is, was unconscious of condemnation, once. 
young Ruler who said of the commandments: 


His conscience did not trouble him. He was like the 
“All these have I kept from my youth up.” “As touch- 


ing the righteousness which is of the law he was blameless” (Phil. 3:6). But when the command- 


ment came, 
revived. The dormant sin was 
a sinner; was convicted of sin. 


brought to light when restraints came. 
It is possible that reference is made to some supreme struggle. Per- 


when he realized that it required a heart service as well as an outward service, then sin 


I died. Realized that I was 


haps in the stern persecution of the saints he was struggling for the righteousness of the law. Perhaps 


it was when Christ said, 


“Tam Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest,” that he first realized that 


38 ROMANS. 


[Ch. VIL. 





13 Was then that which is good made death unto 
me? God forbid. But sin, that it might appear 
sin, working death in me by that which is good; 
that sin by the commandment might become ex- 
ceeding sinful. 

14 For we know that the law is spiritual; but I 
am carnal, sold? under sin. 

15 For that which I do I allow not: for what I 
would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I. 

16 If then I do that which I would not, I consent 
unto the law that z¢ zs good. 

17 Now then, it is no more I that do it, but sin 
that dwelleth in me. 

18 For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh) 
dwelleth no” good thing: for to will is present with 
me; but how to perform that which is good, I find 
not. 

19 For* the good that I would I do not: but the 
evil that I would not, that I do. 

20 Now, if I do that I would not, it is no more I 
that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me. 





and good. Did then that 13 
which is good become 
death unto me? God for- 
bid. But sin, that it might 
be shewn to be sin, by 
working death to me 
through that which is 
good;—that through the 
commandment sin might 
become exceedingly sin- 
ful. For we know that the 14 
law is spiritual: but I am 
carnal,sold under sin. For 15 
that which I do I know 
not: for not what I would, 
that do I practice; but 
what I hate, that Ido. But 16 
if what I would not, thatI 
do, I consent unto the law 
that itis good. Sonow it 17 
is no more I that do it, but 
sin which dwelleth in me. 
For I know that in me, 18 
that is, in my flesh, dwell- 
eth no good thing: for to 
will is present with me, 
but to do that which is 
goodis not.” For the good 19 
which I would I do not: 
but the evil which I would 
not, that I practice. But 20 
if what I would not, thatI 
do, itis no more I that do 
it, but sin which dwelleth 





@2Kings17:17. 6Gen. 6:5. ¢ Gal, 5:17. 





“Christ was the end of the law, and he died. 10. And the commandment, which was ordained 
unto life. The commandments had a promise of Life. ‘The man which doeth those things shall live 
by them” (10:5). I found to be unto death. When he found that, instead of keeping the com- 
mandments, he had broken them, he realized he was under condemnation. 11. For sin, taking 
occasion by the commandment, deceived me. Sin is always a deceiver, however. I cannot 
explain this save by referring it to a period of life when he was self-deceived, and sinned, thinking he 
was doing God service. It exactly describes the persecuting Saul of Tarsus, Sin deceived him. When 
he found he was deceived, it slew him. He was convicted before God. 12. Wherefore the law is 
holy. The law is holy; it occasions sin only because our carnal nature rebels against its holy 
restraints. ’ 

13. Was that then which is good made deathtome?P He has just shown that the law, even 
though it occasions sin, is just and good. He also showed that through it sin slew him. Is the law 
death? Nay, far from it, It is sin, not the law, that is the source of death. Sin is so exceedingly 
sinful, that it seizes upon the law, that which is holy, and just, and good, to work death. It stirs up the 
carnal nature to rebel against the law, to break it, and hence, to pass under the condemnation of death. 
Thus the commandment shows forth sin as exceeding sinful. 

14-23. For we know that the law is spiritual. The apostle continues still further to show 
that, not the law, but sin is the source of death. The law is “spiritual,” that is, is divine and adapted 
to our spiritual nature. While there were “carnal ordinances,” its essential principles were Spiritual. 
Iam carnal. Paul describes his condition while under the law. It was spiritual; but he was carnal, 
and hence, there was a conflict. Sold under sin. Hence, in a state of slavery. Though Paul uses 
the present tense, in order to make the description more vivid, he describes his condition before he 
became a Christian. 16. If then I do. Rather, “But if Ido.” If he sins, against his purpose and 
inclination, he condemns his sin, and thus acknowledges the law, which he disobeyed, to be just and 
good. 17. Now then itis no more I. Not Paul as a freeman who sins, but Paul as the bond- 
servant of sin (see verse 15), and hence it is sin who reigns over him, who sins’ in him, as the instru- 
ment. He describes the sinful state as one of bondage. How often a man does what he “would not!’? 
18. For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh. In his unregenerated human nature. In this 
dwells no good thing. The tendency of the carnal nature of man is evil. Its conflict with the will 
and conscience is now described. To will is present with me. Who has not had the same 
experience? How often we resolve to do better, and break our resolves as soon as temptation comes! 
19. The good that I would Idonot. This verse proves the statement of the last one. It is the 


Ch. VIII] ROMANS. 39 


91 I find then a law, that, when I would do good, | in me. Tfind then the law, 21 


acs . that, t 2 wt d 
evil is present? with me. For evils presents or 22 
th 


92 For I delight” in the law of God after the | 1 delight in the law of God 


. % after the inward man: but 238 
inward? man: Isee a different law in my 


23 But 1 see another law in’ my members, war-| the law of my minc sea 


: aing \ 9 7 Py i , bringing me into captivit 
ring against the law of my mind, and bringing pe gees ach eae oe Ny 
into captivity® to the law of sin, which is in my | which is in my members. 

ber O wretched man thatIam! 24 
mem Ane h deli wee as oo ms om 
-| of the bo (9) is death? 

24 Of wretched man that I am! who shall deliv-| of the poty tough Jesus 25 


er me from the body of this death?*® Christ our Lord. So then 

$5 I® thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Ta ede 
So then with the mind I myself serve the Jaw of ve the flesh the law of 
God; but with the flesh the law of sin. : 


CHAPTER VIII. 
: The Privileges of the Children of God. 


SuMMARY.—No Condemnation to Those in Christ. Walking After the 
Spirit. To be Carnally Minded, Death. To be Spiritually Minded, 
Life and Peace. The Spirit of Adoption. Heirs of God, The Suffer- 
ings of Samts. The Groanings of the Creation. All things Working 
for Good to Saints. The Purpose and Foreordination of God. God’s 
Protection of His Children. CHAPTER VIII. 
1 There is therefore now no! condemnation to| There is therefore now 1 


: . . no condemnation to them 
them which are m Christ Jesus, who walk! not) that are in Christ Jesus. 


after the flesh, but after the Spirit. 


a Psa. 65:3. 6 Psa. 1:2, c2Cor. 4:16; 1 Pet. 3:4. d Rom. 6:13, 19. e Psa. 142:7. f Psa. 88:2,10; 77:3-9. g Psa. 
88:5. h1 Cor. 15:57. iJno. 3:18. j Gal. 5:16. 











ee eee 
strongest expression of sinfulness yet made. What could better demonstrate the bondage to sin? Yet 
how true to human experience! 20. But if what I would not, etc. This experience sustains 
verse 17, and shows that sin has predominated over human nature and rules it. Sin controls, rather 
than good intentions. Aman wills one thing and does another. 21. Ifindthenalaw. It is then 
the law of our unregenerate state that, even if we would do good, and purpose to be better, evil will be 
present, and will be practiced. 22. ForI delight in the law of God. The inner man, the better 
nature, our spiritual being, approves of and delights in the law of God. This is the part of ‘our being 
that “wills to do good,” spoken of in verse 21, but is overcome by evil. 23. ButIsee another law 
in my members. One law of our being is the approval of righteousness; another is the inclination 
‘of the flesh to do eyil. This law wars against the law of the mind, the conscience and will, and 
brings it into captivity. It prevails. Hence, unregenerate man is a captive. There is a struggle in the 
nature of man; of the “inward man” with the flesh, with the result of captivity of the soul. 

24, 25. O wretched man thatIam! Wretched because he has no power in himself of deliver- 
ance. Who shall deliver from this body of death? He is acaptive, a captive to the body, the 
members of which are controlled by sin. Hence, he isa helpless slave of sin, and as such, is under the 
condemnation of death. The body, the seat of the fieshly desires, has become “‘a body of death,” since 
jt is controlled by sin. Who shall deliver him from its power? From verse 14 to 24 Paul has described 
the bondage of the will to the flesh which is the condition of the natural man, and closes with the ery 
for deliverance. 25. I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Through him the deliver- 
ance comes. So then with the mindI myself. I myself, that is, by myself and without Christ. In 
that state the mind delights in the law of God (verse 22), but the flesh is devoted to the service of sin. 
Hence the struggle, the captivity, the bondage, the ery for deliverance. Hence the failure of the law 
to deliver, and the need of Christ. a 

One of the best comments on the whole passage is Gal. 5: 16-18: “‘ Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not 
fulfil the desires of the flesh; for the desire of the flesh fights against the Spirit, and the desire of the 
Spirit fights against the flesh, for these are contrary the one to the other; that ye may not do the things 
that ye would. But if ye are led of the Spirit ye are not under the law.” 

4-4, There is therefore. The “therefore” points to the argument of chapter VII., which shows 


40) ROMANS. [Cie-WITT. 
SEE EO ERED AS KE OS Lingle Ss Dey 


2 For the law of the Spirit of life* in Christ | Por the 1aw of the Spirit 2 
b alee of life in Christ Jesus 
Jesus hath made me free” from the law of sin and made me free from the 
death ; law of sin and of death. 
cath. R 3 For what the law could 3 
3 For what the law could not® do, in that it was| not do,in thatat was peut 
. . a| through the fiesh, God, 
- weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son sending his own Son in thé 


7 1 4 | 5 4 47 . ~ | likeness of sinful fleshand 
in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin con Sian ofeHag total Cn 
demned sin in the flesh; demned sin in the flesh: 


: ° that the ordinance of the 4 
4 That the righteousness of the law might be law might be fulfilled in 


G a ‘ us, who walk not after the 
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but Hew pat ade gy 


after the Spirit. Wor they that are after the 5 
= es omin e ings O 
5 For they that are after the flesh do mind the the flesh; but they that are 


things of the flesh;® but they that are after the of een Pe : 
Spirit the thingst of the Spirit. of the flesh is death ; but 
iS 5 ° e€ mind o Spirit is 
6 For to be carnally minded és death;% but to be | thé and peace: because 7 
spiritually minded ¢s life and peace. a bre Dee Bh 
7 Because the carnal mind 7s enmity against| isnot subject to the jaw of 


God: for it is not subject to the law of God, | 9% neither indeed can it 
neither indeed can be. 


42Cor. 3:6. 6 Gal. 2:19; 5:1. c Acts 13:39; Heb. ee ne - Gal. 3:13. eJohn 3:6; 1 Cor. 15:48. JF 1 Cor. 2:14. 
g Gal. 6:8. 











that in Christ we are delivered from sin and from the curse of the law. No condemnation to those 
in Christ Jesus. As those in Christ haye died with him (6: 1-4), they have in him satisfied the law, 
and hence they cannot be under condemnation. He, the sinless One, “was made sin for us ;*? so we, 
forgiven through him, are “‘made the righteousness of God in him” (2 Cor. 5: 21). This blessed condi- 
tion depends on a vital union with Christ, “Baptized into Christ,” we must walk in him, not after 
the flesh, but after the Spirit. Compare John 15: 1-7, and Eph. 1:23. 2. For the law of the 
Spirit of life. The Spirit of life must be the Holy Spirit. The whole phrase is equivalent to the 
Gospel, which has been given to men by the agency of the Holy Spirit. The Spirit has quickened us 
into a new life, and as we have died to the law and to sin, we are freed from them, Wesley says that 
the meaning is that the “Gospel has freed us: from the Mosaic law.” That the law of the Spirit of life 
describes the Gospel is shown by verse 3, which explains verse 2. 3. What the law could not do. 
Because of the resistance it met in human nature. It was not strong enough to overcome the tendency 
of the flesh, the carnal nature, to evil. God did this by sending his own Son in the likeness of 
sinful flesh. When Christ came in human form he took the likeness of sinful flesh. And for sin. 
As a sacrifice for our sins. See John 1: 29, Condemned sin in the flesh. To “condemn” is to sen- 
tence and to devote to destruction, Sin is condemned, (1) By the spotless life of Christ. In the flesh 
he was without sin. (2) By his death for sin our past sins are forgiven. (3) By our vital union with his 

‘death and life we rise to walk in a new life, with a new spirit, and hence, not under the power of the 
flesh. See 6:4. 4. That the righteousness of the law. The righteous demand of the law, its 
substance, is a loving obedience to God (see Luke 10: 27). By the Gospel the love of God is shed 
abroad in our hearts through the Spirit. Hence, we comply with its righteous demands when we 
walk, not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. To walk after the flesh is to Obey the dictates of 
the flesh; to walk after the Spirits to obey its dictates. It dwells in the believer to help him, but its 
dictates are found in the “words of the Holy Spirit.” 

5-8. They that are after the flesh. The unconverted, Those still in a state of nature. These 
are put in contrast with the converted, believers, who are after the Spirit. These classes aree 
distinguished. The first obeys the dictates of the flesh; the other obeys the dictates of the Spirit. 
“The things of the Spirit? are not revealed to us by internal impulses, but by the words of the Spirit, 
the Holy Scriptures. The indwelling Spirit helps the new man in Christ to keep these words. 6. To 
be carnally minded. To be under the dominion of the fleshly impulses of the body. Is death. Is 
sure proof that one is spiritually dead and under condemnation. To be Spiritually minded. To be 
walking in obedience to the Spirit of Christ, This ives life to the soul, maintains a vit 
Christ, and brings peace, or conscious enjoyment of the grace of God. 7%. Because the 
is enmity to God.. Is opposed to God’s law, and demand fora righteous life. 
against God, it is under condemnation. He does not say that it is impossible 
become good, but that it cannot be done while he retains a carnal mind, He mu 


asily 


al union with 
carnal mind 
Hence, since it fights 
for a wicked man to 
st be converted first. 


© 


Ch. VIII.] ROMANS. 


AY 





8 So then they that are in the flesh cannot please | be: and they that are in 8 
God the flesh cannot please 
: . F +6 f God. But ye are not in9 
9 But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if | the Aesh, bat in one eT od 
ate ‘ 2 if so be that the Spirit of 
so be that the Spirit of God dwell* in you. Now, God dwelleth in you. | But 
. : Cutty . . j t ti 
tet man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none Spirit of Christ, he is teas 
3 of his. ndi rist is in 10 
2 3 ene 5 : f you, the body is dead be- 
10 And if Christ de in you, the hody zs dead be- | cause of sin: but the spirit 
. ene ie : ° is li ighte- 
cause of sin; but the Spirit zs life because of right- Gusness, But if the Spirit 11 
eousness. of nu ee Paice? up a 
es . “ sus from the dea well- 
11 But if the Spirit of him who raised up Jesus | eth in you,he that raised 
from the dead dwell in you, he? that raised up Se eon ules 
Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mor- ee conn a 
tal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you. dwelleth in you. 

12 Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not® to] acvtors> Aoresk Wel ii ho 
the flesh, to live after the flesh. he ia ad ie ern ead 
13 For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but aie; but if by the s irit ye 

) as : mortify the deeds of the 
if ye through the Spirit do mortify’ the deeds of | fody, ye shall live. For as 1¢ 
the body, ye shall live. many as are led by the 
: A aks spirit of God, these are 
14 For as many as are led® by the Spirit of God, | sons of God. For ye re- 15 
they are the sons of God. concen eet SR, a 


15 For ye have not received the spirit of bond- 








a1Cor. 6:19; Gal. 4:6. 62Cor. 4:14. ¢ Psa. 16:16. 


d Col. 3:5. 


e Gal. 5:18. 





8. So then. The result naturally follows that a “carnally-minded man,” one “in the flesh” and 
under its dominion, “cannot please God.” This is impossible while he continues to mind the things of 
the flesh. , 

9-11. But ye are not in the flesh, etc. It has just been shown that he who is under the sway of 
his fleshly passions is at war with God, cannot please him, and is spiritually dead. But the Christian is 
under the influence of the Spirit if the Spirit of God dwells in him. It does dwell in him if he is a new 
creature, “minding the things of the Spirit.’ Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he 
is none of his. The proof that we have this indwelling Spirit is that we ‘‘mind the things of the 
Spirit” (verse 5), and bear its fruits (Gal. 5: 22). Observe that the Spirit is spoken of in this verse both 
as the Spirit of God, and of Christ. 10. But if Christ be in you. Cbrist is in us by his Spirit. 
Notice that the indwelling of the Spirit of God, having the Spirit of Christ, belonging to Christ, having’ 
Christ in us, are all varied expressions of the same great fact. The body is dead because of sin. 
Our bodies have died physically because death came into the world through sin. But the Spirit is 
life. Our spirit is made alive by union with Christ, and partaking of his righteousness. 11. But if 
the Spirit of him, etc. The Holy Spirit. That Spirit in us is a pledge that God will raise us, even as 
Christ was raised from the tomb. Shall also quicken your mortal bodies. Though the body be 
doomed to death “because of sin,” it shall be “quickened” for those who haye God’s Spirit dwelling in 
them. Even our mortal bodies shall be raised, not in corruption, but in incorruption (1 Cor. 15: 42-44). 

12-17. Therefore. Seeing that we are to enjoy such glorious ‘privileges in Christ. These are 
described in this section. We are debtors. Under obligation. Since the flesh, or carnal nature is 
death, we are under no obligation to obey its dictates. 13. But if through the Spirit. By follow- 
ing the Spirit, “minding the things of the Spirit,” we secure life. This is shown in verse 11. The: 
deeds of the body are the sinful deeds suggested by the fleshly desires. We cannot in our own 
strength mortify, 7%. @., put an end to, the deeds of the body. It is accomplished by the aid of the 
Spirit, helping our spirit in the effort. 14. For as many as are led by the Spirit. Those who. 
“through the Spirit mortify the deeds of the body” are led by the Spirit. They obey it rather than the 
flesh. The presence of the Spirit in leading them shows that they are sons of God. How are they led? 
(1) They have given up their own wills to do God’s will, and seek to obey him in all things. (2) To them 
the Spirit is given as a helper of their weakness (verse 26 below), and by its aid they overcome the flesh. 
Sons of God. We become sons of God when we are born again, born of water and the Spirit (John: 
3:5),and we maintain the sonship by being led by the Spirit. 15. For ye did not receive the 
spirit of bondage. The time is referred to when they were born again, and entered the kingdom of 


42 ROMANS. 


[Ch VIE. 








age* again to fear; but? ye have received the Spirit 
of adoption’ whereby we cry, Abba, Father. 

16 The Spirit itself beareth witness’ with our 
spirit, that we are the children of God: 

17 And if children, then heirs; heirs® of God, 
and joint heirs with Christ;' if so be that we suffer 
with 42m, that we may also be glorified together. 

18 For I reckon’ that the sufferings of this pres- 
ent time are not worthy to be compared with the 
glory which shall be revealed in us. 

19 For the earnest expectation of the creature 
waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God. 

20 For the creature was made subject to vanity, 
not willingly, but by reason of him who hath sub- 
jected the same in hope; 





bondage again unto fear; 
but ye received the spirit 
of adoption, whereby we 
ery, Abba, Father. The 
Spirit himself beareth wit- 
ness with our spirit, that 
we are children of God: 
and if children, then heirs; 
heirs of God, and joint- 
heirs with Christ; if so be 
that we suffer with him, 
that we may be also glori- 
fied with him. 

For I reckon that the 
sufferings of this present 
time are not worthy to be 
compared with the glory 
which shall be revealed to 
us-ward. For the earnest 
expectation of the cre- 
ation waiteth for the re- 
vealing of the sons of God. 
For the creation was sub- 
jected to vanity, not of its 
own will, but by reason of 
him who subjected it, in 


16 


17 





e Acts 26:18; 1 Pet. 1:4. 


61 Cor. 2:12. d2 Cor. 1:22; 1 Jno. 4:13. 


g 2 Cor. 4:19. 


a2 Tim. 1:8. ce Jer. 1:19; Gal. 4:5, 6. 


1/2 Tim. 2: 11, 12. 








God, They did not receive the spirit of bondage, of slavery to sin, so that they would obey its dictates, 
and thus be in fear of death. Instead, they received the Holy Spirit according to the promise (Acts 
2:38). The Spirit of adoption. The Spirit God bestows upon those who are accepted as his chil- 
dren. Paul was writing to the Romans, among whom the adoption of children, not their own by nature, 
was common. They would understand this to mean that those converted, or born again, are adopted as 
children of God; upon those thus adopted he bestows his Spirit; this Spirit in their hearts produces a 
loving trust that enables them to address God as Father. Abba, Father. Abba, Chaldee for Father. 
16. The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God. 
The Spirit of God is one witness to the fact. Our spirit is a corroborative witness. How do each bear 
witness? (1) Witness is usually borne in words, but not always. God’s Spirit bears witness in words 
(see Heb. 10:15). The Holy Spirit shows us how we must become God’s children, and how to continue 
the Christian life. (2) It bears testimony in our lives by its fruits. Do we bear the fruits of the Spirit? 
(See Gal. 5: 22.) (3) Does our own spirit testify that we “mind the things of the Spirit?’? Does our 
consciousness recognize its fruits, inward as well as outward? If the testimony of our spirit is that 
what God’s Spirit witnesseth of the sons of God is true of us, then they concur in the testimony that we 
are the children of God. 17. If children, then heirs. Observe the chain of argument: (1) We are the 
sons of God. (2) This is shown by our having received the Spirit of adoption. (3) Both God’s Spirit 
and our own spirit witness together that we are children of God. (4) But children are heirs; hence we 
are “heirs of God; joint heirs with Christ.’? Under the Jewish law the older brother had a double 
portion, but Christ admits all to a joint share of the great inheritance. If so be that we suffer with 
him. 1m the figure, we suffer with him when we are “baptized into his death” (6:3). Weare crucified 
(6:6); become dead (6: 2); ‘‘are buried with him” (6: 4); ‘‘are planted in the likeness of his death” 
(6:5). Hence, in these respects we have the “fellowship of his sufferings” (Phil. 3:10). But we must 
be ready, for his sake, to bear the cross through life. If we do all these things, we'shall be “glorified 
with him also.” We shall share with him in all things. 

18-25. The sufferings of this present time. The Christian of our time has little conception 
of the sufferings of the ancient saints, counted as outcasts, despised, persecuted, slain (see verse 36 
below; also 2 Cor, 11: 23-28), Yet Paul counted these as nothing in view of the hope of eternal glory. 
Revealed in us. In the saints when they shall have received the inheritance which God bestows in 
Christ. The comforts of the saint in the midst of suffering are now given: (1) The hope of glory for 
which all creation, ruined by the Fall, is looking. (2) The present help of the Spirit. (3) The over- 
ruling providence of God. 19. The earnest expectation of the creature. “Creature” is ren- 
dered creation in the Revision, and this rendering is approved by all the best critics. Chrysostom says 
“Paul personifies the world, just as the prophets do when they make the floods to clap their hands.” 
The whole world is represented earnestly looking forward to that day of future glory when the sons of 
God will have reached their high estate and be revealed as his children. It is a fine, poetic figure, a 
grand conception. 20. For the creature was made subject to vanity. The creation was sub- 
jected to vanity ; i, e., became empty; lost its original significance. The Greek word rendered “vanity” 
means to “seek without finding.’ God placed “‘the creation’? under man’s dominion, and when man 


Ch. VUL.] ROMANS. 43 


21 Because* the creature itself also shall be deliv- Te eae 


ered fron o , j ; »7_| from the bondage of cor- 
1 the bondage of corruption into the glori Pee en ave Want yniaoe 


ous liberty of the children of God. the glory of the children 


‘ y F . of God. For we know that 22 
22 For we know that the whole creation groaneth | the whole creation groan- 


and travai i i i . eth and travaileth in pain 
and travaileth in pain together until now: CU cthenupil now, nd.28 


93 And not only they, but ourselves also, which | not only so, but ourselves 


= e pe rie jai al . ta st- 
have the first-fruits® of the Spirit, even we our- SE eer 
selves groan® within ourselves, waiting for the | we ourselves groan within 

. ° : ourselves, waiting for our 
adoption, fo wit, the redemption of our body. adoption, to wit, the re- 


94 For we are saved by hope: but hope that is see re ea 


4 “fa -d > : ‘ ; but hope that is seen is 
seen is not hope:4 for what a man seeth, why doth | no nope: for who hopeth 


he yet hopé for? for that which he seeth? | 
25 But if we hope for that we see not, Tom AO Wel ee ao 


with patience wait for 2d. | we with patience wait for 


_ 5 5 Sea fe Re isin 
96 Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmi- And in like manner the 26 
ties: for we know not what we should pray for as pa eee noe, eet 


7 oht.: e SyHirit its al 1 ° 4] how to pray. as we ought: 
we ought; but® the Spirit itself maketh intercession | ef "Re eririt himself 


for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. maketh intercession for us 
with groanings which can- 


a2Pet. 3:18. 6 Eph. 1:14. c2 Cor. 5:2,4. @2 Cor. 6:7. e Zech. 12: 10. 














fell the whole was subjected to vanity by God. In hope. A hope was left to creation im its fallen 
estate. A promise of final redemption was made to fallen man (Gen. 3: 15), and the creation 1s repre~ 
sented as sharing that hope. 21. Because the creature itself shall be delivered. The Reyision 
reads, ‘‘The creation was subjected . . . in hope that the creation itself shall also,” ete. Though 
“subjected to vanity,” it still retained the hope of final deliverance. Bondage of corruption. 
Decay and death. Into the glorious liberty. “The liberty of the glory.” The present state 1s 
édyondage to corruption.” The hope is ‘deliverance from the bondage into ‘‘the liberty,” ete. In the 
day of the revelation of that glory, ‘call things shall become new”? (Rev. 21:1). 22. For we know 
that the whole creation groaneth, etc. The world is m travail, groaning for deliverance. That it 
is in travail is certain; there is unrest and crying for deliverance everywhere, It may not understand 
its trouble, nor even what it wants, but the meaning is that it is fallen, its wishes frustrated, and it is 
sighing for deliverance. These groans and sorrows are a prophecy of a time of deliverance when 
“there shall be a new heaven, and a new earth, wherein dwelleta righteousness.” 23. Not only 
they, but ourselves also. Not only does the world groan, but Christians, “though they have the 
first fruits of the Spirit,” a pledge of arich and full harvest, groan. There 1s an eager longing for the 
fuller enjoyment promised. Waiting for our adoption. We are already adopted children, but 
rather in expectation than i realization. We have not received the inheritance, the full “revelation of 
the sons of God.” The redemption of our pody. When the full adoption comes, we will not have 
these poor, frail, dying bodies, subject to weakness, sinfulness and decay, but spiritual bodies. “For 
in this we do groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heayen” (2 Cor. 
5:2). 24. For we were saved by hope. Were saved when we became Christians, not that we 
had received all the fruits of salvation, but were enabled to hope for all, even for the redemption of the 
body. Jn hope would be a better rendering than by hope. Hope grasped the full salvation, though not 
yet attained. We do not hope for what we have, orsee. 25. But if we hope, etc. Hope has its 
plessed office. If we hope for a blessed realization to come, we can labor for it and wait for it with 
patience. The hopeless soul despairs. 

26, 27. Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmity. While we are waiting in hope, but 
suffering, the Spirit is a helper of our weakness. It not only strengthens us, but helps us in prayer. 
We know not what to pray for as we ought. We often do not know, in our ignorance, what is 
pest. This is especially true in the times of the greatest trial. It was even an experience of our Lord 
in extremity (John 12: 27, 28), and of Paul (Phil. 1: 22, 23). But the Spirit itself. Observe the 
climax: The creation groans; we ourselves groan; the Spirit itself groans. The Spirit within us inter- 
eedes by groanings which are his, in that they are prompted by the Spirit. Augustine says: “Tt is not 
in himself, nor in the substance of the Eternal and Blessed Trinity that he groans, but in us because he 
makes us groan.” Groanings that cannot be uttered. Speechless groanings. 27. Knoweth 


44 ROMANS. 








(Ch. VII. 





27 And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth| not pe uttered and ihe or 
what 7s the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh ee pager yh Sgr 
intercession for the saints according” to the will Of | of the Spirit, because he 
God ee Dan haa foe 

. E Le salnts accor ing to the : 

28 And we know® that all things work together LT eee ated site 
for good to them that love God, to them who are/all things work together 
the called according to his purpose. si Called sheicdng bo ee 

29 For whom he did foreknow‘ he also did pre-| purpose. For whom he 29 

Rie . : foreknew, he also foreor- 
destinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, dained o be conformed to 

5 1 rote n = _| the image of his Son, that 
that he might be the first-born among many breth he might be the tisiborn 
ren. among many brethren: 

* ° and whom he foreordain- 30: 

30 Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them hela. them he aie cata: 
also called;* whom he called, them he also justi- i ee 
fied; and whom he justified, them he also glori- Whom ‘he justified, them 

ea 1 . 
fied.& What then ae say 31 
y h | to these things? od is 

31 What shall we then say to these things? If? te these thing: ear pe 
God de for us, who can be against us? : 

a Jer. 17:10; Rey. 2:23. 6 2 dno. 5: lt. c Psa. 46:1, 2; Heb. 12:6-12. @iPet.1:2. eHeb. 9:15. Ja Cor, 6s ie 


g Jno. 17:22. h Psa. 113: 6. 





what is the mind of the Spirit. These speechless 
according to his will that the Spirit intercedes. 


groanings are understood by God, because it is 


28-30. All things work together for good. The third ground of encouragement to saints in 
suffering is now given. To them, under God’s providence, all things, even their sorrows, trials and 
persecutions, work together for blessing. This precious assurance is not to all mankind, saint and 
sinner, but is hmited toaclass. Tothem that love God; the called according to his purpose. 
These are those who enjoy the blessed assurance just given. These two expressions are different 
ways of describing the same class. Notice the order in the Revision, which is the order of the Greek, 
The love of God is the very foundation of the Christian life. See Luke 10: 28, and John 14: 23. The 
expression, “Those that love God,” is synonymous with ‘Followers of Christ.» See 1 Cor, 2: 95 Eph. 
6; 24; 2 Tim. 4:8; James 2:5. The called. These have been called by the gospel and haye accepted 
the call. Many others are called, Jews and Gentiles, but only those who hear and obey are chosen 
(Matt. 20: 16; 20: 14). Paul uses the term of the latter class; those who hear and obey. The evidence 
that we are “the called” is that we love God. According to his purpose. This call was purposed 
from the time that God promised a Deliverer of the fallenrace. 29. For whom he foreknew, he 
also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son. To foreknow and to pre- 
destinate are not the same thing, One isan act of foreknowledge, or knowing something before it 
occurs; the other is to decree something. We only have knowledge of the past, but God foresees the 
future even as he sees the past; foresees it, not because he has decreed it, but because there are no 
limitations on his knowledge. Augustine Says: “There can be no predestination without foreknowl- 
edge ; but there can be foreknowledge without predestination.” Whom does God Soreknow? Those who 
shall love God. As he looked into the future these were present to his mind; foreknown. What did he 
predestinate of them? Not that they should loye God. Not that they should believe; nor that some 
should be saved and others damned; but that those who he saw beforehand would love God, should be 
conformed to the image of his Son. The only thing predestinated, or foreordained, is that those who love 
God as revealed in Christ shall become Christlike in life, and like Christ in eternity. This is the only 
decree in the passage. 80. Whomhe predestinated. He now shows how this is accomplished for 
those thus foreknown as the lovers of God. He also called. They are “called” by the preaching of 
the gospel, as in 2 Thess. 2:14: ‘“Whereunto he called you by our gospel.” It is not stated that these 
alone are called. We know that many others are called. Justified. The called, accepting the call, 
are justified. Their sins are blotted out. Glorified. These are made heirs of eternal glory. As 
stated by Godet, the purport of the whole passage may be expressed as follows: ‘Isee that thou dost 
love God; art a believer; I therefore decree of thee that thou shalt become like my Son and be glorified 
with him.” The steps by which this is accomplished are calling, justification, and final glorification, 

31-39. What shall we say to these thingsP The rest of the chapter is a hymn of triumph 
over this assurance of salvation. If God be for us. What has been shown shows that he is for all 


Ch. VIII] ROMANS. 


45 


ne 


32 He? that spared not his own Son, but deliver- | 


ed him up for us all, how shall he not with him also 
freely give us all things? 

33 Who? shall lay anything to the charge of God’s 
elect? Jé zs God that justifieth ; ; 

34 Who zs he that condemneth? Jt ts Christ 
that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is 
even at the right hand of God, who also maketh 
intercession for us. 

35 Who shall separate us from the love of 
Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, 
or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? 

36 (As it is written,° For thy sake we are killed 
all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the 
slaughter.) 

37 Nay, in all¢ these things we are more than 
conquerors, through him® that loved us. 

38 For I am persuaded, that* neither death, nor 
life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor 
things present, nor things to come, 

39 Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, 
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, 
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. 


a Rom. 5:6-10. 6b Rey. 12:10,11. ¢ Psa. 44:225 1 Cor. 15:30,31. 








d@1 Cor. 15:57. 


He that spared not his 32 
own Son, but delivered 

him up for us all, how 

shall he not also with him 

freely glve us all things? 

Who shall lay any thing to 33 
the charge of God’s elect? 

It is God that justitieth; 

who is he that shall con- 34 
demn? Itis Christ Jesus 
that died, yea rather, that 
was raised from the dead, 
who is at the right hand 
of God, who also maketh 
intercession for us. Who 
shall separate us from the 
love of Christ? shall trib- 
ulation, or anguish, or per- 
secution, or famine, or 
nakedness; or peril, or 
sword? HEven as it is writ- 


ten. 
For thy sake we are kill- 
ed all the day long; 
We were accounted as 
sheep for the slaughter. 
Nay, in all these things we 
are more than conquerors 
through him that loved us. 
For I am persuaded, that 
neither death, nor life, nor 
angels, nor principalities, 
nor things present, nor 
things to come, nor pow- 
ers, nor height, nor depth, 
nor any other creature, - 
shall be able to separate 
us from the love of God, 
which is in Christ Jesus 
our Lord. 


eJude 24. fJno. 10:28. 





who love God. If he is on our side, we must prevail. 82. He that spared not his own Son. If 
he gaye his Son to die for us, it is impossible that he should refuse us anything that will help or bless 
us, He has nothing he values more than his Son. 83. Who shalllay anything to the charge of 
God’s elect? No one can, since God himself has justified them. 84. Who is he that condemneth P 
‘There can be no condemnation (8:1) since Christ died, has risen, and maketh 
intercession for us. There is no condemnation in Christ Jesus. 85. Who shall separate us 
from the love of Christ? Can anything? Can the sufferings of the Christian calling in a time of 
persecution, such as the prophet described and the early Christians suffered? 36. As it is written. 
In Psalm 44: 22. Will such persecution lead us to abandon Christ? 37. Nay. Not all these suffer- 
ings can lead us from Christ, for in all these things we are more than conquerors. We over- 
come by the aid of him that loved us. 88. For I am persuaded. No hostile power of the 
universe can lead us away, is the apostle’s holy confidence. Death nor life. These adversaries seem 
to advance in pairs. Death is named first, because death by martyrdom threatens. The next pair is 
angels, and principalities and powers. “The angels” are good angels, while malignant angels 
are meant by the other terms. Nor things present, nor the things to come. The present or the 
future. 89. Nor height, nor depth. Perhaps, the things which exalt us and the things which cast 
us down. Things high and things low. Nor any other creature. Any other created thing. Shall 
be able. None of these, “Iam persuaded,” shall have power enough to tear us away from Christ, by 
causing us to apostatize. The love of God, which is in Christ. God’s great love for us is all 
shown through Christ. Nowhere has Paul shown more exultation, more overflowing emotion, than in 
this close of a profound argument, which shows the-complete and full salvation of those who believe 
upon Christ and are found in him. 


46 ROMANS. 


CHAPTER IX. 


The Rejection of the Jews. 

SUMMARY.—Paul’s Deep Sympathy for His Nation. God’s Promise to the 
Jewish Race not Void. The Argument that itis not. The Promise 
is not to the Seed According to the Flesh, but a Spiritual Seed. God 
has a Right to Choose what Race He Will. As the Potter has the 
Right to Shape His Clay, so God can Exalt or Reject a Race. The 
Acceptance of the Gentiles and the Rejection of the Jews Foretold. 
A Remnant of Israel Sayed. 

1 I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my con- 
science also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost, 

2 That I have great heaviness and continual sor- 
row in my heart. | 

3 For I* could wish that myself were accursed 
from Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen accard- 
ing to the flesh: 

4 Who are Israelites; to whom pertaineth the 
adoption,” and the glory,° and the covenants,’ and 
the giving of the law,¢ and thet service of God. and 
the promises ;& 

5 Who are the fathers,» and of whom,'! as eon- 
cerning the flesh, Christ came, who is over all, Sod 
blessed for ever. Amen. 





@ Wx. 32:32. 6 Deut. 7:6. ¢ Psa. 90:16; Isa. 60:19. 


19. fEx. 12:25. g Eph. 2:12. h Rom. 11: 28. 





[Ch. IX. 


CHAPTER Ix, 


I say the truth in Christ, 
I lie not, my conscience 
bearing witness with me 
in the Holy Ghost, that I 
have great sorrow and un- 
ceasing pain in my heart. 
For I could wish that I 
myself were anathema 
from Christ for my breth- 
ren’s sake, my kinsmen 
according to the flesh: who 
are Israelites; whose is 
the adeption, and the glo- 
ry, and the covenants, and 
the giving of the law, and 
the service of God, and the 
promises; whose are the 
fathers, and of whom is 
Christ as concerning the 
flesh, who is over all, God 
blessed for ever. Amen. 





d Gen. 17:2; Deut. 29:14; Jer. 31:33. e Rom. 3:2 
t Luke 8:23, ete. 





To understand the reasoning of this chapter, 


the reader must keep in mind the aim 


3 


5 


2; Psa. 147: 


of the apostle. 


He had in the beginning of this letter (1: 16, 17) shown that the gospel was God’s power of salvation 


“to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.” 


But the Jews as a nation had rejected Christ, and 


God had rejected them. They were soon to be destroyed as a people and their land taken away. But 


the Jew fell back on the promises made to Abraham, 


Has God broken his promises? If Christ was the 


true Messiah, and the Jewish nation rejected, he held that the promise was made void. To answer 


their objection Paul shows (1) that the promise was 
seed according to the promise; and (2) that God, in his sovereignty, 
pass it by at his will. 
but of the election of the Jews to be the chosen 
Gentiles. Isaac, Esau and Jacob are the representatives of races, 


1-5. I say the truth in Christ. This affirmation is made so solemn 
He speaks as in the presence of Christ, 


Paul with having forsaken his race, 


ened by the Holy Spirit. 2. ThatI have great heaviness, 


not to all the fleshly seed of Abraham, but to the 
has the right to choose a race or to 
The subject of individual and personal election is not in the mind of the apostle, 


people, their rejection afterwards, and the choice of the 


because the Jews charged 
with a conscience enlight- 
etc. Not so much that his countrymen 


were estranged from him, as that they were without the blessing of Christ. 3. For I could wish. 


myself accursed from Christ. He could 
brethren. Accursed. “Anathema,” 


wish this, if that would avail anything, to save his Jewish 
in the Revision. Rejected from Christ and lost. My brethren. 


His Jewish brethren, those of the same Jewish stock as himself, 4. Who are Israelites. He now 


enumerates some of the glories of the Jewish race. 
82: 28) by the angel. This means a Prince with 
Whose is the adoption. 
verses. They were adopted as the chosen people (Deut. 7: 6), 
ark of God and the glory of the Divine Presence (1 Sam, 4; 21), 
made with Abraham and at Sinai. The giving of the law. 
vf Israel. 
“wromises. Hspecially the blessed promise of Christ. 
sud prophets. Of whom .. , Christ came. 
their race, of the tribe of Judah, and of the seed of 
oar King and our Judge. God blessed forever. 


Jacob, their ancestor, had been c 
God, and this proud title w 
Six high privileges of the chosen people a 


alled Israel (Gen, 


as borne by his descendants. 


He 


re named in the 4th and 5th 
And the glory. The presence of the 
The covenants. The covenants 
The law of Moses given to the children 
And the service of God. The worship of the tabernacle and temple. And the 
5. Whose are the fathers. The patriarchs 

Greatest of all, Christ, in his fleshly 
David. Who is over all. See Matt. 28: 18, 
More than man; Divine. 


nature, was of 


is. 


Ch. IX.] ROMANS. 


AT 





6 Not as though the word of God hath taken* 
none effect. For they are not all Israel which are 
of Israel: 

7 Neither, because they are the seed of Abraham, 
are they all children: but, In® Isaac shall thy seed 
be called; 

8 That is, They which are the children of the 
flesh, these are not the children of God: but the 
children* of the promise are counted for the seed. 

9 For this 7s the word of promise, At® this time 
will I come, and Sara shall have a son. 

10 And not only this, but when Rebecca* also 
had conceived by one, even by our father Isaac, 

11 (For the children being not yet born, neither 
having done any good or evil, that the purpose of 
God according to election might stand, not of 
works, but of him that calleth,) 

12 It was said unto her, The elder shall serve the 
younger. 

13 As it is written,’ Jacob have I loved, but Esau 
have I hated. 


But it is not as though the 6 
word of God hath come to 
nought. For they are not 
all Israel, which are of Is- 
rael: neither, because they 7 
are Abraham’s seed, are 
they all children: but, In 
Isaac shall thy seed be 
called. That is, it is not 8 
the children of the flesh 
that are children of God; 
but the children of the 
promise are reckoned for 
aseed. For this is a word 9: 
of promise, According to 
this season will I come, 
and Sarah shall have a 
son. And not only so; but 
Rebecca also haying con- 
ceived by one, even by our 
father Isaac—for the chil- 
dren being not yet born, 
neither having done any- 
thing good or bad, that the 
| purpose of God according 
to election might stand, 
not of works, but of him 
that calleth, it was said 
unto her, The elder shall 
serve the younger. Even 
as it is written, Jacob I 
loved, but Esau I hated. 








alsa. 55:11. 6 Rom. 2:28,29. c Gen. 21:12. d Gal. 4:28. e Gen. 18:10, 14. 


f Gen. 25: 21, 23. 


g Mal. 1: 2,3. 





6-9. Not as though the word of God had taken none effect. 


The Jew might reply, “Why, 


then, if Israel had such privileges, covenants and promises, is the nation rejected? Has God, if Jesus 

is really the Christ, made his word of none effect?” The apostle in the rest of the chapter answers this 

objection. The first point is that there is a wider, greater Israel than that of the flesh. Those of 
Israel are not all Israel. There is an Israel according to the promise as well as according to the 

flesh. 7. Neither because they are Abraham’s seed are they all children. Abraham had 

other children besides Isaac, notably Ishmael, but none of these belonged to the chosen people, for it 

was said (Gen. 21: 12), In Isaac shall thy seed be called. 8. That is, not the children of the- 
flesh, etc. Since Ishmael, born according to natural laws, was not of the chosen race, but Isaac, the 

child of promise, born contrary to natural laws, became the chosen people, it follows that the children 

of God are not the children of the flesh, the mere fleshly descendants of Abraham, but the children of 

the promise; those who are of the seed according to the conditions of the promise. This argument is a 

reply to those who based all apon their fleshly relation to Abraham. “We have Abraham to our father” 

(Matt. 3:9). In order to show this more fully Paul recalls the incidents recorded in Gen. 18: 10-14. 

9. This is the word of promise. This promise was made when Sarah was far beyond the natural 

age of bearing children, and when Abraham was an old man. So the chosen seed are children of' 
promise. 

10-13. And not only this. The first argument is that the true seed are children of the promise, a 
spiritual seed rather than of the flesh. The second argument, now begun, is that God has the right to 
reject what nation he will, including the Jews, and to choose other races if he will. This is shown by 
facts from history. He did exercise the right of choice when he chose Jacob as the chosen nation, 
instead of Esau. The facts are recited to show this. 11. For the children. The children, yet 
unborn, were both Isaac’s seed according to the flesh; hence, according to the flesh, of the promised 
seed, and both equally without works, neither having done good norevil. That the purpose of 
God according to election might stand. That it might stand forth that he made the choice of his 
own will, freely. Of his own will he chose Jacob, yet unborn, to become the head of the chosen race, 
rather than Esau. Note that this election was not to eternal salvation, but to become the head of a 
As Moses, Samuel, and John the Baptist were raised up for a great work of God, so was Jacob. 
12. It was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger. See Gen. 25: 23. It was said to 
Rebecca, ““T'wo nations are in thy womb, . . . one people shall be stronger than the other, and the 
elder (people) shall serve the younger.” Esau never served Jacob, but the Edomites,.descended from 
Jacob, served the Israelites. The election here is that of a race. 18. As itis written. In Mal.. 


people. 


48 ROMANS. 


[Ch LX. 





14 What shall we say then? 
eousness with God? God forbid. 

15 For he saith to Moses, I> will have mercy on 
whom I will have merey, and I will have compas- 
sion on whom I will have compassion. 

16 So then 7zé ¢s not of him that willeth, nor of 
him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy. 

17 For the scripture saith® unto Pharaoh, Even 
for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I 
might show my power in thee, and that my name 
might be declared throughout all the earth. 


Is there? unright- | 


What shall we say then? 14 
Is there unrighteousness 
with God? God forbid. For 15 
he saith to Moses, I will 
have mercy on whom I 
have mercy, and I will 
have compassion on whom 
I have compassion. So 16 
then it is not of him that 
willeth, nor of him that 
runneth, but of God that 
hath mercy. Forthe script- 17 
ure saith unto Pharaoh, 
For this very purpose did 
I raise thee up; that I 
might shew in thee my 
power, and that my name 


might be published abroad 

in all the earth. So then 18 
he hath mercy on whom 
he will, and whom he will 
he hardeneth. 


18 Therefore hath he mercy on whom he will 
have mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth. 








a Deut. 32:4, 6 Ex. 33:19. ¢ Ex. 9:16; Proy. 16:4. 





1: 2,3. The language of Malachi, in its connection, shows that this is spoken of the two races. Verse 3 
says, “I hated Hsau and laid waste his mountains and his heritage.” This was not true of Esau as a 
person, but was true of his descendants. One race was loved and the other race hated. God has then 
asserted his right to freely choose or to reject races. There is not the slightest hint of electing some 
persons to eternal salvation and others to damnation. 

14-18. Is there unrighteousness with God? Does not this liberty of God, in his election of 
races, do violence to his justice? Is it not unjust that God should choose one nation and reject 
another? The answer to this is now given. -Paul shows that the Scriptures recognize this liberty, and 
these Scriptures, reverenced by the Jewish objector to whom he is writing, would not assign injustice 
to God. The argument is wholly scriptural. 15. I will have mercy upon whom I will have 
mercy. This is found in Exod. 33: 19, and is in answer to a request of Moses fora high privilege. The 
Lord grants it, not because he merits it, but of grace, because he “will be gracious to whom he willeth, 
and will have mercy where he will.” The passage, as applied by Paul, asserts that God favors nations 
according to his pleasure. He exercises free choice. 16. So then it is not of him that willeth. 
When God is gracious, it is not because a human will (him that willeth), or a human work (him that 
runneth) lays him under obligation, and forces him to give, but the gift is of him, due to his mercy, 
which he has the right to bestow where he will. Isaac willed to bestow the blessing on Esau, and the 
latter run to obtain the venison (Gen. 27:5), but Jacob had been chosen to become the founder of the chos- 
en people.and received the blessing, which promised that he should be the father of a great nation. 17. 
The Scripture saith unto Pharaoh. Exod. 9:16. It is not said that Pharaoh was born for, but was 
raised to the throne for a particular purpose. That purpose was that I might shew my power in 
thee. It is not said that God raised him up to destroy him. His power might have been shown by 

. Pharaoh yielding to his power. Pharaoh’s conduct made it necessary to abase him. Here, again, the 
election is not of an individual to destruction, but of a man to be a king for a particular purpose. The 
destruction came upon him because, in that position, he resisted God. 18. Therefore hath he 
mercy. Verse 15 has shown that he hath mercy according to his own sense of right, not according to 
any human code. The case of Pharaoh shows, in addition, that whom he will, he hardeneth. 
“What must not be forgotten, and what appears distinctly, from the whole narrative in Exodus, is that 
Pharaoh’s hardening was at first his own act. Five times it is said of him that he himself hardened, or 
made heavy his heart (Exod. 7: 13; 7: 22; 8:15; 8: 82; 9: 7), before the time when it is at last said that 
God hardened him (Hxod. 9: 12), and even after that it is said that he hardened himself (Exod. 9: 34), 
Thus he at first closed his own heart to God’s appeals; grew harder by stubborn resistance under God’s 
judgments, until at last God, as a punishment for his obstinate rejection of right, gave him over to his 
mad folly and took away his judgment.’’—G@odet. At first Pharaoh hardened his own heart; God’s judg- 
ments only made it harder, and then God “gave him over.’ God only made harder, by his judgments 
and by leaving him to his folly, pne who had already hardened his own heart. That he was given over 
to madness is shown in the record. Even his magicians said, “This is the finger of God” (Exod. 8: 19) 
He himself once said, “I have sinned; the Lord is righteous” (Exod. 9: 27). Had he not hardened him- 
self again, the result would have been different. Then God gave him up to his own folly, ‘‘to hardness 
of heart and reprobacy of mind.” The Jews approved of all this in the case of Pharaoh, but held that 
God could never.abandon them on account of their sinful course. Paul’s argument is, that if they, the 
‘favored people,should pursue Pharaoh’s course, they might experience Pharaoh’s fate. They, also, 


Gh TX] ROMANS. 


19 Thou wilt say then unto me, Why doth he yet 
find fault? for who* hath resisted his will? 

20 Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest 
against God? Shall? the thing formed say to him 
that formed z¢, Why hast thou made me thus? 

21 Hath not the potter® power over the clay, of 
the same lump to make one vessel unto honour, and 
another unto dishonour? 

22 What if God, willing to shew his wrath, and 
to make his power known, endured with much 
long-suffering the vessels? of wrath fitted to de- 





49 


Thou wilt say then unto 19 
me, Why doth he still find 
fault? For who withstand- 
eth his will? Nay but, O 
man, who art thou that re- 
pliest against God? Shall 
the thing formed say to 
him that formed it, Why 
didst thou make me thus? 
Oy hath not the potter a 
right over the clay, from 
the same lump to make 
one part a vessel unto 
honour, and another unto 
dishonour? What if God, 22 
willing to show his wrath, 
and to make his power 


20 


21 


known, endured with 

struction ; als of saath, AEE Toate 
23 And that he might make known the riches of | destruction: and that he 23 

his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had | mfty MPS, oN open 

afore prepared unto glory, fe ee ies 
24 Even us, whom he hath called, not of the) glory, even us, whom he 24 


also called, not from the 
Jews only: but also from 
the Gentiles? As he say» 25 
eth also in Hosea, 


é Hos. 2:23. 


Jews only, but also of the Gentiles? 
25 As he saith also in Osee,® I will call them my 








a@Job9:12. 6b Isa. 29:16; 45:9; 64:8. cJer. 18:6. d1Thes. 5:9. 








hardening themselves, might be “‘delivered over to hardness,” for God is not limited by race, or by any 
limitation, but hardens whom he wilis. He wills to harden those who harden themselves. I have dwelt 
upon this passage at greater length than usual, because it is so little understood. Godet well says that 
in this whole passage Paul is not writing theology, but answering the arrogant pretensions of Jewish 
Pharisaism, and hence he asserts the Divine liberty. Had he been replying to those who have exagger- 
ated this liberty into a purely arbitrary and tyrannical will, he would have brought out the opposite 
side of truth, 

19-24. Who withstandeth his willP He now meets another objection of the Jewish adversary. 
If God’s willis paramount, why should he find fault, for no one nation can withstand his will. If God 
hardens, the nation that is hardened only submits to him. Paul does not stop to show that this objec- 
tion is far-fetched, and illogical, but in substance says: ‘‘Let that be granted. Then what right has 
the Jewish nation to object? It is nothing but a lump of clay in the hands of the potter.’ 20. Who 
art thou that repliest against God? Shall men charge God with injustice? We have no right to 
strive with our Maker. He has the right to declare his own conditions upon which he will have mercy. 
21. Hath notright over the clay? So God, as far as right is involved, has the right to make of 
his creatures what he will. It is not said that we are as clay in the potter’s hands, but that God has the 
right oyer us that the potter has over his clay, One lump the potter can use forasplendid vase; 
another for a vessel for base uses. 22. What if God. Now if God, in the exercise of his undoubted 
right, has done something like this, in his dealings with the Jew and the Gentile. Willing to show 
his wrath. Though provoked to visit punishment on the Jewish nation for its sin in rejecting Christ, 
and thus to demonstrate his power, yet thus far he has endured with much long-suffering 
vessels of wrath. The unbelieving Jewish nation, so sinful before God, yet long endured, is meant. 
God, in the exercise of his sovereign will, has thus far deferred the exhibition of his wrath in its 
destruction. This verse began witha question. It implies, If God does all this, where is the fault? 
23. And that he might make known. “The vessels of mercy” are both Gentile and Jewish 
pelievers. What if God endured vessels fitted for destruction (verse 22), was there wrong in this? 
What if he thus made known the riches of his glory on vessels of mercy, was there wrong in this? 
‘Which he had afore prepared unto glory. The preparation referred to is not that of individuals 
for eternal life, but the preparation made was to save the Gentiles as well as Jews. The next verse 
shows whatis meant. 24. Even us whom he hath called. He “endured the vessels of wrath,” 
that he might make known his mercy in calling both Jews and Gentiles. The destruction of the Jewish 
nation, predicted by the Savior in Matt. 24, was delayed in mercy until tens of thousands of Jews, as 
well as of Gentiles, accepted Christ. The whole passage shows that God suffered the sins of the Jewish 
nation, without cutting it off, because its existence was essential in his plans for saving the world, Of 
it Christ came. From it the apostles were chosen. In it the church was formed, and from it went 


forth the gospel preachers. 
ey 


o 


50 ROMANS. 





people, which were not my people; and her beloved 
which was not beloved. 

26 And it? shall come to pass, ¢hat in the place 
where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people; 
there shall they be called the children of the living 
God. 

27 Esaias also” crieth concerning Israel, Though 
the number of the children of Israel be as the sand 
of the sea, a remnant shall be saved: 

28 For he will finish the work, and cut z¢ short in 
righteousness; because’ a short work will the Lord 
make upon the earth. 

29 And as Esaias said before,? Except the Lord 
of Sabaoth had left us a seed, we® had been as 
Sodoma, and been made like unto Gomorrha. 

30 What shall we say then? That the Gentiles, 
which followed not after righteousness, have attain- 
ed to righteousness, even the righteousness which 
is of faith; 

31 But Israel, which* followed after the law of 
righteousness, hath not attained to the law of 
righteousness. 


I will call that my peo- 
ple, which was not 
my people; 

And her beloved,which 
was not beloved. 

And it shall be, that in 
the place where it 
was said unto them, 
Ye are not my peo- 


ple, 

There shall they be 
called sons of the 
living God. 

And Isaiah erieth con- 
cerning Israel, If the num- 
ber of the children of Is- 
rael be as the sand of the 
sea, itis the remnant that 
shall be saved: for the 
Lord will execute his word 
upon the earth, finishing it 
and cutting it short. And, 
as Isaiah hath said before, 

Except the Lord of 
Sabaoth had leftus a 
seed, 

We had become as 
Sodom, and had been 
made-like unto Go- 
morrah. 

What shall we say then? 
That the Gentiles, which 
followed not after righte- 
ousness, attained to right- 
eousness, even the righte- 
ousness which is of faith: 


[Gh IX- 


26 


30° 


but Israel, following after 31 
a law of righteousness, 
did not arrive at that law. 
Wherefore? Because they 32: 
sought it not by faith, but 
as it were by works. They 
stumbled at the stone of 


elsa. 13:19. fGal. Gal. 5:4. 


32 Wherefore? Because they sought it not by 
faith, but as it were by the works of the law: for 
they stumbled at that stumbling-stone; 





aHos.1:10. bIsa. 10:22. cIsa. 28:22. dIsa.1:9; Lam. 3:22. 





25-29. As he saith also in Hosea. Hosea 2: 23. Thatit was God’s plan aforetime to call the 
Gentiles to salvation he shows by this prophecy. In Hosea1: 10, there is a prediction of the same 
import, which Paul quotes in verse 26. Both passages show that the gospel call to the Gentiles is only 
in harmony with the long-declared purpose of God. 2'7. And Isaiah crieth. Isa. 10: 22,23. Not only 
do the prophets show that the Gentiles are to be called, but that a great part of Israel is to fall from. 
God. The passage says that though the people of Israel become numerous as the sands of the sea- 
shore, only aremnant shall be saved. This prophecy originally applies to the return of the Jews 
from the Captivity, but, like many other prophecies, has a double application. 28. For he will 
finish the work. This verse, quoted also from Isaiah, shows why only a remnant will be left. God’s 
righteous judgment will cut the rest off from his favor. 29. As Esaias said before. Isaiah spoke 
this before he wrote what is quoted in verses 27 and 28,. This is found in Isaiah 1:9. This passage, like 
the other, shows that only ‘‘a remnant of Israel shall be saved.” We had been as Sodom. Sodom 
and Gomorrah had perished on account of their sins. Had it not been for God’s mercy, Israel would. 
have been blotted out for the same cause. 

30-33. What shall we say thenP What conclusion shall we reach? It has been shown that 
the word of God is not of none effect (verse 6), for it has foreshown all that has taken place. The con- 
clusion is this: That the Gentiles, who followed not after righteousness, had no knowledge. 
of it, had secured righteousness by accepting Christ, through faith in him, while (verse 31) Israel, fol- 
lowing after the law of righteousness, hath failed of righteousness before God through unbelief. 
82. Wherefore. Why this failure on the part of Israel? Not because God willed that they should be: 
rejected, not because of any foreordination, but because of their unbelief in Christ. They sought it 
not by faith. Sought not the righteousness that comes from faith in Christ, but a righteousness of 
works by keeping the law of Moses. They stumbled at the stumbling-stone. At faith in Christ, 
in a Crucified Christ. This is the one cause of Israel’s failure. They fell through unbelief. 838. As 
it is written. That Christ crucified would be a stumbling-stone to Israel had been foretold in Isaiah 
8:14, and 27:16. When Jesus came as a lowly one, and was crucified, the Jews, who expected the 
Christ to be a mighty earthly king, stumbled and fell. 


CH xe] ROMANS. 51 


ere ee ee ee a 
33 As it is written, Behold, I lay in Sion a stum-| stumbling; even as it is 28 


bling-stone, and rock of offence: and whosoever Pe penola-auay heen 





believeth on him shall not be ashamed. stone of stumbling 
and a rock of of- 

A ence: 
CHAPTER De And he that believeth 


The Jews Excluded from Unbelief. eeu wos be 
SUMMARY.—Paul’s Desire for Israel. The Jews Zealous, but not Accord- 
ing to Knowledge. They Seek a Righteousness of Their Own Rather 
than God’s Plan of Righteousness. The Righteousness by Faith 
Described. Shown to be for Gentiles as well as Jews. Hence, the 
Gospel must be Preached to All Men. The Unbelief of the Jews 


Predicted by the Prophets. CHAPTER XxX. 
1 Brethren, my heart’s desire and prayer to God] Brethren, my heart’s de- 1 


: . d licati 
for Israel is, that they might be saved. | io God is o them, ‘that ; 
a ey may be saved. For 
2 For I bear them record, that they have a zeal raed Bebe sh en eE 
of God, but not according to knowledge. they have a zeal for God, 


. s . but t di t 
3 For they, being ignorant” of God’s righteous-| knowledge. ‘Por being ic. 3 


ness, and going about to establish their own right- | 2orant of God’s righteous- 


ness, and seeking to estab- 


eousness, have not submitted themselves unto the |lish their own, they did 
: a f G d not subject themselves to 
righteousness o oad. the righteousness of God. 


aa = c 7 _| For Christ is the end of 4 
4 For Christ zs the end°* of the law for righteous tia line aenoeig ecu ee 


ness to every one that believeth. to every one that believ- 
: a s etn, or Moses write 
5 For Moses describeth?¢ the righteousness which | that the mam that dowth 


is of the law, The man which doeth those things be ORE Tae aCe 
shall live by them. by. But the righteousness 6 
6 But the righteousness which is of faith speak-| fins” Symone gh 
eth on this wise, Say® not in thine heart, Who shall Tas bearen ed aes 
ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down : 
from above :) : 


aJohn 16:2. 6Rom.1:17. c Matt. 5:17; Gal. 3:24. d Lev. 18:5. e Deut. 30:12. 




















1-4. Brethren. In 9: 3, the “brethren” refers to his countrymen, his Jewish kinsmen, brethren 
according to the flesh. Here it means his brethren in Christ, those united by spiritual ties. My 
heart’s desire and prayer for Israel. Concerning Paul’s deep solicitude for the salvation of his 
countrymen. See9:1-3. 2. They havea zeal for God. They were religious, conscientious, zeal- 
ous, but mistaken and fanatical. For examples of their mistaken zeal, see Acts 21: 27-31; also 22: 3. 
Even mistaken zeal is better than indifference. 8. Being ignorant of God’s righteousness. It 
is now shown that their zeal was not according to knowledge. They had no knowledge of God’s plan 
of righteousness, righteousness by believing upon Christ, but rejecting it they sought a righteousness 
of their own, of works, secured by keeping the law, and by obeying the traditions of men (Mark 7: 7, 8). 
On the other hand they refused to submit to God’s righteousness through faith. 4. For Christ is 
the end of the law for righteousness. The meaning is that the whole law pointed to Christ, and 
his righteousness. They were its object. Yet the Jews clung to the law, and refused to believe upon 
Christ, in whom the law met its fulfillment. To every one that believeth. As long as the Jews 
remained in unbelief, they were cut off from Christ. He who believes submits to God’s plan of right- 
eousness. 

5-11. For Moses describeth the righteousness of the law. Paul now shows the Jews who 
Cling to the law that the law itself is against the law as a way of securing righteousness. Moses 
writeth. In Ley. 18:5. That doeth the righteousness, etc. He who keeps the law in all 
respects blameless shall have life. But Paul has elsewhere shown that no one can keep the law per- 
fectly. That righteousness, then, requires a perfect obedience, a sinless life. What Jew could say that 
he had never sinned? 6, But the righteousness which is of faith. That is, “God’s righteous- 
ness” in contrast with that of the law. The passage that follows is quoted freely from Deut. 30: 11-14. 
Paul modifies it somewhat in order to bring out more strongly its spiritual application. It was applied 
at first to certain commands addressed by Moses to Israel, but its spirit applies to the gospel. Say 


a2 ROMANS. 








rCh. X. 





7 Or, Who shall descend into the deep? (that is, 
to bring up Christ again from the dead.) 

8 But what saith it? The word is nigh thee, even 
in thy mouth, and in thy heart: that is, the word of 
taith which we preach; : 

9 That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the 


Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that | 


God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be 
saved. 

10 For with the heart man believeth unto right- 
eousness; and with the mouth confession is made 
unto salvation. 


bring Christ down:) or, 
Who shall descend into 
the abyss? (that is, to 
bring Christ up from the 
dead.) But what saith it? 
The word is nigh thee, in 
thy mouth, and in thy 
heart: that is, the word of 
faith, which we preach: 
because if thou shalt con- 
fess with thy mouth Jesus 
as Lord, and shalt believe 
in thy heart that God rais- 
ed him from the dead, thou 
shalt be saved, for with 
the heart man believeth 
unto righteousness; and 
with the mouth confession 
is made unto salvation. 


7 


8 


9 


For the scripture saith, 11 
Whosoever believeth on 
him shall not be put to 
shame. For there is no 12 


11 For the scripture saith, Whosoever believeth 
on him shall not be ashamed. 

9 Worr "a 7] iffe distinction between Jew 

12 For? there is no difference between tne2.Jew [aso ee ae Eat 

and the Greek: for® the same Lord over all is rich Lord is Lord of all, and is 

unto all that call upon him. his foe Whee een 


him: for, Whosoever shall 13 
13 For* whosoever shall call upon the name of | ¢@!! upon the name of the 


the Lord shall be saved. 


@ Isa. 28:16; Jer. 17:7. 6 Acts 15:9. c¢ Acts 10:36. d Joel 2:32; Acts 2:21. 











not, Who shall ascend into heavenP The Jews expected a Savior, reigning upon the earth, a 
visible king of an earthly kingdom, and hence said, “Bring down Christ from heaven, where you say he 
is, and we will believe upon him.” 7%. Or who shall descend into the abyss? Another 
stumbling-block with the Jews was the death and burial of Christ. When Jesus died on the cross, they 
held it to be proof that he was not the Christ. They still were wont to demand that they should see the 
Resen Christ with their own eyes, or that he be produced from the realms of the dead. To have met the 
demands of the Jews would haye been sight rather than faith. 8. But what saith itP What does 
God’s righteousness demand? It replies that we do not have to go either to heaven or to hades to lay 
hold of salvation, but that the word is nigh thee. The gospelis at hand. Faith in it, nourished in 
the heart and openly confessed, will secure salvation. This is more fully explained in the next verse. 
9. Because if thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord. For the importance which 
Jesus attached to confession, see Matt. 10: 32; Luke 12: 8, and compare Acts 8: 37. To openly confess 
Christ in those days of persecution was a trial of faith of the severest kind. Note distinctly that there 
is no promise here to a concealed faith. And shalt believe in thine heart. That is, With all the 
heart. The belief must not be only a mental assent, but a belief that brings the whole man into loving 
trust and obedience to Christ. Such a faith is referred to in 1:5, where the “obedience of the faith” is 
described. Thou shalt be saved. Such a faith confessed unites its subject to Christ as his loving 
subject, and imparts to him the righteousness of those who have died to sin and been freed from the 
law. See 6:1-4. 10. For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness. Such a belief, 
the faith that saves, is a power over the life. ‘It influences the actions and brings us into “the obedi- 
ence of faith,” in yielding to Christ, wherein is found pardon. With the mouth. The faith of the 
heart must be openly confessed. This is a test of the faith. Unless Christ had provided such tests as 
confession and obedience we could not know whether ours was really a belief of the heart. That our 
faith moves us to confession is to us an assurance of salyation. The whole Christian life is a con- 
fession, 11. For the Scripture saith. The Scripture (Isa. 28: 16) has predicted a salvation by 
faith, when it says, ‘He that believeth shall not be put to shame,” and hence such a plan of righteous- 
ness was provided for in the Jewish Scriptures. 

12-15. For there is no difference. The Jew objected to salvation by faith, instead of by the 
law. Paul has just shown that righteousness could not be obtained by the law, and, secondly, that the 
prophets had predicted salvation by faith. But the Jew is now supposed to object that this salvation 
was for Jews only, yet Paul is preaching it to the Gentiles. Hence he declares that it is for Greek 
(Gentile), as well as Jew, as shown by the passage just quoted in verse 11. It says 
believeth, etc. He further shows that ‘the same Lord is rich to all that call upon him,” of whatever race, 
by a second quotation from the prophets, found in Joel2: 32, 18. For whosoever shall call upon 
the name of the Lord shall be saved. To “call upon the name of the Lord” implies, (1) That the 


, Every one that 


Ch. X.] ROMANS. 53 





14 How tl im j Lord shall be saved. How 14 
w then shall they call upon him in whom | ford shat Ha 4 peat 


they have not believed? and how shall they believe| in whom they have not 


: A = i 2 
in him of whom they have not heard? and how pres pelete it hon on 


hal r 7 , ») they have not heard? and 
shall they hear without a preacher: Saka Ge 


15 And how shall they preach except they be | out a preacher? and how 15 


sent? as it is written,? How beautiful are the feet | fn3y ne gute neon eee 


aE Q 7 written, How beautiful are 

of them that preach the gospel of peace, and bring | Wlten, How beautiful ar 

glad tidings of good things! glad tidings of goo 
16 But they” have not all obeyed the gospel: for erie didnot halt 16 


Hsaias saith,° Lord, who hath believed our report? | hearken to the glad ti- 
~ : ; ei dings. For Isaiah saith, 
17 So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing | Lord, who hath believed 
: our report? So belief com- 
by the word of God. % eth of hearing, and hearing 
18 But I say, Have they not heard? Yes verily, ee Dade ne 18 
their? sound went into all the earth, and their] Yea, verily, 


words unto the ends of the world. betaine re OntAE: 


19 But I say, Did not Israel know? First, Moses| 4ndtheirwords unto the 
saith,® I will provoke you to jealousy by them that But I say, Did Israel not 19 
are no people, and by a foolish nation,‘ I will anger | “Win ‘provoke you te 
you. epee ie that 

. ‘ which 1s no nation, 

20 But Esaias was very bold, and saith, I® was! Withanation void of un- 


alsa.52:7. 6Heb. 4:2. cJohn12:38. d Psa. 19:4; Matt. 24:14. e Deut. 32:21. f Tit. 3:3. g Isa. 65:1. 

















true God (Jehovah, in the Hebrew quotation) shall be approached in worship, and (2) that there shall 
be something more than saying, ‘‘Lord, Lord,” etc. (Matt. 7: 21, 22). The language, wherever used, 
implies, coming to the Lord. and calling on him in his appointed way. Compare Acts 22: 16; 2: 213; Gen. 
12:8. This promise of Joel, since it says “whosoever,” is not limited to the Jewish race. 14. How 
shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed? The passages quoted from the 
prophets show that the Gentiles also were to have the opportunity of salvation. Hence the duty of 
preaching to them is now shown. They could not “call upon the Lord” (see verse 13) without faith. 
But there could be no faith in the Lord unless they had heard of him, since knowledge is an element of 
faith. But they could not hear the gospel story until it was preached tothem. Hence, preaching to the 
Gentiles was essential to carry out the purposes of God. 15. But how shall they preach, except 
they be sentP Those must go out to them who have knowledge of the gospel. Hence it was needful 
that the apostles and evangelists be sent. Hence Christ said, “‘Go into all the world and preach to every 
creature.” Thus Paul shows the duty was laid upon him to preach to Greek as wellas Jew. As it is 
written. Isaiah 52:7. This message was to the Gentiles blessed tidings, and the passage quoted from 
Isaiah shows, under a figure, how those would rejoice who believed the glad news. See Acts 13: 48. 

16-18. But they have not all obeyed the gospel. All had not yet heard it, and hence could 
not obey it. To those who receive the gospel itis glad tidings. These fulfill the prediction of the 
prophet. But many are in unbelief, and hence do not obey the gospel. (Note that the gospel 1s to be 
obeyed.) This need not surprise us, for Isaiah predicted this also, when he said (Isa. 53:1), Lord, 
who hath believed our report? 17. So, then, faith cometh by hearing. Hence the need of 
preaching. If God by a miracle wrought faith in the heart, he could dispense with the preacher. But 
the divine arrangement is that it should result from hearing the word of God preached. For an 
example of the gospel plan, see Acts 18:8. 18. Have they not heardP Who are alluded to? Both 
Jews and Gentiles. The objector might say, Well, if faith comes by hearing, so few have heard that we 
are not responsible for our unbelief. Nay, says the apostle, the opportunity to hear has been very 
widely extended. Inthe language of the Psalmist (19: 4), Their sound (that of the preachers of the 
gospel) is gone out into all the earth. When the vast multitude converted on Pentecost were 
scattered to their homes, they carried the gospel into all parts of the civilized world. Paul was now 
writing to the church in Rome, where no apostle had ever been. 

19-21. Did not Israel know? Why, the Jew is supposed to object, if the gospel has been 
extended so widely, is the greater portion of Israel in ignorance that the Gentiles were to be saved? 
Paul replies that Israel should have known: (1) Moses (Deut. 82: 21) foretells the call of another 
people to the fayor of God. (2) 20. Isaiah still more plainly predicts the salvation of the Gentiles in 


54 ROMANS. [Ch>XI. 





found of them that sought me not; I was made dettionsing will I an- 

manifest unto them that asked not after me. And Isaiah is very bold, 20 
ave 1 ‘ and saith, 

21 But to Israel he saith, All day long I have |#4°5@itp, a os them that 


stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and sought me not; 
I became manifest unto 


gainsaying people. them that asked not of 
me. 
But as to Israel he saith, 21 
CHAPTER XI. All the day long did I 
spread out my hands unto 
The Two Olive Trees. a disobedient and gainsay- 
ing people. 


SUMMARY.—A Part of Israel Saved. The Rest Blinded by their Hardness 
of Heart. The Salvation of the Gentiles through the Fall of Israel. 
The Figure of the Two Olive Trees. The Jewish Branches Broken 
Off. The Gentile Branches Grafted In. Yet Israel Shall be Saved. 
God’s Unsearchable Judgments. CHAPTER XI. 

1 I say then, Hath God? cast away his people?) Tsay then, Did God cast 1 


2 =, 5 off his people? God forbid. 
God forbid. For” I also am an Israelite, of the seed | For 1 also am an Israelite, 


A hy ° ny ql 7 of the seed of Abraham 
of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin. of the divere! Neca 


2 God hath not cast away his people which he G06 oe peed 
foreknew.* Wot ye not what the scripture saith of Or wot ye not what the 


76 o 2 aq scripture saith of Elijah? 
Klias? how he maketh intercession to God against | \oWhe pleadeth with God 


Israel, saying, pare cilisd aie ae 
5 , 5 re rophets, 
3 Lord, they have killed thy prophets, and dig-| and aiggea acne tines 
C ie . P tars: and I am left alone, 

ged down thine altars; and I am left alone, andj 3 jhey feckany Wie. Baee 
they seek my life. what saith the answer of 


é 5 God unto him? I have left 
4 But what saith the answer of God unto him? | for myself seven thousand 


I have reserved to myself seven thousand men, who | ™®*™ W20 have not bowed 
have not bowed the knee to the image of Baal. 





@a18am. 12:22; Jer. 31:37. 6 2 Cor. 11: 225; Phil. 3:5. ¢ Rom. 8:29. d1 Kings 19:10. 








65: 1, and (3) in the next verse (65: 2) he predicts the falling away of Israel. 21. All day long, etc. 
Quoted from Isaiah 65: 2. It presents the figure of a parent, with hands extended, appealing to a way- 
ward child, That child was the Jewish nation. It was cast off because it would be cast off. It refused 
to listen to appeals. See Matt. 23:37. The apostle is far from ascribing the rejection of Israel to a 
divine decree, but he assigns the cause to Israel itself. Just so the Savior says in the passage (Matt. 
23: 37) just referred to, ‘“How often would I have gathered, etc., . . . but ye would not.? The divine 
wish was that Israel should be saved, but Israel stubbornly refused. 

1-4. Hath God cast away his peopleP In chapter 10 Paul has shown that the Gentiles were to 
come into God’s favor, and the Jews, the chosen people, to be rejected. He now asks whether the 
Jews were finally cast off. He shows that the rejection was not total, but partial, many Jews being 
sayed; and, secondly, that it was not eternal, but finally all Israel would come to Christ. I also am 
an Israelite. Hence all Isracl is not cast off, since he, an Israelite, is an apostle of Christ. He 
shows that he is of approved Jewish descent. 2. God hath not cast away his people whom he 
foreknew. Israel was the people foreknown, “the chosen people.” In verse 1, “his people” refers to 
the nation; here it must mean the same, not individuals. The nation foreknown and chosen is not 
totally and eternally cast off. This is what Paul means, and what he devotes the rest of the chapter to 
proying. He first shows that a portion of Israelis saved. Know ye not what the Scripture saith 
of EliasP The passage referred to is found in 1 Kings 19:10. Elijah, a fugitive for his life, in his 
appeal to God, assumes that all Israel had fallen into the idol worship of Ahab and Jezebel. But there 
were true worshipers left, although the nation seemed to have fallen away. In what seemed a general 
apostasy, there were seven thousand left. So, argues the apostle, there are faithful ones left now in 
Isracl. 4. Not bowed the knee to Baal. Baal was the principal deity of the Phenicians, and 
represented the sun, Jezebel, the qaeen of Ahab, was a Phenician, and sought to supplant the wor- 
ship of Jehovah with the worship of Baal. Though it seemed as though she had succeeded, still there 
were those left who had not bowed the knee to the false God. 


Ch. AT.) ROMANS. 5d 








5 Even so* then at this present time also there is the knee to Baal. Even so 5 


a remnant according to the election of grace. ar Poe erecunaet ae: 


6 And if by grace,” then és ¢é no more of works; | cording, to the election of 
otherwise grace is no more grace. But if 7 be of Riv we mose erewerts? : 
works, then it is no more grace; otherwise work is Oe Monet ene rial 7 
no more work. which Israel seeketh for, 
7 What then? Israel® hath not obtained that ther Bo deae aeined fu 


which he secketh for; but the election hath obtain- Bd eee oie acre xe 
ed it, and the rest were blinded. ten, God gave them a spir- 
: Re ys > a 4 it of stupor, eyes that they 
8 (According as it is written, God? hath given | should not see, and ears 
them the spirit of slumber,° eyes that they should eae ee Gass and 
see a David saith, 
ae ae and ears that they should not hear) unto | °P; their table be made 
Ss day. snare, and a trap, 
9 And David saith, Let their tablet be made a Se ee 


sa them: 
snare, and a trap, and a stumbling-block, and (ale PoE reves he datte 10 





recompence unto them: ened, that they may 
10 Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not oth chor down belt 
see, and bow down their back alway. Ae re Nr oman 


11 I say then, Have they stumbled that they | ble ‘that they might fall? 
should fall? God forbid: but rather through Pholt le sense eat 
fall salvation is come unto the Gentiles, for to| Gentiles,for to provoke 
provoke them to jealousy. 


a Rom. 9:27. 6 Deut. 9:4,5._¢ Rom. 10:3. d@ Isa. 29:10: Matt. 13:14; John 12:40; Acts 28:26 ,27. € Deut. 27:43 
Isa. 6:9; Jer. 5:21; Ezek. 12:2. 7f Psa. 69:22. g Acts 13:46; 18:6; 22:21. 














5,6. Even so . = «+ there is a remnant. As in the times of Ahab, there is ‘a remnant,” a 
portion of Israel left, which 1s faithful. According to the election of grace. ‘The idea contained 
in these words is this: In virtue of the election of Israel as the salvation-people, God has not left them 
in our days without a faithful remnant any more than he did in the kingdom of the Ten Tribes at the 
period when a far grosser heathenism prevailed.’’— Godet. The idea is that Israel was the elected 
(chosen people), and out of it God has always preserved a remnant by his grace. The election of indi- 
viduals 1s not referred to, but the election of a remnant to represent the race. 6. If by grace, it is 
no more of works. The salvation of the gospel is by grace, that is, it is the gift which springs from 
the love of Ged. If that be true, it is not to be earned by the works of the Jewish law. Paul is very 
emphatic in showing that the Jewish Christians were saved, not because they deserved it on account of 
keeping the law blameless, but because they accepted the offered mercy of God. 

7-10. What thenP What is the inference from the fact that the greater part of Israel has fallen 
away? It is that Israel has not obtained what it hoped and sought for, justification by the law, and is 
under condemnation, but that the election hath obtained it. “The election” means “the elect,” 
and this term is applied to all believers. Here it is limited to that portion of the elect people, Israel, 
which had accepted Christ, and hence were an clect remnant. That “election” does not mean a decree 
that an individual shall be eternally saved is shown by 2 Peter1: 10: ‘Give all diligence to make your 
calling and election sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall.’ If an individual was elected 
before time began to eternal salvation by a divine decree, no act of his could render his election surer. 
The scriptural election is one that requires diligence on our part, and effort to keep from falling. The 
rest were blinded. Israel had eyes and saw not. See Isaiah 6: 9; also Matt. 13: 14,15, The Savior 
says they were blinded because they closed their eyes. It was their own act. 8. As it is written. 
Isaiah 29:10, The deep sleep spoken of by the prophet was sent because Israel abused its opportuni- 
ties. They who love darkness will finally be left in darkness. 9. And David saith. Psalm 69: 22, 
93, This prediction is applied to the enemies of Christ. Its meaning is that their enmity shall react 
upon and injure themselves. Even their table shall become a place of danger. 10. Let their eyes 
be darkened. Darkness shall come upon them because they love darkness rather than light. Bow 
thou down their back. This implies a condition of bondage on account of their sins. 

11-15. Have they stumbled that they should fall? Shall we conclude that Israel has fallen 
forever? The apostle now proceeds to the second branch of his argument, and shows that God, for wise 
reasons, has cast off Israel for atime, but that finally the nation will be converted. Through their 


56 ROMANS. 


(Che XL. 





12 Now, if the fall of them be the riches of the 
world, and the diminishing of them the riches of 
the Gentiles; how much more their fulness? 

13 For I speak to you Gentiles, inasmuch as I? 
am the apostle of the Gentiles, I magnify mine 
office ; 

14 If by any means I may provoke to emulation 
them which are my tlesh, and might save” some of 
them. 

15 For if the casting away of them de the recon- 
ciling of the world, what shall the receiving of them 


them to jealousy. Now if 
their fall is the riches of 
the world, and their loss 
the riches of the Gentiles; 
how much more their ful- 
mess? 


12 


But I speak to you that 13 


are Gentiles. Inasmuch 
then as I am an apostle of 
Gentiles, I glorify my min- 
istry: if by any means I 
may provoke to jealousy 
them that are my flesh, and 
may save some of them. 
For if the casting away of 
them is the reconciling of 
the world, what shall the 
receiving of them be, but 


14 


7 > ad ? life from the dead? And if 16 
be, but life from the deadt ‘ the firstfruit is holy, so is 
16 For if the first-fruit be holy, the lump ¢s also fhe Jomps/and At ie ou: 
. s holy, soa 2 
holy; and if the root be holy, so are the branches. es. But if “some ‘of the WW 
g d ranches were broken off, 
17 And if some of the branches be broken off, and (bed, bel a etd 
and thou, being® a wild olive-tree, wert graffed in| olive, jvast grafted | in 
among them, and with them partakest of the root come, partaker with aon 
‘ q x ap ‘ of the root of the fatness 
and fatness of the olive-tree; aleiopledies ieee ee 


18 Boast® not against the branches; but if thou 





over the branches: but if 





@a Acts 9:15. 61 Cor. 7:16; Jas. 5:20. ¢ Lev. 23:10, dJer. 11:16. e Eph. 2:12. f1 Cor. 10:12. 





fall salvation is come to the Gentiles. Christ said, “I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unte 
me.” He referred to the cross. Rejected by the Jewish nation, and sent to the cross, he became the 
Savior of all mankind, Gentiles as well as Jews. So, too, the rejection of the gospel by the Jews, accel- 
erated the preaching among the Gentiles. See Acts 8:4; 13:46. So, too, when the Jews crucified 
Christ, “the handwriting of ordinances was nailed to the cross,” the “partition wall” between Jews and 
Gentiles was broken down. So the result of the Jews hardening themselves and rejecting Christ was, 
under the providence of God, that the Gentiles should be saved. To provoke them to jealousy. 
The elder brother, in the parable of the Prodigal Son, was filled with jealousy when he saw the younger 
son accepted by the father. 12. If the fall of them be the riches of the world. In contributing 
to the conversion of the Gentiles their fall has been “riches.” How much more their fulness? In 
the remaining part of the chapter the apostle shows the grand results which will follow the final con- 
version of the Jewish nation asabody. 18. Ispeak to you as Gentiles. As an apostle to the 
Gentiles he reminded them of what they owed to the falling away of the Jews, and was active in his 
office (magnify mine office), seeking to convert as many Gentiles as possible, hoping thus (verse 14) 
to provoke to emulation his Jewish brethren. 15. Forif the casting away of them be the 
reconciling of the world. See the notes on verse 11. Their unbelief caused the preaching of the 
gospel of reconciliation to the Gentiles. But life from the dead. The apostle, under this strong 
expression, describes a wonderful resurrection of spiritual life which will follow the national conver- 
sion of Israel. 

16-24. For if the first fruit be holy, the lump is also holy. See Numbers 15: 18-21, Some 
explain the first fruits by Abraham and the patriarchs. It probably refers, rather, to the Jewish Chris- 
tians, ‘‘the election by grace” (verse 5). Ifa portion of the nation has been saved, it is an assurance 
that the whole nation can be saved. And ifthe root be holy. The root may refer to Abraham. The 
figure is that of a tree, with the patriarchs for the root. “Holy” is used in the sense of acceptable to 
God, a common sense in the Scriptures. In the next verse the figure of the root, the stalk and the tree, 
isexpanded. 17, Now ifsome of the branches were broken off. To-understand the next seven 
verses we must have a clear idea of what is meant by the olive tree. That it means the chosen family of 
Abraham, not his children merely of the flesh, but his believing children, the heirs of the promise, is 
clear. The Jewish nation inherited the temporal promises as Abraham’s children; we become heirs of 
the promise when we become his children by faith. See Gal. 3: 28,29. The Jews, the natural branches 
of this olive tree, “‘were broken off” by unbelief. The root is Abraham. Thou, being a wild olive, 
wast grafted in. When the Jews, the natural branches, were broken off by their unbelief, the Gen- 
tile Christians, not natural branches, not of the seed of Abraham, but wild olive, “were grafted im 3? = 
that is, were adopted into God’s family, and became Abraham’s children. With them partakest of 
the root. With Jewish Christians, these Gentile Christians became partakers of all the blessings 


‘ 


Che Xtal ROMANS. ) Ba 


boast, thou bearest not the root, but the root. thee. (Ong losient, isis mot cae 
19 Thou wilt say then, The branches were broken | the root thee. “how tae te 

ry say 1en, ranches were 

off that I might be graffed in. peat Mrcders ae ahs 
20 Well; because of unbelief they were broken grafted in. Well; by their 20 

off, and thou standest by faith. Be not high-mind- oft and thou, Standest by 

ar hy faith. e not high: 
ed, but fear ra minded, but fear: for if 21 
21 For if God spared not the natural branches, | God spared not the natural 


take heed \est he also spare not thee. cpare thee. Boliold. then = 
22 Behold therefore the goodness and severity of ee 
God: on them which fell, severity ; but toward thee, fell, severity; but toward 
goodness, if? thou continue in Ais goodness; other-| {pee Gots 8o° is ok 

wise thou’ shalt be cut off. Sey eee ow 
z 3 8 a, Re shalt be cut off. And they 
23 And they also, if they abide not still in unbe- also, if they continue not 
lief, shall be graffed in, for God is able to graff | Bihelt unbelief, shall be 

them in again, ‘Meion Wadlnnten nities 
. . a 
24 For if thou wert cut out of the olive-tree, Which is by nature a wild 
which is wild by nature, and wert graffed contrary | ed contraiy to nature into 
, re Int ; a : a good olive tree; how 
to nature into a good olive-tree; how much more Aol code wan 
shall these, which be the natural branches, be graf-|which are the natural 


fed into their own olive-tree? chet oat oerne. 
25 For I would not, brethren, that ye should be ee pot Deo 25 
ignorant of this mystery, (lest ye should be wise in| this mystery, lest ye be 
your own conceits,) that blindness in part is hap-| that a hardomme nots: 
pened to Israel, until the fulness* of the Gentiles | hath befallen, He 
be come in. be come in; and so all Is- 26 


: ° : { shall : 
26 And so all Israel shall be saved; as it is writ-| 72% © Si pe 


@ Phi, 2:12.. 61 Cor, 15:2; Heb. 3:6. cJohn 15:2. @ Luke 21:24; Rev. 7:9. 

















belonging to Abraham’s seed. 18. Boast not overthe branches. There is too much of this in the 
prejudice against the Jewish race. The root beareth thee. The riches of grace of the Gentile Chris- 
tian are due to the fact that he 1s “grafted in” upon the Abrahamic stock, and becomes his child by faith. 
19. Thou wiltsay. Perhaps the Gentile believer might boast over the Jews: ‘The Jewish branches. 
were broken off, that we Gentiles might be grafted in. Is not this a preference of the Gentile?” 
20. It is not. Because of unbelief they were broken off. Had they believed, they would have: 
remained. The Gentile,is grafted in when he believes. Thou standest by faith. Unbelief would 
cut off the Gentile branch as wellas the Jew. 21. Forif God spared not the natural branches, 
the Jews, but broke them off on account of their unbelief, certainly he would not spare the Gentile, not. 
anatural branch, if he was an unbeliever. 22. Behold, therefore, the goodness and severity 
of God, “Severity” is shown in breaking off the Jewish branches on account of their unbelief; “sood- 
ness’’ in admitting Gentile believers, 28. And they also, if they abide not still in unbelief, 
As Gentile believers will be cut off unless they ‘“‘continue in the goodness of God,” so the Jews, if they 
abandon their unbelief, shall again be grafted in. They are not cut off by a decree of God casting them 
away, but by their own unbelief. 24. For if thou, etc. This argument is to the Gentile. If wild 
branches were grafted into the good olive tree, the Gentiles grafted into the spiritual stock of Abraham, 
how much more likely is it that the natural branches, the Jews, shall be grafted again into their own 
olive tree, the seed of Abraham to which they belong by nature. 

25-27. I would not - - have you ignorant of this mystery. Any secret thing, known to 
but a few, 1s called ‘‘a mystery.”’ The mystery that Paul is about to unfold is concerning the conver- 
sion of Israel, He unfolds it lest the Gentile Christians may have incorrect views, or be wise in their 
own conceits. The first thing noted in explaining this mystery, is that hardening hath happened 
to Israel. This blindness, or hardening, had been due to Israel’s sins, especially to unbelief. The 
second fact is that it would continue until the fulness of the Gentiles had come in, or the greater : 
part of the Gentile world been converted. 26. SoallIsrael shall be saved. After the fulness of 
the Gentiles has come in, the Jews, as a people, shall be saved. That is, of the Jews then lying, the 


58 ROMANS. 








ten,* There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, 
and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob: 

27 For this” ¢s my covenant unto them, when I 
shall take away their sins. 

28 As concerning the gospel, they are enemies for 
your sakes: but as touching the election, they are 
beloved? for the fathers’ sakes. 

29 For the gifts and calling of God are without 
repentance.‘ 

30 For as ye in times past have not believed 
God, yet have now obtained mercy through their 
unbelief; 

31 Even so have these also now not believed that 
through your mercy they may also obtain mercy. 

32 For God hath concluded them all in unbelief, 
that he may have mercy upon all. 

33 O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom 
and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his 
judgments, and his ways past finding out! 

34 For who® hath known the mind of the Lord? 
or who hath been his counsellor? 

385 Or who? hath first given to him, and it shall 
be recompensed unto him again? 

36 For’ of him, and through him, and to him, are 
all things: to whom be glory for ever. Amen. 





[Ch. XI. 





There shall come out of 


Zion the Deliverer ; 
He shall turn away un- 
godliness from Jacob: 
And this is my covenant 
unto them, 
When I shall take away 
their sins. 
As touching the gospel, 
they are enemies for your 
sake: but as touching the 
election, they are beloved 
for the fathers’ sake. For 
the gifts and the calling of 
God are without repent- 
ance. For as ye in time 
past were disobedient to 
God, but now have obtain- 
ed mercy by their disobe- 
dience, even so have these 
also now been disobedi- 
ent, that by the mercy 
shewn to you they also 
may now obtain mercy. 
For God hath shut up all 
unto disobedience, that he 
might have mercy upon 


all. 

O the depth of the riches 
both of the wisdom and 
the knowledge of God! 
how unsearchable are his 
judgments, and his ways 
past tracing out! For who 
hath known the mind of 
the Lord? or who hath 
been his counsellor? or 
who hath first given to 
him, and it shall be reeom- 
pensed unto him again? 
For of him, and through 
him, and unto him, are all 
things. To him bethe glory 
forever. Amen. 








@ Psa. 14:7; Isa. 59:20. b Jer. 31:31; Heb. 8:8; 10:16. c Deut. 9:5. 


g 1 Cor. 8:6; Col. 1:16. 


d Num. 28:19. 


é Isa. 40:18. fJob 35:7. 


27 


28 


29° 


30 


31 


32 


33 


34 


35 


36 





great part shall be converted. The nation shall turn to the Lord. Even asitis written. Paul does 
not quote literally in what follows, but cites the sense of Isa. 59: 20, 21, and Isa. 27:9. There shall 
come a Deliverer out of Zion. Christ. He shall turn ungodliness from Jacob. Convert to 
righteousness the descendants of Jacob, the Jews.. 27. This is my covenant unto them. The 
Lord’s covenant unto them is what follows, “Take away their sins.” Hence these passages imply the 
‘restoration of Israel to the divine favor. EA 
-28-32. As touching the gospel, they are enemies for your sake. Their rejection of the 
gospel had proved a blessing to the Gentile world. See verse 11. Hence their enmity was allowed for 
the sake of the conversion of the Gentiles. As touching the election. The nation was a chosen 
nation. Though enemies of God, God still remembered that they were children of Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob,and did not cast them off forever, but remembered them in love. To this day he has preserved 
Israel, and yet purposes the salvation of the nation. 29. For the gifts and calling, etc. God does 
not change his purposes or fail to keep his covenant. What he has promised concerning Israel will be 
fulfilled. 80. For as ye, etc. The Gentiles. Formerly they were without God, but had now 
obtained mercy. This was due, indirectly, as shown above, to the Jewish unbelief. 831. Even so 
have these also now not believed. These Jews who were now in unbelief. Their disobedience 
had opened the door for the Gentiles. But the mercy shown the Gentiles, the fact that they are honor- 
ing and worshiping God, shall be a means of converting the Jews, Thus shall they also (the Jews) 
obtain mercy. 32. For God hath shut up all unto disobedience. Hath included all under dis- 
obedience. First the Gentiles were disobedient, but now were called. Now the Jews were disobedient, 
but would finally be saved. God would have mercy on all, both Jew and Gentile, 

83-36. Othe depth of the riches. The rest of the chapter is an outburst of wonder 
From a mountain height the apostle surveys the sublime plan of God, and his soul breaks out ina 
transport of delight. In this wonderful plan for the salvation of Jew and Gentile there is an unfathom- 
able depth of riches, and wisdom, and knowledge. The depth of the knowledge is shown in the latter 
part of verse 33. The wisdom is described in verse 34, and the riches in verse 35. 


and praise. 


Ch. XIL] ROMANS. 





CHAPTER XII. 
Christian Life. 


‘SSUMMARY.—The Divine Mercy should Move Us. Being Transformed. 
Humility. Faithfulness in Our Own Personal Duties. Loving with 
Pure Hearts. Blessing for Cursing; Good for Evil. Leaving Ven- 
geance tothe Lord. Treatment of Knemies. 

1 I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mer- 
cies of God, that ye* present your bodies? a living 
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your 
reasonable service. 

2 And° be not conformed to this world; but* be 
ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that 
ye may prove® what is that good, and acceptable, 
and perfect will of God. 

3 For I say, through the grace given unto me, to 
every man among you, not to think of himself more 
highly than he ought to think; but to think soberly, 
according as God hath dealt' to every man the 
measure of faith. 

4 For as we have many members in one body, 
and all members have not the same office; 

5 So% we, being many, are one body in Christ, 
and every one members one of another. 


59 


CHAPTER XII. 


I beseech you therefore, 1 
brethren, by the mercies 
of God, to present your 
bodies a living sacrifice, 
holy, acceptable to God, 
which is your reasonable 
service. And be not fash- 
ioned according to this 
world: but be ye trans- 
formed by the renewing 
of your mind, that ye may 
prove what is the goodand 
acceptable and perfect will 
of God. 

For I say, through the 
grace that was given me, to 
every man that is among 
you, not to think of him- 
self more highly than he 
ought to think; but s0 to 
think as to think soberly, 
according as God hath 
dealt to each man a meas- 
ure of faith. For even as 
we have many members in 
one body, and all the 
members have not the 
same office: so we, who 
are many, are one body in 
Christ, and severally mem- 








aiCor. 6:13. 8 Heb. 10:20. cl Pet. 1:14; 1John2:15, d Eph. 1:18; 4:23; Col. 1:21,22, 3:10. e Eph. 5:10,175 
1Thes. 4:3. f1Cor. 12:7; Eph. 4:7. g Eph. 1:23. 
a rn SS aE EO 


1, 2. I beseech you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God. The depth of the riches of 
the divine mercy has been shown in the argument of the preceding chapters, mercy for Jew and Gen- 
tile believers, and mercy in prospect for all Israel. The argument is now ended; God’s plans have 
been explained, and the apostle appeals to those who have found mercy, in the name of that mercy, “to 
continue in the goodness of God.” That you present your bodies a living sacrifice. The Jewish 
dispensation with its sacrifices was ended; it closed when Christ, ‘“‘our passover,” was offered for us. 
But a new order of sacrifice has come in. We should give ourselves. As the victim on the altar was 
surrendered wholly to God, so our bodies with all their members should be consecrated to his service ; 
not as slain, but as “living sacrifices.” We do this when they become the temple of the Holy Spirit, and 
are used to serve God. Reasonable service. The consecration of the body to God is not an out- 
ward act, like the sacrifice on the altar, but an act of the mind, or reason; hence ‘ca reasonable service.” 
2. Be not conformed tothis world. The spirit of the world is opposed to that of Christ. Satan is 
“the Prince of this world.” Christ died (Gal. 1: 4) “to deliver us from this present wicked world.” 
Hence the service of Christ renders necessary a refusal to fashion ourselves after its ways. But be ye 
transformed. Instead of following the ways of the world, the Christian must be “transformed,” 
changed into a new form of life by the renewing of his mind, by having a new spirit, and walking 
after the Spirit. That ye may prove. Demonstrate, show forth. The saint, transformed, renewed 
will show forth in his life “the will of God.” 

8-5. ForlI say, through the grace given untome. The grace given unto him, specially, was 
that of apostleship. See Rom. 1:5; 16: 15; 1Cor.3:10. Not to think more highly, etc. A much 
needed exhortation. To be puffed ap in one’s own conceits is the end of progress. It is the humble who 
are exalted; those that hunger who are filled. Think soberly. Let each one take a sober judgment 
of himself, of his powers, and duties. The measure of faith. That measure of faith which would 
‘enable one to exercise spiritual gifts. The verses that follow show that this is Paul’s meaning. It is 
not the ordinary faith that saves the soul, but the extraordinary faith, which was accompanied in the 
first century by supernatural gifts, that is meant. 4. For as we have many members, etc. The 
church is likened to the human body in which the various organs each has its own office; so (verse 5) in 
the church, we being many, are one body in Christ, and all related to each other as the organs of 


‘the body are related. 


60 ROMANS. (Ch. XT. 


6 Having? then gifts differing according to the bers one of another. And 6 
= a ~ 1 In. iver: - 
grace that is given to us, whether prophecy,” Jet ws | cordine to the grace that 
a ; * 1 1 . was given to us, whether 
prophesy according to the proportion of faith; peDpliooy, Wee We pravecde 


7 Or ministry, let us wait on our ministering; or® according, to tBE BED ren 
f : iono aith ; or minis- 
he that teacheth, on teaching; try, let us give ourselves to 


d ~ > | 7 ; our ministry; or he that 
8 Or* he that exhorteth, on exhortation; he that taachol lobe tenenid 
giveth, let him do tt with simplicity;* he that rul-|or ne that exhorteth, to 8 


8 : his exhorting: he that giv- 
eth, with diligence; he that sheweth mercy, with) eth. iz him do dt with liber: 


s ality; he that ruleth, with 
cheerfulness. diligence ; he that sheweth 


9 Let love be without dissimulation. Abhor mercy, with Cheertulness.— 
ol 3 by 0 ° etlove be without hypoc- 
that! which is evil, cleave to that which is good. cis, bhor that ech 


Ee 5 , i evil; cleave to that which 
10 Be kindly affectioned one to another with |& on ie ae ee 


brotherly love; in honour preferring one another; brethren be tenderly affec- 
° 5 o . ‘os ioned on sat 
11-Not slothful in business;* fervent. in spirit; | honour aretermne one a 


serving the Lord; plothfal’ tovent ce a u 
12 Rejoicing” in hope;! patient in tribulation: | serving the Lora; rejoicing 12 
continuing instant in prayer; Gon Gonluaingerediacth 
13 Distributing! to the necessity of saints; given* fee ee 
to hospitality. saints ; given to hospital- 
14 Bless! them which persecute you: bless, and | {cute “soue mies’ Bet; 4 


eurse not. Rejoice with 15 
CESS not. | é ele j them that rejoice; weep 
15 Rejoice with them that do rejoice; and weep 
with them that weep. 


@1Pet. 4:10. 61 Cor. 12:10. c Gal. 6:6. d Acts 15:32; 1 Cor. 14:3. e Acts 20:28; 1 Pet. 5:2. J Amos 5:15. 
g Rev. 3:15. h Heb. 3:6. i Heb. 10:36. y Heb. 6:10. k& Heb. 13:2. 71 Pet. 3:9. 














6-8. Having then gifts. Each in the church had his duties, just as the hand, or foot, or eye of 
the body. These duties were indicated by the “gift” dealt out by ‘‘the measure of faith.” They differed 
according to the grace that was given. Compare verse 3. One gift was given to one, as he was 
seen to be fitted for it, and another gift to another. Seven gifts are now spoken of in succession.. The 
first four are official, and some of them are extraordinary. Whether prophecy. To prophesy was to 
speak by inspiration. As the early church did not yet have the New Testament, many were thus 
inspired to speak, One would be called to this work. '7. Or ministry. If instead of prophecy, our 
gift be the more lowly one of ministering, let us give our time and attention to it. The word rendered 
“ministry” is Diakonia, “Deaconship,” service. Or he that teacheth. ‘The work of an elder, or 
bishop, who must be “apt to teach.” If this was one’s work, his soul must be putintoit. 8. Or he 
that exhorteth. He whose peculiar strength was to encourage feeble saints, and to stir up Chris- 
tians to duty. He that giveth. A duty of all, which must be discharged without Ostentation. See 
Matt.6:2. He that ruleth. One who is an elder should attend to his duty with diligence, an exhor- 
tation that a great many elders have overlooked. Every leader should be diligent. He that sheweth 
mercy. Whenever called upon to show compassion, 

9-13. Let love be without dissimulation. Not a deceitful profession of love, but genuine; not 
like that of Judas to Christ, or Joab to Abner: a kiss anda stab, Abhor that which is evil. Evil 
must be repulsive to the saint; good, on the other hand, attractive. 10. With brotherly love. The 
brotherhood of the saints was not a name only, but a real tie of tenderness and love; and each, in the 
spirit of true brotherhood, was to seek the honor of his Christian brother. 11. Not slothful in 
business. See the Revision. The idea is, “Give all diligence.’ Fervent in spirit. Zealous, 
enthusiastic, not indifferent. Serving the Lord. Whatever we find to do is to be done with otfr 
might, but above all, the service of Christ. 12. Rejoicing in hope. Hopeful, and hence rejoicing 
in the prospect. Patient in tribulation. Patient in sorrow, suffering and persecution. Patience 
implies steadfastness. In prayer. ‘Praying always and fainting not’ (Luke 18:1). 18. Distrib- 
uting. Making the needs of fellow saints your own and helping them. Given to hospitality. This 
duty was especially needful in those early days when Christians were so often driven from their homes 
by persecution. ; 

14-17. Bless them that persecute you. See Matt.5: 44. Thus did Christ on the cress, and the 
martyred Stephen. He who can obey this precept is a transformed man. 15. Rejoice with them 


Ch: XIUT.] ROMANS. 


61 





16 Be of the same mind one toward anothe:z. 
Mind not high things, but condescend to men of 
low estate. Be not wise in your own conceits. 

17 Recompense to no man evil for evil. Provide 
things honest in the sight of all men. 

18 If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live 
peaceably with all men. 

19 Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but 
rather give place unto wrath: for it is written,* 
Vengeance zs mine; I will repay, saith the Lord. 

20 Therefore” if thine enemy hunger, feed him; 
if he thirst, give him drink: for in so doing thou 
shalt heap coals of fire on his head. 

21 Be’ not overcome of evil, but overcome evil 
with good. ; 


CHAPTER XIII. 


The Christian and Civil Governments. 


SuMMARY.—Civil Government an Appointment of God. A Protection to 
the Law-Abiding. A Terror to Evil Doers. Must be Supported by 
Taxes and Customs. Love the Fulfillment of the Divine Law. The 
Christian to Live a Holy, Spiritual Life. 

1 Let every soul? be subject unto the higher 
powers; for® there is no power but of God: the 
powers that be are ordained of God. 





a Deut. 32:35. 6 Prov. 25:21. c1Pet.2:21. d1Cor. 7:21; Titus 3:1. 


with them that weep. Be 
of the same mind one to- 
ward another, Set not your 
mind on high things, but 
condescend to things that 
are lowly. Be not wise in 
yourownconceits. Render 
to no man evil for evil. 
Take thought for things 
honourable in the sight of 
allmen. If 1t be possible, 
as much as in you lieth, be 
at peace with all men. 
Avenge not yourselves, 
beloved, but give place un- 
to wrath: for it is written, 
Vengeance belongeth unto 
me; I will recompense, 
saith the Lord. Butif thine 
enemy hunger, feed him; 
if he thirst, give him drink: 
for in so doing thou shalt 
heap coals of fire upon his 
head. Be not overcome of 
evil, but overcome evil 
with good. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


16 


ras 


9 


21 


Let every soul bein sub- 1 


jection to the higher pow- 
ers: for there is no power 
but of God; and the powers 
that be are ordained of 


e Proy. 8:15; Dan. 2:21; 4:32; John 19:11. 





that rejoice, etc. Sympathize with the joys and sorrows of others. 16. Be of the same mind, 
etc. Let there be harmony; a spirit of concord. Mind not high things. Do not seek for official or 
social distinction. Obedience to this would eliminate caste from the church. Condescend to 
things that are lowly. Soreads the Revision. Instead of seeking pre-eminence, we are to walk in 
lowly spirit like our Savior. Be not wise in your own conceits. Conceited and opinionated as the 
result. 

18-21. Live peaceably with all men. If you can do so. Sometimes it is impossible. Some- 
times sinners are exceedingly mad against the saints. But we are to be “‘peacemakers” (Matt. 5: 9). 
19. Beloved, avenge not yourselves. If we are injured, we are to leave the matter in the hands 
of God and give place unto his wrath, He sees and resents the injuries of his children. For it is 
written. Deut. 32:35. The Lord claims it as his prerogative to avenge what needs to be avenged. 
When we do it, we trample on the divine rights. 20. If thine enemy hunger, feed him. This is 
the spirit of Christ’s command, to return good for evil, Compare Prov. 20: 21, 23, Thou shalt heap 
coals of fire on his head. Thou wilt by this kindness most readily subdue him, and make him feel 
most keenly the wrong he has done. 21. Be not overcome of evil. Don’t let the fact that you are 
treated wickedly induce you to do wrong, but overcome evil by returning good for evil. This sums 
up the whole matter respecting the treatment of adversaries. Happy would it be if the Christian 
world could come up to these requirements! The logic of kind deeds is more powerful than the 
logic of argument. ‘ 

1-5. Let every soul be subject to the higher powérs. To the established civil government. 
Why should Paul, in this portion of the epistle devoted to Christian life, give this exhortation to obedi- 
ence to civil government? Perhaps for several reasons: (1) The Christians at that early period were 
usually associated by the heathen with the Jews, and the Jews were noted for turbulence. See Acts 
18:2. (2) The fires that broke forth a few years later, in the Jewish uprising that led to the destruction 
of Jerusalem, were already smouldering wherever there were those of Jewish blood. Many Christians 
were Jews by birth. (3) There was danger that Christians, especially under persecution, should be 
inclined to make disturbance. (4) Some even held that since Christ’s kingdom was established human 


62 ROMANS. 


- 2 Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, re- 
sisteth the ordinance of God; and they that resist 
shall receive to themselves damnation: 

3 For? rulers are not a terror to good works, but 
to the evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of the 
power? Do” that which is good, and thou shalt 
have praise of the same: 

4 For he is the minister of God to thee for good. 
But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he 
beareth not the sword in vain: for he is the minis- 
ter of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him 
that doeth evil. 

5 Wherefore’ ye must needs be subject, not only 
for wrath, but also for conscience sake. 

6 For, for. this cause pay ye tribute also: for 
they are God’s ministers, attending continually 
unto this very thing. 

7 Render therefore to all their dues: tribute to 
whom tribute 7s due; custom to whom custom;® 
fear to whom fear; honour to whom honour. 

8 Owe no man any thing, but to love one anoth- 
er: for’ he that loveth another hath fulfilled the 


[Ch. XIII. 


God. Therefore he that 2 
resisteth the power, with- 
standeth the ordinance of 
God: and they that with- 
stand shall receive to 
themselves judgment. For 3 
rulers are not a terror to 


| the good work, but to the 


evil. And wouldest thou 
have no fear of the power? 
do that which is good and 
thou shalt have praise 
from the same: for he isa 4 
minister of God to thee for 
good. Butif thou do that 
which is evil, be afraid; 
for he beareth not the 
sword in vain: for he isa 
minister of God, an aveng- 
er for wrath to him that 
doeth evil. Wherefore ye 5 
must needs be in subjec- 
tion, not only because of 
the wrath, but also for 
conscience sake. For, for 6 
this cause ye pay tribute 
also; for they are minis- 
ters of God’s service, at- 
tending continually upon 
this very thing. Render 7 
to all their dues: tribute 
to whom tribute is due; 
custom to whom custom; 
fear to whom fear; honour 
to whom honour. 

Owe no man any thing, 8 
save to love one another; 





law. 
' @2Sam. 23:3; Psa. 94:20. 


for he that loveth his 
e Lev. 19:3. jf Matt. 7:12. 











61 Pet. 3:18. cEHccl. 8:2. d Luke 20:25. 





governments had no rightful existence. There is no power but of God. He is the source of ali 
authority, and he has appointed human governments for the welfare of man. The existing government 
over us is to be regarded as a divine arrangement. 2. Whosoever therefore resisteth the power. 
It follows that he who seeks to break down his government is fighting the ordinance of God, and shaly 
be liable to punishment. This implies a loyal submission to the form of government over us. it does 
not imply that we shall obey wicked magistrates when they command us to disobey God. See Acts 
4:19. 3. For rulers are not a terror to the good work. This is the general rule. Of course 
there have been occasional exceptions, when some human monster has been invested with absolute 
power, but the principle is true. Itis not the law-abiding, but the lawless, who fear the law. Rulers 
as a Class are a blessing. There was an exception a few years later when Nero developed his fiendish 
hate of all good. 4. For he is the minister of God to thee for good. The ruler, the guardian of 
order and the preserver of peace is, as arule, a blessing. He beareth not the sword in vain. Not 
only did the magistrate wear the sword, but one was borne before him in public processions as an 
emblem of his right to use it in the interests of order and justice. 5. Wherefore not only 
for wrath, but for conscience’s sake. There are two reasons for obedience to the civil ruler: 
(1) If one fails to obey him, he willbe a subject of his wrath (judgment) and be punished. (2) It is 
God’s will that we should obey our civil rulers. Hence, conscience should be a motive. 

6,7. For this cause pay ye tribute also. Taxes. The taxes gathered from the Roman 
provinces were called tribute. As the rulers are God’s ministers, his agents to attend to necessary 
duties, itis right that they should be supported. 7. Render therefore to all their dues. To all 
rulers. Render them whatever they have aright toclaim. Tribute. Direct taxes, whether upon per 
sons or property. Custom. A toll on goods, similar to the modern tariff. It was usually collected at 
the gates of cities on all goods entering. See Matt. 9: 9. 

8-10. Owe no man anything, save to love one another. Not only pay all tribute due, but all 
that is due every man. Every obligation must be discharged. The church member, who makes debts 
and does not meet them, violates this command. Bengel says: “Pay every debt; let none remain due 
to any man, save that immortal debt of mutual love, which, though fully paid, is still forever due.” 
Hath fulfilled the law. He who loves his neighbor will not do to his neighbor any of the things 
forbidden by the law; will not steal, kill, commit adultery, bear false witness, covet, and hence his love 
fulfills the Mosaic iaw. 9. It is briefly comprehended. It is summed up in the single sentence, 


Ch. XIV.] ROMANS. 


63: 





9 For this, Thou shalt not commit adultery, 


Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou) 


shalt not bear false witness, Thou shalt not covet; 
and if there be any other commandment, it is briefly 
comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou® shalt 
love thy neighbour as thyself. 

10 Love worketh no ill to his neighbour: there- 
fore love zs the fulfilling of the law. 

11 And that, knowing the time, that now 7 7s 
high time” to awake out of sleep: for now ¢s our 
salvation nearer than when we believed. 

12 The night is far spent, the day is at hand: let 


neighbor hath fulfilled the 
law. For this, Thou shalt 
notcommit adultery, Thou 
shalt-not kill, Thou shalt 
not steal, Thou shalt not 
covet, and if there be any 
other commandment, it is 
summed up in this word, 
namely, Thou shalt love 
thy neighbor as thyself. 
Love worketh no ill to his 
neighbor: love therefore is 
the fulfillment of the law. 

And this, knowing the 
season, that now it is high 
time for you to awake out 
of sleep: for now is salva- 
tion nearer to us than 
when we first believed. 


9 


The night is far spent, and 12, 
us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and° the day is at hand: let us 
as he 
let us put on the armour of light. olka of divers. and iet 
; i ° 1 us put on the armour o 
13 Let* us walk honestly, as in the day; not in Tou cere cei ae 
rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and |ly, as in the day; not in 
es trif | . 2 revelling and drunken- 
wantonness, not® in strife anc envylng; ness, not in chambering 
f i £]and wantonness, not in 
14 But* put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and BE pe ere eaters 
make not provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts | put ye on the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and make not pro- 
thereof. uous se ese to ful- 
jil the lusts thereof. 
CHAPTER XIV. 
Differences of Opinion. 
SUMMARY.—Differences Concerning Food and Holy Days. We May not 
Condemn One Another for Things Indifferent. Let Us not Judge 
One Another. Let Us be Charitable to Each Other. The Kingdom 
ae than Meats, Drinks, or Days. Do Nothing Doubtful in your CHAPTER XIV. 
suns But him that is weak in 1 


1 Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but 
not to doubtful disputations. 





faith receive ye, yet not to 





a Lev. 19:83; Gal. 5:14; Col. 3:14; Jas, 2:8. 61 Cor. 15:34. ¢ Eph. 6:13. 


g Gal. 5:16. A1 Cor. 8:9. 


d Phil. 4:8. 


edas. 3:14. f Gal. 3:27. 





Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. The several laws that flow from love are gathered up 
in this saying as a fountain head. 10. Love worketh no ill, etc. Neither the ills forbidden in the 
commandments, nor any other. Love is the fulfilling of the law. Not the law, but law. There is 
no article in the Greek. All divine law is fulfilled by love. God requires nothing which is not compre- 
hended in this word. , 

11-14. It is high time to awake out of sleep. To awake from carelessness and indifference, 
For now is our salvation nearer, etc. Their eternal salvation, That was certainly true of them, 
and is true of every believernow. Some have thought that Paul referred to the speedy second coming 
of the Lord. He did not know the time of that event, nor did any man (Matt, 24: 36), but it might be 
that he shared the hope of the early, suffering church, that it would be speedy. Seel Thess. 5: 1, 2; 
2 Thess. 2:1. 12. The night is far spent. The night is the period before the full realization of 
that salvation named in verse 11, whether that be when Christ comes, or when we are called to Christ. 
That salvation is the day. The works of darkness. Such sinful deeds as men do under the cover 
of darkness, and all sinful deeds. The armour of light. The armor worn in the light, and with 
which the Christian will be clad when “‘the day” comes. See Eph. 6:11. 13. Let us walk honestly. 
Dishonesty seeks the night. The children of the day will walk honestly. This implies honest, 
upright, pure lives, which need no concealments. Not in rioting. Nocturnal revels. Chambering 
and wantonness. In lascivious vice. Not in strife and jealousy. These followed naturally 
upon revels and drunkenness, and shameless sensuality. This passage is referred to by the great 
Augustine as the cause of his conversion. It rebuked his own sins, which were the common sins of his 
time. (Confessions, 8.12.) 14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. See Gal. 3: 27, for the way 
to put on Christ. To put on Christ is to enter into fellowship with him. He who is in fellowship with 
Christ cannot fulfill the lusts of the flesh. “He walks after the Spirit and not after the flesh.” 


64 ROMANS. (CRO 








2 For one believeth that he* may eat all things: Gonbeia) dispatatiotis, One 2 
i man ha aith to eat a 
another, who is weak, eateth herbs. flings: but he thar ie poe 


Q G : ee . eateth herbs. Let not him 3 
3 Let not him that eateth despise him that eateth Hise eureu tor ora 


not; and? let not him which eateth not judge him him that eateth not; and 

. . etn I at eateth no 

that eateth: for God hath received him. judge him that eateth for 

J € : ‘ a } . | Go ath received him, 
4 Who art thou that judgest another man’s ser Whoa a ane 

vant? to his own master he standeth or falleth: yea, | the servant of another? to 


. - this own lord he standeth 
he shall be holden up; for God is able to make him ox fulletls Yeah ee 
stand. 


; Be ae 2 stand; for ne 
Or ath power to make 

5 One*t man esteemeth one day above another; him stand. One man es. 6 
another esteemeth every day alike. Let every man | (inuy. another esteemeth 
be fully persuaded in his own mind. every day alike. Let each 


c man be fully assured in his 
6 He that regardeth the day, regardeth ¢t unto|own mind? He that re. 6 


the Lord; and he that'regardeth not the day, to the | ardeth the day, regara- 


Lord he doth not regard zt. He that eateth, eateth | he that eateth, eateth unto 
ie 3 : h the Lord, for he giveth 
to the Lord, for® he giveth God thanks; and he| Goa thanks: and be that 
that eateth not, to the Lord he eateth not, and giv- he uitben wakes ee 
eth God thanks. pe ke a poss = 1 
b ara us liveth to himse an 
7 For* none of us liveth to himself, and no man| tone dieth to himself. For 8 
: whether we live, we live 
dieth to himself. & s unto the Lord ; or whether 
8 For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; |we die, we die unto the 


fo i 5 Lord: whether we live, 
and whether we die, we die unto the Lord: whether therefore, or die, we are 
we live therefore, or die, we are the Lord’s. 











@1 Cor. 10:25. 6 Col. 2:16. ¢Jas. 4:12. d@ Gal. 4:10. e1 Cor. 10:31; 1 Tim. 4:3. JF1Cor. 6:19; Gal. 2:20. 


1-4. Him that is weak in the faith. Not firmly established; “not rooted and grounded in the 
faith ;” not fully instructed in Christian knowledge. Receive ye, etc. Take him into your fellow- 
ship, but not to discuss and pass judgments on any doubts he may entertain. “Literally, not acting so 
as to make distinctions about disputatious reasonings.”—Conybeare and Howson. The idea is that dis- 
putes over doubtful questions must not be in the way of Christian fellowship. 2, For one believeth, 
etc. The apostle now names one of those differences of opinion that had made trouble. Differences 
had risen over food. The flesh of animals offered in idol sacrifices was offered in the markets, and one 
buying could not always be sure that he did not get it. Others, Jewish Christians, or of Judaizing ten- 
dencies, believed it wrong to eat any food forbidden by the law. Perhaps others believed, like the 
Essenes, that the regenerate man should eat only vegetables, like the primitive race in Eden. Hence, 
for one or all of these causes, some thought meats ought to be abstained from entirely. Disputes arose 

’ over this difference. 8. Let not him that eateth despise, etc. Look with contempt on what he 
considers the weakness of the other. Let not him that eateth not judge, etc. Condemnas guilty 
of sinful practices. For God hath received him. God hath taken him into his church without 
making conditions concerning meats. Hence, you have no right to reject him. 4. Who art thou 
that judgest another man’s servant? Since God has received him, he is God’s servant, and his 
accountability is not to you, but to God. God is able to make him stand. In spite of what some 
of you think is an error, he shall stand, for God is able to keep him. This conduct shall not cut him off 
from the grace of God in which we all stand. 

5-9. One man esteemeth one day above another. <A second difference of opinion is now 
cited. Some, Jewish converts or Gentiles who did not understand that the old covenant was ended, 
believed that the Jewish Sabbaths and new moons should be kept sacred. Compare Col. 2: 16, and Gal. 
4:10. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. Let each act as he thinks right, 
If he thinks he ought to observe the days, let him do as his conscience demands. If he thinks other- 
wise, let him not observe them. 6. He that regardeth the day, ete. It is regarded unto the 
Lord if he keeps it, because he thinks it is the Lord’s will. If another refuses to keep it, because he 
believes it is the Lord’s will that he should not, his non-keeping is to the Lord. He that eateth. 
Meats. See verse 2. He who obeys what he regards the Lord’s will in this, either eating or abstaining, 
does it with reference tothe Lord. '7. For none of us liveth to himself, No Christian lives to 
please himself, but with the conscious aim of pleasing the Lord. 8. We are the Lord’s. While 


eee hae 8 ROMANS. 


9 For? to this end Christ both died, and rose, and 
revived, that he might be’ Lord both of the dead 
and living. 

10 But why dost thou judge thy brother? or why 
dost thou set at nought thy brother? for® we shall 
all stand before the judgment-seat of Christ. 

11 For it is written,4 As I live, saith the Lord, 
every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall 
confess to God. 

12 So then® every one of us shall give an account 
of himself to God. ; 

13 Let us not therefore judge one another any 
more: but judge this rather, that? no man put a 
stumbling-block, or an occasion to fall, in his broth- 
er’s way. 

14 I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus,¢ 
that there 7s nothing unclean of itself: but to® him 
that esteemeth anything to be unclean, to him 7é 7s 
unclean. 

15 But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, 
now walkest thou not charitably. Destroy not him 
with thy meat for whom Christ died. 

16 Let! not then your good be evil spoken of: 





65 


the Lord’s. For to this end 
Christ died, and lived 
again, that he might be 
Lord of both the dead and 
the living. But thou, why 
dost thou judge thy broth- 
er? or thou again, why 
dost thou set at nought 
thy brother? for we shall 
all stand before the judg- 
ment-seat of God. For it 
is written, 

As L live, saith the Lord, 
to me every knee shall 
bow, 

And every tongue shall 
confess to God. 

So then each one of us 
shall give account of him- 
self to God. 

Let us not therefore 
judge one another any 
more: but judge ye this 
rather, that no man puta 
stumbling - block in his 
brother’s way, or an occa- 
sion of falling. I know, 
and am persuaded in the 
Lord Jesus, that nothing 
is unclean of itself: save 
that to him who account- 
eth anything to be un- 
clean, to him it is unclean, 
For if because of meat thy 
brother is grieved, thou 
walkest no longer in love. 
Destroy not with thy meat 
him for whom Christ died. 


9 


10 


11 


14 





j : 7 Let not then your good be 16 

17 For’ the kingdom of God is not meat and evil spoken of for the i 
drink: but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the | kingdom of God is not eat- 
ing and drinking, but 


Holy Ghost. 


a2 Cor. 5:15. 6 Acts 10:36. 


righteousness and peace 








d Isa. 45:23. e Matt- 12:36. 71Cor. 8:9. 
g1Cor. 8:8. 


(2 ea 25:31; Jude 14,15. g Titus 1:15. 


1Cor. 8:7. i Kom. 12:17. 








living, the aim must be to do the Lord’s will, and even when we die we will be fully resigned to his will. 
We are not at our own disposal. 9. For to this end Christ both died, and rose, ete. The life of 
the Christian is a new life that springs out of Christ’s death (Rom. 6: 4); we die with him; we rise with 
him; hence, since our life comes from him, and springs from his death and resurrection, these make 
him our Lord, whether we be living or dead. 

10-18. Why dost thoujudge thy brother? Christ, the Lord of all, is his Lord. He shall judge 
him and us alike. We are not the judges, for we shall all stand before the judgment-seat of 
Christ. 11. Foritis written. In Isaiah 45:23. The passage quoted declares that the whole world 
will yet make humble acknowledgment of the sovereignty of Jehovah. 12. So then every one of 
us shall give account. God’s universal sovereignty gives him the right to call every mortal to 
account. Hence, we should leave judgment to God. 18. Let us not therefore judge one 
another. Since God is to judge us all, brethren should not condemn each other for differences of 
opinion over some untaught question. But judge this rather. Rather condemn severely throwing 
a stumbling-block in a brother’s way. A stumbling-block is anything which might cause a brother to 

ll. 
ee 15. ITIknow .. . inthe Lord Jesus. The conviction is that of a mind in communion 
with Christ, enlightened by his Spirit. That nothing. Nokind of food. Is unclean of itself. Is 
by its own nature such that it is a sin to partake of it. The legal distinction between clean and unclean 
animals is abolished. But to him. If one, uninstructed, considers anything unclean, to his con- 
science it is so. It is wrong for him to eatit. 15. If thy brother be grieved with thy meat. 
If his feelings are hurt because you eat food that he thinks it is sinful to eat, it would be charitable for 
you to abstain from it for his sake. Destroy not him. His grief, and the effect upon him of seeing 
you do what he regards as sinful, may be to destroy him. It is kinder to give up the meat than to risk 
his destruction. If Christ died for him, you surely can do that much. 

16-18. Let not then your good be evil spoken of. You have greater knowledge than these 
weak brethren, and know that “nothing is unclean.” That is “good.” But if you sternly insist on your 

(5) 











66 ROMANS. (Ch. XV. 
18 For he that in these things serveth Christ* zs and joy in the Toly Ghost. | 
acceptable to God, and approved of men. etit Christi well pleasing 
° > ; : to God, and approved of 
19 Let? us therefore follow after the things Mow’ So glen lot ue tollow io 
which make for peace, and things wherewith* one Bien Saige aw Eioe ake 
; “eC. . or peace, an ings 
may edify another. whereby we may edify one 
20 Kor meat,déstroy not the work of God,” VAlIS;onie. | Ove ae 
things indeed are pure; but z¢ ¢s evil for that man | ot God. All things indeed 
0 7 P t S 
who eateth with offence. ____ | evil for that man who eat. 
91 if is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink) with offence. Tt ae 2b 
r F good not to eat flesh, nor 
wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, | to drink wine, nor to do 
or is offended, or is made weak. CT 9 Tee a aero 
22 Hast thou faith? have zt to thyself before cone ee oe es 
God. Happy és he that condemneth not himself in God, Happy is_he, that 
o jndge not imse in 
that thing which he alloweth. ; : Voce winek he approveth. 
23 And he that doubteth is damned if he eat, | But he that doubteth is 25 
j : ee condemned if he eat, be- 
because he eateth not of faith: for whatsoever® 7s | cause he eateth not of faith; 
not of faith is sin and whatsoever is not of 


faith is sin. 


CHAPTER XV. 


Mutual Love and Forbearance Enjoined. 


SUMMARY,—The Strong Must Bear with the Weak. Not to Seek to Please 
Ourselves. Christ Did Not. As Christ Received Us, so We should 
Receive Each Other. Christ the Savior of Both Jews and Gentiles. 
Paul’s Apostleship. His Work Among the Gentiles. His Purpose to 
Visit Rome. 


1 Wet then that are strong ought to bear theé 
infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves. 


CHAPTER XV. 


Now we that are strong 1 
ought to bear the infirmi- 
ties of the weak, and not 





a2Cor. 8:21. 6 Psa. 84:14. ¢1Cor, 14:12. @ Acts10:15. e Titus1:15. Gal. 6:1. g Rom. 14:1. 





right to do what the weak regard as sinful, your “good” will be evil spoken of. 17. For the king- 
dom of God. Christ’s dominion; the church visibly; personally, his sway over your soul. This does. 
not depend on meat and drink. It rises higher than food questions, Personally, its essence is not 
in external things. It consists of righteousness. Justification; the forgiveness of sins. Peace. 
Reconciliation to God, and peace of soul as the result. Joy in the Holy Ghost. The rejoicing of 
those who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Seek these rather than to eat and drink what. 
you will. 

19-23. Let us follow .. . peace. Hence, charitably yield what grieves a brother. May 
edify. Build up and make strong. Compare 1Thess.5:11. 20. For meat destroy not. A rigid 
insistance on eating the meat so offensive to some of the brethren may rend the church. All things 
indeed are pure. All kinds of food are morally clean. See verse l4. But it is evil. It is morally 
unclean to him who eateth with hurt to his conscience. 21. It is good neither to eat flesh, etc. if 
eating any kind of food, or drinking wine, is in the way of your brother’s peace and security, it is better 
to abstain from both. Deny yourself rather than offend a brother. Compare 1 Cor. 8:13. This maxim 
applies to all things indifferent. It applies to wine-drinking at our time. No Christian ought ever to 
set an example that may destroy another. 22. Hast thou faithP Art thou strong in the faith, and 
possessed of knowledge that the weaker brethren have not? Let God take not of it, but do not parade. 
it before the weak. Happy is he that condemneth not himself, etc. If one “allowed” that he: 
had the right to eat all kinds of meats, etc., and did it to the injury of his brother, he would condemn. 
himself, because he trampled on the law of love. 23. He that doubteth is damned if he eat. 
He is contrasted with him ‘‘who has faith’ (verse 22), He has not faith, or does not believe that it is 
right to eat these meats. Hence he is condemned (“‘damned’’) by his own conscience. Whatsoever is. 
not of faith is sin. The context shows that Paul means that whenever actions are done by a Chris- 
tian which he does not believe are right, he sins in doing them. If he is doubtful whether they are right, 
he must not do them, 


Ch X Vel ROMANS. 


67 


ee ee 


2 Let* every one of us please Ais neighbour for 
his good” to edification. / 

3 For even Christ pleased not himself; but, as it 
is written,* The reproaches of them that reproach- 
ed thee fell on me. 

4 For’ whatsoever things were written aforetime 
were written for our learning; that we, through 
palace and comfort of the scriptures, might have 

ope. 

5 Now® the God of patience and consolation grant 
you to be like-minded one toward another, accord- 
ing to Christ Jesus; 

6 That ye may with one mind and one mouth 
glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. é 

7 Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ 
also received us, to the glory of God. 

8 Now I say, that® Jesus Christ was a minister of 
the circumcision for the truth of God,® to confirm 





to please ourselves. Let 2 
each one of us please his 
neighbour for that which 
is good, unto edifying. For 3 
Christ also pleased not 
himself; but, as it is writ- 
ten, The reproaches of 
them that reproached thee 
fell upon me. For what- 4 
soever things were written 
aforetime were written for 
our learning, that through 
polianes and through com- 
ort of the scriptures we 
might have hope. Now the 5 
God of patience and of 
comfort grant you to be of 
the same mind one with 
another according to 
Christ Jesus: that with 6 
one accord ye 2 with 
one mouth glorify the God 
and Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. Wherefore 7 
receive ye one another, 
even as Christ also re- 
ceived you, to the glory of 
God. For I say that Christ 8 
hath been made a minister 
of the circumcision for the 
truth of God, that he might 
confirm the promises given 


unto the fathers, and that 9 
the Gentiles might glorify 
God for his mercy; as it is 
written, 

Therefore will I give 
praise unto thee among 
the Gentiles, 

And sing unto thy name. 


the promises made unto the fathers: 

9 And! that the Gentiles might glorify God for 
his mercy; as it is written,i For this cause I will 
confess to thee among the Gentiles, and sing unto 
thy name. 








6 Rom, 14:19. ¢ Psa. 69:9. 


d@2 Tim. 3:16. e1Cor. 1:10. fRom. 5:2. g Matt. 15:24; 
h Rom. 3:3; 2 Cor. 1:20. 


@1Cor. 9219; Phil. 2: 4,5. : ) 
Af 7 John 10:16; Rom. 9:23. j Psa. 18:49. 


ohn 1:11; Acts 3:25,26. 











1-3. We that are strong. In the last chapter Paul contrasts the strong and the weak. The 
first are those, like himself, who know that no kind of food “‘is unclean of itself,” and are emancipated 
from Jewish prejudices. These strong ones are to bear with the “infirmities of the weak,” as has been 
enjoined in the preceding chapter. The lesson is a practical one for all ages. 2. Let every one 
please his neighbor. We are not to seek to please ourselves, but to please others. Nor are we to 
seek to please them for our own selfish purposes, as is often the case, but for their good to edifica- 
tion, with a view to their good and upbuilding in Christ. 3. For even Christ pleased not him- 
self. Our duty to others is enforced by the example of Christ. He forgot himself in his work of 
saving men. So ought we to do. As itis written. In Psalm 69:9. The passage affirms that the 
Messiah, instead of pleasing himself, became the subject of ‘the reproaches of them who reproached” 
his Father. 

4-6. For whatsoever things were written. The passage just quoted applies to Christ, and all 
things written in the Old Scriptures are for our instruction. Learning. Instruction. Might have 
hope. The purpose of the Scriptures is to impart a present blessed hope through the patience and the 
comfort they impart to those who suffer for God. 5. Grant you to be like-minded one toward 
another. The apostle does not pray that they may be of the same opinion, but that there be harmony 
of feeling. According to Christ Jesus. Let each be so conformed to Ohrist that all may be of one 
mind. See Phil. 2:5. 6. That ye may be of one mind, etc. That being in full accord you may 
with one voice (mouth) utter the praises of God. 

7-12. Wherefore receive ye one another. Let the strong receive the weak, all receive each 
other into full fellowship, even as “Christ has received us.” Tothe glory of God. All must be done 
so as to glorify God. So Christ hath done. 8. NowIsay. Rather, ‘“‘ForI say.” The work of Christ 
1s given to show the spirit we ought to have. A minister of the circumcision. Christ became a 
minister of the circumcision; that is, a Jew, of the seed of Abraham, for the truth of God. The 
Scriptures had declared that he would be of the seed of Abraham. That he might confirm the 
promises. Had he not been of the circumcision, the promises would not have applied to him. 
9. That the Gentiles might glorify God. It was a part of this plan, all the while, that Christ, 
“born under the law,’’ should save the Gentiles, and enable them to glorify God for his mercy to 


68 ROMANS. (Gh, XV. 








10 And again he saith,* Rejoice, ye Gentiles, with | Andagain he saith, _10 
hi ] Rejoice, ye Gentiles,with 
1s peopte. ae i a people. a 
7 + 7 3 nd again, 
11 And again,? Praise the Lord, all ye Gentiles; | And agai. | Wark, ates 
and laud him, all ye people. Gentiles ; 


: ‘ it 1 
12 And again Esaias saith,* There shall be a root a praise ono ee 

a 4 rey : And again,Isaiah saith, 12 
of Jesse, and he that shall rise to reign over the | And again, Isaiah saith, 


Gentiles; in him shall the Gentiles trust. of Jesse, 
And he that ariseth to 


13 Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and rule over the Gentiles; 


- 7 7 1 ‘ 7 On him shall the Gen- 
peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope Bec oe. 


through the power of the Holy Ghost. Now the God of hope fill 13 
14 And* I myself also am persuaded of you, my |{n believing, that ye may 


7 , 3 ; 1a € abound in hope, in the 
brethren, that ye also are full of goodness,? filled poner of the vole ches 


with all knowledge, able also to admonish one an-| And I myself also am 14 
ther porsuased of you, my 
ouner. rethren, that ye your- 


p ¢ ; selves are full of good- 
15 Nevertheless, brethren, I. have written the ener Rear ioe ene 


more boldly unto you in some sort, as putting you edge, able also to admon- 
in mind, becauset of the grace that is given to me | write the more boldly unto 
of God. yeu some measure, as 
: eos : : putting you again in re- 
16 That® I should be the minister of Jesus Christ thembrance, because of 

to the Gentiles, ministering the gospel of God, that | ns Sf °Gea Mar sia 16 
the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, | »¢ @ minister of Christ Je- 
: sus unto the Gentiles, 


being sanctified by the Holy Ghost. ministering the gospel of 
2 y God i 

17 [have eee ees cae glory through | ¢? the Gentiles might bé 
Je s et aq made acceptable, bein 
Jesus Christ in® t ose things which pertain to God. sanction, Eee. dai 

Ghost. I have therefore 17 

my glorying in Christ Je- 
sus in things pertaining to 








@ Deut. 32:43. 6 Psa. 17:1. cIsa. 9:6,7; 11:1; Rev. 5:5; 22:16. @2 Pet. 1:12; 1John2:21. e1 Cor. 8:1. 
f Gal. 1:15. g Gal. 2:7,9; I Tim. 2:7. A Heb. 5:1, 








them. As it is written. Various passages from the Old Testament are now quoted to show God’s 
purpose to give the gospel to the Gentiles. For this cause, etc. This quotation is from Psalm 18: 49, 
and implies that God shall be confessed, and his praises sung among the Gentiles. 10. Rejoice, ye 
Gentiles, etc. This is found in Deut. 32: 43, and is a direct command to.Gentiles to worship with the 
Lord’s people. 11. Praise the Lord, all ye Gentiles. This command to the Gentiles, still clearer 
and stronger, is found in Psalm 97:1. 12. Again, Isaiah saith. The quotation that follows is from 
‘Isaiah 11: 10, a chapter which is throughout a prediction of Christ and his kingdom. Jesse, the father 
of David, was an ancestor of Jesus. The passage quoted shows very clearly that Christ was to be the 
Savior of the Gentiles. 

13-16. Now the God of hope fill you with all joy. Paul has just quoted from Isaiah, “In him 
shall the Gentiles hope,” and follows it by a prayer that the God who has given them the blessed hope 
may fill them with joy and peace, so that they may abound in hope. The hope we have in Christ is the 
source of a great part of our joy. 14. Filled with all knowledge. Compare 1 Cor. 8: is HO peti 
It is evident that the knowledge of spiritual truth, professed by the strong in faith, is meant. Able 
also to admonish one another. Therefore haying less need of the admonition of the apostle. 
15. Nevertheless, brethren. Though they were able to admonish each other, he has written to 
them boldly and plainly, as was his right, because of the grace, the apostleship to the Gentiles, 
given him of God. 16. That I should be a minister to the Gentiles. This is the grace just 
referredto. Ministering. The Greek reads, ‘“‘Ministering in sacrifice.” The figure is that of Paul, 
as a priest, bringing the converted Gentiles as offerings, which are placed upon the altar of God and 
dedicated to his service. This offering, the Gentiles, is made acceptable through the gospel, they being 
sanctified, set apart, by the Holy Spirit. See Rom. 8: 1, 2. 

17-21. Ihave therefore whereofI may glory. Because of his wonderfully successful minis- 
try among the Gentiles. Yet he glories not in himself, but only through Jesus Christ. See 1 Cor. 
15:31. In those things which pertain to God. In his ministry as an apostle of Christ. 18. I 


Ch. XV.] ROMANS. 


18 For I will not dare to speak of any of* those 
things which Christ hath not wrought by me,” to 
make the Gentiles obedient, by word and deed. 

19 Through mighty signs and wonders, by the 
ower of the Spirit of God; so that from Jerusa- 
em, round about unto Illyricum, I have fully 

preached the gospel of Christ. 

20 Yea, so have I strived to preach the gospel, 
not where Christ was named? lest I should build 
upon another man’s foundation: 

21 But, as it is written,¢ To whom he was not 
spol-en of, they shall see: and they that have not 
heard shall understand. 

22 For which cause alsof I have been much hin- 
dered from coming to you. 

23 But now having no more place in thes parts, 
and® having a great desire these many y-.-s to 
come unto you; 

24 Whensoever I take my journey into Spain, I 
will come to you; for I trust to see you in my jour- 
ney," and to be brought on my way thitherward by 
you, if first I be somewhat filled with your company. 

25 But now I go unto Jerusalem to minister unto 
the saints. 





69 


God. For I will not dare 
to speak of any things 
save those which Christ 
wrought through me, for 
the obedience of the Gen- 
tiles, by word and deed, in 
the power of signs and 
“wonders, in the power of 
the Holy Ghost; so that 
from Jerusalem and round 
about even unto Illyri- 
cum,I have fully preach- 
ed the gospel of Christ; 
yea, making it my aim so 
to preach the gospel, not 
where Christ was already 
named, that I might not 
build upon another man’s 
foundation; but, as it is 
written, 

They shall see, to whom 

no tidings of him came, 

And they who have not 
' heard shall under- 

stand, 

Wherefore also I was 
hindered these many times 
froin coming to you: but 
now, having no more any 
place in these regions, and 
having these many years a 
longing to come unto you, 
whensoever I go unto 
Spain (for I hope to see 
you in my journey, and to 
be brought on my way 
thitherward by you, if first 
in some measure I shall 
have been satisfied with 


18. 


19 


20 


21 


22 
23 


24 


your Ccompany)—but now, 25 





@ Acts 21:19. 6Rom.1:5. cActs19:11. d@2 Cor. 10:18. eIsa. 52:15. J Rom. 1:18. g Acts 19:21. hk Acts 15:3. 

oe 
will not dare to speak, etc. The meaning is: “I will not dare to speak of the Signs of grace and. 
the work of others, but only of the mighty works God hath wrought through me to make the Gentiles 
obedient.” 19, Through mighty signs and wonders. This describes what extraordinary help. 
had been given—the power to work miracles and the gifts of the Holy Spirit. So that from Jerusa- 
lem, and round about unto Illyricum. Jerusalem was near the southeast corner of the 
Mediterranean ; Illyricum lay north of Greece, on the Adriatic, so that his gospel labors had embraced 
acircuit clear around the east and northeast shores of the sea. 20. Yea, so have I strived to 
preach. He declares the fixed policy of his ministry not to preach where Christ had been heard, but. 
in new fields. Where other apostles or evangelists had laid a foundation, he did not seek to build. 
Compare 2 Cor. 10: 12-16. As no apostle or great evangelist had yet visited Rome, his letter to the 
Romans was no violation of his principle. 21. Butasitis written. In Isaiah 52:15. The passage 
declares that God’s name shall be carried where it was unknown; hence, Paul’s course was in harmony 
with the will of God. 

22-24. For which cause Ihave been much hindered. The greatest hindrance to his coming 
to Rome hitherto was the duty of preaching in places where Christ was unknown. 23. But now 
having no more place in these parts. Everywhere around the eastern Mediterranean the name 
of Christ had been preached, so that churches were formed in all the chief cities. Hence, Paul wished 
to seek new fields. Having a great desire - to come unto you. See Rom. 1: 11, and Acts 
19:21. 24. WhensoeverI take my journey into Spain. It was his purpose to go to Spain asa 
new field. The New Testament does not record that he ever carried out his purpose, though it is the 
testimony of the early church that he did. To see you in my journey. He only intended to stop 
for a season, in passing through, for the reason that there was already a church there. God willed that 
it should be otherwise. 

25-27. Now I go unto Jerusalem, etc. See Acts 20:3, for account of the undertaking of this 
journey. Also Acts 24:17. He is going to Jerusalem to minister to the poor saints. 26. For it hath 
pleased them of Macedonia, etc. Concerning this contribution, see 1 Cor. 16:1; 2 Cor. 8:1, and 9: 2. 
Certain contribution. The Greek word is the same rendered fellowship in Acts 2: 42. 27. Their 
debtors they are. It pleased these Gentile Christians to help those at Jerusalem, and, besides, they 











(Ch. XV. 


70 ROMANS. 

26 For* it hath pleased them of Macedonia and 1 Ea Ie on OY 
Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor saints, hoe it hath been 26 
. . sure ace - 

saints which are at Jerusalem. REA Wie Re 
27 It hath pleased them verily; and their debtors a cesta cone Denge 1 
they are. For if the-Gentiles have been made par- that are at Jerusalem. Yea, 27 
takers of their spiritual things, their? duty is also | it hath, been, their dot. 
to minister unto them in carnal things. ors they are. For if the 
28 When therefore I have performed. this, and partakers of their spiritual 
2 iQ 1 7 things, they owe it to them 
have sealed to them’ this fruit, I will come by you things, they owe it to them — 
into Spain. a carne Ve When 28 
t efore ave accom- 
29 And*]I am sure that, when I come unto you, | plishea’ this, ‘and. have 
I shall come in the® fulness of the blessing of the aie aig saga 
gospel of Christ. — Spain. And I snow shat, 29 
30 Now, I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord shall come in the fulness 
Jesus Christ’s sake, and‘ for the love of the Spirit, CNC ee = 
that® ye strive together with me in your prayers to brethren, by our oo 
u ist, v 
God for me; of the Spirit, that ye strive 
- 81 That? I may be delivered from them that do more Piha aes Peli 
not believe in Judea; and that my service which J thai I may be delivered 31 
® rom em at are disobe- 
have for Jerusalem may be accepted of the saints; | Gent te yeiee  sobe. 
; 10OVvl my ministration which 7 
32 That I may come unto you with joy' by the leet epee 
will of God, and may with you! be refreshed. acceptable to the saints; 
G a may com n yO 
33 Now the God of peace de with you all. Amen.|‘ doy thcongh the walt ae 
God, and together with 
you find rest. Now the 33 
God of peace be with you 





all. Amen. 





a1 Cor. 16:1; 2 Cor. 8:1; 9:2. 61 Cor. 9:11; Gal. 6:6. c Phil, 4:17. 
g 2 Cor. 1:11; Col. 4:12. 





d@ Rom. 1:11. 
A2Thes. 3:2, iJas. 4:15. j2 Cor. T1332) Pin, Wis Piet. 


e Eph. ee J Phil. 2:1. 





were under obligation to them, for the church at Jerusalem was the center from which the gospel had 


been spread abroad. 


Why the need of this contribution for the church at Jerusalem? This is often asked. (1) Because it was 


mainly composed in the start of the poor. (2) Because it had undergone persecution, and this always 
impoverishes, not only because members are spoiled of their goods, but because they are driven from 
their employments. Hence, this church, at the center of conflict, and with a great number of poor, had 
need of the aid of the saints elsewhere, where they were more favored with worldly blessings. 

28, 29. When, therefore, I have performed this. As soon as he has discharged this office, it 
is his purpose to start to Spain, and to take Rome in on the way. Sealed to them this fruit. Made 
this contribution safe to them. What is sealed is made secure. 29. Iam sure that when I come. 
He assures them that his coming will be full of blessing to them in Christ. Godet says, with force, 
“Would a forger of this epistle, in the second century, have drawn a picture of the future so opposite to 
the way in which things really came to pass?” These allusions to his future movements are positive 
proof that this was written before Paul was a prisoner, \ 

380-33. NowTI beseech you, ete. This urgent request of the apostle for his brethren’s prayers, 
shows a strong confidence in their faith and devotion. Compare verse 29, 81. That I may be 
delivered. Paul knew too well the bitter hostility, of the Jews to him, and that his visit to Jerusalem 
would be beset with dangers. He goes there with some forebodings. See Acts 20: 22, and 21:13. And 
that my service . .° may be accepted of the saints. We learn from Acts 21: 21, that the 
Jewish brethren looked with great prejudice on Paul’s work among the Gentiles, and that various 
rumors were circulated among them. 82. That I may come, etc. Three things he desires through 
their prayers: (1) That he may be delivered from his Jewish enemies ; (2) be cordially received by his 
Jewish brethren; (3) come unto them with joy by the will of God. He did come to Rome, sub 
missive to the will of God, but not “in joy,” though no doubt God was with him and “refreshed” him. 
33. Now the God of peace be with you all. Amen. Asking their prayers, it was but natura) 


past he should ask God to bless them. Compare other benedictions, in 2 Cor, 13: 11; Phil. 4: 9; 1 Thess, 


Ch. XVI.] ROMANS. 


71 








CHAPTER XVI. 


Personal Salutations. 


SUMMARY.—The Bearer of the Letter Commended. The Church Asked 
to Give Her Aid in the Work that Calls Her to Rome. Greetings for 
Old Friends and Fellow-Laborers. A Househeld Church. Warned 
Against Divisions. Farewell Benediction. 

1 I commend unto you Phebe our sister, which is 
a servant of the church which is at* Cenchrea: 

2 That? ye receive her in the Lord, as becometh 
saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoever business 
she hath need of you: for she hath been a succour- 
er of many, and of myself also. 

3 Greet® Priscilla and Aquila my helpers in 
Christ Jesus; 

4 Who have for my life laid down their own 
necks: unto whom not only I give thanks, but also 
all the qhurches of the Gentiles. 

5 Likewise greet? the church that is in their 
house. Salute my well-beloved Epenetus, who is® 
the first-fruits of Achaia unto Christ. 

6 Greet Mary, who! bestowed much labour on us. 





-my 


CHAPTER XVI. 


I commend unto youl 
Pheebe, our sister, who is 
a servant of the church 
that is at Cenchrex: that 2 
ye receive her in the Lord, 
worthily of the saints, and 
that ¥e assist her in what- 
soever matter she may 
have need of you: for she 
herself also hath been a 
succourer of many, and of 
mine own self. 

Salute Prisca and Aquila 3 
fellow - workers in 
Christ Jesus, who for my 4 
life laid down their own 
necks; unto whom not 
only I give thanks, but 
also all the churches of 
the Gentiles: and salute 5 
the church that is in their 
house. Salute Epzenetus 
my beloved, who is the 
first fruits of Asia unto 
Christ. Salute Mary, who 6 
bestowed much labour on 





c Acts 18:2; 2 Tim. 4:19. 


a Acts 18:18. 
fi Tim. 5:10. 


6 Phil. 2: 29; 3 John 5, 6. 
e1Cor. 16:15. 


d1 Cor. 16:19; Col. 4: 15; Phi. 2. 





1, 2- Icommend unto you Phebe. Evidently the bearer of the letter, a sister in Christ. In this 


list of persons greeted, a number are women, 


and the greetings show how highly Paul esteemed 


woman’s work in the church. A servant. The word is deacon in the Greek. The word also means 


“servant,” as rendered, but we know that there were 
and Paul, in giving her a recommendation, no doubt mentions her office. 
of the church, would convey no special distinction. 
deaconesses would be anecessity. 1 Tim. 5: 9,10, evidently 


deaconesses in the church of the first century, 
To say that she was a servant 
In the Hast, where women were so much secluded, 
refers to them; Ignatius, a companion of 


the apostles, mentions them in one of his epistles, and Pliny does also, in his famous letter to Trajan, 


early in the second century. Which is at Cenchreez. 


Paul wrote this letter at Corinth; Cenchrex 


was its seaport, on the Augean sea, about nine miles from the city. A small town with the old name 


2. That ye receive 
The term used in the Greek is a legal one; 


still marks its site. 
that ye assist her. 
of legal business called her to Rome. 


her in the Lord. Give her a Christian welcome. And 
hence it is supposed that some kind 
She hath been a succourer of many. This would result 


from her office as a deaconess. Among those ministered to was the apostle himself. 


3-5. Greet Priscilla and Aquila. 


These active fellow-workers had first aided Paul at Corinth 


(Acts 18: 2); then they went to Ephesus, and prepared the way for his work there (Acts 18: 26); they 


had now returned to Rome, their former home. 


Some haye argued that this greeting could not have 


been sent to Rome, from the fact that Paul had left them at Ephesus. It was the natural thing for them 
to go back home, when they could safely do so, and Godet says that from two to three years had passed 
since Paul left them at Ephesus, which gives ample time fora change of residence. The fact that the 
name of the wife comes first here, and in Acts 18: 2, seems to imply that she was the most eflicient. 


"They are also named in 1 Cor. 16: 19, and in 2 Tim. 4: 19. 
It is evident that at some time they had endured great peril for 


4. Who have for my life laid down, etc. 
Paul’s sake. We know from 2 Cor. 


11: 23-27, that only a small part of his perils have been recorded. Also all the churches of the Gen- 


tiles. Are under a debt of gratitude to Priscilla and Aquila, 5. 


is in their house. 
jnent brethren. In the large cities there would be several such groups. 


Likewise greet the church that 


As the early Christians had no houses of worship, they met in the homes of prom- 
One of these in Rome met in 


the house of Priscilla and Aquila. Salute Epenetus. He is not mentioned elsewhere. The first 
fruits of Achaia. “Asia,” as in the Revision, is the true reading. The family of Stephanas were the 


first converts of Achaia (1 Cor. 16: 15). 


6-16. Greet Mary. A large number of those named were personal acquaintances of Paul; some 


72 ROMANS. 


[Ch. XVI. 





7 Salute Andronicus and Junia, my kinsmen, and 
my fellow-prisoners, who are of note among the 
apostles, who also* were in Christ before me. 

8 Greet Amplias, my beloved in the Lord. 

9 Salute Urbane, our helper in Christ, and 
Stachys my beloved. 

10 Salute Apelles, approved in Christ. Salute 
them which are of Aristobulus’ household. 

11 Salute Herodion my kinsman. Greet them 
that be of the household of Narcissus, which are in 
the Lord. 

12 Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labour in 
the Lord. Salute the beloved Persis, which la- 
boured much in the Lord. 

13 Salute Rufus,” chosen in the Lord, and his 
mother and mine. 

14 Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patro- 
bas, Hermes, and the brethren which are with 
them. 

15 Salute Philologus, and Julia, Nereus and his 
sister, and Olympas, and all the saints which are 
with them. 

16 Salute® one another with an holy kiss. ‘The 
churches of Christ salute you. 

17 Now, I beseech you, brethren, mark them? 
which cause divisions and offences contrary to the 
doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid? them. 

18 For they that are such serve not our Lord 
Jesus Christ, but theirt own belly; and by good 
words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the 
simple. 


@Gal. 1:22. 6 Eph. 1:4; 2John1. c1Thes. 5:26: l’Pet.5:14, 


2 Tim. 3:5; Tit. 3:10; 2John 10. f Phil 3:19; 1 Tim, 6:3. 


———___., 


you. Salute Andronicus 7 
and Junias, my kinsmen, 
and my fellow-prisoners, 
who are of note among the 
apostles, who also have 
been in Christ before me. 
Salute Ampliatus my be- 8 
loved in the Lord. Salute 9 
Urbanus our fellow-work- 

er in Christ, and Stachys 
my beloved. Salute Apel- 16: 
les the approved in Christ. 
Salute them which are of 
the household of Aristobu- 
lus. Salute Herodion my 11 
kinsman. Salute them of 
the household of Narcissus, 
which are in the Lord. Sa- 12 
lute Tryphena and Try- 
phosa, who labour in the 
Lord. Salute Persis the 
beloved, which laboured 
much in the Lord. Salute 13: 
Rufus the chosen in the 
Lord, and his mother and 
mine, Salute Asyncritus, 14 
Phlegon, Hermes, Patro- 
bas, Hermas, and the 
brethren that are with 
jthem. Salute Philologus 15: 
and Julia, Nereus and his 
sister, and Olympas, and 
all the saints that are with 
them. Salute one another 16. 
with a holy kiss. All the 
churches of Christ salute 
you. 

Now :I beseech you, 
brethren,mark them which 
are Causing the divisions 
and occasions of stum- 
bling, contrary to the doc- 
trine which ye _ learn- 
ed: and turn away from 
them. For they that are 
such serve not our Lord 
Christ, but their own belly; 
and by their smooth and 
fair speech they beguile 
the hearts of the innocent. 





17 


18. 





@ Acts 15; 1 Tim. 6:3. 
g Col. 2:4; 2 Pet. 2:3. 





el Cor. 5:9;2 Thes. 3: 6:, 





had rendered him special service; many were, no doubt, his own converts. 
7. Salute Andronicus and Junia, my 
When confined with Paul, we do not know. of 


nothing, save that he places them in this honorable roll, 
kinsmen. Countrymen. My fellow-prisoners. 


note among the apostles. Welland favorably known to the apostles. 
Aristobulus was either dead, 


are of the household of Aristobulus. 


Of most of them we know 


10. Salute them which 
or not a believer. The house- 


hold is, perhaps, his slaves. Great Romans had hundreds of slaves, usually white, many of them 


cultured. Thousands of the early 


Christians were gathered from these. 


11. The household of 


Narcissus. At the time Paul wrote, a favorite of Nero, named Narcissus, was all powerful in Rome. 


He is probably meant, a number of his servants having accepted Christ. 
- - Persis. These are the names of women. From the fact state 
deaconesses. 18. Salute Rufus. 


says she had been a mother to him. 14. Hermas. 
early Christian writing, called 
saints which are with them. 
named. 16. Salute one another with a holy kiss. 
East, and was in New Testament times. See Luke 7 
is still preserved in the Greek churches. 

17-20. Mark them which cause divisions. Judaizing, 


12. Trypheena, Tryphosa, 


d of them, they were probably 
Some have supposed this to be the Rufus named in Mark 15: 21. 
His father was of Cyrene. Paul had certainly met his mother elsewhere, 


for he not only greets her, but 


Supposed by some to have been the author of an 
“The Shepherd of Hermas,’? which still remains, 
Probably another household church, 


15. And all the 
which met with those just 


The kiss is still a common salutation in the 
: 45; also 2 Sam, 20: 9, and 1 Peter 5:14, The custom 


or other false teachers, who disturbed 


Ch. XVI.] ROMANS. 





73 





19 For your obedience is come abroad unto all 
men. Iam glad therefore on your behalf: but yet 
I would have you wise* unto all that which is good, 
and simple concerning evil. 

20 And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under 
your feet shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ be with you. Amen. 

21 Timotheus” my work-fellow, and° Lucius, and 
Jason, and Sosipater,* my kinsmen, salute you. 

22 I Tertius, who wrote th7s epistle, salute you in 
the Lord. 

23 Gaiust mine host, and of the whole church 
saluteth you. Erastus, the chamberlain of the 
city, saluteth you, and Quartus a brother. 

24 The"™ grace of our Lord Jesus Christ de with 
you all. Amen. 

25 Now to him that is of power to stablish you! 
according to my gospel, and the preaching of Jesus 
Christ, (according! to the revelation of the mystery,* 
which was kept secret since the world began, 

26 But! now is made manifest, and by the scrip- 
tures of the prophets, according to the command- 
ment of the everlasting God, made known to all 
nations for the obedience of faith; ) 

27 To God only wise, de glory through Jesus 
Christ for ever. Amen. 


Written to the Romans from Corinthus, and sent by Phebe, 
servant of the church at Cenchrea. 





6 Acts16:1;1Tim.1:2. cActs13:1. d Acts 17:5. 


hi Thes. 5:28. 


a Matt. 10: 16. 
2 Tim. 4:20. 





e Acts 20:4. 
4 Rom. 2:16. 9 Col. 1:27; Eph. 3:3,5; 1 Pet. 4:20. 


For your obedience is 19 
come abroad unto all men, 
I rejoice therefore over 
you: but Iwould have you 
wise unto that which is 
good, and simple unto that 
which is evil. And the God 20: 
of peace shall bruise Satan 
under your feet shortly. 
The grace of our Lord 
Jesus Christ be with you. 
Timothy my  fellow- 
worker saluteth you; and 
Lucius and Jason and So- 
Sipater, my kinsmen. I 
Tertius, who write the 
epistle, salute you in the 
Lord. Gaius my host, and 
of the whole church, sa- 
luteth you. Erastus the 
treasurer of the city salut- 
eth you, and Quartus the 
brother. 
_ Now to him that is able 
to stablish you according 
to my gospel and the 
preaching of Jesus Christ, 
according to the revela- 
tion of the mystery which 
hath been kept in silence 
through times eternal, but 26 
now is manifested, and by 
the scriptures of the 
prophets, according to the 
commandment of the eter- 
nal God, is made known 
unto all the nations unto 
obedience of faith; to the 
only wise God, through 
Jesus Christ, to whom be 
the glory forever. Amen. 


23 


25: 


27 


g Acts 19: 225: 


f1Cor. 1:14. 
kl 72 Tim. 1:10. 


Cor. 2:7. 





the Gentile churches by urging them to keep the law of Moses, or by teaching some heresy. Read the 
Epistle to the Galatians. They were not to listen to them, and were to avoid them. 18. Serve not 
our Lord Jesus Christ. These men, like many other false teachers, were more devoted to their 
own appetites than to Christ. The simple. The unsuspecting. 19. For your obedience is come 
abroad. Your reputation as good Christians is so well known that you ought not to be deceived by 
these false teachers. 20. The God of peace shall bruise Satan. Shall give you the victory. 
21-23. Timothy. We learn from Acts 20: 4, that Timothy was with Paul at this time. He joins 
with other companions of Paul in greetings. Lucius. Possibly, ‘Lucius of Cyrene” (Acts 13:1). 
Jason. Possibly, the one named in Acts 17:5. Sosipater. The same name as Sopater. See Acts 
20:4. Kinsmen. Countrymen; Jews. 22. I, Tertius. Otherwise unknown. Paul dictated the 
letter, and Tertius acted as scribe. 28. Gaius, mine host. Paul baptized a Gaius at Corinth (1 Cor. 
1:14). The name occurs several times. He was noted for his hospitality. Erastus the chamber- 
lain. The city treasurer, hence a man of high position, The name occurs in Acts 19; 22, and in 2 Tim. 
4; 20, : 
24-27. The grace of our Lord. At the close of his greetings, Paul adds his benediction. He had 
already given it in verse 20. It is now written with his own hand (2 Thess. 3:17). He also adds a 
doxology, which makes a noble conclusion. 25. Tohim. They are commended to God. According 
to the revelation of the mystery. The mystery of the gospel, and especially of the salvation of 
the Gentiles. See Rom. 11: 25. A mystery 1s a divine purpose that had been kept secret. When God’s 
glorious purpose was revealed, the mystery was made known. 26. This mystery now is made 
manifest. The apostles were engaged in declaring this mystery to the world. 2'7. To God only 


wise. The source of all wisdom. 


INTRODUCTION TO FIRST CORINTHIANS. 


The Epistles of Paul, like the prophecies of Jeremiah or Amos, were often’ called 
out by the mistakes, errors and sins of the churches which he had planted, and were 
intended to correct them. The newly planted churches were in the midst of heathen, 
and were composed in great part of those who had early heathen training. It is not 
wonderful that converts from such populations, unused to Christian morality, knowing 
little of ‘the Old Testament Scriptures, and without the New Testament, should some- 
times go astray, or become the victims of false teachers. Yet the church of all ages 
has reason to be thankful for the circumstances which called out the collection of 
Inspired Letters on practical Christian life so essential to its instruction as we find in 
the Epistles of Paul. In order to gain the greatest profit from these it is necessary that 
the reader be informed concerning the conditions which called out each letter, what 
were the circumstances of each church, what were the wants the Apostle sought to 
supply and the sins he sought to correct. 

I will endeavor to explain in the case of the church at Corinth, what were these 
conditions. Though letters were written to other churches planted by Paul earlier 
than the one we are now considering, the First Epistle to the church of Corinth is the 
first of the letters of this class that we reach in the present arrangement of the New 
Testament. In the eighteenth chapter of Acts the account is found of the planting of 
this church. At that time, about A. D. 54, the Apostle sojourned in that great city for 
the space of a year and six months, preaching at first in the Synagogue and afterwards 
in the house of Justus. A large congregation was gathered as the result of his labors, 
composed in part of Jews, but with a much larger number of Gentiles. After Paul 
departed to other fields of labor Apollos, an eloquent and learned Alexandrian Jew 
who had been instructed in the gospel by Priscilla and Aquila, the companions of Paul, 
visited Corinth and continued the work. ‘ Paul planted; Apollos watered ”’ (1 Cor. 
3:6). 

The congregation which had begun its career so auspiciously was in a great commer- 
cial center, with a mixed and dissolute population, and could not but meet with many 
temptations. The city, situated on the Isthmus which connected Southern Greece with 
the mainland of Europe, with the advantage of two harbors on either sea, and of a 
citadel as impregnable as Gibraltar on the lofty Acrocorinthus, had for centuries been 
influential in Grecian history but had in B. ©. 146 been taken by the Romans and 
reduced to ruins. One hundred years later Julius Oxsar had founded it a second time, 
planting a Roman military colony on the old site, and the commanding situation soon 
restored its ancient prosperity and splendor. It was about a century after its second 
founding that it was visited by Paul. It was then the greatest commercial city in 
Europe with the exception of Rome, and no cities of the East surpassed it save Antioch 


and Alexandria. It is estimated to have had a population of about four hundred 
(74) 


INTRODUCTION TO I. CORINTHIANS. 75 





thousand people, as cosmopolitan as is usually found in a great commercial center ; 
Romans, Greeks, Jews, Syrians, Egyptians, sailors, traders and slaves. 

It would be strange if there was a high standard of morals in the mixed population 
of a commercial dette rolls, nor were morals held in high regard anywhere in the 
heathen world. One fact will illustrate the shameless condition of this city. At the 
date of this Epistle there was standing there a vast and renowned temple of Venus, 
called the temple of Aphrodite Pandemos, ‘‘the Venus of all the people,’’ which had a 
thousand consecrated priestesses, every priestess dedicated to the service of Aphrodite, 
or in other words to harlotry. The temple of worship, consecrated to religion, was a 
gigantic brothel! Indeed, even in that dissolute age when immorality was the rule in 
all the heathen world, Corinth had so bad an eminence that the word ‘ to Corinthian- 
ize’? had become a synonym for an impure life. It is not wonderful that amid such 
influences some of the Gentiles who had become members of the Corinthian Church 
showed the influence of their old habits, nor that the apostle found it necessary to 
rebuke licentiousness again and again. See Chapter V. and other passages here and 
there. 

But what especially called out this Epistle were the tidings of divisions in the church 
which had been brought to him at Ephesus by members of the household of Chloe, 
one of the principal members. Paul had confined himself while at Corinth to the 
simple principles of the gospel and scrupulously abstained from the philosophical 
discussions so dear to the Greek mind. (1 Cor. 1: 17-22; 2:1-5). Apollos, schooled 
in the philosophy of Alexandria, and not yet so thoroughly grounded in the gospel as 
Paul, evidently engaged in some philosophical speculations. It is also manifest that 
some of the Judaizing teachers who constantly followed in the footsteps of the great 
Apostle and sought to Judaize the churches, had come to Corinth, and by exalting 
Peter, in order to depreciate Paul, had formed another party. Hence there were 
various factions whose discords rent the body of Christ; one party claiming to be 
Pauline; another making Apollos its leader; still another claiming to be of Cephas, and 
still a fourth, whatever it may have been, claiming to be of Christ. The four chapters 
of the Epistle, the first in order, are a vigorous and indignant arraignment of these 
schisms. 

Other questions discussed were suggested to him by a letter brought to him at 
Ephesus by Corinthian brethren begging a solution of various difficulties; on marriage, 
the veiling of women in assemblies, on sacrificial feasts, and perhaps on the nature of 
the resurrection from the dead. See Chap. VII. 1. These questions and various 
irregularities which are rebuked will be duly considered in the Notes. 

This Epistle was written at Ephesus while Paul was engaged in his ministry of three 
years in that city (Acts 19: 1-41; Acts 20: 31; 1 Cor. 16: 8). The time when it was 
written can be determined with no little Gerinanby to have been the spring of A. D. 57. 
That the Epistle is genuine has been conceded by all respectable critics, both ancient 
and modern. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE 


CORINTHIAN 


CHAPTER I. l 


The Divisions in the Church Brought to Light. 


SUMMARY.—Greetings to the Church. Thanksgiving for the Grace of 
God. An Exhortation to Unity. Schisms Rebuked. The Sin of Hon- 
oring Human Leaders Instead of Christ. The Preaching of the Cross 
the Power of God to Salvation. Not the Worldly Wise and Proud, 
but the Humble and Lowly Converted. 


1 Paul, called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ 
through the will of God,* and Sosthenes our broth- 
er, 

2 Unto the church of God which is at Corinth, to 
them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus,° called to 
be saints, with all that in every place call upon the 
name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and 
ours: 

3 Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our 
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ ; 

4 I thank my God always on your behalf, for the 
grace of God which is given you by Jesus Christ; 





=: 


CHAPTER I, 


Paul, called to be an apos- 
tle of Jesus Christ through 
the will of God, and Sos- 
thenes our brother, unto 
the church of God which is 
at Corinth, even them that 
are sanctified in Christ 
Jesus, called to be saints, 
with all that call upon the 
name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ in every place, their 
Lord and ours: Grace to 
you and peace from God 
our Father and the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

I thank my God always 
pe ado e 3 you, for the 
grace of God which was 
given you in Christ Jesus; 





@ Acts 18:17. 6John 17: 19. ¢2Tim.1:9. dRom.3: 


22. 





1-3. Paul, called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ. Some of the Judaizing teachers, who had 
visited the church at Corinth after the departure of-Paul, in order to lessen his authority, had asserted 
Hence, at the beginning, he asserts his 
See 1 Cor. 9: 1, and 2 Cor. 12: 12. Sosthenes, our brother. 
of the synagogue at Corinth. The 
have been well known to, and infiu- 
» who had been converted. 
were at Ephesus with Paul (see chap. 16), 
but Sosthenes is chosen to appear with him in the salutation. 2. Unto the church of God. This 
designation of the church appears oftener than any other in the New Testament. 


that he was not an apostle, divinely called like the Twelve. 
apostleship, and refers to his divine call. 
A Sosthenes is named in Acts 18: 17, who was then the chief ruler 
Sosthenes whom Paul associated with himself in the letter must 


ential among, the Corinthians, and was probably the former chief ruler 


Apollos, Priscilla and Aquila, all well known to the church, 


sanctified. All of “the church of God at Corinth” were ‘“ 
were set apart from the world and consecrated to God. All 
the term in the New Testament, and “called to be saints.” 
as Peter or Paul. With all that in every place call, ete. 


divine Savior. Both theirs and ours. 


1 


9 


s 


3 


To them that are 
sanctified in Christ Jesus;” that is, they 
Christians are “sanctified” in the sense of 
The humblest Christian is a saint, as well 

The letter is intended for all Christians, 
as well as for those at Corinth. Call upon the name of Jesus Christ. Recognize him as their 
The Lord of the saints everywhere as well as ours (8: 6; Eph. 


4:5). Since there is only one Lord and Master, all Christians should be brethren. 8. Grace be unto 


you. The favor of God; the divine blessing. This is the apostolical benediction. Peace. This is 


always an appropriate benediction, since peace is one of the 
appropriate to a church which was torn by dissensions. 
4-9. I thank my God always on 


greatest blessings, but was especially 


your behalf. Before speaking of the faults which he must 
rebuke, he speaks of the grounds for praise and hope. He did not forget these, because there was 
76 








Ch. I.] I. CORINTHIANS. Cas 
. 0 C gy se) * that in every thing ye were 5 
5 That in every thing ye are enriched by him,® in | enriched id, te all aie 
all utterance, and 7n all knowledge; aes ba cae 
. . 3 e testi- 
6 Even as” the testimony of Christ was confirmed mony of Christ was con- 
: : irmed in you: so that ye 7 
in you: P ‘. ‘ oe come belind in no itt; 
7 So that ye come behind in no gift; waiting for | Waiting for the revelation 
a ‘ - Tord as Classi: of our Lord Jesus Christ; 
the coming of our Lor esus Tist: who shallalso confirm you 8 
8 Who‘ shall also confirm you unto the end,‘ that | Unreprovesble 1m the ane 
ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus | of our Lord Jesus Christ. | 
; P iv 
Christ. whom ye were called As 
9 Gode és faithful, by whom ye were called untot | {uc ChicteaeLon 
the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Now I beseech you, bre- 10 
thren, through the name 
10 Now, I beseech you, brethren, by the name of of out Lord Jesus Christ, 

z a hat ye all speak the same 
our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, Reape sith trent aye 
thing, and ¢hat there be no divisions among you; eo hema ica nue 
but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same gether in the same mind 
mind, and in the same judgment. ment. Seg eye cen 

11 For it hath been declared unto me of you, my | *ignified unto me con- 

‘ cerning you. my breth- 
brethren, by them which are of the house of Chloe, ren, by them which are of 
that there are contentions among you. Haare tac ac coutentions 

12 Now this I say,£ that every one of you saith, [| among you. Now this I 12 
h mean, that each one of 
am of Paul, and I® of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and | you saith, I am of Paul; 


I of Christ. 


and I of Apollos; and I of 
Cephas; and I of Christ. 








c2 Thes. 3:3. 
g 1 Cor.3: 4. 


di Thes. 5: 


a2Cor. 8:7. b Acts 20: 28; 2 Tim. 1:8; Rev. 1:2. 


f John 15:4; 1John 4:18. 


23. elsa. 49:7; Heb. 10: 23. 


h Acts 18:24. 





much that he could not praise. He could see their improvement on their former condition, as well as 
their present faults. A good example for allcritics. 5. Thatin everything ye are enriched by 
him. “The grace of God” (verse 4) had “enriched” them. In all utterance. The reference is 
especially, but not exclusively, to the supernatural gifts of tongues and of knowledge which were 
imparted to the early church. See 12: 8-10; and 2 Cor. 8:7; 11:6. 6. Even as the testimony of 
Christ was confirmed in you. It was confirmed by the fruits which it brought forth; their belief 
and the spiritual gifts which were bestowed upon some of them, 7%. So that ye come behind in no 
gift. They were “enriched” by the grace of God so that they were not inferior to other Christians in 
privileges. Waiting for the coming. They, like other Christians, were eagerly waiting for the 
rettirn of the Lord to the earth. 8. Who shall confirm you. He will do his part to confirm you; 
give you strength to the end, that you may be blameless in the day, etc. Free from blame when 
they are called to meet the Lord. 9. God is faithful. Hence he will faithfully discharge his part 
of the covenant. His promises may be relied upon. The fact that he had called the saints to fellow- 
ship with his Son, 1s proof that their salvation will be completed. 

10-17. Now I beseech you, brethren, etc. How earnest and imploring is the Apostle’s exhor- 
tation that they should maintain unity! That ye all speak the same thing. Have no distinctive 
party declarations. This is violated in the modern sectarian symbols and confessions. That there 
be no divisions. “No schisms,’ in the Greek. If there were none, and all “were perfectly joined 
together in the same mind and in the same judgment,” all would ‘‘speak the same thing.” There 
would be no variance in their declarations. It is evident, from what follows, that, while the 
Corinthians had not separated into various church organizations, they had formed several parties 
within the church. Organized sects, claiming to be “branches of the church,” were unknown till cen- 
turies later. 11. For it hath been declared unto me. He candidly tells them how he had 
Jearned of their dissensions. Them which are of the house of Chloe. Whether these were her 
children or her servants, or whether she lived at Corinth and these members of her household had 
come to visit Paul at Ephesus, or whether she lived at Ephesus and these persons had made a visit to 
Corinth, these are all unknown. Chloe is not elsewhere named, 12. Now this I say. I explain 
more fully what mean. He shows that there were four existing parties: A Pauline party, clinging to 
the founder of their church; a party of Apollos, who were probably carried away by their admiration of 
his Alexandrian philosophy; a party of Judaizers, who claimed tobe following Peter, called here by 


78 I. CORINTHIANS. 


[Ch. I. 





13 Is* Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? 
or were ye baptized in the name of Paul? 

14 I thank God that I baptized none of you, but? 
Crispus® and Gaius; 

15 Lest any should say that I had baptized in 
mine own name. 

16 And I baptized also the household® of Step- 
hanas: besides, I know not whether I baptized any 
other. 

17 For® Christ sent me not to baptize, but to 
preach the gospel: not with wisdom of words, Jest 
the cross of Christ should be made of none effect. 

18 For the preaching of the cross is to them‘ 
that perish® foolishness; but unto us which are 
saved it is" the power of God. 

19 For it is written,! I will destroy the wisdom of 
the wise, and will bring te nothing the understand- 
ing of the prudent. 

20 Where! zs the wise? where zs the scribe? 
where és the disputer of this world? hath* not God 
made foolish the wisdom of this world? 


Is Christ divided? was 13 
Paul crucified for you? or 
were you baptized into the 
name of Paul? I thank 14 
God that I baptized none 
of you, save Crispus and 
Gaius; lest any man 15 
should say that ye were 
baptized into my name. 
And I baptized also the 16 
household of Stephanas: 
besides, I know not wheth- 
er I _ baptized any other. 
For Christ sent me not to 
baptize, but to preach the 
gospel; not in wisdom of 
words, lest the cross of 
Christ should be made 
void. 

For the word of the cross 
is to them that are perish- 
ing foolishness; but unto 
us which are being saved 
itis the powerofGod. For 
it is written, 

Iwill destroy the wisdom 

of the wise, 

And the prudence of the 

‘ prudent will I reject. 
Where is the wise? where 
is the scribe? where is the 
disputer of this world? 
hath not God made foolish 
the wisdom of the world? 


17 


18 


19: 





a@2 Cor. 11:4; Eph.4:5. 6 Acts 18:8. c Rom. 16:23. dl Cor. 16: 15, he 26: 
Isa . 44: 


h Rom. 1:16. isa. 29:14. j Isa. 33: 18. 


17. 
25. 


f2Cor.2:5. g Acts 17:18. 








his Hebrew name of Cephas; and a fourth party, who claimed to turn away from all these human 
leaders, and to be only of Christ. 13. Is Christ dividedP The church is “the Body of Christ’ 
(12: 12,13). Can that body be cut into parts, and these assigned to human leaders? Was Paul cru- 
cified for youP The cross binds us to Christ alone. By baptism we are baptized in Christ's name, 
into his death, and into Christ (Rom. 6:3). 14. I thank God that I baptized none of you, etc. 
“The Corinthians hearing, believed and were baptized” (Acts 18: 8), but the fellow-ministers of Paul 
usually administered the baptismal rite. Since some of the Corinthians were claiming to be of his 
party, he was glad that he had not personally baptized them, lest some should say he had baptized in 
his own name (verse 15). Crispus. Formerly chief ruler of the synagogue at Corinth (Acts 18: 8). 
Gaius. See Romans 16:23. He was Paul’s host at Corinth when the Epistle to the Romans was 
written. 16. I baptized also the household of Stephanas. This household was “the first 
fruits of Achaia” (16:15); Stephanas was one of the three Corinthian brethren then visiting Paul at 
Ephesus (16:17). There is no proof that this, or any other household named in Scripture, contained 
infants, but there is proof that most of them did not. “The household” does not mean the same as “the 
family” but those dwelling in the house; often the servants only. 17. For Christ sent me not to 
baptize. Paul does not intend to disparage baptism, but to say that, in the division of labor, the work 
assigned him was to preach, while others did the baptizing. If the common views of his physical 
condition are correct, he was hardly strong enough to doa great deal of baptizing. Not with wisdom 
of words. Instead of seeking eloquence or philosophical speculation, which might hide the cross, he 
told the simple story of the gospel in plain and simple language. 

18-21. The preaching of the cross. The gospel of a Crucified Savior. To them that perish. 
Those who are unregenerate. Is foolishness. The Greek philosopher and the Jewish scribe scoffed 
at the thought of a Savior who had been crucified. They held that his crucifixion proved that he was 
not divine. Unto us who are saved. There are two sections of mankind—the unsaved and the 
saved, To the first, the cross is folly; to the second, the gospel of the Crucified One comes as the 
power of God. See Rom. 1:16. To the unsaved, the cross is a pillar of cloud; to the saved, a pillar 
of light. 19. I will destroy the wisdom of the wise (Isa. 29:14). By turning to the passage in 
Isaiah, its meaning is clear, God will put aside the wisdom and understanding of men; these will not 
save; but he will save by what the world called foolishness. 20. Where arethe wise? The Greek 
philosophers. The term “philosopher” means a lover of wisdom. The scribeP The scribes were the 
Jewish learned class. The disputerP etc. Probably the Greek teachers who “disputed daily” in the 
public places. Hath not God made foolish? ete. All their worldly wisdom is excluded from the 


Ch. 1.] I. CORINTHIANS. 





21 For* after that, in the wisdom of God, the 
world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by 
ae foolishness of preaching to save them that be- 

lieve. 

22 For the” Jews require a sign, and the Greeks 
seek after wisdom: 

23 But we preach Christ crucified, unto the* 
Jews a stumbling-block, and unto the Greeks fool- 
ishness ; 

24 But unto them which are called, both Jews 
and Greeks, Christ,4 the power of God, and the® 
wisdom of God. 

25 Becauset the foolishness of God is wiser than 
men; and the weakness of God is stronger than 
men. 

26 For ye see your calling, brethren, how that® 
not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, 
not many noble, are called: 

27 But® God hath chosen the foolish things of 
the world to confound the wise; and God hath 
chosen the weak things of the world to confound 
the things which are mighty; 

28 And base things of the world, and things 
which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and! 
things which are not,! to bring to nought things that 
are; 





For seeing thatin the wis- 21 
dom of God the world 
through its wisdom knew 
not God,1t was God’s good 
pleasure through the fool- 
ishness of the preaching 
to save them that believe. 
Seeing that Jews ask for 22 
signs, and Greeks seek 
after wisdom: but we 23 
preach Christ crucified, 
unto Jews a stumbling- 
block, and unto Gentiles 
foolishness; butuntothein 24 
that are called, both Jews 
and Greeks, Christ the 
ower of God and the wis- 

om of God. Because the 25. 
foolishness of God is wiser 
than men; and the weak- 
ness of God is stronger 
than man, 

For behold your calling, 
brethren, how that not 
many wise after the flesh, 
not many mighty,not many 
noble, are called: but God 27 
chose the foolish things of 
the world, that he might 
put to shame them that 
are wise; and God chose 
the weak things of the’ 
world, that he might put 
to shame the things that 
are strong; and the base 28: 
things of the world, and 
the things that are despis- 
ed, did God choose, yea 
and the things that are 
not, that he might bring to 
nought the things that are: 


26 





cIsa. 8:14; Matt.11:6. d Rom. 1:4. 


6 Luke 11: 16. 
hPsa.8:2. @Rom. 4:17. 71 Cor. 2:6. 


@ Luke 10: 21. 


é Col. 2:8. f2 Cor. 4:7. 


g John 7:48, 





gospel. 21. For . 


knew not God. Worldly wisdom did not search out the true God. Intel- 


lectual speculation had done its utmost, and failed. Hence it was rejected, and the Divine Wisdom 
chose by the foolishness of preaching to save, etc. That is, by preaching what the wise and 
puffed up of this world called foolishness. They called the gospel foolishness. 

22-25, For the Jews require a sign. Not merely miracles, such as the apostles worked, but a 
sign from heaven (Matt. 12: 38). They said, “Let Christ come down from heayen, if he be risen.” And 
the Greeks seek after wisdom. While the Jews asked for a sign from heaven, the Greeks 
demanded a well-argued system of philosophy (Acts 17: 18). 28. But we preach Christ crucified. 
Not merely Christ, but Christ Crucified; a Crucified Savior. Unto the Jews a stumbling-block. 
Because they had an entirely different conception of the Christ. Yetit was predicted that he should be 
“a stone of stumbling” (Matt. 21: 24). Unto the Greeks foolishness. It seemed to the Greeks that 
a being who died so ignominious a death could not be divine. 24. But to them which are called. 
But to those who obey the gospel call, whether Jews or Gentiles, the Crucified Christ is found to be the 
power of God, and the wisdom of God. The gospel not only is found to be mighty, but wise in 
meeting the wants of the soul. 25. The foolishness of God. In one thing that men call foolish- 
ness, in Christ Crucified, there is greater wisdom than in all the philosophers, and though it seemed 
weakness of God to let Christ be crucified, yet the Crucified Savior is mightier than all the strength 
of men. If folly and weakness be of God, these will be wiser and stronger than men. 

26-31. Not many wise men after the flesh. Paul now shows the weakness of the human 
instrumentality chosen to convert the world; not those the world called wise, not the mighty, not the 
noble, yet the work was moving on with wonderful power. 2'7. But God hath chosen the foolish 
things. Men whom the world would call foolish, with a gospel that it called foolishness; yet these 
«confounded the wise” and upturned the world’s philosophies. 28. Base things. Those of lowly 
birth. Things which are not. People that the world would call ‘‘nobodies,” and things that it 
counts as nothing. These are chosen to bring to nought things that are; the existing state of 


80 I. CORINTHIANS. 


fCh. II. 





29 That no flesh should glory in his presence. 

30 But of him ye are in Christ Jesus, who of God 
is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and 
sanctification, and redemption; 

31 That, according as it is written,* He that glor- 





ieth, let him glory in the Lord. 
CHAPTER: IL. 


Christ Crucified. 


SUMMARY.—The One Theme of Preaching Christ Crucified. Not Elo- 
quence or Human Wisdom, but the Power of the Spirit Needed. A 
Divine Wisdom in the Cross of Christ. This is a Mystery Revealed to 
the Converted; Unseen by the Unregenerate. The Things of the 
Kingdom Not Understood by the Worldly. These are Revealed to 
‘Those who Have the Spirit of God. 


1 And I, brethren, when I came to you, came? 
not with excellency of speech, or of wisdom, declar- 
ing unto you the testimony of God: 

2 For I determined not to know any thing among 
you,° save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. 

3 And‘ I was with you® in weakness, and in fear, 
and in much trembling. 

4 And my speech and my preaching * was not 
with enticing words of man’s wisdom, but in de- 
-monstration of the Spirit and of power; 

5 That your faith should not stand in the wisdom 





of men, but in the® power of God. 


~~ ader. 9:23. b1Cor. 1:17; 2 Cor. 11:6. ¢ Gal 6: 14; Phil. 8:8. d Acts ie: 1. 
g 2 Cor. 4:7. 








that no flesh should glory 29 
before God. But of him 30 
are ye in Christ Jesus, 
who was made unto us 
wisdom from God, and 
righteousness and sancti- 
fication and redemption: 
that, according as it is 
written, He that glorieth, 
let him glory in the Lord. 


CHAPTER II. 


And I, brethren, when I i 
came unto you, came not 
with excellency of speech 
or of wisdom, proclaiming 
to you the mystery of God. 
For I determined not to 2 
know anything among you, 
save Jesus Christ, and him 
crucified. AndI was with 3 
you in weakness, and in 
fear, and in much tremb- 
ling. And my speech and 4 
my preaching were not in 
persuasive words of wis- 
dom, but in demonstration 
of the Spirit and of power: 
foo yous faith should not 5 
stand in the wisdom of 
eeu, but in the power of 
God. 


ée2 Cor. 10:4. 72 Pet. 1:6. 





things; the pagan religions, governments, and Civilization; these were t 


obe overthrown through the 


influence of the gospel. 29. That no flesh should glory, ete. That it should be shown that the 
power was of God. 80. Who of God is made unto us wisdom. “Christ, the power of God and 


the wisdom of God” (verse 24), is wisdom to us. 
and obtain sanctification and redemption. Christ is all of these to us. 
(Jer. 9: 23.) As Christ is our all, imparts every grace that we enjoy, 


And righteousness. In him we are made righteous, 
31. He that glorieth, etc. 
and bestows every blessing, there 


is no ground for glorying in Paul, Apollos or Cephas, but in the Lord alone. 
1-5. Paul has ‘shown, in the preceding chapter, that God chose the things and persons which the 
world calls foolish, and weak, and base, and of no account, in order to confute the world’s wisdom and 


to overthrow its power. He now shows that this harmonizes with the means used 


at Corinth in the 


founding of the church. Not with excellency of speech or of wisdom. Not with the eloquent 


arts of a Grecian orator, or the speculations of a Greek philosopher; things highly 


esteemed at Corinth 


and among all the Greeks. The testimony of God. The Revision has, ‘‘Mystery of God,” which has 


the support of the best MSS., and harmonizes better with the context. 
mystery” (Eph. 3:9, and 1 Tim. 3: 16). 
ing centered upon this great theme, “To the Greeks foolishness, and 


The gospel is often called “a 
2. Save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. 


All his preach- 


to the Jews a stumbling-block” 


(1: 23). 8. I was with you in weakness, etc. In this great center of Greek culture, he felt a 


human timidity at first in presenting the simple gospel in the face 
losophy. 4. Not with enticing words of man’s wisdom. 


of the splendors of the Greek phi- 
He did not resort to the arts and 


enticements of Greek oratory or philosophy. Butin demonstration of the Spirit and of power. 


Filled by the Holy Spirit, he spoke in its power, 
words were also supported by the power of the 
5. That your faith should not stand. Their faith was not 


and thus moved upon the hearts of his hearers. His 
Spirit shown in miracles (Romans 15: 19; 2 Cor. 12: 12) 
produced by the triumphs of oratory or 


philosophy, but by the gospel preached in the power of the Spirit. Hence it was wrought through the 


means supplied of God. 


4h. TT.) I. CORINTHIANS. 


81 





6 Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that? | 


are perfect; yet not the wisdom of this world, nor 
of the princes of this world, that come to nought: 

7 But speak we the wisdom of God in a mystery, 
even the hidden wisdom,” which God ordained be- 
fore the world unto our glory; 

8 Which® none of the princes of this world 
knew: for had they known 7/, they would not have 
crucified the Lord of glory. 

9 But, as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor 
ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of 
man, the things which God hath prepared for them 
that love him. 

10 But® God hath revealed them unto us by his 
Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the 


Howbeit we speak wis- 
dom among the perfect: 
yet a wisdom not of this 
world, nor of the rulers of 
this world, which are com- 
ing to nought: but we 
speak God’s wisdom ina 
mystery, even the wisdom 
that hath been hidden, 
which God foreordained 
before the worlds unto our 
glory: which none of the 
rulers of this world know- 
eth: for had they known 
it, they would not have 


6 


crucified the Lord of glory: 3 


but as itis written, 

Things which eye saw 
not,and ear heard not, 

And which entered not 
into the heart of man, 

Whatsoever things God 
prepared for them that 
love him. 


: But unto us God revealed 10 

deep things of God, ae Pare 
° rl r 

11 For what mant knoweth the things of a man] things Put Seare “deep 

; ase : Tere TW) 9 things of God. For who 11 
save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the anenwinsn ona 
things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of | things of a man, save the 
spirit of the man, which is 
God. in hee even so site things 
1 iv] of God none knoweth, save 

12 Now we have received, not the spirit of the che Sint bi Goa, Bere 


world, but® the Spirit which is of God; that we 
might know the things that are freely given to us 
of God. 





received, not the spirit of 
the world, but the spirit 
which is of God; that we 
might know the things 
that are freely given to us 





a Eph. 4:13; Jas. 3:15. 6 kom. 16:25; 2 Tim. 1:9. c Acts.13:27. d Isa. 64:4. e Matt. 16:17; 1 John. 2:27, 


h Rom. 8:15. 


fer. 17:9. g Rom. 11:33. 








6-9. Howbeit we speak wisdom. “We” refers to Paul and his fellow-preachers. Though the 
gospel abjured carnal wisdom, yet it has a wisdom of its own, a divine wisdom, which is imparted to 
and recognized by those who have become full-grown Christians. ‘The perfect” are the full-grown in 
Christ, instead of babes. Babes must be fed on milk, but the grown can endure strong meat. For such 
there is a depth of wisdom revealed in the gospel, but not the wisdom of this‘world. Princes of 
this world. Leading men of the Jews, Greeks and Romans. They had not learned this divine wis- 
dom. 7. Wespeak the wisdom of God inamystery. The Greeks had their mysteries, like the 
Eleusinian, in which secrets were imparted to the initiated. A mystery is asecret as yet not made 
known. The wisdom of God in the gospel was a mystery hidden until Christ came, and since then fully 
comprehended only by “the initiated,” the full-grown Christians. The apostolic sense of “mystery” is 
that which was hidden, but is now disclosed to those who accept the gospel. Those who will not 
receive the gospel cannot comprehend this wisdom. See Rom. 16: 25, 26; Eph. 3:6; 1 Tim. 3:16. Even 
the hidden wisdom. Long hidden, though existing in God’s plans made before the “age” (see mar- 
gin of Revision). The Jewish age or dispensation may be meant, or it may mean the ages of man’s 
existence. The Greek word is “ages.”” This hidden wisdom proposed all through the dispensations 
the glory of God’s chosenones. 8. Which none of the princes . knew. Utterly ignorant of 
the divine wisdom to be revealed in Christ, they, the high priests, with Pilate and Herod, crucified the 
Son. 9. As it is written (Isa. 54:4). There was no human conception, as shown by the prophet, 
of the glory to be revealed in the mystery of the gospel. And indeed that glory is still beyond the 
power of mere human conception. 

10-13. But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit. These wonders of the love of 
God, not seen by eye, nor heard by ear, nor revealed to the senses, were revealed by the Spirit to the 
apostles (to ws), and made known through them to full-grown Christians (‘‘the perfect,” verse 6). The 
Spirit searcheth, etc. The Holy Spirit, imparted so freely to the apostles to lead them into all truth 
(John 16:13), is the Spirit of God. Hence this Spirit imparts a knowledge of the deep things of God. 
The secrets of the divine wisdom are thus made known. 11. For what man knoweth, etc. A 
man’s spirit knows all his secrets, though these are unknown to another man. So God’s Spirit knows 
the Divine secrets, and imparts these wherever he dwells in full measure as the Spirit of knowledge. 


TI. CORINTHIANS. 


82 (Ch. II. 


by God. Which things also 13 





13 Which things also we speak, not in the words 
which man’s wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy 
Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things with 
spiritual. 

14 But® the natural man receiveth not the things 
of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto 
him: neither” can he know them, because they are 
spiritually discerned. 

15 But® he that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet 
he himself is judged of no man. 

16 For* who hath known the mind of the Lord, 





we speak, not in words 
which man’s wisdom 
teacheth, but which the 
Spirit teacheth; compar- 
ing spiritual things with 
spiritual. Now the natural 
man receiveth not the 
things of the Spirit of God: 
for they are foolishness 
unto him; and he cannot 
know them, because they 
are spiritually judged. But 
he that is spiritual judgeth 
all things, and he himself 
is judged of noman. For 
who hath known the mind 
of the Lord, that he should 


instruct him? But we have 


that he may instruct him? But* we have the mind | the mina of Christ. 


of Christ. 
CHAPTER III. 


Carnal Divisions. 

SumMary.—The Proofs that the Corinthians were Yet Carnal. Not Able 
to Endure Strong Meat. The Work of Paul and Apollos. The In- 
crease of God. The Church God’s Building. The One Foundation. 
Perishable Materials Built on This. The Sin of Defiling God’s Tem- 
ple. The Glorious Estate of the Christian. 





CHAPTER III. 


And I, brethren, couid 1 
you as! not speak unto you as unto 


1 And I, brethren, could not speak unto 





a Matt. 16:23. 6 Rom. 8:5; Judel9. ¢ Proy. 28:5. d Job 15:8; Isa. 40:13; Jer. 23:8; Rom. 11:34. 


John 15:6. 


a 


12. Now we have received, etc. We apostles. The Spirit received by all the apostles was not the 
spirit of the world, but the Holy Spirit which Christ promised them as a guide into all truth. Hence 
they were enabled to know what God imparted freely to them. 13. Which things we also speak. 
The grand truths, “the hidden wisdom,” “the mystery of God,” revealed to them through the Spirit, 
they spoke to others. These things they spoke, not in the words of man’s wisdom, not in the 
garb of philosophy, but in the words given by the Holy Spirit. Comparing spiritual things with 
spiritual. This difficult clause has received many explanations. Canon Cook explains it: ‘““Matching 
spiritual things with spiritual words.” Conybeare and Howson say: “Explaining spiritual things to 
spiritual men.” This last view, which Canon Cook says does no violence to the Greek, harmonizes best 
with verses 6and14. I think that verse 14, the next verse, shows that this is the true meaning. 

14-16. But the natural man. The natural man is the unregenerate, one who has the spirit of 
the world, one not born anew of water and of the Spirit. Man is a triune being—body, soul and spirit. 
The natural man is under the dominion of the soul, the animal life. The spirit must be stirred from its 
dormant condition, and born again, before one can comprehend the things of the Spirit. These are 
foolishness to one under the dominion of the animal life, such as the Jewish scribes and Greek ‘‘dis- 
puters,” for they can be discerned only by the spirit of aman. It is only whena spiritual hunger is. 
felt, when one is born again, and when man becomes a spiritual instead of an animal being, that he can 
understand “the deep things of the Spirit.” But blessed be God, the A B C’s of the gospel, which the: 
ignorant and unlearned can understand, are sufficient to convert and prepare one for a higher knowl- 
edge. 15. He that is spiritual. He who lives the spiritual life. Judgeth all things. ‘‘Exam- 
ineth,” in the margin of the Revision. The spiritual man, helped by the indwelling Spirit, is prepared 
to study the deeper truths of the Spirit. Judged of no man. None who are not spiritual are able to. 
sit in judgment upon his higher life. He is on a higher level, and the animal man, from his lower level, 
cannot well estimate him. 16. For who hath known the mind of the Lord? etc. No man, not 
even the most spiritual, knows the mind of the Lord so as to instruct him. If*there was such a one, he, 
and he only, might instruct those who have the mind of Christ. 

Two things are learned from this chapter: (1) There is a divine wisdom or philosophy. (2) This 
divine wisdom, or mystery, is an absurdity or perplexity to the world, but the wisdom of God to the 
saints. 

1-4. And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual. See verse 6 of the pre- 
ceding chapter; also verse 14. The brethren at Corinth had not reached the state of “spiritual men.’” 


é Psa. 25:145 


Ch. Ti.) I. CORINTHIANS. 83 
ae oe wei: 
unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto | spiritual, but as unto car- 
: : nal, as unto babes in 
. babes in Christ. Christ. I fed you with 2 


2 I have fed you with? milk, and not with meat: 
for hitherto ye were not able to bear at, neither yet 
now are ye able. 

3 For ye are yet carnal: for whereas there is 
among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are 
ye not carnal, and walk as men? 

4 For while one saith, I am of Paul; and anoth- 
er, Lam of Apollos; are ye not carnal? 

5 Who then is Paul, and who ¢s Apollos, but 
ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord 
gave to every man? 

6 I” have planted,° Apollos watered; but God@ 
gave the increase. 

7 So then neither is he that planteth anything, 
neither he that watereth; but God that giveth the 
increase. 

8 Now he that planteth and he that watereth are 
one:* and every man shall receive his own reward, 
according to his own labour. 

9 For’ we are labourers together with God: ye 
are God’s husbandry, ye are God’s% building. 





milk, not with meat; for 
ye were not yet able to 
bear it: nay, not even now 
are ye able; for ye are yet 3 
carnal: for whereas there 
is among you jealousy and 
Strife, are ye not carnal, 
and walk after the manner 
of men? For when one 4 
saith, I am of Paul; and 
another, I am of Apollos; 
are ye not men? What 5 
then is Apollos? and what 
is Paul? Ministers through 
whom ye believed; and 
each as the Lord gave to 
him. 1 Bianted. Apollos 6 
watered ; but God gave the 
increase. So then neither 7 
is he that planteth any- 
thing, neither he that 
watereth; but God that 
be the increase. Now 8 

e that planteth and he 
that watereth are one: but 
each shall receive his own 
reward according to his 
own labour. For we are 9 
God’s fellow-workers: ye 
are God’s husbandry, 
God’s building. 

According to the grace 10 
of God which was given 
unto me, as a wise master- 
builder I laid a founda- 


10 According to the grace of God which is given 
unto me, as a wise master-builder, I have laid" the 


@ Heb. 5:13; 1 Pet.2:2. 6 Acts 18:4. c Acts19:1. dIsa. 55-10. é Psa. 62:12; Rom. 2:6; Rev. 2:28; 22:12. 
J Acts 15:4. g Eph. 2:20; Col. 2:7. h Rom. 15:20. 





They were carnal, undeveloped like babes. 2. I have fed you with milk. When he was at 
Corinth he treated them as babes, teaching them the simple, rudimentary principles. Milk. Simple 
teaching. Meat. Stronger and deeper doctrines. In the school of Christ, like all others, the teaching 
must be adapted to the advancement of the learner. 8. Ye are yet carnal. Hence, still not 
spiritual enough to receive the higher teaching, the “hidden wisdom,” the meat. The proof that they 
were yet carnal was the existence of divisions in the church. Walk as men. Exhibit the jealous and 
discordant spirit characteristic of men of the world. 4. When one saith, I amof Paul, etc. The 
fact that they divided by following different human leaders, instead of all following Christ, demon- 
strated that they were yet carnal. 

5-9. Who then is Paul and Apollos? Their carnal-mindedness showed itself in choosing and 
following these human leaders. One said he was a Paulite, etc. Hence he asks, Who is Paul, or 
Apollos? Only ministers, servants, subordinates, agents through whoin they believed on Christ. As 
the Lord gave to every man. Gave to Paul and Apollos power to lead you tofaith. 6. I have 
planted, ete. It was Paul’s work given him to plant the seed of the kingdom; it was the work of 
Apollos to afterwards water or cultivate the Christian plants which had come forth, but God gave the 
growth; gave the seed its vitality and the plant its life. 7% So then neither is he that planteth, 
etc. The parts of Paul and Apollos were as nothing; the power was all of God, who gave growth to the 
seed and plant. 8. Nowhe that planteth and he that watereth are one. They have kindred 
work, as servants, and each will be rewarded as a servant according to his labor. 9. For we are 
laborers together with God. The Revision gives the true meaning. They, he and Apollos, were 
fellow-laborers belonging to God (of God, not with God). They were fellow-laborers with each other, 
of God. The Corinthian church was God’s field in which they labored. The Greek word means “tilled 
land.” Husbandry is obscure. Ye are God’s building. The figure is now changed. Paul and 
Apollos are God’s builders, and the church is the building they build. The leading idea is that they are 
only God’s employees. How can Paul have a party, then, and Apollos another, when they are only 
employees of God? 


10-15. According to the grace given to me. When he was called to be an 


Given when? 


84 lL... CORINTHIANS. 


foundation, and another buildeth thereon. 
let every man take heed how he buildeth there- 
upon. 

ah For other foundation can no man lay than" 
that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. 

12 Now if any man build upon this foundation 
gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble; 

13 Every man’s work shall be made manifest: 
for the day® shall declare it, because it shall be re- 
vealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man’s 
work of what sort it is. 





But? | 


(Ch. IIL. 


tion; and another buildeth 
thereon. But let each man 
take heed how he buildeth 
thereon. 
dation can no man lay than 
that which is laid, which 


is Jesus Christ. But if any 12 


man buildeth on the foun- 
dation gold, silver, costly 
stones, wood, hay, stub- 


ble; each man’s work shall 13 


be made manifest; for the 
day shall declare it, be- 
cause it is revealed in fire; 
and the fire itself shall 
prove each man’s work of 
what sort it is. 
man’s work shall abide 


For other foun- 11 


If any 14 


which he built thereon, he 
shall receive areward. If 15 
any man’s work shall be 
burned, he shall suffer 
loss: but he himself shall 
be saved; yet so as through 
fire. 

Know ye not that ye are 16 
atemple of God, and that 
the Spirit of God dwelleth 
in you? If any man de- 17 
stroyeth the temple of 
God, him shall God de- 
stroy; for the temple of 
God is hol¥, which temple 
ye are. 

Let no man deceive him- 18 
self. If any man thinketh 


14 If any man’s work abide which he hath built 
thereupon, he shall receive a reward. 

15 If any man’s work shall be burnt, he shall 
suffer loss: but he himself shall be saved; yet so 
as by fire. 

16 Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, 
and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? 

17 If any man defile the temple of God, him shall 
God destroy: for the® temple of God is holy, which 
temple ye are. 

18 Let no man deceive himself. 





If any man 





a1lPet.4:11. 6dIsa. 28:16; Matt. 16:18. cl Pet. 1:7. dJude23. e Heb. 3:1. 





apostle. I have laid the foundation. The figure of the building is retained. Paul is a discreet 
master-builder. He had laid the foundation at Corinth, when he was preaching Christ, and working 
through faith in him (2:4,5). Notice it is not a, but the foundation, because God’s spiritual temple (vy. 16) 
can have only one. Another buildeth thereon. After Paul left Corinth, Apollos and other teachers 
continued to build upon the foundation Paul had laid. Let every man take heed how, etc. Since 
there is only one foundation ofthe temple, viz: Jesus Christ, there should be most careful and conscien- 
tious building upon it (verse 12). 11. Other foundation can no man lay, ete. There is only one 
foundation of the church (Matt. 16: 16), This foundation-stone was laid by God (Isaiah 28:16). Paul’s 
work under God was to point the Corinthians to this foundation, to induce them to believe, and thus to 
puild them upon it. His preaching laid it in their hearts. To preach Christ is to preach the funda- 
mental or foundation truth 6f the church. 12. If any man build upon this foundation. There 
is only the one foundation for all builders to build upon. The church or temple will be of the character 
of the material built upon it. If this material be precious and imperishable, if apostolic doctrines and 
men moulded into the image of Christ be this material, itis well. If erroneous doctrines and unstable 
men, wood, hay, stubble, this will all be revealed in due time. 18. Every man’s work shall be 
made manifest. The kind of work that every builder does will be manifested. The day shall 
declare it. Probably the day of Christ’s coming. As fire destroys wood, hay, stubble, but leaves gold, 
silver, precious stones, so the work of some builders, when tested, will vanish. They do not do solid 
work. 14. If any man’s work shall abide. Shall stand the test of trial. Such a builder will be 
rewarded. There shall be stars in his crown. 15. If any man’s work shall be burned. Shall 
perish as worthless. Such an one will forfeit his reward. So as by fire. He is saved, because he 
intended well, but is barely saved, like one who escapes from a burning house where all his property is 
consumed. } 
16,17. If any man defile the temple of God. In verse 9 the apostle had said, “Ye are God’s 
building.” Now he returns to that figure, and denounces the judgment of God upon all who would 
defile his house by their carnal divisions. In that temple the Spirit dwelt, as the Shekinah had dwelt in 
the temple of God at Jerusalem; it was therefore a holy temple, and an awful sin to defile it. Under 
the old dispensation, death was the penalty of polluting the temple. ‘ 
18-28. Let no man deceive himself. A caution against the philosophical tendencies of the 
Apolloite party. If any man thinketh that he is wise. If he is wise in his own estimation and 


Ch. IV.] I. CORINTHIANS. 


among you seemeth to be wise in this world, let 
him become a fool, that he may be wise. 

19 For the wisdom of this world is foolishness 
with God: for it is written,? He taketh the wise in 
their own craftiness. 

20 And again,” The Lord knoweth the thoughts 
of the wise, that they are vain. 

21 Therefore let no man glory in men: for all 
things are yours; 

22 Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the 
world, or life, or death, or things present, or things 
to come; all are yours; 

23 And? ye are Christ’s;® and Christ is God’s. 


CHAPTER IV. 
The Apostles and the Church. 


SUMMARY.—The Apostles Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Forming 
Judgments of Religious Teachers. The Apostles Made a Spectacle 
to the World. The Apostolic Trials. Counted by the World as Off- 
scouring. Yet, Paul the Spiritual Father of the Corinthian Church. 
And His Example should be Imitated. 


1 Let a man so account of us as of the ministers 
of Christ,‘ and stewards of the mysteries of God. 

2 Moreover, it is required in stewards, that a 
man be found faithful. 

3 But with me it is a very small thing that I 
should be judged of you, or of man’s judgment; 





85. 


that he is wise among you 
in this world, let him ‘be- 
come a fool, that he may 
become wise. For the 
wisdom of this world is 
foolishness with God. For 
it is written, He that 
taketh the wise in their 
craftiness: and again, The 
Lord knoweth the reason- 
ings of the wise, that they 
are vain. Wherefore let 
no one gloryinmen. For 
all things are yours; 
whether Paul, or Apollos, 
or Cephas, or the world, or 
life, or death, or things 
present, or things to come; 
all are yours; and ye are 
Christ’s; and Christ is 
God’s. 


CHAPTER IV. 


Let aman so account of 
us, as of ministers of 
Christ, and stewards of the 
mysteries of God. Here, 
moreover, it is required in 
stewards, that a man be 
found faithful. But with 
me it is a very small thing 
that I should be judged of 
you, or of man’s judgment: 


20: 


21 


i 


2: 


3. 





yea, I judge not mine own self: yea, I judge not mine own 








@Job 5:13. 6 Psa. 94:11. ¢2Cor.4:5. d Rom. 14:8; Gal. 3:29. e Heb. 1:3. J Luke 12:42. 








that of the world, let him choose what the world calls “foolishness,” in order that he may became 
“wise unto salvation.” 19. For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. See 
chapter 1:20. For it is written. Job 5:13. 20. And again, the Lord knoweth, etc. Psalm 
94:11. 21. Wherefore, let no one glory in men. In preachers like Paul, and Apollos, and Cephas. 
Above all, let them not form parties around human leaders. For all things are yours. All, the 
preachers as well as all beside, are ordained to prepare you for eternal glory. 22. Whether Paul, 
ete. See verses. Or the world. The world is not to be the master, but the servant of God’s chil- 
dren. Or life. Life is given to do God’s work and to insure life eternal. Or death. To the saint 
“death is gain.” Or things present. These, whatsoever they are, “shall work together for good to 
them that love God.” Or things to come. The things to come to the Christian are the presence of 
Christ, and the joys of the New Jerusalem. All are yours. What a climax! 28. And ye are 
Christ’s. He has procured for us all things, but has bought us with a price. Christ is God’s. 
God’s Son, and belonging to the Father. All things are ours, but we are not our own! We own all else, 
but we do not own ourselves! Hence our duty to be consecrated to the service of Christ. 

1-5. Let a man so account of us. The apostles and evangelists. They are to be regarded as 
ministers (servants) of Christ (3:5), not as leaders. The word rendered “ministers” means, liter- 
ally, “under-rowers.” The figure is that of a ship impelled by oars. The church is the ship; Christ. 
commands ; the rowers only obey orders. Since they have no right to give orders, no parties should be 
formed about them. Stewards. Again the figure is changed, but still the idea is that they were 
seryants. The steward has charge of the house for his master. The church is the house; Christ is the 
Master; the apostolic stewards in charge, having the mysteries of God, the revealed knowledge,, 
knowledge not their own but given them, must faithfully dispense it to the household. 2. Moreover, 
it is required of stewards, etc. The supreme quality required in a steward is fidelity to his trust. 


86 I. CORINTHIANS. 





4 For I know nothing by myself; yet am I not | 


hereby justified: but he that judgeth me is the 
Lord. 

5 Therefore® judge nothing before the time, until 
the Lord come, who both will bring to life the hid- 
den things of darkness, and will make manifest the 
counsels of the hearts; and” then shall every man 
have praise of God. 

6 And these things, brethren, I have in a figure 
transferred to myself and ¢o Apollos for your 
sakes; that® ye might learn in us not to think of 
men above that which is written, that no one of you 
be puffed up for one against another. 

7 For who maketh thee to differ from another? 
and? what hast thou that thou didst not receive? 
now, if thou didst receive ¢¢, why dost thou glory 
as if thou hadst not received 7t? 

8 Now ye are full,® now ye are rich, ye have 
reigned as kings without us: and I would to God ye 
did reign, that we also might reign with you. 


[Ch. IV. 


self, ForI know nothing 4 
against myself; yet am I 
not hereby justified: but 
he that judgeth me is the 
Lord. Wherefore judge 
nothing before the time, 
until the Lord come, who 
will both bring to light the 
hidden things of darkness, 
and make manifest the 
counsels of the hearts ; and 
then shall each man have 
his praise from God. 

Now these things, breth- 
ren, I have in a figure 
transferred to myself and 
Apollos for your sakes; 
that in us ye might learn 
not ¢o go beyond the things 
which are written; that no 
one of you be puffed up 
for the one against the 
other. For who maketh 7 
thee to differ? and what 
hast thou that thou didst 
not receive? but if thou 
didst receive it, why dost 
thou glory, as if thou hadst 
not received it? Already 8 
are ye filled, already ye 
are become rich, ye have 
reigned without us: yea 
and I would that ye did 


or 


for) 


reign, that we also might 
reign with you. For, 19 
think, God hath set forth 
us the apostles last of all, 
as men doomed to death: 
for we are made a specta- 
cle unto the world, and to 


9 For I think that God hath set forth us the 
apostles last,f as it were appointed to death: for® 
we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to 
angels, and to men. 














a Matt. 7:1; Rev. 20:12. 6 Rom, 2:29; 2Cor. 5:10. 


c Rom. 12:3. d@ John 3:27; 1 Pet. 4:10. 
44:22; 2 Cor. 4:11. 


g Eph. 6:12; Heb. 10:33. 


eRev. 3:17. jf Psa. ~ 








8. It is a very small thing, etc. The essential matter with Paul was, not that the Corinthians 
should judge him a faithful steward, or that he should be faithful in his own judgment, but that the 
Lord should count him faithful. Of course, with factions at Corinth, some disparaged Paul. 4. ForTI 
know nothing by myself. In the Revision, “Against myself.” In his own judgment he had been a 
faithful steward at Corinth, but that did not justify him, for he must be judged by the Lord. To the 
Lord, then, he must give a satisfactory account. 5. Therefore, judge nothing, etc. Hence, let no 
one form premature judgments. Only when the Lord comes, in the day of judgment, will all secrets be 
brought to light, and the motives of hearts be manifest, Then, when just judgments are given, shall 
every man have the praise (due him) of God. Each shall be judged as he deserves. Only then 
can the Corinthians form an infallibly correct estimate of their religious teachers. 

6-9. These things, brethren, I have in a figure transferred to myself and Apollos. I 
have used the names of Paul and Apollos to illustrate lessons that I wished to impress upon you; 
especially the lesson not to think of men too highly. Be puffed up for one against another. © 
Exalting one preacher and making him a leader, while seeking to pull down another. '7. Who 
maketh thee to differ? Who has imparted to you graces which distinguish you from others? All 
were imparted to you. If you have nothing that you didst net receive, Why dost thou glory? Some 
unseemly exaltation, probably over spiritual gifts,is rebuked. 8. Now ye are full, now ye are 
rich, ete. Paul has just rebuked their glorying over gifts bestowed upon them. Now he uses a burst 
of irony. Though receiving all the, grace they had, being dependent and needy, they boasted as if they 
had it of themselves. The apostles had spiritual gifts, but were poor and persecuted; the Corinthians 
had these gifts, imparted by Paul, but were puffed up, felt, in his absence, as though they were full, had 
all things; were rich, well supplied; they reigned as kings. Held their heads high as though they 
were made kings. I would ye did reign. Here comes the keenness of the rebuke which follows the 
irony. If they were only exalted to be kings, as they seemed to think themselyes, perhaps then those 
who had imparted to them all that they boasted of might become kings also. The apostles were in the 
suffering period, but these converts had got to the reigning period. 9. God hath set forth us the 
apostles last. In contrast with them, the state of the apostles is given. The figure is drawn from 


Ch. IV.] I. CORINTHIANS. 


87 





10 We are* fools for Christ’s sake, but ye are 
wise in Christ:” we ave weak, but ye are strong: ye 
are honourable, but we are despised. 

11 Even unto this present hour we both hunger, 
and thirst, and are naked, and are® buffetted, and 
have no certain dwelling-place ; 

12 And®@ labour, working with our own hands:° 
being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer 
1t: 

13 Being defamed, we entreat: we are made as 
the filth of the world, and are the off-scouring of 
all things unto this day. 

14 I write not these things to shame you, but, as 
my beloved sons, to warn you. 

15 For though ye have ten thousand instructors 
in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for* in 
ie ra Jesus I have begotten you through the gos- 

el. 

16 Wherefore, I beseech you,® be ye followers of 
me. 

17 For this cause have I sent unto you Timoth- 
eus," who is my beloved son, and faithful in the 
Lord, who shall bring you into remembrance of 
my ways which be in Christ, as 1 teach every where 
in every church. 

18 Now some are puffed up, 
not come to you. 


as though I would 





angels, and to men. We 
are fools for Christ's sake, 
but ye are wise in Christ; 
we are weak, but ye are 
strong; ye have glory, but 
we have dishonour. HKyen 
unto this present hour we 
both hunger, and thirst, 
and are naked, and are 
buffeted, and have no cer- 
tain dwelling-place; and 
we toil, working with our 
own hands: being reviled, 
we bless; being perse- 
euted, we endure; being 
defamed, we intreat: we 
are made as the filth of the 
world, the off-scouring of 
all things, even until now. 

I write not these things 
to shame yon, but to ad- 
monish you as my beloved 
children. For though ye 
should have ten thousand 
tutors in Christ, yet have 
ye not many fathers: for 
in Christ Jesus I begat 
you through the gospel. I 

eseech you therefore, be 
ye imitators of me. 
this cause have I sent unto 
you Timothy, who is my 
beloved and faithful child 
in the Lord, who shall put 
you inremembrance of my 
ways which be in Christ, 
even as I teach every- 
where in every church. 
Now some are puffed up, 
as though I were not com- 





d Acts 18:3; 1 Tim. 4:10. 
g1Cor. 11:1. 


62 Cor. 13:9. ¢ Acts 23:2. 


James 1:18. 


a Acts 26:24. 


e Matt. 5:44; 1 Pet. 2:28. Rom. 15:20; 
h Acts 19:22; 1 Tim. 1:2. 





the Roman amphitheatre. At “last,” near the 
forth and shown to the spectators, then stripped of all armor, 
others. So the apostles were a spectacle unto the world, 
death. 

10-18. We are fools for Christ’s sake. 
Christ’s sake they 
Christ. Think you are wise in your religious speculations. 
strong. In yourown conceits. 


chose a path of sorrow that made the world call them fools. 


11. Unto this present hour. All through our minis 


10 


16 


For 17 


close of the games, gladiators doomed to die were led 
and exposed naked to the attack of 
doomed to reproach, suffering and to 


The sad worldly lot of the apostles is set forth. For 
Ye are wise in 
We are weak. See 2:3. Ye are 
try we suffer 


want for the needs of life, are often in want of food and drink and clothing, are beaten (buffeted), and, 


like the Master, have nocertain home. 12. And labor. 


preaching the gospel, returning good for 


Support ourselves by our own hands while 
evil. 18. Are made as the filth of the world. Are 


accounted by the world as its very sweepings, as scum, as refuse utterly worthless and repulsive. Such 
passages, which are not overdrawn, show the greatness of faith, the devotion, the heroism of and the 


debt we owe to such men as Paul. 


14-17. Iwrite not these things to shame you. I do not contrast your pride and glorying with 
our humiliation to shame you, but asa fatherly admonition to beloved children. 15. Yet have ye 


not many fathers. They might have many 
was their father who had begotten them in 


tutors, who sought to train them as children, but Paul 
the gospel; that is, converted them. 16. Be ye followers 


of me, Hence, since he was their spiritual father, they ought all to imitate him, his lowliness and 


self-denial. Children should seek to 


cause I sent Timotheus. 


Timothy, Paul’s ‘son in the gospel” (Acts 16: 1-3), 


be like the parent, rather than like the tutor. 17. For this 
had already been sent 


onward toward Corinth (1 Cor. 16: 10), but going round by land would not arrive until after this letter, 


ifit went across by sea. Of my ways in I 
life, conduct and teachings, so that they can the better “follow” him. 


Christ. Timothy will revive their remembrance of Paul’s 


88 I. CORINTHIANS. 


[Ch. V. 








19 But? I will come to you shortly, if the Lord 
will, and will know, not the speech of them which 
are puffed up, but the power. 

20 For? the kingdom of God és not in word, but 
in power. 

21 What will ye? shall I come unto you with a 
rod, or in love, and in the spirit of meekness? 


CHAPTER VY. 


Impurity in the Church. 


SUMMARY.—The Incestuous Person. The Discipline Commanded. The 
Old Leaven to be Purged Out. Heinous Offenders Not to be Recog- 
nized Socially in the Church. 


1 It is reported commonly that there ts fornica- 
tion among you, and such fornication as is not so 
much as named’ among the Gentiles,4 that one 
should have his father’s® wife. 

2 And ye are puffed up, and have not rather 
mourned, that he that hath done this deed might be 


ing to you. 
come to you shortly, if the 
Lord will; and Iwill know, 
not the word of them 
which are puffed up, but 
the power. 
dom of God is not in word, 
but in power. 
ye? shall I come unto you 
with a rod, or in love and 
a spirit of meekness? 


CHAPTER V. 


It is actually reported 1 
that there is fornication 
among you, and such for- 
nication as is not even 
among the Gentiles, that 
one of you hath his fath- 
er’s wife. And ye are 
puffed up, and did not 
rather mourn, that he that 
had done this deed might 


But I will 19 


For the king- 20 
What will 21 


be taken away from among 

you. For I verily, being 3 
absentin body but present 
in spirit, have already, as 
though I were present, 
judged him that hath so 
wrought this thing, in the 
name of our Lord Jesus, 
ye being gathered togeth- 
er, and my spirit, with the 
power of our Lord Jesus, 


taken away from among you. 

3 For" I verily, as absent in body, but present in 
spirit, have judged already, as though I were pres- 
ent, concerning him that hath so done this deed. 

4 In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye 
are gathered together, and my spirit, with the 
power of our Lord Jesus Christ, 








@ Acts 19:21; 2;Cor.1:15. 61Thes.1:5. cEph. 5:3. d Deut. 27:20. 


John 20:23; 2 Cor. 2:10; 13:3. 


e2 Cor. 7:12. Col. 2:5. g Matt. 18:18; 





18-21. Now some are puffed up. Some of those who were factious thought, as Paul was send- 
ing Timothy, he would not come himself, and this encouraged them to continue their factious conduct.. 
19. Iwillcome to you shortly. If God permitted, he would soon follow (16: 7,8), and would put 
to the test those puffed up. Not the speech, . .. but the power. He will confront these vain 
boasters, and see what power is behind their swelling words. 20. For the kingdom of God. For 
in the kingdom of God it is not words or professions which avail, but the power of God in the heart. 
21. What will yeP When he comes, how shall he come? Willit be necessary to rebuke and exert 
his apostolic authority, or will the condition of the church be such that only love and gentleness will be 
called for? 

1-5. There is fornication among you. Licentiousness was one of the besetting sins of the 
Gentiles at this time. Purity of life was almost unknown. So far was unchastity from being held in 
disrepute that temples were everywhere dedicated to Aphrodite (Venus), andin Corinth at the time 
when Paul wrote there stood one with a thousand priestesses, harlots, a gigantic brothel in the name of 
religion. It is not wonderful that time was required to cleanse the church, formed of converts from 
these heathen, from impurity. Asis not named among the Gentiles. There was in the churcha 
still worse case than the Gentiles would condone; a man had taken, probably after the death of his 
father, his father’s wife, his own step-mother. This sort of incest was condemned by Greeks and 
Romans (Cicero, Oratio pro Cluentio), 2. And ye are puffed up. In the face of such a scandal, such 
a disgrace upon the church of which he is a member, ye are still puffed up, instead of being humiliated 
and covered with a sense of shame. To manifest sorrow was your duty, and to take such steps that the: 
evil doer might be taken from among you by means of church discipline. The early church 
mourned those who fell into licentious or other grievous sin as dead (Origen), and if they repented,. 
received then as risen from the dead. 8. ForTI verily, ete. Though absent, yet with them in spirit,. 
Paul judged the case as present, and commanded the church as a body to take action by withdrawal at. 


Gh. V.J I. CORINTHIANS. 


89 





5 To deliver? such an one unto Satan for the deci 


struction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved 
in the day of the Lord Jesus. 

6 Your glorying ts not good. Know ye not? that 
a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump? 

7 Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may 
be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. For even‘ 
Christ our® passover is sacrificed for us: 

8 Therefore® let us keep the feast, not with? old 
leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wick- 
edness; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity 


to deliver such a one unto 
Satan for the destruction 
of the flesh, that the spirit 
may be saved in the day of 
the Lord Jesus. Your 
glorying is not good. Know 
ye not that a little leayen 
leaveneth the whole lump? 
Purge out the old leaven, 
that ye may be a new 
lump, even as ye are un- 
leavened. For our pass- 
over also hath been sacri- 
ficed, even Christ: where- 
fore let us keep the feast, 
not with old leaven, nei- 
ther with the leayen of 
malice and wickedness, 


iz 


6: 


ay 


but with the unleayened 
bread of sincerity and 
truth. 

I wrote unto you in my 9 
epistle to have no compa- 
ny with fornicators; not 10 
altogether with the forni- 
cators of this world, or 


and truth. 
9 I wrote to you in an epistle not® to company 
with fornicators. ; 
10 Yet not altogether with the fornicators of this 
world, or with the covetous, or extortioners, or with | ca 
idolaters; for then must ye needs go out of the bs aeetucahhatidet tes 
world. } ters; for then must ye 


F needs go out of the world: 
11 But now I have written unto you not to keep | but nowI write unto you 


not to keep company, if 


a Job 2:6; Psa. 109:6; Acts26:18; 1 Tim. 1:20. 6 Gal. 5:9. cIsa. 53:7: John 1:29; 1 Pet.1:19; Rey. 5:6. 
dJohn 19:14. e Ex. 12:15. fDeut.16:3. g2 Cor. 6:14. AJohn 17:15. 











once from the evil doer. 4. Inthe name of our Lord Jesus. The solemn act of excommunication 
must be in the name, that is, by the authority, of the Lord. When ye are gathered together. The 
act is to be administered in full assembly. It must be the act of the whole church. Compare 2 Cor, 2:6. 
And my spirit. He will be present in spirit, since the act will be carrying out his command. With 
the power of our Lord Jesus Christ. The act of excommunication for misdeeds, when adminis- 
tered according to the will of the Lord, is not merely man’s decision, but will be executed by the power 
of the Lord. 5. To deliver such a one unto Satan. Not only this one, but all such persons. To 
deliver unto Satan is to excommunicate; to extradite from the kingdom of God to the kingdom of the 
prince of this world. The expression is used in 1 Tim. 1:20. For the destruction of the flesh. 
Fleshly desires had caused the sin. These must be destroyed. The humiliation of excommunication, 
the sense of one’s lost condition, was well adapted to bring arepentance. Some haye held that this. 
meant to send some painful disease miraculously. I believe that the Latin fathers and Beza are right 
in understanding that it refers to the mortification of the offender, cast out, shunned by the church as: 
a dead body. In 2 Cor. 2:7, this person is ordered to be restored, having repented, and no mention is: 
made of disease. That the spirit may be saved. This is the object of all true discipline. If carried 
out, asin the early church, it was well calculated to bring to repentance. It was effective in this. 
instance, as we learn from 2 Cor. 2: 6. 

6-8. Your glorying is not good. Boasting, in such a state of affairs, was unseemly. A little 
leaven, etc. As alittle leayen leavens the whole mass of dough, so one sinner suffered to go on in 
impurity sends a corrupting influence through the whole church. '7, Purge out therefore the old 
leaven. Let the leaven of impurity be removed, by putting out the fornicator, that the church may be: 
pure from the impure leaven, or influence. So, too, each one must cleanse his own heart. For even. 
Christ our passover, etc. At the passover, Jews were required to put all leaven from their houses 
(Exod. 12: 15). As we have a Paschal Lamb, slain for us, the church should cleanse out the leaven of 
sin. 8. Let us keep the feast. Let us keep feast, or festival. No article in the Greek. The refer- 
ence is not to the Lord’s Supper, or to Easter, as some have supposed, so much as to a constant duty. 
We always have a Paschal Lamb; hence it is always our duty to keep festival by casting out all 
leaven; either the old leaven of heathen vice, or of malice and wickedness, or any sin, 

9-13. I wrote unto you in an epistle. He had written an earlier letter which has not beem 
preserved, probably a short one, to which reference is made. So most commentators understand.. 
10. Yet not altogether with the fornicators of this world. His direction had been misunder- 
stood. The fornicator in the church must be shunned as an outcast, for the sake of the discipline. 
This was what he meant. He did not give directions concerning their conduct towards the heathen. 
Then must ye needs, etc. As the whole heathen world were addicted to the vices named, to apply 


90 - I. CORINTHIANS. 


[Ch>-VI. 





company,* if any man that is called a brother be a 
fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, 
or a drunkard, or an extortioner; with such an” one 
no not to eat. | 

12 For what have I to do to judge them also‘ that 
are without? do not ye judge them that are within? 

13 But them that are without God4 judgeth. 
Therefore put away from among yourselves that 
wicked person. 


CHAPTER VI. 


Litigation Among Brethren. 


SUMMARY.—Going to Law Before Heathen. The Saints as Judges. 
Suffer Wrong Rather than Do Wrong. The Impure Cannot Be God’s 
Children. What is Lawful not Always Expedient. The Christian’s 
Body a Temple. 


1 Dare any of you, having.a matter against an- 
other, go to law before the unjust, and not before 
the saints? 

2 Do ye not know that® the saints shall judgef 
the world? and if the world shall be judged by you, 
are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters? 

3 Know ye not that we shall judge angels? how 
much more things that pertain to this life? 

4 If then ye have judgments of things pertain- 
ing to this life, set them to judge who are least 
esteemed in the church. 


a@ Matt. 18:17; Rom. 16:17: 2 John 10. 5 Gal. 2:12. 





¢ Mark 4:11; Col. 4:5; 1 Tim. 3:7. 


any man that is named a 
brother be a fornicator, or 
covetous, or an idolater, 
or areviler, or a drunkard, 
or an extortioner; with 
such a one no, not to eat. 
For wht have I to do 
with judging them that 
are without? Do not ye 
judge them that are with- 
in, Whereas them that are 
without God judgeth? Put 
away the wicked man from 
among yourselves. 


CHAPTER VI. 


13 


Dare any of you, having 1 


matter against his neigh- 
bour, go to law before the 
unrighteous, and not be- 
fore the saints? Or know 
ye not that the saints shall 
judge the world? and if 
the world is judged by 
you, are ye unworthy to 
judge the smallest mat- 
ters? Know ye not that we 
shall judge angels? how 
much more, things that 
pertain to this life? If 
then ye have to judge 
things pertaining to this 
life, do ye set them to 
judge who are of no ac- 


d@ Eccl. 12:14; Heb. 13 


e Psa. 49:14; Dan. 7:22; Luke 22:30; Rev. 2:26; 20:4. J2 Pet. 2:4; Judeé. 


+ 


24, 





the rule to it would require that the church have nought whatever to do with the unconverted. 


11. Now Ihave written unto you, ete. 


‘sins named. Covetous. A greedy person, under the influence of 
but for self-indulgence. The Greek word implies this. 


He now writes and explains his meaning. Church mem- 
bers must not have social intercourse with one who has been a member who is guilty of the grievous 
passions, not only greedy for gain, 


With such a one, no, not to eat. Hither at 


the Lord’s table, or in friendly meals, which would imply a brotherly recognition. 12. For what have 
I to do, ete. It was not Paul’s business, nor ours, to judge those without; hence the rule just given 


is not one to regulate our intercourse with them. 
authority of the church is over those who have been united with it. 


Do not ye judge them that are within? The 
It can judge them. 18. Them 


that are without God judgeth. The unconverted are left in the hands of God. He will judge 


them according to their deeds. 


We are not to seek to inflict punishment on them b 


y shunning them, 


but rather to go to them in the love of Christ to try to lead them to repentance. Therefore put 
away,etc. Asummary order to execute discipline upon the incestuous offender, an order that we 


know from the second letter was obeyed. 


1-4. Dare any of you... go to law before the unjustP The third indictment against 


the Corinthian church is now presented. 
heathen courts. This Paul indignantly rebukes. 
eases before heathen tribunals. Much worse was it in Christians. 
saints shall judge the world? Shall sit with Christ, 


Some had sought judgments against their brethren in 
The Jews themselves made it a rule never to carry 
2. Know ye not that the 


after they have been judged, while the world 


is judged (Matt. 25: 41; Matt. 19: 29). If so high a trust is to be given, it is a little thing that saints 


should judge differences between church members. 


These ought all to be submitted to arbitrators, or 


to the officers. 8. Know ye not that we shall judge angels P Evidently the bad angels, who 


shall be judged when the world is judged. 4. 


If then ye have judgments, etc. If the saints shall 


Ch. VI.j I. CORINTHIANS. 


5 I speak to your shame. Is it so, that there is 
not a wise man among you? no, not one that shall 
be able to judge between his brethren? 

6 But brother goeth to law with brother, and that 
before the unbelievers. 

7 Now therefore there is utterly a fault among 
you, because ye go to law one with another:* why. 
do ye not rather take wrong? why do ye not rather 
suffer yourselves to be defrauded? 

8 Nay, ye do wrong, and defraud, and that” your 
brethren. 

9 Know ye not that* the unrighteous shall not 
inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived: 
neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, 
nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with 





OL 


count in the church? 15 


say this to move you to 
shame, Is itso, that there 
cannot be found among 
you one wise man, who 
shall be able to decide be- 
tween his brethren, but 6 
brother goeth to law with 
brother, and that before 
unbelievers? Nay, already 7 
it is altogether a defect in 
you, that ye have lawsuits 
one with another. Why 
not rather take wrong? 
why not rather be de- 
frauded? Nay, but ye8 
yourselves do wrong, and 
defraud, and that your 
brethren. Orknow ye not 9 
that the unrighteous shall 
not inherit the kingdom of 
God? Be not deceived: 
neither fornicators, nor 
idolaters, nor adulterers, 
nor effeminate, nor abus- 


ers of themselves with 
men, nor thieves, nor coy- 10 
etous, nor drunkards, nor 
revilers, nor extortioners, 
shall inherit the kingdom 
of God. And such were 11 
some of vous but ye were 
washed, but ye were sanc- 
tified, but ye were justified 

in the name of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and in the 
Spirit of our God. 

All things are lawful for 12 
me; but not all things are 
expedient. All things are 
lawful for me; but I will 
not be brought under the 


mankind, 

10 Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor 
revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom 
of God. 

11 And such were some of you: but ye are 
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in 
the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of 
our God. 

12 Alle things are lawful unto me, but all things 
are not expedient: all things are lawful for me, but 
I will not be brought under the power of any. 


etsa. 3:11. 








aProv. 20:22; Matt. 5:39; Rom. 12:17. 61 Thes. 4:6. d Heb.10:22. e1 Cor. 10:23. 





have the high prerogative of judging the world and bad angels with Christ, then it is a condescension to 
judge of trivial earthly matters. Set them to judge who are least esteemed. An ironical way of 
hinting that their differences were so petty as to be worthy only of the poorest witted. 

5-8. I speak to your shame. The last sentence was spoken to shame them, not as a serious 
rule. He now speaks seriously. Is there nota wise man among youP Amanof prudent judg- 
ment, capable of settling differences among them. 6. That before unbelievers. It was lament- 
able that brethren should go to law. How much more of a scandal when they carried their cases into 
the heathen courts. 7 There is utterly a fault among you. It was a fault (a loss or defeat in 
the Greek) to go to law at all. It was better rather to take wrong to be defrauded, than 
to work so great an injury to the church by the ill-feeling aroused, and by the scandal in the eyes of the 
heathen. The rule is, then, (1) To suffer wrong rather than to go to law. (2) If an adjudication is 
required, to refer the case, not to unbelieving judges, but to a “wise man” within the church. For 
other Scriptures bearing on the subject, see 1 Peter 2: 23; Matt. 5: 40; 1 Peter 2: 19; Prov. 20: 22. 

9-11. Shall not inherit the kingdom of God. The glorious kingdom of which the church is the 
earthly type. The charch is God’s kingdom on earth, and its faithful members “inherit” the heavenly 
kingdom (Matt. 25:34). Be not deceived. Let no one make the mistake of thinking that any un- 
righteous man shall be an heir. Effeminate. This and the next clause refer to a shameful crime quite 
prevalent among the heathen, the first submitting themselves to the foul sensuality, and the second 
actively ‘abusing themselves with men,” contrary to nature. Both are Sodomites. None guilty of any 

one of the list of vices given can be an heir of heaven. 11. And such were some of you. Some 
of the worst classes had been converted. Ye are washed. The rite of baptism is probably 
referred to. Ye are sanctified. Were sanctified. These verbs are all past tense. See the Revision. 
To be sanctified is to be set apart to God. Ye were justified. That is, their sins were blotted out 
and they were counted righteous. Sinners as they were before, the gospel had washed, hallowed, and 
justified them. By the Spirit. The work was consummated by the gift of the Holy Spirit (Acts 2: 38). 
12-17. All things are lawful forme, . put not expedient. Paul had taught that a 


I. CORINTHIANS. | 


13 Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats: 
but God shall destroy both it andthem. Now the 
body zs not for fornication, but for* the Lord, and? 
the Lord for the body. 

14 And* God hath both raised up the Lord, and 
will also raise up us by* his own power. 

15 Know ye not that your bodies are the members 
of Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ, 
and make them the members of an harlot? God 
forbid. 

16 What! know ye not that he which is joined to 
an harlot is one body? for® two (saith he) shall be 
one flesh. 

17 But* he that is joined unto the Lord is one 
spirit. 

Pig Flee fornication. Every sin that a man doeth 
is without the body; but he that committeth forni- 
cation sinneth® against his own body. 

19 What!" know ye not that your body is the 
temple of the Holy Ghost which és in you, which 
ye have of God, and! ye are not your own? 

20 For! ye are bought with a price: therefore* 
glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which 
are God’s. | 
@1Thes. 4:3. 0b Eph. 5:23. cRom.5:6. 


92 





ad Eph. 1:19. 





eGen. 2:24; Matt. 19:5. 


[Ch.-¥I. 


power of any. Meats for 13 
the belly, and the belly for 
meats ; but God shall brin 

to naught both it an 
them. Butthe body is not 
for fornication, but for the 
Lord; and the Lord for the 
the body: and God both 14 
raised the Lord, and will 
raise up us through his 
power. Know ye not that 
your bodies are members 
of Christ? shall I then 
take away the members of 
Christ, and make them 
members of a harlot? God 
forbid. Or know ye not 
that he that is joinedtoa 
harlot is one body? for, 
The twain, saith he, shall 
become one flesh. But he 
that is joined unto the 
Lord is one spirit. Flee 
fornication. Every sin that 
aman doeth is without the 
body; buat he that com- 
mitteth fornication sin- 
neth against his own body. 
Or know ye not that your 
body is a temple of the 
Holy Ghost which is in 
you, which ye have from 
God? and ye are not your 
own; for ye were bought 20: 
with a price: glorify God 
therefore in your body. 


15 


bh 


> 


J John 17:21: Eph. 4:40; 5:30. 


g Rom. 1:24; 1 Thes. 4: 4. h2 Cor. 6:6. ¢ Rom. 14:7, j Gal. 3:18; Heb. 9:12; 1 Pet. 1:18; Rev. 5:9. k2 Cor, ere 





Christian could use liberty in regard to things indifferent. 
sensual indulgence, as was taught by the Epicureans. 


Some seem to have held that this justified 
Paul says in substance, “Be it so ; but all things 


are not expedient,” for the Christian, Christ’s freeman, must not be brought under the power of 
any appetite. Whoever is thus subjected is not a freeman, but a servant, the servant of sin. Though 


all things are in eur power, we must not be brought under their power. 


ete. Self-indulgence was also excused, because food and the stomach we 
these are both perishable. Moreover, if “the belly was made for meats,” 
cation. It was not made for this, but for a nobler purpose—for the Lor 


be thus justified. 14. And God . . 
we be. 


sacrilegious to take a member of Christ’s 


will also raise us up. As the Lord was 
Hence, we are for a nobler purpose than engaging in sensuality, 
your bodies are members of Christ? This isa doctrine emphasized 
part of Christ’s mystical body, the Lord’s holy temple, designed for the indwelling of the Spirit. 


13. Meats for the belly, 


re made for each other. But 


the body is not for forni- 
d. Hence, sensuality cannot 
raised, so shall 
15. Know ye not that. 
by Paul. Our bodies are a. 
How 


body and degrade it to fornication, or to any act of licentious- 
ness! Itis a duty which a Christian owes to Christ to keep his body pure. 


As the arm or finger has the 


life of the body until cut off, so we have the life of Christ until we sever ourselves from him by sinful 
acts. 17. He that is joined to the Lord, etc. There is one life and one spirit until severed from 


Christ. 


18-20. Flee fornication. The sin must be fled. The way to avoid itis to 


must conquer by running away. Thus it was that Joseph preyailed. 


Every sin ..., 


We 
is without 


avoid temptation. 


the body. The temptations come from without and assail the man through the senses. This is the 
rule in the case of sin. It is not said of fornication that itis not stimulated from without, or that it, 
alone of sins, assails the body, but that it is peculiarly a sin against the body. It defiles a body which is 
designed to be a member of Christ, anda temple of the Holy Spirit; Separates it from the union with 


Christ, and unites it with a harlot, 


The grievousness of the sin is in the desecration to such an unholy 


purpose of a body which has become a member of Christ, a part of the temple of God. 19. What? 
know ye not that your body, etc. This makes clear how terrible is the sin of defiling the body by 


licentiousness. It is desecrating God’s temple. 
Holy Spirit in Christ’s temple, which we are. 


As the Shekinah dwelt in the temple of Israel, so the 
Ye are not your own. But members 


of Christ, and. 


Ch. VII.) I. CORINTHIANS. 





CHAPTER VII. 


Marriage. 


SUMMARY.—Marriage the Resource Against Social Sins. Not to be 
Lightly Dissolved. The Mutual Obligations. The Unmarried State 
Freest from Trouble in Times of Persecution. But Neither Husband 
nor Wife to Leave Each Other. If they Should, to Remain Unmar- 
ried. Not to Abandon an Unbelieving Husband or Wife Because of 
their Unbelief. To Rest Content with the Secular State in which One 
is Converted. The Treatment of Virgin Daughters. Let Them Marry 
Under Certain Conditions. Under Others, Best Not to Marry in those 
Critical Times. The Remarriage of Widows. 


1 Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote 
unto me: J¢ zs good for a man not to touch a 
woman. 

2 Nevertheless,* to avoid fornication, let every 
man have his own wife, and let every woman have 
her own husband. 

3 Let® the hushand render unto the wife due 
benevolence: and likewise also the wife unto the 
husband. 

4 The wife hath not power of her own body, but 
the husband: and likewise also the husband hath 
not power of his own body, but the wife. 

5 Defraud ye not one the other, except 7 be with 
consent for atime, that ye may give yourselves to 
fasting and prayer; and come together again, that* 
Satan tempt you not for your incontinency. 


93 


CHAPTER VII. 


Now concerning the 
things whereof ye wrote: 
It is good for a man not to 
touch a woman. But, be- 
cause of fornications, let 
each man have his own 
wife, and let each woman 
have her own husband. 
Let the husband render 
unto the wife her due: and 
likewise also the wife unto 
the husband. The wife 
hath not power over her 
own body, but the hus- 
band: and likewise also 
the husband hath not 
power over his own body, 
but the wife. Defraud ye 
not one the other, except 
it be by consent for a sea- 
son, that ye may give 
yourselves unto prayer, 
and may be _ together 
again, that Satan tempt 
you not because of your 
incontinency. But this I 
say by way of permission, 


1 


nw 


wo 


- 


6 But I speak this by permission, and* not of 
commandment. 











aProv.5:19. 6 Exod. 21:10; 1Pet.3:7. ¢1Thes.3:5. d2Cor. 8:8; 11:17. 





hence have not the right to use our bodies according to our own pleasure. 20. Ye are bought with 
a price. Christ paid the price, even his blood. Hence, since both body and spirit are God’s, both 
should be used to glorify him. The fact that we are his, purchased, parts of his spiritual temple, makes 
the obligation imperative to consecrate body and spirit to his service. 

1-7. Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote. In the preceding six chapters Paul has 
mainly treated of irregularities in the Corinthian church, of which he had learned through the ‘“‘house- 
hold of Chloe,’ and other private sources. Now he begins to answer various questions asked in a letter 
from the church. If we had that letter, it would aid much 1n understanding what follows by revealing 
more clearly the state of the church and the discussions going on within. It is good foraman not 
to touch a woman. An Old Testament phrase which means not to marry. He does not mean that 
marriage is wrong, but that on account of “the present distress” it was a good thing not to be bound by 
family ties. See verse 26. “Forbidding to marry” is one of the signs of the apostasy (1 Tim. 4:3). See 
Heb. 13:4. 2. To avoid fornication. To prevent this sin, and the temptations to it in an unmarried 
state, especially in a vicious community, 1t was was best for each sex that they be married; the normal 
condition of the sexes. 8. Let the husband render unto the wife her due. The Revision 1S 
correct. Marriage is astate of mutual obligations. Each must yield to the other what those obliga- 
tions require. 4. The wife hath not power over her own body, etc. Each sex here is puton 
exactly the same footing. The body of each belongs to the other, and cannot be yielded to other 
parties. The spirit of the passage not only forbids adultery, but polygamy. 5. Defraud ye not one 
the other. The married pair are not to live apart, except by mutual agreement, and that only fora 
season, while devoting themselves to a period of prayer. In the East, the women have separate apart- 
ments, and during this season the husband would not enter the wite’s apartments. 6. But this I say 
by permission, etc. What is just stated (verse 5) is permissible in the married state, not com- 


f 


94 I. CORINTHIANS. 


— 


7 For? I would that all men were even as? I 
myself: but* every man hath his proper gift of 
God, one after this manner, and another after that. 

8 Isay therefore to the unmarried and widows, 
It is good for them if they abide even as-I. 

9 But* if they cannot contain, let them marry: 
for it is better to marry than to burn. 

10 And unto the married I command, yet not I, 
but the Lord,* Let not the wife depart from her 
husband: 

11 But and if she depart, let her remain unmar- 
ried, or be reconciled to her husband: and let not 
the husband put away his wife. 

12 But to the rest rpeak I, not the Lord; If any 
brother hath a wife that believeth not, and she be 
pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her 
away. 

13 And the woman which hath an husband that 
believeth not, and if he be pleased to dwell with 
her, let her not leave him. 

14 For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by 
the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by 
the husband: elset were your children unclean; but 
now are they holy. 








[Ch. Val. 


not of commandment. Yet 
I would that all men were 
even as I myself. Howbeit 
each man hath his own 
gift from God, one after 


| this manner, and another 
| after that. 


But I say to the unmar- 
ried and to widows, It is 
good forthem if they abide 
evenasI. Butif they have 
not continency, let them 
marry. for it is better to 
marry than to burn. But 
unto the married I give 
Charge, yea not I, but the 
Lord, That the wife depart 
not from her husband (but 
and if she depart, let her 
remain unmarried, or else 
be reconciled to her hus- 
band); and that the hus- 
band leave not his wife. 
But to the rest say I, not 
the Lord: If any brother 
hath an unbelieving wife, 
and she is content to dwell 
with him, let him not 
leave her. Andthe woman 
which hath an unbeliey- 
ing husband, and he is 
content to dwell with her, 
let-her not leave her hus- 
band. For the unbeliey- 
ing husband.is sanctified 
in the wife, and the unbe- 
lieving wife is sanctified in 
the brother: else were 
your children unclean; 
but now are they holy. 





@ Acts 26: 29. b1Cor.9:5. c Matt. 19: 125; 1 Cor. 12:11. d1Tim. 5:14 


Mark 10: 11. 12; Heb.¢12: 14. 7 Mal. 2:1 


7 


8 


9 


10 


11 


13 


14 


e Mal. 2: 14, 16; Matt. 5: 323 19: 6; 
5. 





manded. '7. I would that all men were as I myself. Had absolute self-control, as Ihave. His. 


directions all recognize the weakness of human nature, and the need of makin 


great forit. But every man hath his 
have other gifts which he did not have. 


§ no requirements too 
proper gift. He had the gift of self-control; others might 


8-11. To the unmarried and widows. If they have his self-control, it is well for them to 


remain unmarried, even as he, 
distress” (verse 26), the critica] times, 
instance, in atime of war andinyvasion. The ground of his 


Not that the unmarried state is better, but on account of 
There are times still when itis best to remain unm 


“the present 
arried; for 
advice 1s not moral, but prudential. 9, If 


they cannot contain. If they cannot control their desires it is best to marry. 10. To the unmar- 


ried I command. Some might say, 


married partner.” He replies, “The Lord commands otherwise” 


“Tf the unmarried state is best now, it will be better to le 
(Mark 10: 12; Matt. 5: 32; Matt. 19: 2). 


ave our 


11. But and if she depart. Provided, despite the prohibition, there is such disagreement that she 


leaves her husband, she must remain unmarried, or be reconciled. 
his wife. The wife “departs,” because she leaves the home; the 


Let not the husband put away 
husband ‘puts away his wife,” by 


sending her off. Both are equally prohibited. The same rules apply to each sex. Among the Jews, 
only the husband exercised the right of divorce; among the Greeks and Romans, the wife exercised it 


equally with the husband. 


12-17. To the rest speak I, not the Lord. On the circumstances that follow, the Lord has not 


directly spoken, as he did on divorce; 


wife that believeth not, etc. If either husband or 


hence, Paul speaks by inspiration. If any brother hath a. 
wife is converted, and the other is not, they 


must not on this account forsake the unbelieving helpmeet, provided he or she is pleased to remain, 


14, For the unbelieving husband is sanctified, etc. 


This passage has been much debated, and. 


little understood. The unbelieving husband or wife is not made personally holy, nor do the children of 
believers have personal holiness transmitted to them by virtue of birth relation. Sanctification, then, 


means something besides personal holiness. 


To sanccify is to separate to a sacred use, or relation 


(Exod. 20: 8; 28:38). In 1 Tim, 4: 4,5, food is “sanctified by the word of God and prayer.” Here Paul 
uses the term to denote that one Christian member of a household brings a sanctifying influence to it,, 
so that all the members are to be regarded as separated in part from the great, ungodly, unclean world. 


Ch. ViIIs] I. CORINTHIANS. 














95 





15 But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart. ie oe ba 
. . a é ’ e rb: 
A brother or a sister is not under bondage in such | the brother or the sister is 
nae * Py é not under bondage in such 
cases; but God hath called us to peace. cases: but God ey eee 
16 For what knowest thou, O wife, whether thou | ts, in peace. Hop wow 4° 
¢ nowes ou Wile, 
shalt save? thy husband? or how knowest thou, O whether thou ‘shalt save 
‘ 3 ~ : a6 ; a usband: or 
man, whether thou shalt save thy wife? kiowesh thot O Anshan) 
17 But as God hath distributed to every man, as | Whether SHOR RRO BAe 
FE t ae . y wile: nly, as ne 
the Lord hath called every one, so let him walk: | Lord hath distributed to 
and” so ordain I in all churches. ee 
18-Is any man called being circumcised? let him | walk. And so ordain Tin 
. . ° . . . a echurenes. as any ' 
not become uncircumcised: is any called in uncir- man called being cireum- 
11 9 c : ie SPS cised? let him not become 
cumcision? let _ him not be circumcised. =o, > ‘ih Wahewenmbiced: (Hath ace 
19 Circumcision? is nothing, and uncircumcision is | been called in ungrcei- 
. . cision? et Him no e cir- 
nothing, but* the keeping of the commandments of | cumcisea. Cixcameision 19 
is nothing, and uncircum- 
God. : s 4 4 cision is nothing; but the 
20 Lett every man abide in the same calling pecpee ot pean ae 
5 ; ments of God. Let each 20: 
wherein he was called. man abide in that calling 
21 Art® thou called being a servant? care not for | Wherem he was called. , 
ae : * i eons ? asi thou called being a iL: 
it; but if thou mayest be" made free, use ¢¢ rather. bondsérvane? cnny sat Ie 
¢ ° . . lt: ans De- 
22 For he that is called in the Lord, being a ser-| come. free, use it rather, | 
vant, is the Lord’s free man: likewise also he that | fF 6.4 Selme called tn 22 
is called, being free, is' Christ’s servant. servant, “is the Lord's 
} 3 A r an: s 
23 Ye! are bought with a price; be not ye the|was called, being free, is 
Christ’s bondservant. Ye 23. 


servants of men. were bought with a price; 





dGal. 6:15; Col! 3:11. eJohn 15:14; 1John 2:3; 3:24. fEph. 


62 Cor. 11:28. ¢ Acts 15; Gal. 5:2. 
i Gal. 5:13; Eph. 6:6; 1 Pet. 2:16. jg 1 Pet. 1:18; Lev. 25: 42. 


a1 Pet. 3:1. 
g Gal. 3:28. hIsa. 58:6. 


4:1; 2 Thes. 3:11. 





Nehemiah commanded Jews to part from heathen wives on the ground that they were ceremonially 
unclean. Paul insists, rather, that the believer cleanses the other, and that the unbelieving partner, or 
the children, are rendered ceremonially clean. But now are they holy. Brought into such a sacred 
relation that they are under the power of sacred influences, and not to be counted as sources of defile- 
ment. 15. Butif the unbelieving depart. If the unbelieving ‘husband or wife insists upon 
making the Christian profession a ground of separation, let them have their way. Examples of this. 
kind occur in every age, and the rule is always applicable. God hath called us to peace. Hence, 
if strife must prevail to prevent separation, let the other go. 16. How knowest thou, O wife, etc. 
Let the Christian be gentle, forbearing, unselfish, though true to Christ, and perhaps the result will be 
that they will be God’s means to save their partner. This has occurred in thousands of instances. 
17. As God hath distributed to every man. “This I would add,’’ says Paul in effect, ‘‘what- 
- ever may be the lot and special circumstances of each man, single, married, or deserted on account of’ 
Christianity, let him walk in it without seeking a change.”’ 

18-24. Was any one called being circumcised P He now applies the principle just stated, of 
walking “as God called every one.” The circumcised Jews were to be content that they were circum- 
cised; the uncircumcised Gentiles were to remain so when they became Christians. 19. Circumcis- 
ion is nothing, etc. Has no bearing on final salvation. The one essential condition is ‘‘keeping the 
commandments of God.” Nothing can take the place of this. 20. Let each man abide, ete. In 
that secular condition of life in which he was when called. 21. Art thou called, being a servant? 
Half the population of the Roman Empire at this time were slaves. Thousands of the early Christians 
were in this condition. If aservant was converted, let him not be troubled over his servile state; but if 
he had the means of becoming free, let him rather choose freedom. 22. For he that is called . . 
being a servant. The eternal equality of the servant and freeman in Christ is shown. The 
“servant” is Christ’s freedman, since Christ has freed him from sin; the freeman, when converted, is 
Christ’s servant. 23. Ye are bought with aprice. Christ has bought each alike, ransomed them 
from the bondage of sin with his blood, and bound them to his service as his own. Be not ye the 


servants of men. As Christ’s servants, do not become the followers of any other religious master, 


96 I. CORINTHIANS. 


‘(Ch-MII. 





24 Brethren, let every man, wherein he is called, 
therein abide with God. 

25 Now concerning virgins? I have no command- 
ment of the Lord: yet I give my judgment, as one? 
that hath obtained mercy of the Lord® to be faith- 
SP ULL 

26 I suppose therefore that this is good for the 
present distress; J say, that ¢¢ 7s good for a man so 
to be. 

27 Art thou bound unto a wife? seek not to be 
loosed. Art thou loosed from a wife? seek not a 
ites = 1 m4 

28 But and if thou marry, thou hast not sinned; 
and if a virgin marry, she hath not sinned: never- 
theless such shall have trouble in the flesh; but I 
spare you. 

29 But? this I say, brethren, the time 7s short: it 
remaineth, that both they that have wives be as 
though they had none; 

30 And they that weep as though they wept not; 
and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; 
and they that buy, as though they possessed not; 

31 And they that use this world, as not abusing 
at: for’ the fashion of this world passeth away. 

32 But I would have you without carefulness.® 
He that is unmarried careth for the things that be- 
long to the Lord, how he may please the Lord. 

33 But he that is married careth for the things 
that are of the world, how he may please his wife. 

34 There is difference also between a wife and a 





| become not bondseryants 


of men. Brethren, leteach 24 
man, wherein he was call: 
ed, therein abide with 
God. 

Now concerning virgins 25 
I have no commandment 
of the Lord: but I give my 
judgment, as one that hath 
obtained mercy of the 
Lord to be faithful. I 26 
think therefore that this 
is good by reason of the 
present distress, namely, 
that itis good for a man 
to be as he is. Art:thou 
bound unto a wife? seek 
not to be loosed. Art thou 
loosed from a wife? seek 
not awife. Butand if thou 
marry, thou hast not sin- 
ned; andif a virgin marry, 
she hath not sinned. Yet 
such shall have tribula- 
tion in the flesh: and I 
would spare you. But this 
I say, brethren, the time 
is shortened, -.that hence- 
forth both those that have 
wives may be as though 
they had none: and those 
that weep, as though they 
wept not; and those that 
rejoice, as though they re- 
joiced not; and those that 
buy, as though they pos- 
sessed not; and those that 
use the world, as not abus- 
ing it: for the fashion of 
this world passeth away. 
But I would have you to 
be free from cares. He 
that is unmarried is care- 
ful for the things of the 
Lord, how he may please 
the Lord: but he that is 
married is careful for the 
things of the world, how 
he may please his wife. 


30 


31 


32 


33 





And there is a difference 34 





@2 Cor. 8:8,10. 61 Tim.1:16. cl Tim.1:12. @1¥Pet. 4:7. 


Qs17. gl Tim. 55. 





e1Cor. 9:18. Psa. 39:6; Jas.4:14; 1John 








—— 


24. Let every man, wherein he is called, ete. Let each one remain in the domestic and social 


‘condition in which the call of God found him. 


25-28. Now concerning virgins. No doubt in the letter from Corinth it was asked whether a 


father should place his virgin daughters in marriage. In the East to this day the marriage arrange- 
ments are made by the parents. IThavenocommandment. He had no revelation upon the subject, 
but could give his Christian judgment. 26. I suppose . for the present distress. The 
critical condition in which Christians were placed by the spirit of persecution which then prevailed. 
‘Good fora man so to be. To remain in the state he already is. 2'7. Art thou bound? If mar- 
ried, he is to remain true to the bond; if unmarried, at present it seemed best to remain so. 28. But 
andif thoumarry. Still, while it seemed prudent, with impending persecution, not to marry, it was 
not wrong to do so. Nevertheless, those who did, should have trouble in the flesh. Anxiety and 
distress on account of their domestic ties. $ ; 
29-35. The time is short. The precise application cannot be known. It was but a short time 
until Jerusalem should be destroyed, and the early church supposed this would be the end of the 
world. Life, too, is short; the time of preparation is short. It was the general feeling then that some 
‘awful conyulsion was close at hand. There was. Within half a generation the whole Roman world 
was turned up by civil war, three emperors in succession were slain, and Jerusalem was destroyed, 
As though they had none. Should look on all earthly ties as soon to be broken. All earthly 
arrangements must be regarded as transitory. 81. Those that use this world, etc. We all have 
‘to use the world; but we must not misuse it. Thatis the charge here, 32, I would have you free 








| Ri 
Cm Vis I. CORINTHIANS. oF 
virgin. The* unmarried woman careth for the | also between the wife and 
things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in Bed hea aiiee tre 
body and in spirit: but she that is married careth | (pings of ine ou a 
for the things of the world, how she may please her | body and in spirit: but she 
h b ] that is married is careful 
Us and. om ' for the things of the world, 
35 And this I speak for your own profit; not that | how she may, please her 
7 é a 3 é ° é : ay 35 
I may cast a snare upon you, but for that which is Be AY not 
ee ha may cast 2 
comely, and that ye may attend upon the Lord] upon you, but for. that 
without distraction. Wish 36 seem yz and eee 
‘ ‘ f es may attend upon the 
36 But if any man think that he behaveth himself Lord ywithout distraction, : 
> Net ar ORO F eS b ut if any man thinketh 36 
uncomely to his virgin, if she pass the flower of Ler | that he behaveth himself 
age, and need so require, let him do what he will, | unseemly toward his vir- 
: 2 | gin daughter, if she be 
he sinneth not; let them marry. passzd the flower of her 
37 Nevertheless, he that standeth stedfast in his | 2g 37ers 
heart, having no necessity, but hath power over his] Toy) pe en ie inst 37 
own will, and hath so decreed in his heart that he | standeth étedfast in_his 
will keep his virgin, doeth well. i ee ai ee 
38 So” then he that giveth her in marriage doeth | touching his own will, and 
: : : hath determined this in 
well; but he that giveth Her not in marriage doeth | his own heart, to keep his 
better oe ey ee shall = 
* owell. So then both he 
39 The* wife is bound by the law as long as her ee aI 
husband liveth; but if her husband be dead, she is| well; and he that giveth 
: Z . : 4 : her not in marriage shall 
at liberty to be married to whom she will; only* in do better. A wite ishound 39 
or so long time as er 
the Lord. 4 4 * . husband liveth; but if the 
40 But she is happier if she so abide, after my husband he dead, she is 
judgment: and I think also that I have the Spirit Riot che elton ore 
of God the Lord. But she is hap- 40 
2 pier if she abide as she is, 











a Luke 10:40. 6 Heb. 13:4. cRom.7:2. d2Cor. 6:14; Deut. 17:3. 





from cares. That is, I would have you free from the causes which bring cares. 34. There is 
difference also between a wife anda virgin. The sole thought of the unmarried person who is 
consecrated to Christ is to please Christ. 85. ThisIspeak .. . not thatI may cast a snare. 
Not to interfere with your freedom to marry. A snare thrown over the head made the victim helpless. 
Paul merely advises what, under the circumstances of that period, seemed most prudent. 

36-38. But if any man think that he behaveth himself uncomely toward his virgin 
daughter. While giving a judgment in favor of the unmarried state, at that time, he gives full liberty. 
Aman may give his daughter in marriage. Behaveth uncomely. Improperly in withholding her 
from marriage. If she pass the flower of her age. If she is fully matured. If need so require. 
If circumstances of any kind seem to require her marriage. 837. He that standeth steadfast . . 
having no necessity. If no need makes marriage necessary, and the purpose that she remain 
unmarried continues steadfast, he does well to let herremain so. To choose either course is well, but 
the last is the better, where circumstances permit (verse 88), on account of the “distress” (verse 26). 

89, 40. The wife is bound by the law, etc. One point remains to be discussed, viz., The 
remarriage of widows. I suppose that the letter of inquiry asked about this. She is at liberty. In 
case of her husband’s death, she is free from the marriage bond, and can marry whom she will, with 
‘one limitation—she must marry in the Lord; that is,a Christian, An alien marriage is prohibited. 
Indeed, so far was an ancient Christian from marrying an unbeliever that the question actually arose 
whether, when the sinner was converted, he could still live with an unconverted partner, See verses 
12-14, 40. But she is happier. In his judgment, and in the conditions then prevailing, she will 
consult her happiness by remaining a widow. It is not only his judgment, but the Spirit seems to point 
the same lesson. 1 Tim. 5: 14, might be supposed to conflict with this, but it does not, when we remem- 
ber that Paul’s advice here is due to prevailing circumstances. The question of marriage or remar- 


riage is one of prudential considerations. 
7 


98 I. CORINTHIANS. 





CHAPTER VIII. 
The Duty of the Strong Toward Weaker Brethren. 


Not Changed Because So 
Those 


SUMMARY.—Meat Offered in Idol Temples. 
Offered. But Not to Be Eaten Because of Weaker Brethren. 
Having Knowledge Must Act in Love. ; 


1 Now,? as touching things offered unto idols, we 
know that we all have? knowledge. Knowledge 
puffeth up, but charity edifieth. 

2 And* if any man think that he knoweth any 
thing, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know. 

3 But if any man love God,? the same is known 
of him. : 

4 As concerning therefore the eating of those 
things that are offered in sacrifice unto idols, we 
know that® an idol zs nothing in the world, and 
that there 7s none other God but one. 

5 For though there be that® are called gods, 
whether in heaven or in earth, (as there be gods 
many, and lords many, ) 

6 But" to us there ts but one God, the Father,' of 
whom are all things, and we in him; andi one Lord 
Jesus Christ," by whom are all things, and we by 
him. 

7 Howbeit there ts not in every man that knowl- 
edge: for some, with conscience of the idol unto 
this hour, eat 7¢ as a thing offered unto an idol; and 
their conscience being weak is defiled. 

8 But meat commendeth us not to God: for 
neither, if we eat, are we the better; neither, if we 
eat not, are we the worse. 





a Acts 15:20. b Rom. 14:14. c Gal. 6:3; 1 Tim. 6:4. 
f Deut. 4:39; Isa. 44:8. g John 10:34. hk Mal. 2:10; Eph. 4: 6. 
J Acts 2:36; Phil. 2:11. &AJohn 1:33; Col. 1: 16; 





1-8. As touching things offered untoidols. Corinth, like all Greek cities, 


to heathen idols. 


true knowledge. Humility is essential. 8. 
*“puildeth up.” Love, too, is a source of true knowledge. 


known by him,” 
knowledge. 


4-6. Weknow that an idol is nothing. Nota god, not even a livin 


or metal. 5. Though there be that are called gods. 








d Exod. 93:12; Nahum1:7; Gal. 4:9. 
@ Acts 17: 28; Rom. 11:3 
Heb. 1: 2. 


If any man love God. 


(Ch. VIII. 


after my judgment: andI 
think that I also have the 
Spirit of God. ; 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Now concerning things 1. 


sacrificed to idols: We 
know that we all have 
knowledge. Knowledge 
puffeth up, but love edifi- 
eth. If any man thinketh 2: 
that he knoweth anything, 
he knoweth not yet as he 
ought to know; but if any 3. 
man loveth God, the same 
is known of him. Concern- 4 
ing therefore the eating of 
things sacrificed to idols, 
we know that no idol is 
anything in the world, and 
that there is no God but 
one. For though there be 
that are called gods, 
whether in heayen or on 
earth; as there are gods 
many,and lords many; yet 
to us there is one God, the 
Father, of whom are all 
things, and we unto him; 
and one Lord, Jesus 
Christ, through whom are 
all things, and we through 
him. Howbeit in all men 
there is not that knowl- 
edge: but some, being 
used until now to the idol, 
eat as of a thing sacrificed 
to an idol; and their con- 
science being weak is de- 
filed. But meat will not 
commend us to God: nei- 
ther, if we eat not, are we 
the worse; nor, if we eat, 


elIsa. 41:24, 
6. 





instead of the “lords many” of heathenism; one God, and one Mediator between man and God, 


‘ 


was full of temples. 
At their altars victims were constantly sacrificed, the flesh of which was afterwards 
eaten. The question arose whether a Christian could eat of such flesh without the sin of showing 
deference to an idol. Perhaps the letter to Paul (7:1) had asked about this matter. We all have 
knowledge. Some pleaded their knowledge that ‘an idol was nothing, 
Paul tells them that the question is one, not of knowledge, but of charit 
Those who professed to be knowing ones put on an air of superiority. 2. 
he knoweth, etc. If he is inflated with a sense of knowledge, he has not got on the right track for 
Not knowledge, but love 
It is he who loves God who knows him. 
“The same,” grammatically, refers to God. The sentence then says, “If any man love God, the s 


* not divine in any sense. 
y. Knowledge puffeth up. 
If any man thinketh that 


ame is 
z.¢e.,by that man. Love is the means of obtaining the true knowledge, the highest. 


g being. Only wood, stone, 
The heathen world worshiped many false 
gods. 6. But to us there is but one God. To Christians, there is but one divinity, one object of 


worship, the true and living God. One God, the Father, instead of the ‘‘gods many;” one Lord, Christ,. 








Gh. 1X7] I. CORINTHIANS. 99 
9 But take heed lest by any means this liberty of Dea ee ee eee 
: : 7 y means 
yours’ become a stumbling-block to them that are| this hberty of youre be 
weak. come a stumbling-block to 
4 4 the weak. For if a man 10: 
10 For if any man see thee which hast knowledge Pieicae nie 
° . . itt) at mea 
sit at meat in the idol’s temple, shall not the con-| in an idols temple, will 
science of him which is weak be emboldened to eat | ROU his conscience, if he is 
those things which are offered to idols; BPA wa Eke ere 2h CoE 
1 ce) rou, 
di sAnd through thy knowledge shall the weak | knowledge he that is weak 
brother perish, for whom Christ died? Puese wae CL ce 
12 But* when ye sin so against the brethren, and foe eee 
5 ; ‘ 3 . und- 
wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ. ing their conscience when 
. ? it is weak, ye sin against 
i Wherefore, if meat make my brother to of-| Ghnst Wnesofore't acstiie 
fend, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth, | maketh my brother to 
stumble, I will eat no flesh 


lest I make my brother to offend. 





for evermore, that I make 


not my brother to stumble. 


CHAPTER IX. 
The Apostleship of Paul. 


SUMMARY.—Answer to Various Insinuations of Judaizers. The Corinth: |, 
ians Had Proof of His Apostleship. He Had the Right to Have a Wife | 
as Well as Peter. It was His Right to Be Sustained by the Church. 
He Sustained Himself to Have One Ground for Self-Congratulation. 
Adapted Himself to All Classes to Save Them. The Christian Race. 


1 Am” I not an apostle? am I not free? have® I 
not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? are not ye my work 
in the Lord? 


a Matt. 25: 40; 


CHAPTER IX. 


Am I not free? am I not & 
an apostle? have Inot seen 
Jesus our Lord? are not ye 
my work in the Lord? If 2 


Acts9:4. 61 Tim.2:7; 2Tim.1:11. ¢ Acts9:3; 18:9. 





7-9. There is not in every man that knowledge. While “we,” the better informed, know 
better, still there were some in the church who had not entirely outgrown their former superstitions, 
They could not realize that an ‘‘idol was nothing.”? Meat that came from idol sacrifice was to them the 
meat of theidol. They could not eat it without their conscience being defiled. 9. Take heed lest 
. . . this liberty of yours, etc. The meat itself made one neither better nor worse (verse 8), but 
if those who “had knowledge” ate it, it might prove a stumbling-block, the occasion of the fall of those 
who were not so well informed and were weaker, 

10-18. For if any man see thee .. . sit at meat in an idol’s temple. In the heathen 
temples, great banquets often followed the sacrifice. That a weaker Christian should see a stronger 
one, a leader, sitting at such a banquet, would lead him to believe that his brother was honoring the 
idol. The example would encourage idolatry. 11. Hence his knowledge, the knowledge that made 
him dare eat, because he knew an idol was nothing, might be the means of destroying the weak brother: 
by leading him to idolatry. 12. But when yesosin. To wound, injure, imperil the weak brethren, 
is asin against Christ. It injures Christ’s cause; besides, he denounces those whe cause the weaker 
ones to stumble (Matt. 18:6; 25:40). 13. Wherefore, if meat make my brother to offend. To 
stumble and fall. Love, in this case, would demand that the meat be givenup. The principle applies 
to many things. Some Christians can, perhaps, go to the theater, or dance, or attend the fairs of our 
day, where the races are the great feature, or even drink wine or beer, without falling. Others cannot. 
Yet the example of the strong will lead the weak to engage in them, and hence that example will lead 
them to spiritual death. The Christian principle, the rule of love, is, “If eating meat, or going to the 
theater, or going to a ball, or attending the fair, or drinking wine or beer, causeth my brother to offend, 
I will not do these things while the world standeth.” 

1,2. AmInotan apostle? Two objects are held in view in this chapter; to answer those, the Ju- 
daizers, who disparaged his authority by contrasts between him and the other apostles, and to enforce 
upon the church, by his example, self denial for the benefit of others. AmInot free? He had spoken 
(8:9) of Christian liberty. He was free also, and an apostle who had seen the Lord, and hence, could wit- 
ness to his resurrection. The seal of mine apostleship are ye. The existence of the church at Cor- 
jnth, founded by his labors, proved that he was their apostle, at least, 





100 ; I. CORINTHIANS. [Ch-IX. 
2 If I be not an apostle unto others, yet doubtless a Src ogee 
Tam to you: for* the seal of mine apostleship are ye| to you: ‘tor the ‘seal of 
a Ry mine apostleship are ye in 
in the Lord. the Lord. My defence to 8 
. " 7 ig | them that examine me is 
3 Mine answer to them that do examine me is this. | lave wadocod ae 
thi eat and to drink? five 5 
is; 
= Oh pe we no right to lead about 
4 Have’ we not power to eat and to drink? a wife that is a believer, 
7 even as the rest of the 
5 Have we not power to lead about a sister, a apostles, andite see 
wife, as well as other apostles, and as° the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas? 
« ty 
of the Lord, and* Cephas? harewe 2004 Hight to tor. 
: e ane bear working? What sol- 7 
} ora I vekh one Barnabas,* have we not power to dier ever serveth Ae 
orpeaYr WOrking: own Charges? who plant- 
. . th ] 7 
7 Who* goeth a warfare any time at his own|&# ‘the $n whee 
charges? who® planteth a vineyard, and eateth not ee Peking: 
the fruit thereof? or who feedeth® a flock, and eat-| {ie flock? Do I speak 8 
eth not of the milk of the flock? not Oh ann eee 
8 Say I these things as a man? or saith not the| the law also the same? For 9 
9 1t is written in the law of 
law the same also: Moses, Thou shalt not 
9 For it is written in the law of Moses, Thou! qendeth ceo ee 
shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth eae oxen that God. 
? 1 = 
out the corn. Doth God take care for oxen? gether for our sake? Yea, 
10 Or saith he ¢¢ altogether for our sakes? For en Gee bye oa 
our sakes, no doubt, this is written: thati he that See pent te Dow ia hope, 

: oP 
ploweth should plow in hope; and that he that thresh in hope of partak. 
thrasheth in hope should be partaker of his hope. dpiitust te oe 

11 If* we have sown unto you spiritual things, ¢s| great matter if We, shall 
a . . reap your ¢# a : & 
wa great thing if we should reap your carnal Bi cihers pane ot aed 
things? right over you, do not we 
I s yet more? Nevertheless 
12 If others be partakers of this power over you Wwe did not use this right; 
are not we rather? Nevertheless! we have not used | Put, ¥e wae Unter eee 
this power; but suffer all things, lest we should |4tance to the gospel of 
hinder the gospel of Christ. 





@2Cor. 8:2. b2Thes. 3:9. ¢ Matt. 13:55; d Matt. 8:14. e2'Thes. 3:8. 
f2 Cor. 10:4; 2Tim.4:7. g Deut. 20:6; Prov. 27:8. hJobn 21:15; 1Pet.5:2. t Deut. 25: 4. 
j2 Tim. 2:6, & Rom. 15:27. 22 Cor. 11:7. 





Mark 6:3; Luke6:15; Gal. 1:19. 








3-6. Have we not power to eat and to drinkP To live atthe charges of the churches we have 
a sister, etc.P Peter (Cephas) was am 
Had Paul no right to have a wife? The answer is that he had th 
Brethren of the Lord. Luke 6:15; G 
He and Barnabas worked with their own hands to 
while preaching. Others were sustained. Had not they the same right? He next shows that they had 


founded? 5. Have we not power to lead about 
Other apostles had wives. 
well as others if he had chosen to use it. 
Barnabas and I only, etc. 


the right by various illustrations. 





arried man. 
is liberty as 
al. 1:10. Or have 
sustain themselves 


7-10. Who goeth a warfare at his own chargesP Soldiers were paid while on ‘a campaign, but 
he and Barnabas were Christian soldiers. The husbandman ate of his vineyard ; but they worked in 
the vineyard of the Lord. The Seeder of a flock drank of its milk, but they were feeders of the flock of 
God. 8. SayIthese things asa manP Human affairs teach our right to be sustained, but the law 
of Moses teaches the same lesson. 9, Thou shalt not muzzle the ox, etc. See Deut. 25:4, In the 
East still the grain is trodden out on the threshing floor by the cattle, nor do the people muzzle the cattle 
to this day. 10. Doth God take care of the oxen P Was this enactment made solely for the benefit 
of the oxen? Or was not it rather to teach that those who did a work had a right to live off of that work? 
The latter, doubtless. 

11-14. Ifwe have sown to you in Spiritual things, 


Preached the gospel, converted them, built 
them up in Christ. This conserved their eternal interests. 


Carnalthings, An earthly support. 12, 








Cha EX: | I. CORINTHIANS. 101 
13 Do* ye not know, that they which minister be phen eee eneee 13 
. . . 3 ou 
about holy things live of the things of the temple? | sacred things eat of the 
and they which wait as the altar are partakers with | they wien wait upon the 
they which wait upon the 
the altar? ie ee seu poreon 
i wi e altar? ven so 14 
14 Even” so hath the Lord ordained, that they® | did the Lord ordain that 
which preach the gospel should live of the gospel. EEL UOiA Leouot the 
15 But I have used none of these things; neither | 80spel. | But 1 have used 15 
. . A ne Ings: 
have I written these things, that it should be sojand 1 write not these 
done unto me: for zt were better for me to die, than | Mngs, tat Mt may Pee 
that any man should make my glorying void. were good for me rather to 
16 F ey hi I A | " i die, than that any man 
or though I preach the gospel, I have noth-| should make my glorying 
C = - S : = a Se voidsetiors reach the 16 
ing to glory of: for necessity is laid upon me; yea, | gospel, 1 have ROtine o6 
woe is unto me, if I preach not the gospel! aes eee 
A A ete i me; for woe is 
17 For if I do this thing willingly, | have a re-|unto me, if I preach not 
ward: but if against my will, a4 dispensation of the See rT tae an 
gospel is committed unto me. zeqand Veet eetenaied 
° ° ’ s ard- 
18 What is my reward then? Verily, that, when| ship intrusted to me. 18 
Y> d - , | What then i rd? 
I preach the gospel, I_ make the gospel of Chyist'l that, when ® preach the 
without charge, that I abuse not my power in the eo eieathoas ae ae 
gospel. as not to use to the full 
19 For though I be free from all men, yet have® i Rene er seeps 
made myself servant unto all,’ that I might gain the from all men, I brought 
myself under bondage to 
more. all, that I might gain the 
90 Andé unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that [] mene ne sosne ater 
might gain the Jews; to them that are under the | might san jena law, as 
" 5 that are under the law, as 
law, as under the law, that I might gain them that under the law, not being 
E i ' myself under the law, that 
are under the law 5 I might gain them that are 











1 Tim. 5: 17. Phil. td: 


1 Pet. 3: 1. 


c Gal. 6: 65 @ Gal, 2:7; 
g Acts 16: 3; 


6 Luke 10: 7. 
Ff Matt. 18: 155 


a Lev. 6: 16. 





21; 23 


17; Col. 1:25. e Gal. 5: 18. 


If others be partakers of this power. Enjoy this privilege of earthly support. But his right was 


greater than that of these. Have not used this power. 


He had supported himself lest he should 


hinder the gospel. The heathen might say that he was influenced by mercenary motives. As to his 
course see Acts 18:3. 18, They which minister about holy things. He now shows that the temple 
teaches the same lesson. The priests and Levites are sustained by the temple offerings. Partakers 
with the altar. A part of the sacrifice was consumed on the altar and a part was awarded to the 
priests, 14. Even.so hath the Lord ordained, ete. It was the Lord’s ordinance, even if Paul did 
not exercise the power, that those who preach the gospel should be sustained by the church. See 
Matt. 10:9, 10. 

15-18. But Ihave used none of these things. They had neither sustained him, nor did he now 
write to have them do so. Nay, he was fully resolved not to change his course. It were even better for 
him to die than to doso. 16. For thoughI preach * ** I have nothing to glory of. He preached 
because he was Christ’s servant. He was therefore under necessity, as aservant. Nay “‘woe was upon 
him” if he obeyed not. In this, then, he had no right to boast. But if he refused a support from the 
churches when he had liberty to receive it, that might make a ground of boasting. 17. If I do this 
thing willingly. If he preached voluntarily, he might then claim an earthly reward. But if against 
If1 do this as a servant of Christ upon whom the service is laid; then he has @ stewardship. 


my will. 
(See Revision.) In that case he has the obligations of asteward. It is his duty to feed the Master’s 
servants. 18. Whatthen is my reward? He had no earthly wages. What then? That he should 


have the satisfaction of knowing that, for the sake of the gospel, he gave up his right, and preached 
freely. If he was accused of mercenary motives it might interpose a hindrance. 

19-28. For though I be free, ete. He shows why he.used this self denial. In order that he might 
gain souls he was willing to become the servant of all, and to deny himself all things, 20. Unto the 
Jews IbecameasaJdew. With Jews he lived as a Jew in order toreach them. He observed their 


102 I. CORINTHIANS. 


[CRALX. 





21 To? them that are without law, as without 
law, ("being not without law to God, but under the 
law to Christ,) that I might gain them that are 
without law. 

22 To* the weak became I as the weak, that I 
might gain the weak: I am made all things to all 
men, that I might by all means save some. 

23 And this I do for the gospel’s sake, that I 
might be partaker thereof with you. 

24 Know ye not that they which run ina race run 
all, but one receiveth the prize? So* run, that ye 
may obtain. 

25 And every man that* striveth for the mastery 
is temperate in all things. Now they do it to ob- 
‘tain a corruptible crown, but we an! incorruptible. 

26 I therefore so run, not as® uncertainly; so 
fight I, not as one that beateth the air; 

27 But I keep under my body, and bring 7é into 
subjection; lest that by any means, when I have 
preached to others, I myself should be" a castaway. 





under the law; to them 21 
that are without law, as 
without law, not being 
without law to God, but 
under law to Christ, that 

I might gain them that are 
without law. To the weak 22 
I became weak, that I 
might gain the weak: lam 
become all things to all 
men, that I may by all 
means save some. AndI 23 
do all things for the gos- 
pel’s sake, that I may bea 
joint partaker thereof. 
Know ye not that they 24 
which run in a race run 
all, but one receiveth the 
prize? Even so run, that 
ye may attain. And every 25 
man that striveth in the 
games is temperate in all 
things. Now they do it to 
receive a corruptible 
crown, but we an incor- 
ruptible. I therefore so 
run, as not uncertainly; 
so fight I, as_ not beating 
the air: but I buffet my 27 
body, and bring it into 
bondage; lest by any 
means, after that I have 
preached to others, I my- 
self should be rejected. 


26 





@ Rom. 2:12; Gal. 3:2. b1Cor. 7:22. cRom.15:1. d Heb. 12:1. e1 Tim. 6: 12; 
AJer,.6:30; 2Cor. 13:5 


Rey. 2:10: g 2 Cor. 5:1. 


2Tim.2:5. fJames 1:12; 





distinctions of meats, kept feasts, and circumcised Timothy. He observed the law to reach those who 
keptlaw. 21. Tothem withoutlaw. To such, though in the sight of God keeping His law, he came 
not as an enforcer of the law of Moses. He spoke to Gentiles from a Gentile standpoint, as at Athens. 
{Acts 17.) 22. To the weak I became as weak. Adapted himself to their weakness as he had 
directed the “strong” at Corinth to do. I am made all things, etc. While steadfastly keeping 
‘Christ's law he adapted himself to all men in the hope of gaining them. 28. And Idoall things. 
All this self denial had in view a single object—the promotion of the gospel. Would that all Christians, 
from the same motive, would adapt themselves to all classes, in order to reach them. 

24-27. They which run ina race, runall, ete. He had spoken of self denial in order to secure 

-Zospel success. He new enforces the need of sparing no effort, self denial or exertion, to win the crown. 
“The Corinthians were familiar with the races in the stadium. Only one, the foremost, received a prize. 
Hence the lesson, so run that you may obtain; outstrip all others if possible. The Isthmian games, 
-among the most famous of Greece, were celebrated at Corinth. 25. Every man that striveth, etc. 
Everyone who proposed to strive in the games for the prize pursued a course of self control, and exer- 
-cised himself very systematically. All this effort twas made for a corruptible crown. The prize of the 
victor in the foot races was a crown woyen of the pine leaves which grew then, and still grow, on the 
isthmus of Corinth. But we an incorruptible. We run for a crown that never fades (1 Peter 5:4), 
26. I, therefore, sorun, not as uncertainly, Notas one who had no definite goal before him. 
His eye was fixed upon the heavenly prize. Notas one that beateth the air. The first figure s of a 
‘runner with a definite object; the second is taken from the boxer who strikes the air instead of his com- 
petitor. So fights not Paul, He puts a skilful aim into his blows. 27. But I keep my body under. I 
‘buffet my body. Revision. He puts the body down by his blows; by self denial for Christ. It shall 
not be his master but his servant. He keeps it under lest, after having preached to others, he should be 
rejected; that is, refused the prize of the crown. What an exhortation to us is this example of the 
-apostle! Continually vigilant lest he should be finally rejected! Eyen he worked out his salvation With 
fear and trembling. Surely, we should “give all diligence to make our calling and election sure.” In this 
worldly, self-seeking, luxurious age “‘we should give the more earnest heed to the things which we have 
cheard.”’ 


Chee) I. CORINTHIANS. 103 








CHAPTER X. 


Warnings Against Idolatry. 

SUMMARY.— Lights from Jewish History. Beware of a Fall. Will Not 
be Trials Greater than We Can Stand. Beware of the Fellowship of 
Idols. The Analogy of the Lord’s Supper. Ask no Questions ata 
Feast for Conscience Sake. But Avoid Anything Pointed Out as from 
an Idol Sacrifice. CHAPTER X. 


/ Y For I would not, breth- 1 
1 Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should | ,..° have you ignorant, 


be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under | how that our fathers wore 


A ll d é 
the cloud, and all passed through the? sea; all Dr praa arcu ae 


i i sea: and were all baptized 2 
2 And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud | (it5"Moses in the cloud 


and in the sea; and in the sea; and did all 8 
= . . if ee F 
3 And did all eat the same® spiritual meat; oat ot and didall deenk the 4 


i rj : ivi d a .|same spiritual drink: for 
4 And did all drink the same spiritual? drink: | (pm? sear ot a spiritual 


(for they drank of that spiritual Rock that follow-| rock that followed them: 
ed them; and that Rock was Christ.) Be ti Re Oe oueeers 
5 But with many of them God was not well) tiem God was not well 


pleased: for they were 


pleased; for they were overthrown in the wilder-| overthrown in the wilder- 
ae ness. Now these things 6 
ness. were our examples, to the 


; i + | intent we should not lust 
6 Now these things were our examples, to the in-} Mier 9 ees scney 
tent we should not lust after evil things, as they 
also lusted. 


a@ Exod. 13:21; Isa. 63:11. 0 Exod. 14:22. cExod.16:15; Jobn6: 32-56. d Exod. 17:6; Num. 20:11; Psa. 
78:15; John 4:10. 

















1-5. In the preceding chapter Paul warned the Corinthian Christians to avoid all that might cause 
weaker brethren to fall, pointed to his own example, and showed that he spared no effort to win the 
crown for himself. He now enforces the lesson of his own example by pointing to the warnings fur- 
nished in the journey of Israel from Egypt to Canaan, the type of the Christian’s journey to heaven. 
“Tt is worthy of note that he selects his examples from that part of Israelitish history which has an 
analogy in the baptismal commencement, and the eucharistic nourishment of the Christian life.”— 
Schaf. How that our fathers. The ancient meimbers of the Jewish race; the fleshly fathers of 
Jewish Christians, and, in a kind of spiritual sense, the fathers of Gentile Christians. See Gal. 3: 29, 
and Eph. 2:19. Were all under the cloud. With the walls of the sea on each side, and the cloud 
over their heads, the Israelites at the Red Sea passage were buried out of sight of the Egyptians. See 
Exod. 13: 21; Num. 10: 34; 14:13; Psalm 105; 39. : 2. Were all baptized unto Moses. “The two 
phrases, ‘Were under the cloud,’ and, ‘Passed through the sea,’ seem to prefigure the double process of 
submersion and emersion in baptism.”—Canon Cook. Observe that the Israelites, by this event, left 
Egypt, escaped from Pharaoh, and entered upon their march, with Moses as their leader, even as Chris- 
tians leave the Egypt of sin behind, and start upon the Christian life, when they are “baptized into 
Christ.” One of the church Fathers, Theodoret, says: “The sea of transition represents the laver of 
regeneration, Moses foreshadows Christ, Israel the baptized disciples, the pursuing Egyptians are the 
sing left behind, and Pharaoh is a type of the devil.’ 3. And did all eat the same spiritual 
meat. The manna (Exod. 16: 15), called “spiritual,” because supernaturally supplied, and because a 
type of the spiritual bread of the Christian. 4. Did all drink the same spiritualdrink. The 
water supernaturally supplied (Exod. 17:6; Num. 20:11), called “spiritual,” for the same reason. 
That spiritual Rock that followed them. The waters at Rephidim and Kadesh gushed from a 
rock. The rock did not itself supply them, but the Power behind, the “spiritual Rock,” even Christ. 
The rock of Rephidim did not follow them, but the “spiritual Rock” did, and supplied their necessities 
whenever they were in need. As the rock of Rephidim became a fountain, so Christ is the fountain of 
jiving waters to the world. 5. But with many of them God was not well pleased. ‘All’ were 
baptized, ‘all’? were fed, “all” did drink, but notwithstanding God had done so much for them “all” 
without exception, many fell in the wilderness because of their sins; a startling warning to Christians 
an the journey. = she ; 

3-10. Now these things were our examples. Beacon lights to Christians. The Israelites 


were led astray by “Justing after evil things.” Let all beware of this source of destruction. '7. Neither 


I. CORINTHIANS. 


7 Neither be ye idolaters, as were some of them; 
as it is written,* The people sat down to eat and 
drink, and rose up to play. 

8 Neither let us commit fornication, as some of 
them committed, and fell’ in one day three and 
twenty thousand. 

9 Neither let us tempt Christ, as some* of them 
also tempted, and were destroyed of serpents. 

10 Neither murmur ye, as some of them also 
murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. 

11 Now all these things happened unto them for 
ensamples: and they? are written for our admoni- 
tion,* upon whom the ends of the world are come. 

12 Wherefore, let him that thinketh he standeth 
take heed lest he fall. 

13 There hath no temptation taken you but such 
as is common to man: but God és faithful,* who 
will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are 
able; but will with the temptation also make a way 
to escape, that ye may be able to bear Zt. 

14 Wherefore, my dearly beloved, flee from idol- 
atry. : 
15 I speak as to wise men; judge ye what I say. 

16 The" cup of blessing which we bless, is it not 
the communion of the blood of Christ? the bread 


104 - 








(ChsxX. 





also lusted. Neither be ye 
idolaters, as were some of 
them; as it is written, The 
DERE} sat downto eat and 
rink, and rose up to play. 
Neither let us commit for- 
nication, as some of them 
committed, and fell in one 
day three and twenty 
thousand. Neither let us 
tempt the Lord, as some 
of them tempted, and per- 
ished by the serpents. 
Neither murmur ye, as 
some of them murmured, 
and perished by the de- 
stroyer. Now these things 
happened unto them by 
way of example; and they 
were written for our ad- 
monition, upon whom the 
ends of the ages are come. 
Wherefore let him that 
thinketh he standeth take 
heed lest he fall. There 
hath no temptation taken 
‘tee but such as man can 
ear: but God_is faithful, 
who will not suffer you to 
be tempted above that ye 
are able; but will with the 
temptation make also the 
way of escape, that ye 
may be able to endure it. 
Wherefore, my beloved, 
flee from idolatry. I speak 
as to wise men; judge ye 
what I say. The eup of 
blessing which we bless, 
is it not a communion of 


7 


8 


iS 


15 
16 





@ Ex. 32:6. b Num. 25:1. ¢ Ex. 17:2, 7; Num. 21:5. d@Rom. 15: 4. 


h Matt. 26: 26. 


e Heb, 10: 25. 


f2 Pet. 2:9. 





be ye idolators. 
great danger. As it is written (Exod. 32: 6). 
absence of Moses. 


g Jer. 29: 11. 


As many had been idolators, and idolatry was so prevalent in Corinth, this was a 
The Israelites fell into idolatry at Sinai during the 


They sat down to eat. At a feast in honor of the golden calf. Rose up to 


play. To dance religiously around their idol. Such is the meaning, Of course such an example was 
a pertinent warning to Corinthian brethren to shun the banquets in idol temples and their accom pany- 


ing festivities. 
commit fornication, as, etc. 
that 24,000 lost their lives. 


Three thousand Israelites fell 6n the occasion referred to. 
The fornication with the Midianites (Num. 25: 9,10). Itis there stated 
Paul names 23,000 as the number who lost their lives by the plague. The 


8. Neither let us 


number was no doubt between 23,000 and 24,000, and‘is stated in each place by around sum, according 


to Jewish custom, Paul naming the smaller. 
9. Neither let us tempt Christ, as, etc. 


Fornication was also one of the besetting sins of Corinth. 
The eyent referred to is narrated in Num, 21: 4-6, Which 


see. The application is, that we should not be discontented over hardships or long for the sinful 
pleasures of a former life from which we have parted. 10. Neither murmur ye. See Num. 13: 14. 


11-15. Now these things all happened to them for ensamples. 


designed to teach great lessons, since God still deals 
of the world are come. The last of God’s dispensations. 
standeth, etc. Presumption is the greatest of all dangers. 
guard. See the case of Peter’s fall, for an ilustration. 


dally with temptation. 18. There hath no temptation taken 


They are historical facts 
on the same principles. Upon whom the ends 
12. Let him that thinketh he 
He who realizes his danger will be on his 
The safe way is, conscious of weakness, not to 
you but such as is common. 


Perhaps the Corinthians thought their temptations were unusually severe, but these were only what 


human nature is exposed to. 
them strength and deliverance 
Christ, who pray constantly for strength, and trust God, will fall. 


the greatest temptations at Corinth were combined, lust, drinking, revelling, ete. 


these was to flee it. Sin must not be dallied with, but shunned. 
16-22. The cup of blessing which we bless. 


But God is faithful. Will keep every promise, and hence will give 
in every temptation if they trust in him. None who devoutly follow 
14. Flee from idolatry. In idolatry, 
The way to avoid all 


Aname applied to the cup used in the Lord’s 


Chix] I. CORINTHIANS. 


which we break, is it not the communion of the 
body of Christ? 

17 For? we, deing many, are one bread, and one 
body: for we are all partakers of that one bread. 

18 Behold?” Israel after the flesh. Are® not they 
which eat of the sacrifices partakers of the altar? 

19 What say I then? that the idol is any thing? 
or that which is offered in sacrifice to idols is any 
thing? 

20 But Z say, that the things which the Gentiles* 
sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God: 
and I would not that ye should have fellowship 
with devils. 

21 Ye® cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and? 





Lord’s table, and of the table of devils. 

22 Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy?* are we 
stronger than he? 

23 All things are lawful for me, but all things 
are not expedient: all things are lawful for me, but 
all things edify not. 

24 Let® no man seek his own, but every man an- 
other’s wealth. 

25 Whatsoever' is sold in the shambles, that eat, 
asking no question for canscience’ sake. 


d Deut. 82:17. 
41Tim. 4:4. 


7: 15. 
hRom.15 1. 


aRom. 12:5. 6Rom.4:12. cLey.3:33 








e2Cor.6:15. f Deut. 32: 38. 


105: 


the blood of Christ? The 
bread which we break, is 
it not a communion of the 
body of Christ? seeing that 17 
we, who are many, are one 
bread, one body: for we 
all partake of the one 
bread. Behold Israel after 18 
the flesh: have not they 
which eat the sacrifices 
communion with the al- 
tar? Whatsay I then? that 19 
a thing sacrificed to idols 
is anything, or that an idol 
is anything? But JZ say, 20 
that the things which the 
Gentiles sacrifice, they 
sacrifice to devils, and not 
to God: and I would not 
that ye should have com- 
munion with devils. Ye 21 
cannot drink the cup of 
the Lord, and the cup of 


| devils: ye cannot partake 


the cup of devils: ye cannot be partakers of the} 


of the table of the Lord, 
and of the table of devils. 
Or do we provoke the Lord 22: 
to jealousy? are we strong- 

er than he? : 

All things are lawful; 23: 
but all things are not ex- 
pedient, All things are 
lawful; but all things edi- 
fy not. Let no man seek 24 
his own, but each his 
neighbor’s good. Whatso- 25 
ever is sold in the sham- 
bles, eat, asking no ques- 
tion for conscience sake; 


g Ezek. 22: 14. 


Supper. Paul shows, from the nature of the Lord’s Supper, and of the Jewish sacrificial feasts, that to 
eat in an idol feast is an idol communion. Is it not the communion of the blood? etc. The 
symbol of joint participation or fellowship of the blood of Christ. The bread which we break, Is 
not this the symbol of joint participation of Christ’s body? 17. For we being many are one 
pread. One loaf. There being one loaf implies that we Christians, though many, are all one body, 
and joint participators of the one body of Christ. Paul had no conception of a divided church 
18. Behold Israel after the flesh. The natural Israel, in contrast with the spiritual Israel, the 
church. Are not they .. . partakers of the altarP A part of the sacrifice was eaten by the 
offerers and their friends, and as a part was burnt on the altar, as an offering to God, they were sup- 
posed to be partakers with God in the feast. So, too, those who partook of an idol feast, would be 
worshipers of the idol. 19. WhatsayIthen? He had said an idol was nothing (8: 4). Does he not 
now imply an idol is something? 20. He affirms nothing of the kind, but he does say that the sacri- 
fices which the Gentiles sacrifice are to devils. The idol is nothing, but to the worshiper itis a 
reality. That reality is not God, but really ademon. The gods were mainly dead kings and heroes who 
had been deified. The diamonia, or demons, were the spirits of dead men. The worship was really 
demon worship. Fellowship with devils. Demons. If the feast of the Lord’s Supper is com- 
munion with Christ, the feast of the altar sacrifice communion with God, who is worshiped, the feast of 
the idol is communion with the idol. Yet this idol in the mind of the worshiper is a diamonion, a 
demon. 21. Ye cannot drink, etc. So inconsistent are the two with each other that no man can 
who partakes of the feast of the demon. Cup of devils. The libations offered 
at the idol sacrifices. A part of the cup was poured on the altar, and a part drunk by the offerers. See 
Eneid8:273. Table of devils. The table in the idol temple where a feast was spread, 22. Do we 
provoke the Lord to jealousy P Such acts in an idol temple would be worship of the idol. Yet 
Jehovah says that he is ‘‘a jealous God” (Exod. 20: 5). ‘ 

23-26. Allthings are lawful for me. All meats are especially referred to. See note on chapter 
6:12, and chapter 8. But things that are lawful, 7. e., not sinfal in themselves, are often not expedient 
24. Letno man seek his own. In asserting rights, consider the interests of others, 25. What- 


commune with Christ 


106 I. CORINTHIANS. 


26 For the earth 7s the Lord’s, and the fulness 
thereof. 

27 If any of them that believe not bid you to a 
feast, and ye be disposed to go,* whatsoever is set 
before you eat, asking no question for conscience 
sake. 

28 But if any man say unto you, This is offered 
in sacrifice unto idols, eat not” for his sake that 
shewed it, and for conscience sake: for® the earth 7s 
the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof. 

29 Conscience, I say, not thine own, but of the 
other: for’ why is my liberty judged of another 
man’s conscience? 

30 For if I by grace be a partaker, why am I evil 
spoken of for that for which I give thanks? 

31 Whether® therefore ye eat, or drink, or what- 
soever ye do, do all to the glory of God. 

32 Give none offence, neither to the Jews, nor to 
the Gentiles, nor to the church of God: 

33 Even as I please all men in all things, not 
seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, 
that they may be saved. 


CHAPTER «XI. 


Dress and Conduct in the Church. 


SUMMARY.—Men in Church to Pray with Uncovered Heads. Women to 
be Veiled. Disorderly Assemblies. The Abuse of Love Feasts, The 
Lord’s Supper Profaned. The Lesson from Christ’s Appointment of 
the Ordinance. Must be Eaten with Solemn Reverence, 





1 Bet ye followers of me, even as I also am of 
Christ. 








[Ch. XI. 


for the earthis. the Lord’s, 26 
and the fullness thereof, 
If one of them that believe 27 
not biddeth you to a feast, 
and ye are disposed to go; 
whatsoever is set before 
you, eat, asking no ques- 
tion for conscience sake. 
But if any man say unto 
you, This hath been offer- 
ed in sacrifice, eat not, for 
his sake that shewed it, 
and for conscience sake: 
conscience, I say, not 29 
thine own, but the other’s; 
for ‘eda is my liberty 
judged by another con- 
science? IfI by grace par- 30 
take, why am Levil spoken 
of for that for which I 
give thanks? Whether 31 
therefore ye eat, or drink, 
or whatsoever ye do, do 
all to the glory of God. 
Give no occasion of 32 
stumbling, either to Jews, 
or to Greeks, or to the 
church of God: even as I 33 
also please all men in all 
things, not seeking mine 
own profit, but the profit 
of the many, that they may 
be saved, 


28 


CHAPTER XI. 


Be ye imitators of me, 1 
even as also am of 
Christ. 





@Lukel0:7. 61 Cor. 8:10. 


¢ Deut. 10:14. d Rom. 14:16. e Zech. 7:63; Matt.15: 6; John 15:8, f2 Thes.3:9. 





soever is soldin the shambles. In the butcher’s stalls. 
whether it had been part of an idol sacrifice or not. 
offered for sale is the Lord’s bounty. 


This one might eat without question as to 
26. For the earth is the Lord’s. All that is 


27-38. If any of them that believe not, ete. If invited to an unbeliever’s house, go, if you 


wish, and eat what is set before you without question on 


account of conscience, 


28. But if any 


man say unto you, etc. If some one points out that a part is from an idol’s sacrifice, then it is not 
to be eaten; not because the food is sinful, but because the conscience of others might be offended. 


29. Conscience not thine own, but of the other. 
simply wholesome food, his own conscience is not offended, but 
conscience is not abridged by another man’s want of knowledge. 


When one eats what he knows to be 
that of another man. His liberty of 
30. 


For, if I by grace be a 


partaker, etc. If by God’s gift I partake with thanksgiving to him, there should be no reproach. 


31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink. 


The rule for eating and drinking is now given. It must 
be done alltothe glory of God. This implies, (1) Thanksgiving to God. 


(2) Not doing what would 


put a stumbling-block in the way of weak brethren. 32. Give none offence. The rule just given 
implies this. Do nothing that would produce a scandal, or arouse prejudice, whether they be Jews, or 


‘Gentiles, or brethren. 38. EvenasI please all men in all things. 

1,2. Be ye followers of me, etc. 
should not seek to ‘please themselves,” but to so act as to save others, 
praise is preparatory to censure for disorderly conduct among them. 
he had taught them while in Corinth, 


This refers to verse 33 of the 10th chapter. 


See notes on 9: 20-23, 
Like him, they 


2. NowIpraise you. This 
Keep the ordinances. Those 


Ch. XI.] I. CORINTHIANS. 


107 





2 Now I praise you, brethren, that ye remember 
me in all things, and? keep the ordinances as I de- 
livered them to you. 

3 But I would have you know, that” the head of 
every man is Christ; and the® head of the woman 7s 
the man; and? the head of Christ 7s God. 

4 Every man praying or prophesying, having his 
head covered, dishonoureth his head. 

5 But® every woman that prayeth or prophesieth 
with her head uncovered, dishonoureth her head: 
for that is even all one as if she were shaven. 

6 For if the woman be not covered, let her also 
be shorn: but if it be® a shame for a woman not to 
be shorn or shaven, let her be covered. 

7 For a man indeed ought not to cover Ais head, 
forasmuch as" he is the image and glory of God: 
but the woman is the glory of man. 

8 For! the man is not of the woman; but the 
woman of the man. ; 

9 Neither was the man created for the woman: 
but the woman for the man. 

10 For this cause ought the woman’ to have 
power on her head* because of the angels. 

11 Nevertheless,! neither is the man without the 
woman, neither the woman without the man, in the 


Lord. 





Now I praise you that ye 2 
remember me in all things, 
and hold fast the tradi- 
tions, even as I delivered 
them to you. But I would 3 
have you know, that the 
head of every man is 
Christ; and the head of the 
woman is the man; and 
the head of Christ is God. 
Every man praying or 4 
prophase ye. having his 

ead covered, dishonour- 
eth his head. But every 5 
woman praying or proph- 
esying with her head un- 
veiled dishonoureth her 
head: for it is one and the 
same thing asif she were 
shaven. For if a woman 6 
is not veiled, let her also 
be shorn: but if it is.a 
shame to a woman to be 
shorn or shaven, let herbe 
veiled. For aman indeed 7 
ought not to have his head 
veiled, forasmuch as he is 
the image and glory of 
God: but the woman is the 
glory of the man. For the 8 
man is not of the woman; 
but the womanof the man; 9 
for neither was the man 
created for the woman; 
but the woman for the 
man: for this cause ought 10 
the woman to have a sign 
of authority on her head, 
because of the angels. 
Howbeit neither is the 
woman without the man, 
nor the man without the 


il 





c Gen. 3:6. 
i Gen. 2; 24. 


d John 4:84; 14:28; 


6 Rom. 14:9; i Gen. 24:65 


g Num. 5:18. 


Eph. 5:23. 


JOLs Us Lis 
a h Gen. 1: 26. 


J Deut. 21: 12. 





Gal. 4:4; Phil. 2:7 
k Ececel. 5:6. 


. ¢€ Acts 21:9. 
7 Gal. 3: 28. 


3-8. For I would have you toknow. The order of rank is that Christ is the center, with the 
Father above and man below him; and in the family the man is first and the woman second, This is 
nature’s order. 4, Every man praying or prophesying. The last word means speaking by in- 
spiration. With his head covered. He dishonors his head by covering what God would have ex- 
posed. Some hold that the head dishonored is Christ. I agree rather with Meyer and Schaff, that it 1s 
his own. Heathen priests of Rome covered their heads. So do modern Jews. 5, Every one that 
prayeth, etc. With the customs and ideas which existed in the East in that age it would be an un- 
seemly act and would bring reproach. The veil was regarded as a badge of subordination, and if not 
worn would imply that the woinan did not yield deference to her husband. Almost all women are still 
veiled in the presence of men in the Kast. All one as if she were shaven, For a woman’s head to 
be shaven was usually a sign of shamelessness (See Meyer). The uncovered head in an assembly was 
also unbecoming. 6, For if the woman be not covered. If she defies decorum by an uncovered 
head, let her go further, and be shaven. 7, Aman ought not to cover his head, etc. In this whole 
passage we must keep 1n mind the Eastern ideas of the relations of the sexes. Paul bases these rules of 
propriety on the account of their creation, The yveilis a sign of subordination to others present. But 
man, the image and glory of God, has no created superior. Woman, the glory of the man, is sub- 
ordinate to him, of which the veil is the symbol. 8. For the man is not of the woman, In the cre- 
ative act man was first, and woman was made from man. 

9-12. Neither was the man, etc. Woman was made for man because he needed a helpmeet. 10. 
For this cause ought a woman to have power, ete. She ought to have on her head the veil, the 
badge of submission to authority. Because of the angels. This clause has puzzled the critics. The 
idea probably is: “‘There should be no violation of decorum, such as a bareheaded woman in a public 
assembly would be, lest it offend the ministering angels which are always present, though unseen.” 
11. Neither is the man without the woman, etc. Neither sex is independent of the other; each 
needs the other. Inthe Lord, The Lord recognizes their mutual dependence upon each othem 12. 


108 I. CORINTHIANS. 


12 For as the woman 7s of the man, even go 7s the 
man also by the woman: but? all things of God. 

13 Judge in yourselves: is it comely that a woman 
pray unto God uncovered? 

14 Doth not even nature itself teach you, that, if 
a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him? 

15 But if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to 
her: for her hair is given her for a covering. 

16 But? if any man seem to be contentious, we 
have no such custom, neither the churches of God. 

17 Now in this that I declare wnto you I praise 
you not, that ye come together not for the better, 
but for the worse. — 

18 For first of all, when ye come together in the 
church,° I hear that there be divisions among you; 
and I partly believe it. 

19 For* there must be also heresies among you,® 
that they which are approved may be made mani- 
fest among you. 

20 When ye come together therefore into one 
place, this is not to eat the Lord’s supper. 

21 For in eating every one taketh before other his 
own supper: and one is hungry, and‘ another is 
drunken. 








[Che 3a. 
ae ot Ee ee 


woman, in the Lord. 
as the woman is of the 
man, so is the man also by 
the woman; but all things 
are of God. Judge ye in 
yourselves: is it seemly 
that a woman pray unto 
God unveiled? Doth not 
even nature itself teach 
ou, that, if a man have 
ong hair, it is adishonour 
to him? But if a woman 
have long hair, it is a glo- 
ry to her: for her hair is 
given her for a covering. 
But if any manseemeth to 
be contentious, we have 
no such custom, neither 
the churches of God. 

But in giving you this 
charge, I praise you not, 
that ye come together not 
for the,ybetter but for the 
worse. For first of all, 
when ye come together in 
the church, I hear that di- 
visions exist among you; 
and I partly believe it. 
For there must be also 
heresies among you, that 
they which are approved 
may be made manifest 
among you. When there- 
fore ye assemble your- 
selves together, it is not 
possible to eat the Lord’s 
supper: for in your eating 
each one taketh before 
other his own supper; and 
one is hungry, and anoth- 





a Rom. 11:36. 61 Tim. 6:4. ¢1Cor.1:10. d@Lukel7:1. eLuke 2:35. J Jude. 


For 12 


13 


ry 


5 








For as the woman is of the man, ete. As she was created for man so man is born 


is an equipoise. These relations are all of God. 


of woman. There 


18-16. Is it comely that a woman should pray, ete.P That is, in the public assembly. Private 


prayer, or with her own sex or household, is not meant. 


It was very unbecoming in view of the cus- 
toms of the East, nor would it generally be esteemed decorous in our times, and wit 
should appear with no covering on her head atall. 14. Doth not eve 


h our ideas, that she 
m nature itself, etc.P It is 


nature’s arrangement that men should wear short hair, and a woman long. For aman to have long hair 


and a woman to be shorn are violations of nature’s teachings. 
tentious. If, inspite of nature’s lessons, 


16. Butif a man seem to be con- 
a man contentiously opposes, let him know that no such 


custom exists in the churches. Many suppose that custom refers to being contentious. I think, rather, 


that it refers to covering the head, ete. The lesson of this whole passage is that we must not defy ex- 


isting social usages in such a way as to bring reproach on the church. 
17-22. Nowin this . 
When ye come together in the church. In 


- Ipraise younot. That their church assemblies were not orderly. 18. 
a meeting of the church. There be divisions. He had 


spoken in chapters 1-3 of the divisions in the congregation. He now tells them that he had heard that 


these divisions were manifest at their church meetings, 
Heresies were false opinions which led to divisions. 
avoidable, and would sift the church. 20. When 


19. There must needs be heresies. 
In the state of the human mind they were un- 
ye come together, therefore. When they as- 


sembled these heresies and divisions were manifest. There was a Paulite group, an Apolloite group, and 


a Petrine group, who sat apart from each other. 
a spirit they were in no fit mind to eat the Lord’s supper. 
others his own supper. It was customary in Corinth to 


It is not to eat the Lord’ 


S supper. Coming in such 
21. For every one partaketh before 
eat a meal together as did Christ and his 


disciples the night of the Lord’s supper. After this came the Lord’s supper. At this meal each party in 
Corinth sat apart and ate when it was ready. The result was that some began before others. One would 


be hungry and another drunken. 


feasts was at home. Despise ye the church of GodP By 


ously, and put to shame others, perhaps the poor, who had nothing. 


This last phrase means that he had e 
What! Have you not houses to eat and drinkin? The practice is reb 


aten and was satisfied. 22, 
uked. The place to eat their 
a selfish feast, where some ate luxuri- 


Ch. XI.] I. CORINTHIANS. 


_ 22 What! have ye not houses to eat and to drink 
in? or? despise ye the church of God, and shame 
them that have not? What shall I say to you? 
shall I praise you in this? I praise you not. 

23 For’ I have received of the Lord that which 
also I delivered unto you, That the Lord Jesus, the 
same night in which he was betrayed, took bread: 

24 And, when he had given thanks, he brake 7, 
and said, Take, eat; this is my body, which is 
broken for you: this do in remembrance of me. 

25 After the same manner also he took the cup, 
when he had supped, saying, This cup is* the new 
testament in my blood: this do ye, as oft as ye 
drink 7¢, in remembrance of me. 

26 For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink 
this cup, ye do shew the Lord’s death‘ till he 
come. 

27 Wherefore,® whosoever shall eat this bread, 
and drink this cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall 
be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. 

28 Butt let a man examine himself, and so let 
him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. 

29 For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, 
eateth and drinketh damnation to himself, not dis- 
cerning the Lord’s body. 

30 For this cause many are weak 
among you, and many sleep. 





and sickly 








109 


er is drunken. What? have 22 
ye not houses to eat and 
to drink in? or despise ye 
the church of God, and 
pur them to shame that 
ave not? Whatshall Isay 
to you? shall I praise you 
in this? I praise you not. 
For I received of the Lord 23 
that which alsol delivered 
unto you, how that the 
Lord Jesus in the night in 
which he was betrayed 
took bread; and when he 24 
had given thanks, he brake 
it, and said, This is my 
body, which is for you: 
this do in remembrance of 
me. In like manner also 265 





1 the cup, after supper, Ssay- 


ing, This cup is the new 
Covenant in my blood: 
this do, as oft as ye drink 
it, in remembrance of me. 
For as often as ye eat this 26 
bread, and drink the cup, 
ye proclaim the Lord’s 
death till he come. Where- 27 
fore whosoever shall eat 
the bread or drink the cup 

of the Lord unworthily, 
shall be guilty of the bod 
and the blood of the Lord. 
But leta man prove him- 28 
self, and so let him eat of 
the bread, and drink of 
the cup. For he that eat- 
eth and drinketh, eateth 29 
and drinketh judgment 
unto himself, if he discern 
not the body. For this 30 
cause many among you 
are weak and sickly, and 





a Lev. 19:30; Psa. 89:7; 93:5. 6 Gal. 1:1. oobi es 1:11; Rey. 1:7. e¢ Num. 9:10; John 6:51; 13:27. 
al. 6:4. 


28-25. Kor I have received of the Lord. While at Corinth he had told the church the solemn 
history of the institution of the sapper, an account that he received directly by inspiration from the 
Lord. Such a sacred event was utterly inconsistent with strife, revelry or disorder. This history is re- 


peated to show this. 


24, Thisis my body. Is this literal? “Iam the true vine,” ‘“‘These women 


are the two covenants’ (Gal. 4:24), etc., are kindred expressions. The idea is: “This represents my 
body.” The eating of the bread is not to literally eat the Lord’s flesh, but is done in remembrance. 
It is atoken that reminds of his body. 25. This do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of 


me. The memorial design of the Lord’s supper is reiterated. Itis not a 
26. Ye do show forth the Lord’s death till he come. The 


remembrance of Christ’s sacrifice. 


“sacrifice of the mass,” but a 


observance points to two great facts—the Lord’s death, and to his second coming; one past, the other 


future. The observance is to continue “till he come.” 


27-30. Shalleat..ordrink.. 


unworthily. In a light, disorderly way, or with an unholy frame 


ofmind. Shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. Profane the body and blood by pro- 


fanely eating the sacred tokens of these. 
he can eat in loving remembrance of the death of Christ. 


worldly thoughts, as though eating common 


29. EHateth 


28. Let a man examine himself, etc. To see whether 
. . unworthily. With light, 
food. That this is a sin is shown in verse 27. Here itis 


added “the eateth and drinketh damnation;”’ that is, subjects himself to condemnation. Not dis- 


cerning the Lord’s body. 
For this cause many are weak, etc. 
of the supper has made many weak and sickly 


Not distinguishing it, keeping in mind that these are memorials. 80. 
Some have held that this means that the improper observance 
Christians, and some had even died spiritually. Others 


hold that physical judgments had been sent, and some sickened and others died. The last view is most 


generally held. 
31-34. Ifwe would judge o 


urselves. If we would sit in jndgment on our spiritual condition, 


and correct ourselves, we would avert God’s judgments. 82. We are chastened, etc. Judgments 


110 I. CORINTHIANS. 





31 For? if we would judge ourselves, we should 
not be judged. 

32 But when we are judged,” we are chastened of 
the Lord, that we should not be condemned with 
the world. 

33 Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come to- 
gether to eat, tarry one for another. 

34 And if any man hunger, let him eat at home; 
that ye come not together unto condemnation. 
And the rest? will I set in order when? I come. 


CHAPTER XII. 


Spiritual Gifts. 


SUMMARY.—The Test of the Spirit of Christ. The Variety of Spiritual 
Gifts. All Given by the Same Spirit. The Human Body Has Many 
Members, with Different Offices. So it is of the Church, the Body of 
Christ. But All Parts of One Body. The Various Offices and Gifts. 


1 Now® concerning Spiritual gifts, brethren, I 
would not have you ignorant. 

2 Ye know' that ye were Gentiles, carried away 
unto these dumb idols, even ag ye were led. 

3 Wherefore I give you to understand, that? no 
man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Jesus 
accursed; and® that no man can say that Jesus is 
the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. 

4 Now! there are diversities of gifts, but thei 
same Spirit. 

5 And there are differences of administrations, 
but the same Lord. 











[Ch. XSI, 


not afew sleep. Butif we 
discerned ourselves, we 
should not be judged. But 
when we are judged, we 
are chastened of the Lord, 
that we may not be con- 
demned with the world. 
Wherefore, my brethren, 
when ye come together to 
eat, wait one for anoth- 
er. If any man is hungry, 
let him eat at home; that 
your coming together be 
not unto judgment. And 
the rest will I set in order 
whensoever I come. 


CHAPTER XII. 


Now concerning spiritu- 
al gifts, brethren, I would 
not have you ignorant. Ye 
know that when ye were 
Gentiles ye were led away 
unto those dumb idols, 
howsoever ye might be 
led. Wherefore I give you 
to understand,that no man 
speaking in the Spirit of 
God saith, Jesus is anath- 
ema; and no man can say, 
Jesus is Lord, but in the 
Holy Spirit. 

Now there are diversi- 
ties of gifts, but the same 
Spirit. And there are di- 
versities of ministrations, 
and the same Lord. And 





31 
32 


33 


34 


As 
2 


4 
5 
6 


a1John1:9, &J3o0b5:17; Amos 3:2; Heb. 12:5. c¢ Titus1:5. d10Oor. 4:19. ¢1Cor. 14:1. J Eph. 2:11. g Mark 
9:39; 1 John 4:2. A Matt. 16:17; 2 Cor. 3:5. ¢ Heb. 2:4, J Eph. 4:4, 
are used to chasten and to bring to repentance and reformation. Compare Heb. 12:5-8. 838. Where- 


fore, when ye come together to eat, ete. Let all wait, and let 
pertogether. 84. If any manis hungry, 


isfy the cravings of appetite. 


all eat and partake of the Lord’s sup- 
let him eat at home. This feast is notin order to sat- 


The account given here of the institution of the Lord’s suppper is one of the four in the New Testa- 


ment. Matthew’s is that of an eye witness; those of 
nesses who were present; that of Paul was 
written account of the event. 

1-3. Spiritual gifts. The supernatural 
were especially needful, before the church had the New Testament as a 
of Christianity. 2. Yewere Gentiles, 


“received from the Lord,” 


ofthe god. The oracle of Delphos, 
man speaking by the spirit of God, etc. 


ing by the spirit pronounced Jesus the Lord, he had the Holy Spirit. 
always moved by the Spirit. 


4-6. Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. The es 
imparted to fit members for various duties, are now discussed, These are 
tions, but all proceed from the same Spirit. 5. Differences of ministr 


Mark and Luke were rec 


carried away unto these dumb idols. 
ingidols. These false gods had oracles, and priests professed to speak under t 
not far distant from Corinth, was especi 
How should they test those Pp 
divine Spirit? If a heathen priest professed to Speak by the spirit and called J 
the Spirit of God. In times of persecution Christians were asked to say Jesus 


pecial gifts of the Spirit 


eived by them from wit- 
Many regard it as the oldest. 


gifts bestowed in the early church by the Spirit. These 
guide, and in the inauguration 
Idolators worship- 
he influence of the spirit 
ally celebrated. 8, No. 
rofessing to speak by the 
esus accursed, he had not 
Anathema. If one speak- 
This confession from the heart is 


> 


various in their manifesta- 


ations; of ministries or offi- 


Ch. XIT.] I. CORINTHIANS. 


6 And there are diversities of operations, but it | 
is the same God which? worketh all in all. 

7 But? the manifestation of the Spirit is given to 
every man to profit withal. 

8 For to one is given by the Spirit the word® of 
wisdom; to another* the word of knowledge by the 
same Spirit ; 

9 To* another faith by the same Spirit; to an- 
other’ the gifts of healing by the same Spirit; 

10 To® another the working of miracles; to 
another® prophecy; to! another discerning of 
spirits; to another! divers kinds of tongues; to an- 
other the interpretation of tongues. 

11 But all these worketh that one and the self- 








eee Spirit, dividing to every man severally* as he 
will. 

12 For as the body is one, and hath many mem- 
bers, and all the members of that one body, being 
many, are one body;! so also zs Christ. 

13 For™ by one Spirit are we all baptized into one 
body," whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we 
be bond or free; and® have been all made to drink 


111 


there are diversities of 
workings, but the same 
God, who worketh all 
things in all. But to each 7 
one is given the manifes- 
tation of the Spirit to prof- 
it withal. For to one is 
given through the Spirit 
the word of wisdom; and 
to another the word of 
knowledge, according to 
the same Spirit; to anoth- 
er faith, in the same Spir- 
it: and to another gifts of 
healings, inthe one Spirit; 
and to another workings 
of miracles ; and to anoth- 
er prophecy; and to an- 
other discernings of spir- 
its: toanother divers kinds 
of tongues; and to anoth- 
er the interpretation of 
tongues: but all these 
worketh the one and the 
same Spirit, dividing to 
each one severally even as 
he will. , 

For as the body is one, 12 
and hath many members, 
and all the members of 
the body, being many, are 
one body; so also is Christ. 
For in one Spirit were we 13: 
all baptized into one body, 
whether Jews or Greeks, 
whether bond or free; and 


8. 


9 


10: 


iL 


were all made to drink of 
one Spirit. For the body 14 
is not one member, but 
many. If the foot shall 


into one Spirit. 
14 For the body is not one member, but many. 





e Matt. 17:19. *#Mark16:18. g Gal. 3:5. hk Rom. 12:6, 
2 Gal. 8:16. m Isa. 44:3-5; Rom. 6:5. 


o John 6:63; 7:37-39. 


6 Rom. 12:6. ¢1Cor. 2:6. d2Cor. 8:7. 
ilJohn4:1. j Acts 2:4. kJohn 3:8; Heb. 2:4. 
nm Gal 3:28; Eph. 2:13,14,16; Col. 3:11. 


a Eph. 1:23. 





ces, but all are in the service of the same Lord. 6. Diversities of workings. The inward workings 
of the Spirit are not always the same, but it is God, one God, the same God, who causes them all. The 
object of this section is to show that one divine source accounts for spiritual gifts diverse in their mani- 
festations. 

7-11. But the manifestation of the Spirit, etc. However varied these manifestations, all are 
given for the profit of tne whole body. No gift of the Spirit is forthe benefit of the recipient. This is 
now shown. 8. Toone is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom. The ability to reveal divine 
truth, such as possessed by the apostles. To another, the word of knowledge. The aptitude to teach 
unerringly what had been revealed to the apostles and prophets. 9. To another, faith. Not that 
faith which comes by hearing, but that faith which carried miraculous power. See 13:2; Matt. 17;20. 
10. Toanother, prophecy. The prophet was one who, under divine impulse, spoke words given by 
the Holy Spirit. To another, discerning of spirits. The power of reading hearts and determining 
whether men spoke by the divine spirit, or some other impulse. To another, divers kinds of 
tongues. He who spoke with tongues, spoke languages that he had never learned. See Acts 2:6-8. 
Sometimes their utterances were not understood by the audience. Hence another gift was the in- 
terpretation of tongues, the ability to explain the meaning of those who spoke with tongues. There 
are named here nine gifts, all supernatural, imparted by the same spirit, which distributes them ac- 
cording to its own will. 

12-20. The body is not one member, but many. The unity of these diverse gifts, all given by 
the same spirit, 1s illustrated by the human body, which has many members and organs with different 
offices, but all parts of one body. No member could claim that it was not of the body because it is not 
the eye, the ear, or some other organ. Each 1s a part, each necessary, each set where God pleased, and 
all taken together make up the body. So also is Christ. The spiritual body of Christ, the church. 
13. For in One spirit we were all baptized into one body. “For by means of one spirit we were 
all baptized into one body” (Meyer). Rather, moved by one spirit acting through the apostles and 
evangelists, we were all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Gentiles, bond orfree. The idea is that, 
though diverse in race and condition, all had been made parts of one body by baptism, and that this had 


/ 


112 I. CORINTHIANS. 


15 If the foot shall say, Because I am not the 
hand, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of 
the body? 

16 And if the ear shall say, Because I am not the 
eye, 1 am not of the body; is it therefore not of 
the body? 

17 If the whole body were an eye, where were the 
hearing? if the whole were hearing, where were the 
smelling? 

18 But now hath God set the members every one 
of them in the body as it hath pleased him. 

19 And if they were all one member, where were 
the body? 

20 But now are they many members, yet but one 
body. 

21 And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have 
no need of thee; nor again the head to the feet, I 
have no need of you. 

22 Nay, much more those members of the body, 
which seem to be more feeble, are necessary: 

23 And those members of the body, which we 
think to be less honourable, upon these we bestow 
more abundant honour; and our uncomely parts 
have more abundant comeliness. 

24 For our comely parts have no need; but God 
hath tempered the body together, having given 
more abundant honour to that part which lacked: 

25 That there should be no schism in the body; 
but that the members should have the same care 
one for another. 

26 And whether one member suffer, all the mem- 
bers suffer with it; or one member be honoured, all 
the members rejoice with it. 

27 Now? ye are the body of Christ, and members 
in particular. 

28 And” God hath set some in the church, first, 
apostles; secondarily,° prophets; thirdly, teachers; 
after that miracles,‘ then gifts of healings,® helps,‘ 
governments, diversities of tongues. 








@ Rom. 12:55 Eph. 1:23; 4:12; 5:23; Col. 1:24.. 6 Eph. 4:11. ec Eph. 2:20. 
J Rom, 12:8; 1 Tim. 5:17; Heb. 13:17. 





Now ye are the body of 





d Acts 13:1; Rom 12:6. 


(CRSXIT. 


say, Because I am not the 15 
hand, I am not of the 
body; it is not therefore 
not of the body. And if 16 
the ear shall say, Be- 
cause l.am not the eye, 
I am not of the body; 
it is not therefore not of 
the body. If the whole 
body were an eye, where 
were the hearing? If 
the whole were hearing, 
where were the smelling? 
But now hath God set the 
members each one of them 
in the body, even as it 
pleasedhim. Andif they 19 
were all one member, 
where were the body? But 20 
now they are many mem- 
bers, but one body. And 21 
the eye cannot say to the 
hand, I have no need of 
thee: or again the head to 
the feet, I have no need of 
you. Nay, much rather, 
those members of the 
body which seem to be 
more feeble are necessa- 
ry: and those parts of the 
body, which we think to 
be Jess honorable, upon 
these we bestow more 
abundant honour; and our 
uncomely parts have more 
abundant comeliness; 
Whereas our comely parts 24 
have no need: but God 
tempered the body togeth- 
er, giving more abundant 
honour to that part which 
lacked; that there should 25 
be no schism in the body; 
but that the members 
should have the same care 
one for another. And 26 
whether one member suf- 
fereth, all the members 
suffer with it; or one mem- 
ber is honoured, all the 
members rejoice with it. 





17 


18 


22 


23 


Christ,and severally mem- 
bers thereof. And God 
hath set some in the 
church, first apostles, sec- 
ondly prophets, thirdly 
teachers, then miracles, 
then gifts of healings, 
helps, governments, divers 





ée Num. 11:17. 





all been done under the direction of one spirit. A1l, too, receiving it as a gift, drank of the same spirit. 
Hence, if special and extraordinary spiritual gifts were imparted to the members of this body, these 


would be due to one spirit. 


21-26. And the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee. Every member of the 


body has its place and is needed by every other member. 


27-31. Now, ye are the body of Christ, ete. All were “baptized into the one body” (verse 13), 
and hence are severally members or parts of the one body, with offices to discharge like those of the 
members of the human body. 28. And God has set some in the church, first apostles. The 
various offices of the members are pointed out. Some had stations to which they were assigned by the 


Cho XT] ° I. CORINTHIANS. 








29 Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all 
teachers? are all workers of miracles? 

30 Have all the gifts of healing? do all speak 
with tongues? do all interpret? 

31 But* covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet 
shew I unto you a more excellent way. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


The Greatest of All Things. 


‘SSUMMARY.—Christian Love Better than Miraculous Gifts. The Nature 
of this Love and Its Action. All the Miraculous Gifts Shall Pass 
Away, but Love Endureth Forever. All Human Knowledge Imper- 
fect, and Transient. But Faith, Hope and Love Eternal. Of the 
Three Love is Greatest. 


1 Though I speak with the tongues of men and 
of angels, and have not? charity, 1 am become as 
sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. 

2 And though I have the gift* of prophecy, and 


113 


kinds of tongues. Are all 29 
apostles? are all prophets? 
are all teachers? are all 
workers of miracles? have 30 
all gifts of healings? do 
all eo with tongues? 
do all interpret? But de- 31 
sire earnestly the greater 
gifts. And a still more ex- 
cellent way shew I unto 
you. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


If I speak with the 1 
tongues of men and of 
angels, but have not love, 

I am become sounding 
brass, or a clanging cym- 
bal. And if I have the gift 2 


of prophecy, and know all 
mysteries and all knowl- 
edge; and if I have all 
faith, so as to remove 
mountains, but have not 
love, I am nothing. And 3 
if I bestow all my goods 
to feed the poor and if I 
give my body to be burned, 
but have not love, it prof- 


understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and 
though I have all faith,4 so that I could remove 
mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. 

3 And® though I bestow all my goods to feed the 
poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and 
have not charity, it profiteth me nothing. 


6 Rom. 14; 1 Tim. 1:5, 








a1iCor. 14:1. ec Matt. 7:22. dLuke17:6. e Matt. 6:1,2. 





spirit. Nine spiritual gifts have already been named; nine positions in the church are now given. 
Apostles. The twelve, Paul, and such evangelists as Barnabas and others; men sent by the Holy 
Spirit to preach the gospel. Prophets. See note on verse 10. Teachers. Men gifted by the spirit to 
teach in the church. Miracles, Those who had power to work miracles. Gifts of healing. One 
division of miraculous power granted. Helps. Spiritual aid granted to helpers, such as the deacons. 
Governments. The administrative abilities of the presbytery. To each the spirit granted the special 
gifts required. 29. Areallapostles? Only afew had this office given them, and so of each of the 
other gifts. 81. Covet earnestly the best gifts. The highest spiritual gifts. I show a more 
excellent way. There is something still better than these which all may possess. This best of all 
things is shown in the next chapter. 

“This praise of love, almost a psalm on love it might be called, is as rich in its contents drawn from 
deep experience as in rhetorical truth, fullness and power, grace and simplicity.”— Meyer. 

1-3. Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels. In chapter 12 he has spoken 
of spiritual gifts, one of which was to speak with tongues. ‘‘A more excellent way” (12: 31) is now to 
be shown. Hence, various spiritual gifts are taken up and shown to'be useless and vain without love. 
If he spoke not only with the tongues of men, but even those of angels, it would be, without love (see 
Revision), an empty sound, like sounding brass, ora tinkling cymbal. The latter was a brazen basin, 
which was beaten. The sounds of these instruments would not be musical. 2. Though I have the 
gift of prophecy. Another and a high spiritual gift. See note on 12:10. And know all mys- 
teries. Have supernatural wisdom so as to understand all the secrets of God. And all knowledge. 
See note on 12:8. Though I have all faith. See note on 12:9, The faith that imparts miraculous 
power, faith that could remove mountains, See Matt. 17:20, It is clear that Paul knew of the utter- 
ance of Christ, since the test of the power of faithis the same. 8. And though I bestow all my 
goods to feed the poor. Though he exhibit what the world calls charity in the highest degree, 
unless he is filled with love it is nothing. One might give his goods from a desire of praise. Though 
I give my body to be burned. Gives not only goods, but his body itself. If, like a Buddhist 
ascetic, he leaps into the flames to burn away the dross and to etherialize his spirit. These sacrifices 
are useless unless consecrated by love. All these things are excellencies if sanctified by the divine 


principle of love, but.are profitless without it. 


q 


114 I. CORINTHIANS. 


4 Charity? suffereth long, and is kind; charity 
envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not 
puffed up, ; 

5 Doth not behave itself? unseemly, seeketh* not 
her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil; 

6 Rejoiceth* not in iniquity,® but rejoiceth in the 
truth; 

7 Beareth! all things, believeth all things, hopeth 
all things, endureth all things. 

8 Charity never. faileth: but whether there be 
prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be 
tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowl- 
edge, it shall vanish away. 

9 For® we know in part, and we prophesy in 

art. 

10 But® when that which is perfect is come, then 
that which is in part shall be done away. 

11 When I was a child, I spake as a child, I 
understood as a child, I thought as a child; but 








(Ch SI. 


iteth me nothing. Love 4 
suffereth long, and is 
kind; love envieth not; 
love vaunteth not itself, is 
not puffed up, doth not be- 5 
have itself unseemly, 
seeketh not its own, is not 
provoked, taketh not ac- 
count of evil; rejoiceth 6 
not in unrighteousness, 
but rejoiceth with the 
truth; beareth all things, 7 
believeth all things, hop- 
eth all things, endureth 
all things. Love never 8 
faileth: but whether there 
be prophecies, they shall 
be done away; whether 
there be tongues, they shall 
cease; whether there be 
knowledge, it ‘shall be 
done away. For we know 9 
in part, and we prophesy 
in part: but when that 10’ 
which is perfect is come, 
that which is in part shall 
be done away. When I 
was a child, I spake asa 
child, I felt as a child, I 
thought as a child: now 
that I am become a man, I 
have put away childish 


1L 


when I became a man, I put away childish things. 








a1 Pet. 4:8. 6 Phil. 4:8. ¢ Phil. 2:4. d Psa. 10:3; Rom. 1:32. e2John4. J Gal. 6:2. 


g 1 Cor. 8:2. 
h Isa. 60:19; Jer. 81:34. 








4-7. The action of love is now described. Love suffereth long. Endures slights and wrongs 
patiently and long, and returns a kindly spirit. It is “slow to anger” (Psalm 103: 8). Christ “reviled 
reviled not again” (1 Peter 2: 23). ‘The fruit of the Spirit is long-suffering” (Gal. 5: 22). See also Rom’ 
2: 4,and 2 Cor.6:6. Love envieth not. How miserable is that envy which is made unhappy by the 
good fortune of another. Cain is an example. Love excludes it. A mother does not envy her child- 
Vaunteth not itself. Does not ostentatiously boast of superiority, nor is it inflated. 5. Does not 
behave itself unseemly. Discourteously and in a way to shock good manners or morals. Seeketh 
not herown. Is unselfish and disinterested. See Rom. 12:10. Is not provoked. Does not fly into 
arage, but keeps the temper under control. Thinketh no evil. The idea of the Revision is that love 
does not keep a record of eyil rendered so as toreturnit. 6. Rejoiceth not in iniquity. Instead 
of rejoicing, is filled with sadness by wrong doing of any kind, but does rejoice with the truth in its. 
triumphs. '7. Beareth all things. Bears up in spite of all things evil, and is not overcome. This 
is the idea of “beareth.” Love bears up against the tide of evil, as the rock against the waves. 
Believeth all things. Is not distrustful and suspicious. Hopeth all things. Is hopeful instead 
of despondent, and hopes for the best. How hard for the loving mother to give up hope for her: 
recreant son! Endureth all things. Endures patiently persecution and suffering. The cardinal 
quality of fortitude, hardihood, unyielding persistence is meant. 

8-10. Love never faileth. The superiority of love over all besides is shown by its survival of all 
with which it is compared. Itis eternal and imperishable. Whether there be prophecies. The 
gift of prophesying shallcease. As a matter of fact we know that it has long since done so. Whether 
there be tongues. The gift of speaking in unknown tongues was transitory. Knowledge. Even 
the supernatural knowledge, granted as a spiritual gift,is temporary. All these were only granted while: 
the church was in an immature state. 9. For we know in part, and prophesy in part. A reason 
why these gifts should pass away. Our knowledge is now only partial, and the prophecy only gives 
glimpses. These are all imperfect and fragmentary, and hence must give way to something better. 
10. When that which is perfect is come, then the partial knowledge and prophecy will be done 
away. The imperfect will give way to the perfect; the perishable to the enduring. ‘The perfect” was 
expected at the coming of Christ. Some think that it came when the church was fully matured, since 
the special gifts then ceased. If there is a reference to this, the final and complete reference is to the 
glorified church. 

11-13. When I was a child. In these verses the change which he has declared will take place: 
is illustrated by the change from childhood to manhood. The speech, thoughts and feelings of the 
child give way to those of the man, Soit will be when the church moves on from childhood to full. 


Ch= XIV.] I. CORINTHIANS. 


12 For* now we see through a glass, darkly; but 
then” face to face: now I know in part; but then 
shall I know even as also I am known. 

13 And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these 
three; but® the greatest of these is charity. 





115 


things. For now we see 
in a mirror, darkly; but 
then face to face: now L 
know _in part; but then 
shall I know even as also 
I have been known. But 
now abideth faith, hope, 
love, these three; and the 


12 


13 


greatest of these is love. 


CHAPTER XIV. ; 
Order in Public Worship. 


SUMMARY.—Of the Spiritual Gifts Prophecy Given the First Place. 
Speaking With Tongues Secondary. Both Must Be Used so as to 
Edify. In the Church Assemblies What is Spoken ina Tongue Must 
be Interpreted. One Only Must Speak at Once. The Women Must 
Keep Silent. 

1 Follow after’ charity, and desire spiritual 
gifts,* but rather that ye may prophesy. 

2 For he that® speaketh in an unknown tongue, 
speaketh not unto men, but unto God: for no man 
understandeth him; howbeit in the spirit he speak- 
eth" mysteries. 

3 But he that prophesieth! speaketh unto men to 
edification, and exhortation, and comfort. 

4 He that speaketh in an unknown tongue edi- 
fieth himself; but he that prophesieth edifieth the 
church. 

5 I would that ye all spake with tongues, but 
rather that ye prophesied: for greater ¢s he that 
prophesieth than he that speaketh with tongues, 
except he interpret, that the church may receive 


edifying. 


@2Cor. 3:18; 5:6; Phil. 3:12. 
JF Num. 11:25; Rom. 12:6. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


Follow after love; yet 1 
desire earnestly spiritual 
gifts, but rather that ye 
may prophesy. For he 2 
that speaketh in a tongue 
speaketh not unto men, 
but unto God; for no man 
understandeth; but in the 
spirit he speaketh myste- 
ries. But he that prophe- 3 
sieth speaketh unto men 
edification, and comfort, 
and consolation. He that 4 
speaketh in a tongue edifi- 
eth himself; but he that 
prophesieth edifieth the 
church. Now I would 5 
have you all speak with 
tongues, but rather that 
ye should prophesy: and 
greater is he that prophe- 
sieth than he that speak- 
eth with tongues, except 
he interpret, that the 
church may receive edify- 








cMatt. 22:38. d Lev. 19:18; Matt. 22:39. e1 Cor. 12:31. 


6 Matt. 18:10; 1 John 3:2. 
h Matt. 18:11. «Rom. 15:4. 


g Acts 2:4; 10:46; 19:6. 





development. 12. For now we see in a glass darkly. In a “mirror.” The mirrors of the 
ancients were of polished metal, and were far inferior to ours. The images were indistinct in compari- 
son. They were seen darkly, indistinctly, imperfectly. Thus in this state is our knowledge of divine 
things imperfect and incomplete. But then face to face. We will not look in a glass in the coming 
state, but will see face to face, without a veil, or obscurity. Now I know in part. There were 
limitations upon the knowledge even of Paul; only a part was seen. But then, when the veil is taken 
away, and the full revelation has come in the presence of Christ, he shall know fully, know God, 
eternity and its secrets, even as he is known to God. Thus it is shown that all these spiritual gifts are 
fleeting. 18. But now abideth faith, hope, love. These three shall survive. They are eternal. 
They continue to exist in the church, and shall not fail in its glorified state. As long as the redeemed 
saint shall have future ages before him, so long will trust in God and hope give them brightness, while 
love itself is the very atmosphere of the divine life. The greatest of these is love. The greatest 
because it glorifies both faith and hope, sanctifies every faculty and Christian grace, is the very moving 
impulse of the gospel, and is the one quality that is divine. ‘God is love.” 

1-5. Desire earnestly spiritual gifts. Though love is to be a supreme pursuit, yet this is not 
intended to disparage spiritual gifts. Let them be sought, but in seeking, desire above all the gift of 
prophecy. 2. For he that speaketh inatongue. Hath the gift of tongues. The tenor of Paul’s 
remarks shows that the Corinthians placed too high a comparative estimate on this gift. Speaketh 
mysteries. Things that are unknown and mysterious to his hearers. Men do not understand him. 
8. He that prophesieth. To prophesy means more than to foretell. It is to declare the will of 
God under a divine impulse. When Peter spoke on Pentecost, he did the work of a New Testament 
prophet. In this formative period of the church, before the New Testament was written, it was needful 


116 I. CORINTHIANS. [Ch. XIV. 


° 7 | ing. But now, brethren, 6 
6 Now, brethren, if I come unto you speaking if Fodus unto you speak- 


i S or 7 except I shall! ing with tongues, what 
with tongues, what shall I profit you, except Is ng a teeeuee os 


speak to you either by revelation, or by knowledge, | speak th you ether by way 


is a ot of revelation, or of knowl- 
or by prophesying, or by doctrine? edge, or of prophesying, 


7 And even things without life giving sound, or of teaching? kiven 7 
: : one it life, givin 
whether® pipe or harp, except they give a distinc-| 3 véce whether Bioe as 


: . 4 : 1q | harp, if the ive not a 
tion in the sounds, how shall it be known what is qisGhiclon ee oawan: 


piped or harped? how ‘shall it be known 
4 a . : what 1s piped or harped? 
8 For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, | Forit tne trampot eo oe 


: . 7 P) uncertain voice, who shall 
who shall prepare himself to the battle! rapate Weeeienae 


9 So likewise ye, except ye utter by the tongue So also ye, unless ye utter 
. e ton e speech ea 
words easy to be understood, how shall it be known |? 8 iturin te 


: b 7 shall it be known what is 
what is spoken? for ye shall speak into? the air. spokend for oe ee 


10 There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices speaking | into the air. 
° ° . ° . ere _are, . 
in the world, and none of them és without signifi-| ac? jot may, Pe: 8° 


dation the world, and no kind is 
0 : 5 without signification. If 11 
11 Therefore if I know not the meaning of the| then know not the mean. 


+ . ing of the voice, I shall 
voice, I shall be unto him that speaketh a bar-| (05 fn tne shall be 


Se i barian, and he that speak- 
barian, and he that speaketh shall be a barbarian eth wil be fees 


unto me. unto me. So also ye, since 12 


: 28 
12 Even so ye, forasmuch as ye are zealous of | 3¢,Are 2ealous of page 


spiritual gifts, seek that ye may excel to the edify- | abound unto the edifying 
ing of the church. ’ 


A 
a Job 21:11,12. 61 Cor. 9:26. 


eS 
that there be these inspired guides in the churches. Unto men edification. Instruction, and 
strengthening. 4. He that speaketh in a tongue edifieth himself. His speech in the unknown 
tongue tends to strengthen him, though not instructing others. He is made to feel that he is moved by 
God, and so is filled with awe. 5. Greater is he that prophesieth. Greater, because he serves 
the church best. Unless the tongues were interpreted, they were an unmeaning sound to the church, 
while he who prophesied, instructed and built it up. 
NoTE.—Concerning this gift of tongues, there is considerable confusion among commentators. Some 
have held that it was a sort of rhapsody under the influence of the Spirit in no earthly language, 
Others have held that it was a gift of the knowledge of foreign languages to the early Christians to 
enable them to preach the gospel to all nations. Neither view appears to be correct. 1, Undoubtedly 
_ there was a manifestation of the gift of tongues on the Day of Pentecost (Acts, chapter 2). Parthians, 
Medes, Elamites, Greeks, Romans, heard in their own language. 2. It was nota gift of the knowledge 
of foreign languages, for verses 13 and 14 show that the speaker did not understand his own words. 
3. It was a gift, not for exercise in the church, but a “sign to them that believe not” (verse 22). When 
they heard the gospel message in a tongue which the speaker did not understand, but in their own 

_ tongue (as on the Day of Pentecost), their wonder was excited, and many would confess that it was the 
work of God. 

6-11. What shall I profit you, etc. The gift of tongues, exercised to the church, cannot profit 
unless it does one of four things named: A revelation. The inspired utterance of him who proph- 
esies. Knowledge. The gift of teaching the inspired truths of the Scriptures, or those revealed 
by the prophets. '7. Even things without life. Musical instruments that give forth a sound, such 
as a pipe ora harp, the chief musical instruments of the Greeks, must give a distinction of sounds, if 
one would know what is played. 8. If the trumpet. The various distinctions of note sounded a 
«charge, a retreat, etc. 9. So also ve, unless ye utter by the tongue, etc. It is only speech to 
the air, unless there is the distinction of intelligible words. 10. There are, it may be, so many 
kinds of voices inthe world. Articulate languages spoken and understood by some men. 11: If 
I know not the meaning of the voice. The language. I shall be to him that speaketh a 
barbarian. A foreigner, not understanding his language. The Greeks and Romans called all not of 
their races barbarians. 


12-17. Seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the church. If you seek for spiritual 





@ 


© 








Ch. XIV.] I. CORINTHIANS. 


13 Wherefore let him that speaketh in an un- 
known tongue pray that* he may interpret. 

14 For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit 
prayeth, but my understanding is unfruitful. 

15 What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, 
and I will pray with the understanding also:” I will 
sing with the spirit, and I will sing® with the under- 
standing also. 

16 Else, when thou shalt bless with the spirit, 
how shall he that occupieth the room of the 
unlearned say? Amen at thy giving of thanks, see- 
ing he understandeth not what thou sayest? 

17 For thou verily givest thanks well, but the 
other is not edified. 

18 I thank my God, I speak with tongues more 
than ye all: 

19 Yet in the church I had rather speak five 
words with my understanding, that by my voice I 
might teach others also, than ten thousand words in 
an unknown tongue. 

20 Brethren,° be not children in understanding: 
howbeit in malice be’ ye children, but in under- 
standing be men. 

21 In’ the law it is written, With men of other 
tongues and other lips will I speak unto this peo- 
ple; and yet for all that will they not hear me, saith 
the Lord. 

22 Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them 
that believe, but to them that believe not; but 





is not edified. 





117 


of the church. Wherefore 13 
let him that speaketh ina 
tongue pray that he may 
interpret. For if Ipray in 14 
a tongue, my spirit pray- 
eth, but my understanding 
is unfruitful. What is it 15 
then? I will pray with the 
spirit, and I will pray with 
the understanding also: 
I will sing with the spirit, 
and I will sing with the 
understanding also. Else 
if thou bless with the spir- 
it, how shall he that filleth 
the place of the unlearned 
say the Amen atthe giving 
of thanks, seeing he know- 
eth not what thou sayest? 
For thou verily givest 
thanks well, but the other 
I thank 
God, I speak with tongues 
more than you all: how- 
beit in the church I had 
rather speak five words 
with my understanding, 
that I might instruct oth- 
ers also, than ten thou- 
sand words in a tongue. 
Brethren, be not chil- 26 
dren in mind: howbeit in 
malice be ye babes, but in 
mind be men. Inthe law 21 
it is written, By men of 
strange tongues and by the 
lips of strangers will I 
speak unto this people; 
and not even thus will 
they hear me, saith the 
Lord. Wherefore tongues 22 
are for a sign, not to them 
that believe, but to the 





Cor. 12:10. b Eph. 5:19; Col. 3:16. ¢Psa.47:7. d@1 Cor. 11:24. e Psa. 119:99; 131:2; Matt. 11:25; Rom. 16:9. 
eae . 3 7 Matt. 18:3; 1 Pet. 2:2. g John 10:34, : i 





gifts, seek rather those that will build up the church, such as prophesying and teaching. 18. Where= 
fore let him that speaketh in an unknown tongue. Let him pray that he may have the gift of 
interpretation also. See 12:10. Let him pray that he may understand what he utters, so as to explain 
it. 14. If I pray in an unknown tongue. He does not understand, and only his spirit prayeth. 
15. What is it then? HowthenamItoact? He answers that question. He will have both the 
spirit and the understanding unite in singing and praying, by using a tongue that he understands. 
16. Else, when thou shalt bless the Spirit, etc. If an unknown tongue is used, how can one 
who does not understand it say the Amen to the blessing at the proper place? Note here, (1) This 
shows that audible responses to the praises and thanksgivings were the custom of the church. (2) The 
unlearned means a private person, the private members of the church, those not possessed of the 
spiritual gifts. } 

18-22. I had rather speak five words, etc. All must be done to edification. Hence, all must 
be understood. There is alesson here to preachers who are so learned in their utterances that the 
people cannot understand them. 20. Be not children in understanding. Use manly good sense 
and judgment in the church. To babble in an unknown tongue is like achild. In malice be ye chil- 
dren. To vainly choose a course that would merely excite wonder, and not edify, would seem to 
partake of malice rather than love. 21. In the law it is written. Sce Isaiah 28: 11, 12, for the 
quotation. The Jews were there told that for their sins they would be carried into the Assyrian cap- 
tivity, where they would hear strange languages. This was a judgment. Wherefore, do not force the 
church to listen to strange tongues which serve to remind of the judgment of Israel. 22. Wherefore 
tongues, ete. They are a sign to unbelievers, who are moved when they hear the gospel spoken in 
their tongue by men who have never learned it and do not understand it. 


118 I. CORINTHIANS. 


prophesying serveth not for them that believe not, 
but for them which believe. 

23 If therefore’the whole church be come togeth- 
er into one place, and all speak with tongues, and 
there come in those that are unlearned, or unbeliey- 
ers,* will they not say that ye are mad? 

24 But if all prophesy, and there come in one 
that believeth not, or one unlearned, he is convine- 
ed of all, he is judged of all: 

25 And thus are the secrets of his heart made 
manifest; and so, falling down on his face, he will 
worship God, and report? that God is in you of a 
truth. 

26 How is it then, brethren? when ye come to- 
gether, every one of you hath a psalm,°® hath a doc- 
trine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath an 
interpretation. Let all things be done unto edify- 
ing. 

27 If any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it 
be by two, or at the most by three, and that by 
course; and let one interpret. 

28 But if there be no interpreter, let him keep 
silence in the church; and let him speak to himself, 
and to God. . 





[Ch. XIV. 


unbelieving: but prophe- 
as is for a@ sign, not to 
the unbelieving, but to 
them that believe. If there- 23 
fore the whole church be 
assembled together, and 
all speak with tongues, 
and there come in men 
unlearned or unbelieving, 
will they not say that ye 
are mad? Butif all proph- 24 
esy, and there come in one 
unbelieving or unlearned, 
he is reproved by all, he 
is judged by all; the se- 
crets of his heart are made 
manifest; and so he will 
fall down on his face and 
worship God, declaring 
that God is among you 
indeed. 

What is it then, breth- 26 
ren? When ye come to- 
gether, each one hath a 
a hath a teaching, 

ath a revelation, hath a 
tongue,bath an interpreta- 
tion. Let all things be 
done unto edifying. If any 27 
man speaketh in a tongue, 
let it be by two, or at the 
most three, and that in 
turn; and let one inter- 
pret; but if there beno in- 28 
terpreter, let him kee 
silence in the church; an 
let him speak to himself, 
and to God, And let the 29 
prophets speak by two or 


25 


three, and let the others 





29 Let the prophets speak two or three, and let 
the other judge. 





@ Acts 2:13; 26:24. bIsa. 45:14; Zech. 8:23. c1Cor. 12:8,9. d@Rom. 14: 19; 2Cor. 2:19; Eph. 4:12. 








28-25. If therefore the whole church be come together. The apostle now treats of the 
proper order and decorum in the church assemblies. And all speak with tongues. There would 
be a babble of confusion and no edification. Toa private member, or an unbelieyver, they would seem 
to be mad. 24. But if all prophesy. Those speaking would then speak what would be under- 
stood, and, speaking under the divine impulse, would convict. He is judged. His state and character 
are laid bare by the speakers, 25. The secrets of his heart are made manifest. He is made to 
feel that he is face to face with God, who knows his life, and he is brought to confession. It is still 

' often the case that the hearer thinks that the preacher knows his life, and is laying it bare, when it is 
his own conscience that is stirred up. 

26-33. What is it then, brethren? What course should be pursued in the public assemblies of 
the church? When ye come together, each one hath, etc. When they come together, one comes 
purposing to sing a psalm; another to teach concerning some question; another, a prophet, has a 
revelation to present; another proposes to speak ina tongue; another, still, to interpret what is 
spoken, Now this must all be done unto edifying. All that will not tend to this must be left out. 
27. If any man speaketh in a tongue. He must speak two, or at the most three sentences (by 
two, or at the most three) in succession (by course), and another, who has the gift of interpreta- 
tion (12: 10), must interpret. Most commentators refer two or three to persons speaking. I follow 
Macknight. 28. But if there be no interpreter. In that case the rule, “Let all things be done to 
edifying,”’ will force the speaker in tongues to keep silence in the church. He may speak somewhere 
else, or in his soul, but not in the assembly of the saints. 29. Let the prophets speak two or 
three. Let two or three prophets speak at a meeting. In the Greek, ‘two or three” are in the nomina- 
tive. In verse 27, in which speaking with tongues is treated, the numerals are in the accusative case 
with a preposition. Hence there, with Macknight, I have referred them to the sentences spoken. If 
the persons speaking were meant, the construction would be as in verse 29. Let the others discern, 
Let them discern whether they speak by inspiration. 80. If anything be revealed. If the 
prophetic impulse comes upon a hearer, let the first desist. Let only one speak atatime. 81. For 


Ch. XIV.] I. CORINTHIANS. 


30 If any thing be revealed to another, that 
sitteth by,* let the first hold his peace. 

31 For? ye may all prophesy one by one, that all 
may learn, and all may be comforted. 

32 And¢ the spirits of the prophets are subject to 
the prophets. 

33 For God is not the author of confusion, but of, 
peace,® as in all churches of the saints. 

34 Let® your women keep silence in the churches: 
for it is not permitted unto them to speak; they 
are: commanded to be under obedience, as also saith 
the® law. 

35 And if they will learn any thing, let them ask 
their husbands at home: for it is a shame for 
women to speak in the church. 

36 What! came the word of God® out from you? 
or came it unto you only? 

37 If any man think himself to be a prophet, or 
spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that 
I write unto you are the commandments of the 
Lord. 

38. But if any man be ignorant, let him be ignor- 











ant. 


119 


discern. Butif arevelation 30 
be made to another sitting 
by, let the first keep si- 
lence. For ye all can 31 
prophesy one by one, that 
all may learn, and all may 
be comforted; and the 32 
spirits of the prophets are 
subject to the prophets; 
for God is not a God of 33 
confusion, but of peace; as 

in all the churches of the 
saints. 

Let the women keep si- 34 
lence in the churches: for 
it is not permitted unto 
them to speak; but let 
them be in subjection, as 
also saith the law. And if 35 
they would learn any 
thing, let them ask their 
own husbands at home: 
for it is shameful for a 
woman to speak in the 
church. What? was it from 
you that the word of God 
went forth? or came it un- 
to you alone? 

If any man thinketh 
himself to be a prophet, or 
spiritual, let him take 
knowledge of the things 
which I write unto you, 
that they are the com- 
mandment of the Lord. 
Butif any manis ignorant, 38 
let him be ignorant. 


36 








b Rom. 12:7. clJohn4:1. d1Cor. 
Titus 2:2. gGen.3:16. AIsa. 2:3. 


a1 Thes. 5:19. 


i Luke 10:16; 2 Cor. 10: 


11:16. e1 Tim. 2:11. jf1Cor. 11:3; Eph. 5: 2; Col. 3: 18; 


73 


1 John 4: 6. 





ye all may prophesy. 
one speaking at a time. 


All who have the prophetic gift, but it must be one by one, not more than 
82. The spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets. A 


prophet can wait his turn in silence; he is not compelled to speak at once, for his spirit is subject to 


him. He can be silent if he wills it. 


83. For God is not the author of confusion. Such con- 


fusion as more than one speaking at a time is not of God. God demands peace and order ‘in all the 


churches of the saints.” 


34-36. Let the women keep silence in the churches. This, in view of other portions of the 


Scripture, is confessedly a difficult passage. 
other hand, Deborah was a judge and a prophetess ; 
the Christian dispensation 
that this was fulfilled on the Day of Pentecost (Acts 2: 4). 
sied (Acts 21; 9), 
these apparent discrepancies may be reconciled as follows: 
women is, in the churches; that 
into one place” (verse 23). 
always means the ecclesia. 

ings, but to formal gatherings of the whole body. 
circumstances that existed in Ephesus, where Timothy was, 


where. If so, it applies wherever similar circumstances exist, but not elsewhere. 


In 1 Tim. 2: 11,12, we have the same teaching. On the 
Huldah was a prophetess; Joel predicted that in 
“the sons and daughters should prophesy” (Joel 2: 28), and Peter declared 
In addition, the daughters of Philip prophe- 
and in 1 Cor. 11:5, Paul gives directions concerning women prophesying. Probably 
(1) Paul’s prohibition of speaking to the 
is, in the church assemblies when ‘‘the whole church is come together 

It is an official meeting of the church. “Church” in the New Testament 
It does not apply to such informal meetings as the social or prayer-meet- 
(2) It may be that even this prohibition was due to 
and in Corinth, and would not apply every- 


Both were Greek 


churches. Among the Greeks public women were disreputable. For a woman to speak in public would 


cause the remark that she was shameless. 


Virtuous women were secluded. 


Hence it would be. 


a shame for women to speak in the church assembly. It is noteworthy that there is no hint of 
such a prohibition to any churches except Grecian. Wherever it would be shameful women ought not 


to speak. 36. What? Was it from the 
Corinthian church must receive instruction, not give it. 
word of God was sent to it. 


you that the word of God went forth? A rebuke. The 
It did not send out the word of God, but the 


37-40. If any man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual. If any one thinks he is 


inspired, or has spiritual gifts, 


one proof of it is that he recognizes what I write as the Lord’s command- 


ment. This is always a test. Whoever insists that he has the spirit, and sets aside the New Testament 


120 I. CORINTHIANS. 

39 Wherefore, brethren,* covet to prophesy, and 
forbid not to speak with tongues. 

40) Let all things be done decently, and in order. 


CHAPTER XV. 


The Resurrection from the Dead. 
SUMMARY.—The Essential Facts of the Gospel. The Resurrection of 

Christ a Central Fact. The Witnesses of the Resurrection. Those 

at Corinth Who Denied the Resurrection. The Apostles Then False 

Witnesses. Our Faith Vain. Death in Adam, but Life in Christ. The 

Resurrection Body. The Victory Over Death. 

1 Moreover, brethren, I declare unto you the 
gospel which I preached unto you, which also ye 
have received, and” wherein ye stand; 

2 By* which also ye are saved, if ye keep in 
memory what I preached unto you, unless* ye have 
believed in vain: 

3 For I delivered unto you first of all that which 
I also received, how that Christ died for our sins 
according® to the scriptures; 

4 And that he was buried, and that he rose again 
the third day according* to the scriptures ; 

5 And® that he was seen of Cephas, then of" the 
twelve: 

6 After that, he was seen of above five hundred 
brethren at once; of whom the greater part remain 
unto this present; but some are fallen asleep. 

7 After that, he was seen of James; then of! all 
the apostles. F 

8 And) last of all he was seen of me also, as of 
one born out of due time. 


@1Cor. 12:31; 1 Thes. 5:20. b Rom. 5:2. ¢ Rom. 1:16. d Gal. 3:4. 
13:7. f Psa. 2:73 6:10; Isa. 53:10; Hos. 6:2. g Luke 24:34, 











e Gen. 3:15; 


A John 20:19. 


[Ch-Xv- 


Wherefore, my brethren, 39 
desire earnestly to proph- 
esy, and forbid not to 
speak with tongues. But 40: 
let all things be done de- 
cently and in order, 





CHAPTER XY. 


Now Imake known unto 1 
you, brethren, the gospel 
which I preached unto 
you, which also ye receiy 
ed, wherein also ye stand, 
by which also ye are 2 
saved; I make known,T say, 
in what words I preached 
it unto you, if ye hold it 
fast, except ye believed in 
vain. ForI deliveredunto 3 
you first of all that which 
also I received, how that 
Christ died for our sins 
according to the script- 
ures; and that he was bur- 4 
ied; and that he hath been 
raised on the third day ac- 
cording to the scriptures; 
and that he appeared to 5 
Cephas; then to the 
twelve; then he appeared 6 
to above five hundred 
brethren at once, of whom 
the greater part remain 
until now, but some are 
fallen asleep; then he ap- 7 
peared to James; then to 
all the apostles; and last 8 
of all, as unto one born 
out of due time, he ap- 


Psa. 22:15; Dan, 9:26; Zech. 
tActsl:3. j Acta 2:4, 





¥ 
commands, is self-convicted. 88, If any man be ignorant. 
let him remain so. 89. Wherefore. 
commending prophecy as the chief gift, and enjoining order in the church 


If he will be ignorant and obstinate, 
The apostle concludes this section on church order by again 


exercises. 


This chapter is devoted to the resurrection from the dead. Among the various false doctrines which 


had crept into the church at Corinth, composed of those who had so rec 
had so much to unlearn, was one that the resurrection was only the resurr 


ently been heathen, and who 
ection of the soul from sin to 


a new life; that this resurrection was already past in the case of those converted (2 Tim. 2:18), aad that 


a resurrrection after death was impossible. 
the Grecian ideas (Acts 17:32), and “some” 
inth, It is likely that the letter (7:1) of the 
able chapter. The epistle of Clement to 
century, refers to these freethinkers. 

1,2. Ideclare unto you the gospel which I preached unto you. 
of that gospel as the basis of the argument he is about to make. 
they received it and still professed it. 
less they have forgotten the gospel preached and departed from it 
which he shows would be the case if there was no resurrection. 


The doctrine of the resurrection was absurd, acccording to. 
were infusing this kind of skepticism into the church at Cor- 
church asked some questions which called out this remark- 
the Corinthians, written about the beginning of the second 


He states the fundamentals 


That gospel was common ground, for 
2. By which, also, yeare saved. Are ina saved state un- 
; that is, unless their faith is vain, 
Observe the tact with which he first 


presents facts conceded by all the disciples, and upon these builds an impregnable argument. He next 


states those facts. 
8-11. For I delivered unto you, 


first of all, that which I also received (Acts 18:8). Note the 














Ch. XV.] I. CORINTHIANS. hyn 

9 For I am the least of the apostles, that am not peered fom Say oni 

Ss apos- 

meet to be called an apostle, because* I persecuted tles, that am not meet to 
eo e called an apostle, be- 

the chur ch of God. |eause I cere cated the 

10 But? by the grace of God I am what I am: and | church of God. But by 10 
hi : te vas bask a ‘ the grace of God I am 

Is grace which was bestowed upon me was not in| what Tam: and his grace 
vain; but® I laboured more abundantly than they | OCR Was bestowed upon 
all:? yet not I, but the grace of God which was dene ee 
with me. yet not I, but the ae of 

e ae God which was with me. 

11 Therefore, whether at were I or they, 80 Wel whether then be T oo iL 

preach, and so ye believed. » ie eee 
. . eved. 

12 Now, if Christ be preached that he rose from |” Now if Christis preached 12 
the dead, how say some among you, that® there is | fan tho dea posed 
no resurrection of the dead? fone eens soar tae 

. . urrection Oo 

13 But if there be no resurrection of the dead, | the dead? But if there is 13 
then is Christ not risen: dead, nelshar wath Okewe 

14 And if Christ be not risen, then zs our preach- | Pee raised: and if Christ 14 
2 2 2 : - hath not been raised, then 
ing vain, and your faith zs also vain. is our preaching vain, your 

15 Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God; | ig? seis Fain, hee, & 
because we have testified of God that he raised up | witnesses of God; because 
Christ: whom he raised not up, if so be that the he raised up Christ: whom 

2 e€ raised not u ir so e 
dead a not. i that fees dead’ are not 
: : 5 sjaf¢ | raised. For if the dead 16 

16 For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ | "ised. te ee 

raised ; hath Christ been raised: 
@ Acts 8:3. 6 Eph. 2:7. c2 Cor. 11:23. dGal.2:8. e2 Tim. 2:17. £1 Thes. 4:14. 





three facts which Paul declares to be the gospel, or the facts on which it rests; viz: the death, the 
burial, and the resurrection. The facts Paul received by revelation (Gal. 1:12) as well as from men.. 
Christ died for our sins, according to the scriptures. The fifty-third chapter of Isaiah is 
especially exact in the outlines of our Lord’s suffering. He quotes it in Luke 22:37. 4. That he was. 
buried and rose again the third day, according to the scriptures, Paul himself quotes Ps. 16:10 
as predicting the resurrection. See Acts 13:35. 5. That he was seen ofCephas. He now gives the 
proof of these facts. The women saw Christ before Peter, but Paul names the witnesses who would 
carry most weight to the Corinthians. For the appearance to Peter see Luke 24:34. Then of the 
twelve. See Matt. 28:17 and John 20:19, 25. 6. After that he was seen of above five hundred. 
brethren atonce. No other account of this appearance is recorded. It is probable that it took place 
in Galilee where Christ repeatedly directed the disciples to gather. It is possible that Matt. 28:16 refers. 
to it. Paul had no doubt seensome of “the five hundred brethren,” “ the greater part” of whom were 
stillalive when he wrote. '7. After that he was seen by James. James, the Lord’s brother, not 
James the apostle. This James was prominent, when Paul wrote, as the chief bishop at Jerusalem 
(Acts 15:13; Acts 21:18) and the author of the epistle of James. James, the apostle, had been killed by 
Herod (Acts 12:2). Then ofall the apostles. See Luke 24:50. 8, Last of all he was seen by me. 
See Acts 9:4. 9. For Iam the least of the apostles. As far as human worth is concerned, not fit to 
be called an apostle. He could never forget that he had been a persecutor. 10. But by the grace of 
GodIamwhatIam. Not by his own merit, which he considered so small, but by God’s grace he 
had been enabled to do a more abundant work than any other apostle. 11. Whether it be I, or they. 
I and all the apostles preach the same gospel of a risen Lord and this you accepted when you believed, 
Their faith was built on the resurrection. 

12-19. Howsaysome  . .  thatthereis no resurrection of the dead. These seemed 
to admit that Christ was raised, but denied the resurrection of others. He now shows that if Christ be 
raised the general resurrection must follow as a result. 18. If there be then is Christ 
not risen. If persons once dying cannot be raised, as these false teachers say, then Christ could not 
have risen. 14. Thenis our preaching vain. For in that case we have preached what is false, and 
you haye believed it, so that your faith is vain. 15. Weare found false witnesses of God. In 
that case we have declared that God did what he never did do. 17. IfChrist be not raised, your 


122 I. CORINTHIANS. 


(Cho Sie. 








17 And if Christ be not raised, your faith zs vain ;* 
ye are yet in your sins. 

18 Then they also which are fallen asleep in 
Christ are perished. 

19 If” in this life only we have hope in Christ, we 
are of all men most miserable. 

20 But now’ is Christ risen from the dead, and 
become? the first-fruits of them that slept. 

21 For® since by man came death, by’ man came 
also the resurrection of the dead. 

22 For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall 


and if Christ hath not 17 
been raised, your faith is 
vain: ye are yet in your 
sins. Then they also 18 
which are fallen asleep in 
Christ have perished. If 19 
in this life only we have 
hoped in Christ, we are of 
all men most pitiable. 

But now hath Christ 20 
been raised from the dead, 
the first-fruits of them that 
are asleep. For since by 21 
man came death, by man 
came also the resurrection 
of the dead. For as in 22 
Adam all die, so also in 
Christ shall all be made 











Hl A iC alive. But each in_ his 23 
all be made alive. f . , own order: Christ the first- 
23 But® every man in his own order: Christ the | tits; then they ce 
first-fruits; afterward they that are Christ’s at his| Then cometh the end, when 24 
a ; he shall deliver up the 
coming. kingdom to God, even the 
24 Then cometh the end, when he shall have de-j father; when he | shall 
livered up" the kingdom to God, even the Father; | and all anthority and 
= 2 1 power. For he must reign, 25 
when he shall have put down all rule, and all | tirne hath pntall his ene 
eOr ia, = mies under his feet. The 26 
authority and power. A aoe last enemy that shall be 
25 For he must reign,! till he hath put all ene- 
mies under his feet. : 
26 The! last enemy that shall be destroyed 7s 
death. 
a@Rom. 4:25. 62 Tim. 3:12. cl Pet.1:3. d Acts 26:23. eRom. 5:12. fJohn11:25. g1Thes. 4:15. h Dan. 


7:14; John 17:2. 7 Psa. 110:1; Heb. 1:18. j Heb. 2:14. 





faithis vain. In that case he is not the Savior. He is a dead man, who could not even save himself. 
Such a one has no power to pardon sins, and ye are yet in your sins. 18. Then they which are 
fallen asleep, etc. All the Christians who had died had fallen into eternal sleep, There is hope, in 
that case, only in this life; no hope of immortality 19, If in this life, only, we have hopein 
Christ. If there is no life beyond, no hope of it, then Christians who deny themselves in this life and 
endure persecutions and sufferings for the sake of eternal life, are of all men the most miserable. They 
“lose life” and gain no eternal life. Such are the consequences of this false. belief. 

20-28. Butnow is Christ risen. Thisis certain. Paul had seen the risen Lord, So had many 
other credible witnesses. But since he is risen, the resurrection of his disciples must follow. He is the 
first fruits of those who have slept in death. On the morrow after the first Sabbath of the passover a 
sheaf of the first fruits of the barley harvest was ‘“‘waved before the Lord” (Ley. 23:10-16) asa pledge of 
the harvest tocome. Soon the morning after the first Sabbath of the passover, Christ, the first fruits, 
arose and appeared living, “the first fruits” of the great harvest of souls gathered into eternal life. 21. 
Since by man came death. Man, the first man, sinned, and death came upon his race, because in 
him the race had sinned. By man, also, came the resurrection. By Christ, the Sonof Man. 22 
For-as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive, etc. All the race in Adam be- 
came subject to death ; so in Christ all the race shall be raised from the dead to appear at the bar of 
eternal judgment. The passage does not affirm the final salvation of all, but the final resurrection of 
all. There is a “resurrection of the just and of the unjust.” 28. But each in his own order. In his 
own rank or division. The first order or division is Christ. The second division is “they that are 
Christ’s,” who will be raised at his coming. The time of the third division, the wicked, is not named, 
but hinted at in the beginning of the next verse (verse 24). Christ says: ‘All that are in the grave shall 
come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; they that have done evil, to the 
resurrection of judgment.’”. John 5:29. This is what Paul teaches here. 24. Then cometh the end. 
The end follows soon after the resurrection of the saints. When he shall deliver up the kingdom 
to God, See verse 28. When Christ’s work is accomplished he places all in the Father’s hands. 25. 
‘Forhemustreign. He is reigning now, and will continue to reign until he has conquered all his 
enemies, He is not waging a contest for a kingdom, as some contend, but will give up the kingdom when 
‘the contest is over and the final victory won. All enemies, All the wicked opposers, human and 


Ch. XV.] I. CORINTHIANS. 


123 





27 For he hath put all things under his feet. 
But when he saith, all things are put under him, it 
is manifest that he is excepted which did put all 
things under him. 

28 And when all things shall be subdued unto 
him, then? shall the Son also himself be subject 
unto him that put all things under him, that God 
may be all in all. 

29 Else what shall they do which are baptized for 
the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they 
then baptized for the dead? 

30 And why stand we in jeopardy every hour? 

31 I protest by your rejoicing which I have in 
Christ Jesus our Lord,” I die daily. 

32 If after the manner of men I° have fought 
with beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me if 
the dead rise not? let us eat and drink; for to-mor- 
row we die. 


abolished is death. For, 
He put all things in sub- 
jection under his feet. But 
when he saith, All things 
are put in subjection, it is 
evident that he is excepted 
who did subject all things 
unto him. And when all 
things have been subjected 
unto him, then shall the 
Son also himself be sub- 
jected to him that did sub- 
ject all things unto him, 
that God may be all in all. 

Else what shall they do 
which are baptized for the 
dead? If the dead are not 
raised at all, why then are 
they baptized for them? 
why do we also stand in 
jeopardy every hour? I 
protest by that eerie in 
ie brethren, which I 

ave in Christ Jesus our 


Lord, I die daily. If after < 


the manner of men I 
fought with beasts at 
Ephesus, what doth it 
profit me? Ifthe dead are 


not raised, let us eat and 


27 


28 


30 
31 


drink, for to-morrow we 
die. Be not deceived: 
Evil company doth corrupt 33 


33 Be not deceived: evil communications corrupt 


good ei good manners. Awake up 34 
34 Awake® to righteousness, and sin not; for*| righteously, and sin not; 
eS 
aJohn 14:28. b2Cor. 4:10. c2Cor.1:8. d Isa. 22:13; Luke12:19. eEph. 5:14. f1Thes. 4:5. 








supernatural; also sin and death. All must be overthrown. The last enemy . . is death. See 
Rey. 20:12-14. The order there of closing events is the resurrection, the judgment, and the castingiof 
Death and Hell (hades—the grave) into the lake of flre. For he put all things under his feet. 
Quoted from Ps. 8:6; a statement that Christ is Lord of all and that God has subjected allto him. Heis 
excepted who, ete. God gave Christ the power, and hence he is excepted. The Father is not subject 
to the Son. 28, When all things have been subjected. When the world is subdued to Christ. 
Then shall the sonalso himself be subjected. Then, as his work is done, he will give up the king- 
dom to the Father (verse 24). Then Christ will give up the seals of office. 

29-34. Else what shall they do which are baptized for the deadP Paul again returns to 
the argument for the resurrection, This passage is difficult, and has received almost as many inter- 
pretations as there have been commentators. Some have held that there was a custom of baptizing 
living persons for the benefit of persons who had died without baptism. Had that custom existed, Paul 
would have rebuked it. It did arise afterwards, as an abuse from the misinterpretation of this passage, 
among the followers of Cerinthus, and, in our times, of Joseph Smith. I will try to make clear its 
meaning: (1) All the Corinthians were baptized (Acts 18:8). (2) Their baptism was a “planting” in 
the likeness of the burial of Christ, and in the ‘‘likeness of his resurrection” (Rom. 6: 4,5). They were 
in, and raised from, a watery tomb. (3) Their baptism in the likeness of the death and resurrection of 
Christ was in the hope of their own resurrection from the dead through Christ’s resurrection. (Huper 
Nekroon, for, or on account of, the dead, with the expectation of resurrection from the dead.) But if 
Christ has not risen, and the dead rise not, this memorial and emblematic burial has no meaning. 
“Why, then, are they baptized for the dead?” that is, for the sake of their own resurrection from the 
dead. This interpretation harmonizes better with Paul’s argument than any Ihave seen, 80. Why 
do we also stand in jeopardy every hourP What motive, if there is no hope beyond, can we 
apostles have for placing ourselves in constant peril by preaching the resurrection? 81. I protest, 
. . « » Idie daily. Iamin daily peril of death. 32. If, after the manner of men. Speaking 
humanly. I fought with beasts at Ephesus. Encountered furious opposition, like the rush of 
wild beasts. The allusion is hardly to be taken literally. If he had been thrown to wild beasts at 
some record would have been made of it in the record in Acts of his sojourn at Ephesus, 
Besides, a Roman citizen was preserved from that manner of death. What doth it profit meP All 
his sufferings are to no purpose if the dead rise not. Let us eat, drink, etc. An Epicurean maxim, 
a proverbial saying. 84. Awake to righteousness. Such an error leads to Epicurean sensuality. 


Ephesus, 


124 I. CORINTHIANS. 


[Ch. XV. 





some have not the knowledge of God: I speak this 
to your shame. 

35 But some man will say,2 How are the dead 
raised up? and with what body do they come? 

36 Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not 
quickened, except it die. 

37 And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not 
that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may 
chance of wheat, or of some other grain: 

38 But® God giveth it a body as it hath pleased 
him, and to every seed his own body. 

39 All flesh zs not the same flesh: but there 7s one 
kind of flesh of men, another flesh of beasts, anoth- 
er of fishes, and another of birds. 

40 There are also celestial bodies, and bodies 
terrestrial: but the glory of the celestial 7s one, and 
the glory of the terrestrial 7s another. 

41 There ts one glory of the sun, and another 
glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; 
for one star differeth from another star in glory. 

42 So? also zs the resurrection of the dead. it is 
sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption: 

43 It® is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory: 
it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power: 

44 It is sown in a natural body, it is raised in a 
spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there 
is a spiritual body. 

a Ezek. 87:3. 


6 John 12:24. ¢ Psa. 104:14. 








d Dan. 12:3; Matt. 13:43. 


for some have no knowl- 
edge of God: I speak this 
to move you to shame. 

But some one will say, 85 
How are the dead raised? 
and with what manner of 
body do they come? Thou 36 
foolish one, that which 
thou thyself sowest is not 
quickened, except it die: 
and that which thou sow- 37 
est, thou sowest not the 
body that shall be, but a 
bare grain, it may chance 
of wheat, or of some other 
kind; but God giveth it a 38 
body even as it pleased 
him, and to each seed a 
body of its own. All flesh 39 
is not the same flesh: but 
there is one jlesh of men, 
and another flesh of 
beasts, and another flesh 
of birds, and another of 
fishes. There are also ce- 40 
lestial bodies, and bodies 
terrestrial: but the glory 
of the celestial is one, and 
the glory of the terrestrial 
is another. There is one 
glory of the sun, and an- 
other glory of the moon, 
and another glory of the 
stars: for one star differ- 
eth from another star in 
glory. Soalso is the res- 
urrection of the dead. It 
is Sown in corruption; it is 
raised in incorruption: it 
is sown in dishonour; it is 
raised in glory; it 1s sown 
in weakness ;it is raised in 
power ;itis sown a natural 44 
body; itis raised a spirit- 
ual body. If there is a 
natural body, there is also 


e Phil. 3:21. 


43 





Shake it off, that you sin not. Some have no knowledge of God. Such errors can only spring from 


ignorance of God and his power to raise men. 


35-41. But some will say. But two difficulties are raised: How are the dead raised up? What. 


Kind of a body do they have? 86. Thou fool. The idea is, slow of understanding. Why cannot you 
learn the lesson nature teaches? The grain that thou sowest has to die and be dissolved before it comes 
forth in anew life. So the body must die and be dissolved. 87. And that which thou sowest,. 
etc. We sow, not the plant that comes forth, but only a bare seed. 88. But God givethita body, 
etc. To the seed planted God gives a new body, the stalk of wheat or corn, or whatever it may be. 
This new body bears no outward resemblance to the seed planted. 89. All flesh is not the same. 
All the different animals haye bodies unlike, and suited to their conditions. 40. There are also 
celestial bodies and terrestrial. These, too, have forms and glories, unlike, and suited to 
their condition, For instance: 41. Thesun has his own peculiar form and glory. So of the moon, 
and the stars. The thought is, that to every condition is given a form suited to that condition. Now an 
application is made of this thought in verse 42. 

42-50. So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown. Planted in burial in corruption. 
It goes to decay, It is raised in incorruption. With a new body suited to the new condition of 
existence, which is incorruptible; cannot decay. 48. It is sown in dishonor. The dead body is 
repulsive, becomes offensive, and we bury it out of sight. It is raised in glory. Has a glorious. 
beauty. Sown in weakness. All its powers exhausted. Raised in power. Endowed with 
heavenly energy. 44. Sown a natural body. A fleshly body with animal life. Raised a spiritual 
body. A body whose life principle is the spirit. Nota fleshly body, but a spiritual existence. We 
cannot comprehend the nature of this existence, but we can know that it is nota body of flesh, bones, 
and blood; perhaps not more material than the forms of the angels. See verse 50. 45. The first. 
man,Adam, was made a living soul. Gen.2:7, From him came our natural life. The last Adam. 


Ch. XV.] I. CORINTHIANS. 


45 And so it is written, The first man Adam? was 
made a living soul, the” last Adam was made® a 
quickening spirit. 

46 Howbeit that was not first which is spiritual, 
but that which is natural; and afterward that which 
is spiritual. 

47 The‘ first man zs of the® earth, earthy; the 
second man 7s the Lord from? heaven. 

48 As zis the earthy, such are they also that are 
earthy; and as zs the heavenly, such are they also 
that are heavenly. 

49 And® as we have borne the image of the 
earthy,' we shall also bear the image of the heaven- 





y- 

50 Now this I say, brethren, that) flesh and blood 

‘cannot inherit the kingdom of God; neither doth 
corruption inherit incorruption. 

51 Behold, I shew you a mystery; We* shall not 
all sleep,! but we shall all be changed, 

52 Ina moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at 
the last trump; (for™ the trumpet shall sound; ) and 
the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall 
be changed. 

53 For this corruptible must put on incorrup- 
tion, and® this mortal must put on immortality. 

54 So when this corruptible shall have put on in- 
corruption, and this mortal shall have put on 
immortality, then shall be brought to pass the say- 
ing that is written, Death® is swallowed up in vic- 
tory. fi 





125 


a spiritual body. So also 45 
itis written, The first man 
Adam became a living 
soul. The last Adam be- 
came a life-giving spirit. 
Howbeit jthat is not first 46 
which is spiritual, but 
that which is natural; then 
that which is spiritual. 
The first man is of the 47 
earth, earthy: the second 
man is of heaven. As is 48 
the earthy, such are they 
also that are earthy: and 
as is the heavenly, such 
are they also that are 
heavenly. And as we 49 
have borne the image of 
the earthy, we shall also 
bear the image of the 
heavenly. 

Now this Isay, brethren, 50 
that flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the kingdom of 
God; neither doth corrup- 
tion inherit incorruption. 
Behold, I tell you a mys- 51 
tery: We shall not all 
sleep, but we shall all be 
changed, in a moment, in 52 
the twinkling of an eye, at 
the last trump: for the 
trumpet shall sound, and 
the dead shall be raised in- 
corruptible, and we shall 
be changed. For this cor- 53 
ruptible must put on incor- 
ruption, and this mortal 
must ree on immortality. 
But when this corruptible 54 
shall have put on incor- 
ruption, and this mortal 
shall have put on immor- 
tality, then shall come to 
pass the saying that is 
written, Death is swallow- 


® 


rn nen ae! 
a Gen. 2:7. bRom. 5:14. cJohn 5:21; 6:33; Phil. 2:21; Col. 3:4. dJohn 3:31. e Gen. 3:19. J John 3:18. 
g Phil. 8:20. h Gen. 5:3. i Rom. 8:29; Phil. 3:21; 1John 3:2. y Matt 16:17; John 3:3,5. 
kil Thes. 4:15. 1 Phil. 3:21. m Matt. 24:31. 22 Cor. 5:4. o Isa. 25:8; Rev. 20:14. 





‘Christ, of whom Adam was atype. A quickening spirit. By giving life to the dead, and imparting 
spiritual existence. 46. Howbeit that is not first which is spiritual. The first Adam came 
before the second Adam. The natural body which proceeds from the first Adam is our tabernacle first ; 
after this life comes the “spiritual body,” which the second Adam gives. 47. The first man is of 
the earth. Was fashioned out of the earth. Genesis 2:7. The second man is the Lord who 
came from heaven. 48. As is the earthy. All have earthly bodies like that of Adam. As is 
the heavenly. When we are raised to heaven we shall have spiritual bodies like Christ’s, not hke 
the body he received from Mary, but the glorious body in which he appears to saints and angels on 
high. Do we ask what body we shall have? . It shall be like Christ’s glorious body. See Phil. 3: 21. 
Not of flesh and blood, for (verse 50) flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God. If of 
flesh and blood, our bodies would be corruptible, and would not be suited to the eternal kingdom. 
51-58. Behold, I tell youa mystery. I disclose to you a secret of which you have had, hitherto, 
no knowledge. We shall not all sleep. There will be some on the earth who shall be alive when 
Christ comes. But we shall all be changed. The living who meet Christ, as well as the dead who 
are raised up. All shall be made immortal and incorruptible. 52. In a moment. The change will 
be instantaneous. Atthelasttrump. See 1 Thess. 4: 16. The trumpet shallsound. The signal 
for the close of all earthly things. See Matt. 24:31. 53. For this corruptible. For this corruptible 
body must give place to the incorruptible body; the mortal frame to an immortal one. One must be 
“‘put off,” the other “put on.” See2Cor.5:2. 54. Then shall be brought to pass the saying. 


126 ; I. CORINTHIANS. 


(Ch. XVI. 











55 O? death, where ¢s thy sting? O grave, where 
as thy victory? 

56 The sting of death zs sin; and the” strength of 
sin zs the law. 

57 But? thanks de to God, which giveth us* the 
victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. 

58 Therefore, my beloved brethren,* be ye sted- 
fast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of 
the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that*t your labour 
is not in vain in the Lord. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


Concluding Words. 


The First Day of the Week. 
Various 


SUMMARY.—The Collection for the Saints. 
His Work at Ephesus. Timothy Commended to Them. 
Friendly Admonitions. Closing Salutations. 


1 Now concerning® the collection for the saints, 
as I have given order to the churches of Galatia, 
even so do ye. 

2 Upon? the first day of the week let every one 
of you lay by him in store, as God hath prospered 





ed up invictory. O death, 55 
where is thy victory? O 
death, where is thy sting? 
The sting of death is sin; 
and the power of sin is the 
law: but thanks be to God, 
which giveth us the vic- 
tory through our Lord 
Jesus Christ. Wherefore, 
my beloved brethren, be 
ye stedfast, unmovable, 
always abounding in the 
work of the Lord, foras- 
much as ye know that your 
labor is not vain in the 
Lord. 


56 
57 


58 


CHAPTER XVI. 


Now concerning the col- 1 
lection for the saints, as I 
gave order to the churches 
of Galatia, so also do ye. 
Upon the first day of the 2 
week let each one of you 
lay by him in store, as he 
may prosper, that no col- 





3 lections be mad 
him, that there be no gatherings when I come. ra aca eur oo 





@ Hos. 13:14. 6 Rom. 4:15. ¢ Rom. 7:25. @1John5:4. e2 Chron. 15:7. J Isa. 3:10; Rev. 22:12. 


g Acts 11: 29; 
24:17; Rom. 15:26; 2 Cor. 8:4, A Proy. 3:27,28; Luke 24:1; Acts 20:7; Rey. 1:10. 





—— 





Isaiah 25:8. This is the final victory, the victory over death. 55. O death, where is thy sting P 
This is quoted from Hosea 13:14. It is here the triumphant shout of the apostle as he sees by faith the 
final victory over death. 56. The sting of death is sin. It is sin that gives death his power to 
sting and destroy. See Romans 6: 23. The power of sin is thelaw. The law, broken, is sin, and 
when this law is consciously broken the conscience is wounded. When a moral law is broken, 
moral death follows. If there was no law of any kind, there would be no sin, no wounded consciences, 
no moral death. 57. Thanks be to God. For the victory over sin and death through Christ, 
58. Therefore . . be ye stedfast, unmoveable. Firm as arock, deyoted to Christian life, 
for their “faith is not vain.” Their labor is not in vain in the Lord. Jesus Christ is The Resur- 
rection and the Life. The hope of immortality hath sure foundations. 

1-4. Concerning the collection for the saints. The collection for the poor saints at Jeru- 
salem is referred to more than once in Acts. It was first called for when “a great dearth’? came |upon 
the land (Acts 11: 28-30), The chtrch at Jerusalem had been impoverished by the great liberality in its 
first years, and by the persecutions which followed. See also Acts 24:17. References to this collection 
are found in Rom. 15: 26; 2 Cor. 8: 1,2; 2 Cor. 9: 1,2. To the churches of Galatia. The directions 
to the churches of Galatia on this subject have not been preserved. Such hints as this and the refer- 
ence to a lost letter to the church of Corinth (5: 9), show that all that Paul wrote has not come down to 
us. 2. Upon the first day of the week. This shows that the first day of the week was set apart 
and regarded by the church. Acts 20:7, shows that the church assembled to break bread on that day. 
Let every one of you lay by him in store. The usual view is that every one was directed to set 
aside something on the Lord’s day and keep it until Paul came. This view is sanctioned by the trans- 
lations and most of the commentators. Macknight renders: ‘On the first day of the week, let each 
one of you lay somewhat by itself, putting it into the treasury.” I believe Macknight is right; for 
(1) there were to be no collections when Paul came. That implies that the money was to be placed in 
the treasury. Otherwise, it would have to be collected. (2) Thesaurizoon, rendered in the Common 
Version “‘in store,” is a present participle, meaning, literally, “‘putting into the thesaurus,” or treasury. 
(3) All church history testifies that the early church took up weekly collections on the first day of the 
week. See Pliny’s Letter to the Emperor Trajan. (4) We know, from Acts 21: 7, and from all early 
church history, that the church met on the first day of the week. It only remains to add that par? 


Ch, XVI} I. CORINTHIANS. 








3 And when I come,* whomsoever ye shall ap- 
prove by your letters, them will I send to bring 
your liberality unto Jerusalem. 

4 And if it be meet that I go also, they shall go 
with me. 

5 Now I will come unto you when I” shall pass 
through Macedonia: (for I shall pass through 
Macedonia: ) 

6 And it may be that I will abide, yea, and winter 
with you, that ye may* bring me on my journey 
whithersoever I go. 

7 For I will not see you now by the way; but I 
trust to tarry a while with you, if the Lord permit. 

8 But I will tarry at Ephesus until Pentecost. 

9 For* a great door and effectual is opened unto 
me, and® there are many adversaries. 

10 Now, if Timotheus come, see that he may be 
with you without fear: fort he worketh the work of 
the Lord, as I also do. 

11 Let* no man therefore despise him; but con- 
duct him forth in peace, that he may come unto me; 
for I look for him with the brethren. 

12 As touching ow" brother Apollos, I greatly 
desired him to come unto you with the brethren: 
but his will was not at all to come at this time; but 
he will come when he shall have convenient time. 

13 Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you 
like men, be strong. 


6 Acts 19:21; 2 Cor. 1:16. 
Jf Rom. 16:21. g1 Tim. 4:12, 





a2 Cor. 8:19. c Acts 15:33 17:15; 21:5. 








d Acts 14:27; 2 Cor. 2:12; Rey. 3:8. 
A Acts 18:24; 1 Cor. 1:12; Titus 3:13. 


127 


come. And when I arrive, 3 
whomsoever ye shall ap- 
prove by letters, them will 
I send to carry your boun- 
ty unto Jerusalem: and if 4 
it be meet for me to go 
also, they shall go with 
me. But Iwill come unto 5 
you, when I shall have 
assed through Mace- 
onia; for I do pass 
through Macedonia; but 6 
with you it may be that I 
shall abide, or even win- 
ter, that ye may set me 
forward on my ieurney 
whithersoeverI go. Forl 7 
do not wish to see you now 
by the way; for I hope to 
tarry a while with you, if 
the Lord permit. But I 8: 
will tarry at Ephesus until 
Pentecost; for a reat 9 
door and effectual is 
opened unto me, and there 
are many adversaries. 

Now if Timothy come, 10: 
see that he be with you 
without fear; for he work- 
eth the work of the Lord, 
as I also do: Jet no man 11. 
therefore despise him. 
But set him forward on his 
journey in peace, that he 
may come unto me: for I 
expect him with the breth- 
ren. But as touching 12: 
Apollos the brother, I be- 
sought him much to come 
unto you with the breth- 
ren; and it was not at all 
his will to come now; but 
he will come when he shall 
have opportunity. 

Watch ye, stand fast in 13: 
the faith, quit you like 








é Acts 19:96. 


——— 


heauto, rendered by the translators ‘‘by him,’ is rendered with equal correctness, “by itself.” Its 
form is that of the neuter reflexive pronoun. As God hath prospered him. Each week every one 
is to give according to ability. 8. Whomsoever ye shall approve. The church should select its. 
own messengers, giving them letters as credentials. He lets the Corinthians choose the bearers of 
their own bounty. 4. If it be meet that I go. He did not then know whether he would go or not. 
In the outcome he did go (Acts 19: 21; 20: 3). 

5-9. I will come unto you, etc. He outlines his plans. He probably wrote in the spring. He 
intends to visit the churches in Macedonia, and then, perhaps, winter at Corinth. This he did, spend- 
ing three months (Acts 20: 2,3), 6. That ye may set me forward on my journey. Give him 
aid, and perhaps company in going elsewhere. '7. For I will not now see you by the way. He 
will not sail direct across the 4gean Sea to Corinth, and go from thence to Macedonia. He would haye 
to hurry away from Corinth too soon, unless he went to Macedonia first. 8. I will tarry at Ephesus 
until Pentecost. He was then writing before Pentecost, which came in the latter part of the spring. 
9. For a great and effectual door is opened. His ministry in Ephesus was very successful. See 
Acts, chapter 19. There are many adversaries. Demetrius and his fellow-craftsmen had probably 
begun their agitation. ; 

10-12. Now if Timothy come, etc. We learn (Acts 19: 22) that Timothy and Erastus had been 
sent to Macedonia, and Timothy (1 Cor. 4: 17) was instructed to stop at Corinth on the way. Paul asks 
that he be kindly received. 11. Letno man despise him. He was a young man. See 1 Tim, 4: 12, 
I expect him with the brethren. That he came with them, as expected, is seen from 2 Cor. 1:1. 
12. As touching our brother Apollos. Apollos was then at Ephesus when Paul wrote. I greatly 
desired him to come unto you with the brethren. Possibly with Timothy and Erastus. See 
note on verse 10. For some reason Apollos was averse to visiting Corinth at that time. 


128 I. CORINTHIANS. © 


[(ChXVI. 





14 Let all your things be done with charity. 

15 I beseech you, brethren, (ye know the house 
of Stephanas, that it is the first-fruits of Achaia, 
and that they have addicted themselves to the min- 
istry of the saints,) 

16 That ye submit yourselves unto such, and to 
every one that helpeth with ws, and laboureth. 

17 I am glad of the coming of Stephanas, and 
Fortunatus, and Achaicus: for® that which was 
lacking on your part they have supplied. 

18 For they have refreshed my spirit and yours: 
therefore acknowledge ye them that are such. 

19 The* churches of Asia salute you. Aquila and 
Priscilla salute you much in the Lord,? with the 
church that is in their house. 

20 All the brethren greet you. 
another with an holy kiss. 

21 The salutations of me Paul with mine own 
hand. 

22 If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ,° 
let him be Anathema*t Maran-atha. 

23 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with 


Greet ye one 





men, be strong. Let all 14 
that ye do be done in love. 
Now I beseech you, 15 
brethren (ye know the 
house of Stephanas, that 
it is the first fruits of 
Achaia, and that they have 
set themselves to minister 
unto the saints), that ye 
also be in subjection unto 
such, and to every one 
that helpeth in the work 
and laboureth. And I re- 
joice at the coming of 
Stephanas and Fortunatus 
and Achaicus: for that 
which was lacking on your 
part they supplied. For 18 
they refreshed my spirit 
and yours; acknowledge 
ye therefore them that are 


uch. 

The churches of Asia sa- 19 
Inte you. Aquila and 
Prisca salute you much in 
the Lord, with the church 
that is in their house. All 20 
the brethren salute you. 
Salute one another with a 
holy kiss. 

The salutation of me 21 
Paul with mine own hand. 

If any man loveth not the 22 
Lord, let him be anathema. 
Maranatha. The grace of 23 
the Lord Jesus Christ be 
with you. My love be with 24 


16 


you. you all in Christ Jesus. 
24 My love be with you all in Christ Jesus. |*"°™ 
Amen. | 


The first epistle to the Corinthians was written from Philippi 
by Stephanas, and Fortunatus, and Achaicus, and Timo- 
theus. 








a@2Cor. 11:9. 6 Col. 8:4. c Acts 16:6; 19:10; Rev. 1:4,11. d Rom. 16:5; Phile. 2. 


PB rrer a, e Gal. 1:8,9; Heb. 10:26. 
ude 14,15. 





18, 14. Watch ye. Be on the watch; a matter very needful in as gay and corrupt a city as 
Corinth, 14. Let alli be done in love. Compare chapter 13. This would prevent the 
divisions which he had rebuked in chapters 1-4. 

15-20. I beseech you, brethren (ye know the house of Stephanas). Paul had baptized the 
household of Stephanas, See i Cor. 1:16, They were his first converts at Corinth. 16. That ye 
submit yourselves to such. In view of the fact that they were devoted to the ministry. 17. Iam 
glad of the coming of Stephanas. Stephanas is named in 1: 15, and above in verse 15. The other 
two are not named elsewhere. These three doubtless brought to Paul the letter referred to in 7: 1, and 
probably carried back the present letter. 19. The churches of Asia salute you. Of the Roman 
province of Asia, of which Ephesus was the capital. Seven of the churches of “‘Asia” are named in the 
Book of Revelation. Aquila and Priscilla salute you. We first meet this excellent pair at 
Corinth (Acts 18: 2); afterwards they had. gone to Ephesus (Acts 18: 26). With the church in their 
house. The early church had no church buildings, and wouldsbe compelled to meet often in private 
houses. The house of Aquila and Priscilla was sucha place of meeting. See note on Romans 16; 23. 
20. Greet ye one another with a holy kiss. See note on Romans 16: 16. 

21-24. The salutation of me, Paul, with mine own hand. Paul’s letters were written by an 
amanuensis (Rom. 16: 22), but he always added a salutation in his own hand as a proof of genuineness 
(2 Thess. 3:17). 2 Thess. 2: 2,implies that spurious letters were circulated. 22. If any man love 
not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema. That is, accursed. Maranatha. This 
méans, ‘‘Our Lord cometh.” It is likely that he means, “If any church member love not, etc.” He is 
not speaking of the outside world. 


INTRODUCTION TO SECOND CORINTHIANS. 


The second Letter to the Church at Corinth is the supplement of the first. It is due 
to the same circumstances which called out the first, and to the effects that were 
produced in the church at Corinth by the receipt of the first letter. We can almost be 
thankful for the disorders which occasioned these two letters, not only on account of 
the rich fund of practical instruction which they contain, but on account of the picture 
which they present of a Gentile Church, composed of those who had so recently been 
heathen, in the first century of Christianity. They recall to us the immorality which 
had to be overcome, the obstacles in the way of a Christian life, and the mighty 
triumph which the gospel achieved over human nature itself in establishing the 
spiritual reign of Christ where the sensuality of heathen worship had before pre- 
vailed. 

The first letter was written at Ephesus in the spring of A. D. 57; the second was 
written a few months later at some point in Macedonia where Paul had journeyed to 
visit the churches of that province before extending his tour to Corinth. We learn 
from the nineteenth and twentieth chapters of Acts that not long after the first letter 
was written, Demetrius and his fellow-craftsman aroused the terrible riot at Ephesus 
in which Paul so nearly lost his life (2 Cor. 1: 8-10), and that immediately after, at the 
urgency of the brethren, he started on his long contemplated journey to visit the 
churches of Europe. He had expected to meet Titus at Troas with word from Corinth 
concerning the effect of his first letter and was greatly disappointed when he did not 
find him there (2 Cor. 2:13). Hence, although a fine opening for planting the gospel 
was presented, he pressed on to Macedonia. Here he met Titus, who wag on his way 
to him, and was greatly rejoiced when he learned that his letter had been well received 
and his commands obeyed (2 Cor. 7: 5-7). Still the circumstances required another 
letter before his coming and the second letter was written, not only to express his joy 
over the better state of things in the church, but in order to convey further counsels. 

This Epistle naturally divides itself into three parts. In the jirst part, embracing 
chapters 1-7, the Apostle portrays his feelings over the condition of matters in Corinth, 
his anxiety, and his relief after the coming of Titus; in chapters 8, 9, the second part, 
he takes up the great collection of the Gentile churches for the poor at Jerusalem on 
which he had so deeply set his heart; in the third part, chapters 10-13, he repels the 
insinuations of Judaizing teachers who were seeking, not only in Corinth but every- 
where, to destroy Paul’s influence so as to bring the churches under the bondage of the 
Jewish law. In this section he presents those wonderful details concerning what his 
service of Christ had cost him in earthly sufferings. The whole letter is written in the 
expectation of soon being at Corinth, an expectation which we know from Acts, 


chapter 20, was realized. 
eae (129) 


THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAUL 


TO THE 


CORINTHIANS. 


CHAPTER I. 


Paul’s Anxiety Over the Corinthian Church. 


SUMMARY.—Salutations. Paul’s Recent Danger in Asia. His Conscien- 
tious Sincerity in Preaching the Gospel at Corinth. An Answer to 
Those Who Criticised His Change of Plans in Coming to Corinth. 


1 Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of 
God, and Timothy our brother, unto the church of 
God which is at Corinth, with all* the saints which 
are in all Achaia: 

2 Grace” be to you, and peace, from God our 
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. 

3 Blessed* be God, even the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ,’ the Father of mercies, and the God 
of all comfort; 

4 Who® comforteth us in all our tribulation, that 
we may be able to comfort them which are in any 
trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are 
comforted of God. ; 

5 For as‘ the sufferings of Christ abound in us, 
so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ. 

6 And whether we be afflicted, zé® ¢s for your 
consolation and salvation, which is effectual in the 
enduring of the same sufferings which we also 
suffer: or whether we be comforted, ¢¢ 7s for your 
consolation and salvation. 

7 And our hope of you ts stedfast, knowing, that® 
as ye are partakers of the sufferings, so shall ye be 
also of the consolation. 


a Col. 1:2. 





OPhil. 1:2. cEph. 1:3. d Ex. 34:6. 





e2Thes. 2:16. f Acts 9:4. 


CHAPTER I. 


Paul,an apostle of Christ 1 
Jesus through the will of 
God, and Timothy our 
brother, unto the church 
of God which is at Corinth, 
with all the saints which 
are in the whole of Achaia: 
Grace to you and peace 2 
from God our Father and 
the Lord Jesus Christ. 

Blessed be the God and 3 
Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, the Father of mer- 
cies and God of all com- 
fort; who comforteth us in 4 
all our affliction, that we 
may be able to comfort 
them that are in any afflic- 
tion, through the comfort 
wherewith we ourselves 
are comforted of God. For 
as the sufferings of Christ 
abound unto us, even so 
our comfort also abound- 
eth through Christ. But 6 
whether we be afflicted, it 
is for your comfort and 
salvation; or whether we 
be comforted, it is for your 
comfort, which worketh in 
the patient enduring of 
the same sufferings which 
we also suffer: and our 7 
hope for you is stedfast; 
knowing that, as ye are 

artakers of the suffer- 
ings, so also are ye of the 


n 


g 2 Cor. 4:15. hk Rom. 8:17. 





1-7. Paul and Timothy our brother. See notes on 1 Cor. 1:1. Timothy had been 
sent to Corinth along with the First Letter (see 1 Cor. 4: 17), and had now returned to Paul. As he had 
so recently been on a special mission to Corinth, he joins in the salutation. With all the saints 
in the whole of Achaia. That is, in the whole of Greece, Achaia being the Roman name of the 
province. Corinth was the Roman capital. Hence it seems that other churches already existed in the 
province. We know of two, Athens and Cenchrex, See Rom.16:1. 2. Grace be to you, etc. See 
note on1Cor.1:3. 4. Who comforteth us in all our tribulation. He who has bad tribulation 
and has learned the comfort of faith in God is best fitted to comfort others. 5. For as the suffer- 
ings of Christ abound inus. Christ suffers with his saints when they suffer for him. See Acts 9: 4, 
5. Hence, when Paul endured affliction for Christ, ‘‘the sufferings of Christ abounded” in him. But 
Christ comforts those who thus suffer (John 16: * Ao Christ suffers in the person of his servants, but 


Chi] Il. CORINTHIANS. 131 


8 For we would not, brethren, have you ignorant | comfort. For we would 8 
5 not have you ignorant, 


of* our trouble which came to us in Asia, that we| brethren, concerning ouz 


were pressed out of measure, above strength, inso- Ta athe 


much that we despaired even of life: down exceedingly, beyond 
our power, insomuch that 


9 But we had the sentence of death in ourselves, | Ge oop me psomaeh that 


b : . ea, we ourselves have 9 
that we should not? trust in ourselves, but in God ad. the answer of death 


which raiseth the dead; within ourselves, that we 
s our- 


10 Who* delivered us from so great a death, and | selves, but in God which 

a eos = . raiseth the dead: who de- 10 
doth deliver; in whom we trust that yet he will de- | j2seih the de Of ee aoate 
liver us: cent, and wa deliver: on 
, . ' whom we ave set our 

11 Ye also4 helping together by prayer for us, | hope that he will also still 


‘at @ 2 = deliver us; ye also helping 11 
that,° for the gift bestowed upon us by the means of together on our hehalt be 


m ersons, thanks may be giv your supplication; that, 
any persons, thanks may be given by many on our Tonthegtliece ec 


behalf. us by means of many, 


Cra Cie eer 7 c thanks may be given b 
12 For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our many persons on our ie 
alt, 


i in simplicity’ an dly si i 
conscience, that in simplicityt and go y sincerity, For uorielerran anole 


not® with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of Giod, | the testimony of our con: 


P > 7 science, that in holiness 
we have had our conversation in the world, and|s¢¢ sinocrity of Coane 


more abundantly to you-ward. in fleshly wisdom but in 
the grace of God, we be- 


13 For we write none other things unto you than | pero eo the 


+ world, and more abund- 
what ye read or acknowledge, and I trust ye shall so Mvserrpabectc eee 


acknowledge even to the end; write none other things 
unto you, than what ye 


14 As ye also have acknowledged us in part," that | eg on tan acknowledge, 


PATDICL i na and I hope ye will ac- 
we are your rejoicing, even as ye also are ours 10 knowledge unto the end: 


the day of our Lord Jesus. as also ye did acknowl- 14 
i edge us in part, that we 


@ Acts 19:23; 1 Cor. 16:9. 6Jer.17:5,7. c2Pet.2:9. d Rom. 15:30; Phil. 1:9; Phile. 22. e2 Cor. 4:15. 
f2 Cor. 2:17. g1 Cor. 2:4. h2Cor. 5:12. i Phil. 2: 16; 4:1; 1 Thes. 2:19. 

















forgets not his promise to be-with them always. 6. But whether we be afflicted. These words 
concerning suffering are introductory to an allusion to what he had so recently suffered at Ephesus 
(verse 8). His example under affliction would help them in affliction to endure, and his deliverance 
would fill them with hope of a like deliverance. 

8-11. Wewould not, brethren, have you ignorant of our trouble. I believe, in opposition 
to many commentators, that the great trial at Ephesus, caused by Demetrius and his fellow-craftsmen, 
is referred to. See Acts, chapter19. Asia. The Roman province of Asia, embracing the western part 
of Asia Minor. Ephesus was its capital. We despaired even of life. It is evident that the record 
in Acts does not give all the dangers that threatened Paul in Ephesus. His precipitate departure from 
Ephesus immediately after the riot shows that he was in danger. See Acts 20:1. He was not the inan 
to exaggerate his danger. The allusions here, and in 1 Cor. 15: 31, 32, show that he met with extreme 
peril. 9. We had the sentence of death in ourselves. The meaning seems to be that he felt 
that the time had come for him to die, and his reprieve from death was, as it were, a resurrection from 
death by the providence of God. 10. Who delivered us dut of so great adeath. This points 
to some remarkable peril and signal deliverance. Itis probable that Acts 20: 30, 31, hints atit. 11. Ye 
also helping, ete. He recognizes the aid he had received from the prayers of the Corinthian church 
raised in his behalf. The prayers of many persons secured the gift of his deliverance. Hence 
many could give thanks for his escape. 

12-14. For our rejoicing is this. Rather, as in the Revision, “our glorying.”” He could boast 
that in his conduct everywhere, and at Corinth as well, he had acted with purity of purpose, integrity, 
and under the guidance of God. He appeals to his singleness of purpose, because a charge had been 
made against him, which he answers below (verses 15-19), 18. For we write none other things. 
The charge seems to have been that he was ambiguous in what he wrote (verse 17). Hence he insists 
that he writes plainly, and that they read, understand, and accept what he writes. 14. As also ye 
have acknowledged us in part. All but a faction acknowledged him as an apostle and rejoiced in 


his labors. ‘ ss P é 
15-24. In this confidence. Of their acknowledgment of his apostleship and rejoicing in him. 


132 II. CORINTHIANS. (Ch. I. 


, : : c lorying, even as 
15 And in this confidence? I was minded to come a ah cat be oo 


- 2 b 
é secon ne- | day of our Lord Jesus. 
unto you before, that ye might have” a second be of our Lord Jesus. 
fit ; was minded y Eee 
i i : unto you, that ye migh 
16 And to pass by you into Macedonia, and* to| pate you, that ye might 6 


come again out of Macedonia unto you, and of you by you to as into Mace- 
Tae 
to be brought on my way toward Judea. Macedohin toi genie were 


i 7 you, and of you to be set 
17 When I therefore was thus minded, did I use | ¥ou, anc ph bh Rea 


; : y 
lightness? or the things that I purpose, do I pur-| unto Judwa. When Ithere- 17 


u ‘ fore was thus minded, did 
pose? according to the flesh, that with me there|Y shew fickleness? or the 


a ; 7 ; AV ? things that I purpose, do I 
should be yea, yea, and nay, nay! en Snes fee 
18 But as God ¢s true, our word toward you was| tiesh, that with me there 
should be the yea yea and 

not yea and nay. - the nay nay? Butas God is 18 
19 For® the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was toe eee 

preached among you by us, even by me, and? Sil- For the Son of God, Jesus 19 

0 ’ nYist, Who W Teac, 

vanus, and Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in among you by naeoon by 
him was yea ; me and Silvanus and Tim- 
gs ‘ * o othy, was not yea and nay, 

20 For® all the promises of God in him are yea, | but in him is yea. For how 20 


: : many soever be the prom- 
and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us. iags Of. Gad, i eee 


: i : 1 Ww] + 1 the yea: wherefore also 
21 Now he which stablisheth us-with you in thevecwhee ee ee 





Christ, and® has anointed us, zs God; unto ‘the glory of God - 
¢ ro us. ow ne a 
22 Who hath also sealed us, and given the! stablisheth ne OLR wea 
spit 7 ar hrist, and anointed us, is 

earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. Gene eee ee 


23 Moreover, I call God for a record upon my and gave us the earnest of 
] e€ iti r hearts. 
soul,’ that to-spare you I came not as yet unto|”Buttcail God ter a wit- 23 
Corinth ness upon my soul thee i 
‘ ey spare you orbare to 
24 Not for that we have dominion over your come unto Corinth. “Not 24 
. Ct o at we have io s ic 
faith, but are helpers of your joy: for by* faith ye | your faith, but are helpers 
stand of rou joy: for by faith ye 
3 stand. 


a@1Cor. 4:19. 6Rom. 1:11. ¢1Cor. 16:5. d@2Cor. 10:2. e Ex. 3:14; Mark 1:1; Luke 1:35; John 7:58; Acts 9:20; 
Heb. 13:8. fActs 18:5. g Rom. 15:8,9. h1John2:20,27. «Eph. 1:14. j1 Cor. 4:21. & Rom. 11:20; 1 Cor. 15:1. 














Iwas minded to come unto you before. Before going to Macedonia, sailing straight across from 
Ephesus to Corinth. That you might have a second benefit. Two visits, one as Paul went to 
Macedonia, and one on his return. All this is explained in verse 16. 17. When I therefore was 
thus minded, did I use lightnessP Some of his detractors at Corinth had urged from his change 
of plans that he was fickle, or that he made ambiguous promises, and was ready to break them. His 
original plan was probably conveyed in the letter which has not come down to us (1 Cor. 5:9). In 
TCor. 16:5, he declared his change of plans. DoI purpose according to the flesh? Inacarnal 
way, so that there should be a readiness to turn a yea into a nay; that is, no fixed purpose to do as 
promised. 18. Our word . . was not yea and nay. That is, ambiguous and unreliable. 
19. For the Son of God, etc. The idea is that there was no vacillation and uncertainty, about 
Paul’s preaching when he was in Corinth, In him was yea. There was positive affirmation. 
20. For all the promises of God in him are yea. They are sure and positive. 21. Now he 
that stablisheth us with youin Christ. He gives us our stability so that our gospelis yea,sure and 
steadfast. And hath anointed us. With the unction of the Holy Spirit (1 John 2: 20,27). 22. Sealed 
us, The seal was anciently the mark of ownership, In Eph. 1:13 and 4: 30, itis said that the saints 
are sealed by the Holy Spirit. They are thus marked as Christ’s. So here the sealing is by the 
earnest of the Spirit. 23. Moreover . . . tospare youl came not as yet unto Corinth. 
He delayed coming in order to give time for his First Epistle to have effect and bring repentance. Had 
he come before they repented, his coming must haye been in severity. 24. Not that we have 
dominion over your faith. Not that he would exercise a lordship. How different this is from the 
arrogant style of a Catholic bishop!. Paul wishes rather to bea helper. For by faith ye stand. 
Faith in Christ. He hath dominion. Every disciple is accountable to him. Not even an apostle can 
come between. 


Ch. II.] II. CORINTHIANS. 


133 





CHAPTER Il. 


The Repentance of the Corinthians. 


SUMMARY.—Paul’s Affliction Over the Sins at Corinth. His Rebukes 
Caused by His Love for Them. The Excommunication of the Offend- 
er. He to be Forgiven on Repentance. 
His Departure to Macedonia. 


1 But I determined this with myself, that I* 
would not come again to you in heaviness. 

2 Forif I make you sorry who is he then that 
maketh me glad, but the saine which is made sorry 
by me? 

3 And I wrote this same unto you, lest, when I 
came, I should have sorrow from them of whom I 
ought to rejoice; having confidence in you all, that 
my joy is the joy of you all. 

4 For out of much affliction and anguish of heart 
I wrote unto you with many tears; not* that ye 
should be grieved, but that ye might know the love 
which I have more abundantly unto you. 

5 But* if any have caused grief, he hath not® 
grieved me, but in part; that I may not overcharge 
you all. 

6 Sufficient to such a man 7@s this punishment, 
which was inflicted of * many. 

7 Sof that contrariwise, ye ought rather to for- 
give him, and comfort him, lest perhaps such an 
one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow. 

8 Wherefore I beseech you that ye would confirm 
your love toward him: 

6 Gal. 5:10. ¢2 Cor. 7:8:9. @1Cor. 5:1. 





@2 Cor. 12:20. 


Paul’s Uneasiness at Troas. 


e Gal. 4:12. f1 Tim. 5:20. 


CHAPTER II. 


But I determined this for 1 
myself, that I would not 
come again to you with 
sorrow. ForifI make you 2 
sorry, who then is he that 
maketh me glad, but he 
that is made sorry by me? 
And I wrote this very 
thing, lest, when I came, I 
should have sorrow from 
them of whom I ought to 
rejoice; having confidence 
‘in you all, that my joy is 
the joy of youall. For out 4 
of much affliction and an- 
guish of heart I wrote unto 
you with many tears; not 
that ye should be made 
sorry, but that ye might 
know the love which I have 
more abundantly unto you. 

But if any hath caused 5 
sorrow, he hath caused 
sorrow, not to me, but in 
part (that I press not too 
heavily) to you all. Suffi- 6 
cient to such a one is this 
punishment which was in- 
jlicted by the many; so that 7 
contrariwise ye should 
rather forgive him and 
comfort him, lest by any 
means such a one should 
be swallowed up with his 
overmuch sorrow. Where- 8 
fore I beseech you to con- 
firm your love toward him. 


w 


g Gal. 6:1; Heb. 12:12. 








1-4. Iwould not come again to you in heaviness. See verse 23 of last chapter. He desired 


not to come to rebuke, but to rejoice with them. This verse seems to point to a time when he had come 
in “heaviness.” It is generally admitted now by commentators that he did make such a visit, probably 
while preaching at Ephesus, running across the sea, a voyage of two or three days, for a short visit. 
This visit seems to be proved by 2 Cor. 12: 14, 21, and 13:1. See Conybeare and Howson, Vol. II., page 27. 
2. For if I make you sorry, etc. The thought is, your sorrow, because rebuked, gladdens me on 
account of yourrepentance. 3. Iwrotethissame. What he had written in 1 Cor. 16: 5 concerning 
the delay of his coming. He delayed, having confidence that they would reform, so that all could 
rejoice together. 4. For out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote. The First 
Epistle, which rebuked their divisions and immorality. He wrote sharply, but in great sorrow, not to 
grieve them, but to demonstrate his love by his assiduous care of them and rebuke of their sins. 

5-8. If any have caused grief. The reference in this indirect way is to the incestuous person 
named in1Cor.5:1. It was not Paul, only in part, that this man had injured and grieved, but the 
whole church. Overcharge you all. Lay too heavy charges on you. 6. Sufficient to such a 
man is this punishment. The excommunication of the offender (1 Cor. 5: 4, 5). Inflicted by the 
many. Literally, by the majority. This shows that the whole church took action, and implies that 
there were dissenters. The command of Paul was endorsed by the action of the church. So ought the 
decision of the officers of a congregation always to be submitted for approval. 7. Ye ought rather 
to forgive him. The Apostle sternly commands excommunication of the offender, but tenderly 
enjoins forgiveness of the penitent sinner. 8. I beseech you to confirm your love toward him. 
The object of the discipline was to save (1 Cor. 5:5). Since it had had the desired effect, the offender 


should be restored. 


134 II. CORINTHIANS. 


(Ch. IL. 





9 For to this end also did I write, that I might 
know the proof of you, whether ye be obedient in 
all things. 

10 To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also: 
-for if I forgave any thing, to whom I forgave 7¢, for 
your sakes forgave I z¢ in the person of Christ; 

11 Lest* Satan should get an advantage of us: for 
we are not ignorant of his devices. 

12 Furthermore,” when I[ came to Troas to preach 
Christ’s gospel, and a door was opened unto me of 
the Lord, 

13. I had no rest in my spirit, because I found not 
Titus my brother: but, taking my leave of them, I 
went from thence into Macedonia. 

14 Now thanks de unto God, which always caus- 
eth us to triumph in Christ, and maketh manifest 
the savour of his knowledge by us in every place. 

15 For we are unto God a sweet savour of Christ, 
in them that are saved, and in them that perish: 

16 To the one we are the savour of death unto 
death; and to the other the savour of life unto life: 
and who ¢s sufficient for these things? 

17 For we are not as many, which corrupt the 
word of God: but as of sincerity, but as of God, in 
the sight of God speak we in Christ. 





For to this end also did I 9 
write, that I might know 
the proof of you, whether 
ye are obedient in all 
things. But to whom ye 
forgive anything, I forgive 
also: for what I also have 
forgiven, if I have forgiven 
anything, for your sakes 
have I forgiven it in the 
person of Christ; that no 
advantage may be gained 
over us by Satan: for we 
are not ignorant of his de- 
vices. 

Now when I came to 
Troas for the gospel of 
Christ, and when a door 
was opened unto me in the 
Lord, I had no relief for 13 
my spirit, because I found 
not Titus my brother: but 
taking my leave of them, 

I went forth into Macedo- 
nia. But thanks be unto 14 
God,which always leadeth 
us in triumph in Christ, 
and maketh manifest 
through us the savour of 
his knowledge in every 
place. For we areasweet 15 
savour of Christ unto God, 
in them that are being 
saved, and in them that 
are perishing; to the one a 16 
savour from death unto 
death; to the other a say- 
our from life anto life. 
And who is sufficient for 
these things? For we are 
not as the many, corrupt- 


10 


12 


17 


ing the word of God: but 





a1Pet. 5:8. 6 Acts 16:8; 20:6. 








9-11. For to this end also didI write. One object of his writing was to test their obedience. 
He commanded positively in 1 Corinthians, chapter5. 10. To whom ye forgive anything, I for- 
give also. As your excommunication of the man was my act, so also your restoration of him will be 
myact. Forgave I it in the person of Christ. As Paul acted as the servant of Christ, under his 
direct orders, his official acts represented the Master. 11. Lest Satan should get an advantage 
ofus. Satan would gladly have kept the sinful man in the church; since he has repented, Satan would 
gladly have the church keep him out. 

12-17. WhenI came to Troas to preach Christ’s gospel. See Acts 16: 8 and 20: 5-12. In Acts 
two visits to Troas are named, but the one alluded to here is omitted. Troas was then a large city, 
situated not far from the site of old Troy, and almost within sight of Europe. There is now a small 
village there and extensive ruins. See notes in Acts. A door was opened. An opportunity for the 
gospel. Though he did not tarry now, a little later we find a church there (Acts 20: 5). 18. ITLhad no 
rest in spirit. Because he had expected to meet Titus there and to get news concerning the state of 
affairs at Corinth. Hence he went on soon, hoping to meet him on the way in Macedonia. 14. Now 
thanks be to God. He did meet him there, and heard news that filled him with thankfulness. To 
triumph in Christ. A Roman triumph was given because of victory; God always gave the victory, 
through Christ, in the end. He had feared that Corinth would be an exception. Maketh manifest 
the savor of his knowledge. The figure is that of a sacrifice. A sweet-smelling savor was diffused 
by the offerings. So, through them everywhere, the knowledge of God was made Known, and was 
grateful to the saved. 15. A sweet savor of Christ. This fragrant odor of the gospel was diffused 
both among the saved and the unsaved. 16. To the one we are the savor of death unto death. 
In the triumphal procession, alluded to in verse 14, the captives were led, and when it closed were put 
to death. The fragrant odors of the incense, flowers and sacrifices, were a savor to them of their 
approaching death. So the savor of the gospel is a savor, a sign, an intimation of death to those who 
reject it. And to the other the savor of life. This savor to the saved is a sign of life, and leads to 
eternal life. Who is sufficient for these things? He seems to exclaim in astonishment that such 
results should follow human preaching. 17. We are not as many which corrupt the word of 


Char) II. CORINTHIANS. 





CHAPTER III. 


The Two Covenants Compared. 
SUMMARY.—Paul’s Letter of Commendation. The New Covenant and 
the Covenant of the Letter; or the Law and the Gospel. The First 

Written on Tables of Stone; Is a Ministration of Death; Was 

Glorious, But Is Done Away. That Which Remaineth, The New 

Covenant, Far More Glorious. The Veil Over the Faee of Moses a 

Type of the Blindness of Israel. The Transforming Power of the 

Gospel. 

1 Do* we begin again to commend ourselves? or 
need we, as some others, epistles” of commendation 
to you, or letters of commendation from you? 

2 Ye° are our epistle written in our hearts, 
known and read of all men: 

3 Forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared to be 
the epistle of Christ, ministered by* us, written not 
with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; 
not? in tables of stone, but‘ in fleshly tables of the 
heart. 

4 And such trust have we through Christ to God- 
ward: ; 

5 Not® that we are sufficient of ourselves to think 
any thing as of ourselves: but our sufficiency és of 
God; 

6 Who also hath made us able ministers of! the 
new testament; not of! the letter, but of the spirit: 
fork the letter killeth, but! the spirit giveth life. 





a2Cor. 5:12. 6 Acts 18:17. 
36:26. gJohn 15: 5. 


God. The Greek figure is taken 
There were those at Corinth, Judaizing teachers, 
Judaism. 





135 


as of sincerity, but as of 
God, in the sight of God, 
speak we in Christ. 


CHAPTER III. 


Are we beginning again 1 
to commend ourselves? or 
need we, as do some, epis- 
tles of commendation to 
you or from you? Yeare 2 
our epistle, written in our 
hearts, known and read of 


_| all men; being made man- 3 


ifest that ye are an epistle 
of Christ, ministered by 
us, written not with ink, 
but with the Spirit of the 
living God; not in tables 
of stone, but in tables that 
are hearts of flesh. And 4 
such confidence have we 
through Christ to God- 
ward: not that weare suf- 5 
ficient of ourselves, to ac- 
count anything as from 
ourselves; but our suffi- 
ciency is from God; who 6 
also made us sufficient as 
ministers of a new cove- 
nant; not of the letter, but 
of the spirit: forthe letter 
killeth, but the spirit giv- 


i ae en ee ee 
clCor. 9:2. d1Gor.3:5. e Ex. 24:12. f Psa. 40: 8; Jer. 31:33; Ezek. a 
AlGor. 15:10. iJer. 31:31; Matt. 26:28; Heb. 8: 6,8. j Rom. 2: 27; 736. 
k Rom. 8:20; Gal. 3:10. iJohn 6: 635 Rom. 8: 2. 
from the tavern-keepers who adulterate the wine they offer for sale. 
who adulterated the gospel with ingredients of 
These are the “false brethren” (11: 26) with whom his whole ministry was astruggle. On 


the contrary, he and his fellow-preachers spoke the words of genuine sincerity and with a sense of 


responsibility to God. 


1-6. Do we begin again to commend ourselves? Paul had just spoken of his triumphs. 


Opposers, such as were in Corinth, might insist that he was boasting. Need we... - 


epistles of 


commendation? No doubt there is a reference made to letters which the Judaizing teachers, who 
had come to Corinth, carried. They might need them, he did not. 2. Ye are our epistle. The 


church itself owed its existence to him, 
commendation. He was known by his fruits. 


manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ. 


the letter; Paul was the penman,; the message was written on the fleshly t 
The means employed by Christ to convey the messa 


brethren at Corinth. 


He could point to his work, to the disciples, as his letter of 
Written in our hearts. 


heart, he saw them enshrined there, and felt that he needed no commendation to them, 
A beautiful conception. Christ is the author of 


When he looked into his 
3. Ye are 


ablets of the hearts of the 


ge was the Spirit which filled 


Paul. All men who could see the transformation effected in the lives of the Corinthians could read the 


epistle. Not in tables of stone. 


Instead of naming parchment, he mentions tables of stone, because 


he is about to compare the Old Covenant, of which its chief part, the Decalogue, was written on stone 
(Bxod. 24: 12) with the New Covenant. 4. Such trust have we, ete. That the church of Corinth is 
such an epistle as has just been described, 5. Not that we are sufficient of ourselves. He 
would claim no credit for the work at Corinth, as though it was his own, for all his strength was of God. 
6. Who hath made us able ministers of the New Testament. God gave Paul and his fellow- 
ministers their “sufficiency” (verse 5) who had made them able ministers of the gospel. New Testa- 


ment. The New Covenant, the Covenant of Christ. 


This is here contrasted with the Old Covenant, 











136 II. CORINTHIANS. [Ch. IIT. 
7 But if the ministration of death, written and tration Of aeam wena u 
engraven in stones, was glorious, so that the child- pera stones, 
ren of Israel could not stedfastly behold the face the ehildren "of reel 
, 1 a 1 5 ; could not look stedfastly 
of Moses for the glory of his countenance; which npou the fagoo! Mocs tor 
glory was to be done away: the glory of his face : 

8 How shall not® the ministration of the Spirit away: how shall not rath. 8 
be rather glorious? oF ho saint eeretion OF ne 
9 For if the ministration of condemnation be if the ministration of con- 

+ Li et . Q emnation 158 yy 
glory, much more doth the ministration of? right~| (omooten Js glory, much 
j Dg tion of righteousness ex- 
eousness exceed in glory 5 ° ceed in glory. For verily 10 
10 For even that which was made glorious had no that which Hath been made 
= . orious a no x] 
glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that ex-| $104 slorious in hie 462 
celleth y spect, by reason of the 
‘ : 2 5 glory that surpasseth. For 11 
11 For if that which was done away was glorious, | if that hich passeth away 
s i i » was Wi ory,much more 
much more that which remaineth ?s glorious. that Which 2ochdin sth cae 
¢ 7 ory. 
12 Seeing then that we have such hope, we use orriatiny thecetors aaa 
great plainness of speech; hope, we use great bold- 
5 : . e ee: rn 
13 And not as Moses,° which put a vail over his not as Moses, who put a 
face, that the children of Israel could not stedfastly ha bt agree fe oe 
look to the’ end of that which is abolished. not look stedfastly on the 
. . . . ° s 
14,But* their minds were blinded: for until thia) Siac, oes 


@Gal. 3:5. 6Rom.1:17. c Ex. 34:33. d Rom. 10:43 Gal. 3:23. eIsa. 6:10; John 12: 40. 








the Jewish. One is the Law; the other the Gospel. Compare Hebrews, chapter 8. Not of the letter, 
but of the Spirit. The first, the law, was written (by letters written and engraven on stones, hence 
of the letter) ; the gospel is the dispensation of the Spirit. The letter killeth. The law. It condemns 
all who do not obey its commands, but could make no man perfect. The law places under the sentence 
ofdeath. See notes on Romans 7: 9,10. The Spirit giveth life. The gospel bestows eternal life. 

7-11. But if the ministration of death. The Old Covenant, the law is so called, because it. 
places under the sentence of death. Written and engraven in stones. Only the Detalogue was 
written on stones. It was the central and most important part of the Old Covenant. Let it be noted 
that when Paul speaks of the law, or Old Testament, he includes the Decalogue, and does not mean 
simply the ceremonial law, as some have urged (Exod. 34: 1). Was glorious. So glorious that even 
the face of Moses was made to shine as he carried down the tables of the ‘law (Exod. 34: 29) so that he 
had to veil his face. Which glory was to be done away. It was only temporary. 8. How shall 
not rather the ministration of the Spirit be with glory? The gospel, the ministration of life, 
must haye still greater glory. It has a glory now, and will have a fuller glory in the day of the Lord. 
9. If the ministration of condemnation. See verse 7, the law, including the Decalogne. The 
ministration of righteousness. The gospel. The first condemned; the second justifies men with 
the righteousness of Christ. With such transcendent blessings, it far exceeds in glory the Old Cove- 
nant. 10. For even that which was made glorious. The Old Covenant. As the glory of the 
moon and stars fades out before the glory of the sun, so its glory disappears in a comparison with the 
exceeding glory of the gospel. 11. Forif that which is done away was glorious. That which 
was glorious is the Old Covenant, or law. It includes the Decalogue (verse 11). The whole is done 
away. This clear and emphatic statement is made on account of the Judaizing teachers of whom we 
find many traces in the two Letters to the Corinthian church. It is clearly asserted that the Old Cove- 
nant, “the ministration of death written and engraven on stones,” is done away. We are “not under 
the law, but under grace.” Compare Hebrews 8:13. But if that which was done away is glorious, 
much more is that glorious which abides forever, 

12-18. Seeing then we have such hope. The blessed gospel hope, With such a hope he has 
boldness to declare the gospel truths boldly and without reserve. 13. And not as Moses, ete. The 
veil Moses put over his face (Exod. 34: 33) is used by Paul as a symbol to show that all was not made 
plain in the law of Moses, and that there is still blindness on the part of Israel. Could not sted- 
fastly look to the end, etc. The brightness with which the face of Moses shone was to be done 
away. The veil prevented the children of Israel from observing its fading glory. This typifies the fact 


Ch. IV.] II. CORINTHIANS. 137 


day remaineth the same vail untaken away in the SNES arene 
reading of the old testament; which vail is done | reading of the old cove- 


: = nant the same veil remain- 
away in Christ. eth unlifted ; which veil is 


: “ done away in Christ. But 15: 
15 But even unto this day, when Moses is read mite duis Gag whendoceae 





the vail is upon their heart. Moses is read, a veil lieth 
16 Nevertheless* when it shall turn to the Lord,? Gio aeere cee oa ae 

the vail shall be taken away. Tekapo Nae Lon x 
17 Now the Lord is that Spirit: and where the |is the Spirit: and where 

Spirit of the Lord zs, there 7s liberty. ene are as eneape 


= =f 7 cy all, with unveiled face re- 

18 But we all, with open face beholding as* in ’a |RUeie ae a cor ne 

glass the glory of the Lord,* are changed into the glory of the Lord, are 
* n Ss 

same image, from glory to glory, even as by the| image from glory to glory, 


17 even as from the Lord the 
Spirit of the Lord. ccne 





CHAPTER IV. 


Glory Through Suffering. 
SUMMARY.—Paul’s Sincerity and Earnestness in the Ministry. The Eyes 
of Some Blinded by the God of the World. Trouble and Persecution 
Redound to the Glory of God. Paul’s Sufferings for the Gospel’s 
Sake. Exposed to Death in Order to Carry Life. The Present Af- 
fliction Working Glory. The Unseen Things Eternal. CHAPTER IV. 


i VE i ini Therefore seeing wel 
1 Therefore, seeing we have this ministry, as we |, Therefo eee 


have received mercy, we faint not; as We obtained mercy, we , 
° . ° aint not: ut we have re- 
2 But have renounced the hidden things of dis-| nounced the hidden things 
a Rom. 11:23; 1Cor.2:10. dIsa.25:7. ¢2Cor.4:4,6. @John17:17; Rom. 8:29; Col. 3:10. 








that they should not see the end of the law itself which was to be abolished. 14. But their minds 
were blinded. So blinded that they cannot see to this day that if has been set aside by the New Coye- 
nant, and that its types, figures and shadows find their fulfillment in Christ. Which veil is done 
away in Christ. Meyer, with many other able critics, contends that the proper translation of the 
latter part of the verse is: “It not being disclosed that the Old Covenant is taken away in Christ.’”? So 
also Conybeare and Howson, This is no doubt the meaning. 15. When Moses is read, etc. The 
law, or Old Testament. They read it in their synagogues, but do not understand it. The trouble, too, 
isinthe heart. They are blinded by their prejudices. 16. Whenitshallturn tothe Lord. The 
heart. Then the veil of blindness will fall away so that they will see clearly. 177. Now the Lord is 
that Spirit. The New Covenant is of “the Spirit.” See verses 3,6,8, But turning to the Lord is 
entering into this covenant, for the “Lord is that Spirit.” The Spirit is Christ’s presence with us. 
There is liberty. He who comes into this covenant of the Spirit is freed from the bondage of the 
law. 18. But we all. All Christians. With open face. Without a veil. Beholding as ina 
mirror the glory of the Lord. Looking to Jesus and beholding in his covenant, in our hearts and 
minds as in a mirror, and contemplating his glory. Are changed. To look to Jesus has a trans- 
forming power. If we gaze upon him, we will become like him. As Moses unveiled before the Lord 
shone with the glory of the Lord, so we shall reflect the glory of Christ, and show forth his likeness. 
From glory to glory. Developing from one stage of glory toa higher one. Even as by the Spirit 
of the Lord. Rather, ‘‘The Lord the Spirit,” as in the Revision, Verse 17 declares the Lord is the 
Spirit. Our glory is from the Lord the Spirit. The figure here is a very beautiful one. By gazing upon 
the Lord we become like him and show forth his glory. 

1-4. Secing we have this ministry. The ministry of the Spirit and of Life; of the newcovenant, 
described in the precedmg chapter. As we have received mercy. Christ, though he was a perse- 
cutor, had mercy on him and called him to the ministry. Hence, he was under obligations to ‘faint 
not,” though meeting trouble and persecution. 2. But have renounced the hidden things of dis- 
honesty. This glorious ministry was under no ‘“‘veil” and was not hidden. Its ministers must turn 
away from all dishonest practices or teachings. Paul intends to rebuke, by his example, the false and 
deceitful teachers who sought to bring the Corinthians under the old Jewish covenant. Nor handling 


138 II. CORINTHIANS. 


[Ch:-IV. 


pak See ee Ee eS ee 


honesty, not walking in craftiness, nor* handling 
the word of God deceitfully; but, by manifestation 
of the truth, commending ourselves to every man’s 
conscience in the sight of God. 

3 But if our gospel be hid,” it is hid to them that 
are lost: 

4 In whom’ the god of this world hath? blinded 
the minds of them which believe not, lest the light 
of the glorious gospel of Christ,° who is the image 
of God, should shine unto them. 

5 For we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus 
the Lord; and ourselves your servants for Jesus’ 
sake. 

6 For God, who commanded the light to shine 
out of darkness, hath shined" in our hearts to give! 
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in 
the face of Jesus Christ. 

7 But we have this treasure! in earthen vessels,* 
that the excellency of the power may be of God, 
and not of us. 


of shame, not walking in 
craftiness, nor handling 
the word of God deceit- 
fully; but by the mani- 
festation of the truth 
commending ourselves to 
every man’s conscience in 
the sight of God. But and 
if our gospel is veiled, itis 
veiled in them that are 
perishing: in whom the 
god of this world hath 
blinded the minds of the 
unbelieving, that the light 
of the gospel of the glory 
of Christ, whois the image 
of God, should not dawn 
upon them. For we preach 
not ourselves, but Christ 
Jesus as Lord, and our- 
selves as your servants for 
Jesus’ sake. Seeing if is 
God that said, Light shall 
shine out of arkness, 
who shined in our hearts, 
to give the light of the 
knowledge of the glory of 
God in the face of Jesus 
Christ. : 

But we have this treas- 
ure in earthen vessels,that 
the exceeding greatness of 
the power may be of God, 


3 


4 


and not from ourselves; 
we are pressed on every 8 
side, yet not straitened; 
perplexed, yet not unto 
despair; pursued, yet not 
forsaken; smitten down, 9 
yet not destroyed; always 10 
bearing about in the body 


8 Weare troubled on every side, yet not distres- 
sed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; 

9 Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but 
not destroyed; 

10 Always! bearing about in the body the dying 


a1Thes. 2:3,5. 6Isa.6:9; 1 Cor. 1:18. ¢ John 12:31; 14:30; 16:11; Eph. 6:12. d@Isa. 6:10; John 12:40: 2 Cor. 3:14. 
e Zech. 13:7; John 1:18; 12:48; 14:9. f1Cor. 9:19. gGen.1:3. A2Pet. 1:19. @Psa. 27:1: 36:93 
Isa. 2:5; John 1:9; 8:12. j2 Cor. 5:1. k1Cor.2:5. 11 Cor. 15:31; Gal. 6:17; Phil. 3:10. 














the word of God deceitiully. His enemies not only resorted to calumny but perverted the word of 
the Lord by adulterating it with the elements of the law, of tradition, nhd with false ideas of Christ. See 
Gal. 6:12,13. Commending ourselves to every man’s conscience in the sight of God. He pre- 
sented the truth and made his appeal directly to the human conscience, that monitor which God has 
giventoallmen. 8. Butifour gospel be hid. He has shown (3:16) that there is no veil in Christ, 
and declared (verse 2) that he preached not things hidden by a veil, But the Judaizing opposers re- 
plied that his gospel was as much veiled to them as he said that the law was veiled to the Jews. He re- 
plies that itis only veiled to the lost, who are blinded by the god of this world. In order to understand 
the allusions the reader must keep in mind Paul’s life-long contest with Judaism in the church. See 
notes on Acts 15:1, and Gal. 2:4. 4. The god of this world. See John 12.31, 40; Phil. 3:19. Satan is 
called the prince of this world, and the god of this world. By his devices he blinds the eyes of men so 
that they should not see the light of gospel. Image of God. He who would see God, may see him in 
the face of Christ. John 14:9. 

5,6. We preach not ourselves. We have no self seeking aims in preaching, but only seek 
to preach Christ Jesus, the Lord. We know that Paul’s preaching was perverted. He called on the 
disciples to follow him as he followed Christ (1 Cor, 11:1; 4:16; 7:6), and they asserted that he preached 
himself. Instead he made himself “the servant of au” (1 Cor.9:19) for Christ’s sake. 6. For God, 
who commanded light to shine out of darkness. Gen.1:3. Hath shined in our hearts. By 
bringing to the light of the gospel. The light ofthe knowledge, etc. Knowledge is light. The glory 
of God is revealed in his Son, who hath shown for the divine excellency, tenderness and love. 

7-9. We have this treasure in earthen vessels. The treasure of the knowledge of Christ and 
of the ministry of the gospei of life. Perhaps his enemies pointed to his sorrows as a proof that he was 
not so favored as a minister of Christ. A splendid treasure was placed in a fragile, cheap earthen 
vessel. Then it was manifest that the great work wrought was the power of God, not of us, the 
apostles and evangelists. 8,9. Wearetroubled onevery side. In verses 8 and 9 are four pairs of 
contrasts which show the frailty of the instruments andthe greatness of the power: (1) “pressed on 


Ch. IV.] II. CORINTHIANS. 
of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might 
be made manifest in our body. 

11 For we which live are alway delivered unto 
death for Jesus’ sake, that the life also of Jesus 
might be made manifest in our mortal flesh. 

12 So then death worketh:in us, but life in you. 

13 We having the same spirit of faith, according 
as it is written,” I believed, and therefore have I 
spoken; we also believe, and therefore speak: 

14 Knowing that he which raised up the Lord 
Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall pre- 
sent ws with you. 

15 For all things are for your sakes, that the 
abundant grace might, through the thanksgiving of 
many, redound to the glory of God. 

16 For which cause we faint not; but though our 
outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed 
day by day. 

17 For our light affliction, which is but for a 
moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory; 

18 While we look not at the things which are 
seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the 
things which are seen are temporal; but the things 
which are not seen @re eternal. 











139 


the dying of Jesus, that 
the life also of Jesus may 
be manifested in our body. 
For we which live are al- 11 
way delivered unto death 
for Jesus’ sake, that the 
life also of Jesus may be 
manifested in our mortal 
flesh. So then death work- 12 
ethin us, but life in you. 
But having the same spirit 13 
of faith, according to that 
which is written, I believ- 
ed, and therefore did I 
speak; we also believe, 
and therefore also we 
speak; knowing that he 14 
which raised up the Lord 
Jesus shall raise up us 
also with Jesus, and shall 
present us with you. For 15 
all things are for your 
sakes, that the grace, be- 
ing multiplied through the 
many, may cause the 
thanksgiving to abound 
unto the glory of God. 

Wherefore we faint not; 
but though our outward 
man is decaying, yet our 
inward man is renewed 
day by day. For our light 
affliction, which is for the 
moment, worketh for us 
more and more exceed- 
ingly an eternal weight of 
glory; while we look not 18 
at the things which are 
seen, but at the things 
which are not seen: for 
the things which are seen 
are temporal; but the 
things which are not seen 
are eternal. 


@ Rom. 8:17; 2 Tim. 2:11; 1 Pet. 4:13. 6 Psa. 116:10. 











every side)” (Revision) but not hemmed in by the pressure; (2) in apparently overwhelming difficulties, 
but never reduced to despair; (3) persecuted by their enemies, but not forsaken and delivered over to 
them; (4) overthrown and cast to the earth, but even then rescued from the enemy, standing over them 
prostrate, so that they are not destroyed. 

10-12. Always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus. Always bearing suf- 
ferings and danger of death, as the Lord died, so that we may carry the life which the Lord gives to 
others. In constant suffering and peril of death the apostle was the messenger of life. 11. For we 
which live are akway delivered to death. This verse more fully explains the meaning of verse 10. 
‘The ministers of the gospel were always exposed to death, and at their cost bore the precious charge of 
lifeto men. 12. Doath working in us. The ever present image of death, threatening the gospel 
ministers, was the means of life to the saved. 

13-15. We having the same spirit of faith. Yet in spite of all the sufferings and peril described, 
we preach right on. Like the psalmist (Ps. 116:10) we are moved by the power of faith; we believe. 
therefore wespeak. 14. Knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jasus. Assured that we 
shallall be raised and stand together before the Lord, we preach. This is our faith. If we die for Christ 
God willraiseus. 15. Forallthings arefor yoursakes. Our suffering, our dying daily, and the 
glorious hope, and the result of these things is that the thanksgiving of multitudes of the saved should 
redound to the glory of God. 

16-18. For which cause. Moved by faith, hope, the love of souls and desire for the glory of God, 
we faint not; do not for a moment give way and relax our efforts. Though our outward man per- 
ish. Though our body waste away under the trials, or is threatened with death. Yet the inward man. 
His spiritual strength is constantly renewed by Christ. The “inward man’’is the immaterial nature in 
contrast with the material body. See Rom. 7:2 and Eph. 3:16. 17. For our light affliction. Great as 
his afflictions were, he calls them light in view of the glorious reward they will bring; continual as they 
were, he speaks of them as but for a moment in viewof eternity. They were the more easily borne 
for they work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Bearing the cross weaves 


II. CORINTHIANS. 





140 


CHAPTER V. 


The House Not Made With Hands. 


SUMMARY.—The Groaning for Deliverance. The Divine Clothing for the 
Soul Which Has Laid Aside Its Mortal Tenement. Absent From the 
Body, but Present With the Lord. Appearing Before the Judgment 
Seat. Dying With Christ. New Creatures. The Ministry of Recon- 
ciliation, 

1 For we know, that, if* our earthly house of this 
tabernacle were dissolved, we have” a building of 
God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the 
heavens. 

2 For in this® we groan, earnestly desiring to be 
clothed upon with our house which is from heaven: 

3 If so be that? being clothed we shall not be 
found naked. 

4 For we that are in this tabernacle do groan, 
being burdened: not for that we would be uncloth- 
ed, but® clothed upon, that mortality might be 
swallowed up of life. 

5 Nowt he that hath wrought us for the self-same 
thing 7s God, who® also hath given unto us the ear- 





[Ch:-V. 


CHAPTER V. 


For we know that if the 
earthly house of our taber- 
nacle be _ dissolved, we 
have abuilding from God, 
a house not made with 
hands, eternal, in the 
heavens, For verily in this 
we groan, longing to be 
clothed upon with our 
habitation which is from 
heaven: if so be that being 
clothed we shall not be 
found naked. For indeed 
we that are in this taber- 
nacle do groan, being bur- 
dened; not for that we 
would be unclothed, but 
that we would be clothed 
upon, that what is mortal 
may be swallowed up of 
life. Now he that wrought 
us for this very thing 
is God, who gave unto 
us the earnest of the 
Spirit. Being therefore 
always of good courage, 


i 


3 
4 


5 


nest of the Spirit. 


a@2Pet. 1:18. 6 Phil.3:21; Heb. 11:10. 





c Rom. 8: 23. 


@Rev.8:18. ¢1 Cor. 15:53. fIsa. 29:23. g Rom.8:23.. 





an eternal crown. Sorrows endured for Christ’s sake prepare for eternal joys. 18. While we look 
not atthings which are seen, but, etc. Our eyes are fixed on the unseen things beyond, the glory 
that the flesh cannot behold. Hence, we turn away from present afflictions as momentary, as belonging 
to the seen and the transient, and only regard them as adding to the weight of our unseen, eternal joys. 
Our goalis beyond. For the thinza which ara seen are temporal. All material things, and all 
that the world values, are perishing. All things of sense shall pass away; Oesar’s greatness, the might 
of Roman power, the strength of man, the glory of the magnificence of Corinth; even the visible heavens 
andthe earth. But the unssen things are eternal. The things which the senses see not, but which 
faith reveals—God, heaven, the unseen spirit. Let the eye be turned upon the unseen, rather than the 
things of sense. 

1-4. For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle. Paul has spoken of looking for 
the things that are unseen and eternal (4:18). He now decscribes the body as only a tent dwelling, a 
temporary abode, in which we are camping during a journey. If death should came and the body be 
dissolved, there is another dwelling for the redeemed, “the spiritual body” described in 1 Cor, 15:44, a 
heavenly and eternal body. To the saint, death is the exchange of the earthly tent dwelling for this. 
eternal spiritual body. 2. Forinthis we groan. While in this fragile, suffering earthly body, Paul 
longed for the deliverance from it and “for the house not made with hands,” the spiritual body, 
Clothed upon. The thought is that when the spirit leaves the mortal Clay, it lays off an old and worn- 
out clothing, and is to be clothed upon, or invested in, its divine clothing. 8. If so be that, being 
clothed, we shall not be found naked. This shall come to pass, provided the spirit is clothed with 
a spiritual body at the resurrection, and not disembodied or naked. This is an allusion to the errors so. 
prevalent at Corinth which he had combatted in1 Cor. ch. 15. It was a Greek theory that when the 
spirit left the mortal body that it remained without a body, but Paul says: “If we too, clothed upon, 
shall not be without an immortal body.” See Meyer on this passage. Many hold that Paul’s language 
is due to the belief that they would meet the Lord in the mortal body in that age at his speedy coming, 
This, Iam sure, is a wrong interpretation. 4, For we that are in this tabernacle. This tent dwell- 
ing for the journey. Do groan, being burdened. Groan for deliverance from it, because the burden 
isso heavy. Not that we would be unclothed. It is not that we wish to be freed from a body, but. 
we wish a better one; to lay off the old raiment that we may be clothed upon with the heavenly raiment, 
the spiritual body, in order that ‘this mortal shall put on immortality” (1 Cor. 15:53), 


Ch. V.] II. CORINTHIANS. 


141 





6 Therefore we are always confident, knowing 
that, whilst we are at home in the body, we are 
absent from the Lord: 

7 (For* we walk by faith, not by sight:) 

8 We are confident, J say,” and willing rather to 
PS ees from the body, and to be present with the 
ord. 

9 Wherefore we labour, that, whether present or 
absent, we may be accepted of him. 

10 For we must all appear before the judgment- 
seat of Christ;* that every one may receive the 
things done in his body, according to that he hath 
done, whether it be good or bad. 

11 Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we 
persuade men: but we are made manifest unto God, 
and I trust also are made manifest in your con- 
sciences. 

12 For we commend not ourselves again unto 
you, but give you occasion to glory on our behalf, 
that ye may have somewhat to answer them which 
glory in appearance, and not in heart. 

13 For whether we be beside ourselves, ¢é zs to 
God; or whether we be sober, ¢é 7s for your cause. 

14 For the love of Christ constraineth us; be- 
cause we thus judge, that if* one died for all, then 
were all dead: 


a1Cor. 13:12. 





bPhil. 1:23. c Rev. 22:12. d@2Ovr. 11:1. 





and knowing that, whilst 
we are at home in the 
body, we are absent from 
the Lord (for we walk by 
faith, not by sight) ; we are 
of good courage, I say, and 
are willing rather to be 
absent from the body, and 


‘to be at home with the 


Lord. Wherefore also we 
make it our aim, whether 
at home or absent, to be 
well-pleasing unto him. 
For we must all be made 
manifest before the judg- 
ment-seat of Christ; that 
each one may receive the 
things done in the body, 
according to what he hath 
done, whether it be good 
or bad. 

Knowing therefore the 
fear of the Lord, we per- 
suade men, but we _ are 
made manifest unto God; 
and I hope that we are 
made manifest also in 
your consciences. We are 
not again commending 
ourselves unto you, but 
speak as giving you occa- 
sion of glorying on our be- 
half, that ye may have 
wherewith to answer them 
that glory in appearance, 
and not in heart. For 
whether we are beside 
ourselves, itis unto God; 
or whether we are of sober 
mind, itis unto you. For 
the love of Christ con- 
straineth us; because we 


| thus judge, that one died 





e Rom. 5: 15. 








5-9. He that 


wroughtuus for this self-same thing. Gave us this longing for immortality. 


7 
8 


11 


13 


14 


God 


not only gave it but the earnest of the spirit, asure proof of the fulfilment of all that he has prom- 


ised. 6. Therefore we are always confident. Because of what is stated in v 
when danger threatened, that to be in the body was to be absent from the Lord’ 


erse 5. Paul knew, 
s presence, and 


that if he was slain and thus left the body, he would go at once to the presence of the Lord. 7%. For we 


walk by faith, not by sight. It is by faith here that we see the Lord, 


though absentfrom him. 8. We 


are confident. In the face of every peril, because we know that death, an absence from the body, 


syould be to be present with the Lord. 


human spirit. It puts aside the body to be clothed with a new garment, Itis 
present with the Lord. The body is not essential to its conscious existence. 

To Paul, death meant to be present at once with Christ, leaving the body behind. He 
whether present in the body or absent from it,he might be accepted with 


the body sleeps. 
labored (verse 9) so that, 
Christ. 

10-18. For we must all appear before the judgment seat. 
be accepted by Christ (verse 9). 
has done in the body. The language 
Knowing, therefore, 


discharge his ministry by persuading men. See the Revision. We are made 
I trust also. 
known to the saints at Corinth and that he had a witness in 


our whole life and knows our motives as well as our deeds. 
and approved. He hoped, too, that it was 


The object of this judgment is that he may rea 
here implies that our probation ends with our earthly life. 11. 
the fear of the Lord. Fearing the Lord and accountable to him, he seeks to 
manifest to God. He sees 


Note here the doctrine of the immaterial nature of the 
absent from the body but 
It does not sleep because 


This is a stimulus to labor so as to 
p the fruits of what he 


His life was known to God 


their consciences, in the effect of his preaching. 12. We commend not ourselves, but rather gives 
them an opportunity of glorying over his work and life so that they can answer the false teachers who 


assail him. 18. Ifwe are beside ourselves. 


made at Corinth. If it were true, it was 


due to his zeal for God or to the power 


See Acts 26:24. The same charge had probably been 
of God. If at other times 


he was the opposite, sober, it was all that he might calmly reason with them and win them, His trances, 


visions and revelations his enemies imputed to madness, 


142 II. CORINTHIANS. 


15 And that he died for all,* that they which live 
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but 
unto him which died for them, and rose again. 

16 Wherefore,” henceforth know we no man 
after the flesh; yea, though we have known Christ 
after the flesh, yet® now henceforth know we him 
no more. 

17 Therefore, if any man be in Christ, he 7s anew 
creature :" old things are passed away ; behold, all 
things are become new. 

18 And all things are of God, who hath reconcil- 
ed us to himself by Jesus Christ, and hath given to 
us the ministry of reconciliation; 

19 To wit, that® God was in Christ, reconciling 
the world unto himself, not imputing their tres- 
passes unto them; and hath committed unto us the 
word of reconciliation. 

20 Now then we aret ambassadors for Christ, as 
though God did beseech you by us: we pray you in 
Christ’s stead, be ye reconciled to God. 

21 For’ he hath made him ¢o be sin for us, who? 
knew no sin; that we might be made! the right- 
eousness of God in him. 








a1Pet.4:2. 6 Matt. 12:50. cJohn6: 63. dIsa. 65: 17; Rev. 21: 5, 


6:20. gIsa. 53:6,9; Gal. 3:135 1 Pet.2:22. hk Heb. 7: 26, t Jer. 23:6; 








14-16. For the love of Christ constraineth us. It 


all in Christ have died with him to a life of sin. Baptized into hi 


[Ch. “V. 


for all, therefore all died; 
and he died for all, that 
they which live should no 
longer live unto them- 
selves, but unto him who 
for their sakes died and 
rose again. Wherefore we 
henceforth know no man 
after the flesh: even 
though we have known 
Christ after the flesh, yet 
now we know him so no 
more. Wherefore if any 
man is in Christ, he is a 
new creature: the old 
things are passed away; 
behold, they are become 
new. But all things are of 
God, who reconciled us to 
himself through Christ, 
and gave unto us the min- 
istry of reconciliation ; to 
wit, that God was in Christ 
reconciling the world unto 
himself, not reckoning 
unto them their trespass- 
es, and having committed 
unto us the word of recon- 
ciliation. 

We are ambassadors 
therefore on behalf of 
Christ, as though God 
were intreating by us: we 
beseech you on behalf of 
Christ, be ye reconciled to 
God. Him who knew no 
sin he made {fo be sin on 
our behalf; that we might 
become the righteousness 
of God in him. 


Rom. 1:17; Phil. 3:9. 


15 


17 


21 


é Isa. 43:25; Rom. 3:94, Mal. 2:7; Eph. 
Dan. 9:24; & es 


was the power that moved him in all his con- 
duct. That one died for all, therefore all died (revision). I thus jud 


next verse shows that this is the meaning. Compare Rom. 6:3, 4, 6,11 and Gal. 5:4, 15. And hedieq 
for all, etc. He died with this end in view, that those for whom he died and had life through him 


should not live for themselves, but for him who died for them. 


live new lives for Christ, they are not Jews and Gentiles; Romans, 
Christians, not to be knownas belonging to the old fleshly races longer, 
Christ after the flesh. The Christ risen and sitting on the throne a. 
the Christ whom the church adores is that risen Christ. 

17-21. If any man be in Christ, heis 
6: 6), buried into his death (Rom. 6: 4), 
life (Rom. 6:4). The old life ended when we died and were buried. 
who must live a new life. All things are become new. The affe 
the hopes, the whole life. 18. And all thing's are of God. 
through the gospel, who hath reconciled us 
variance with God, and disobedient, 
will, and hence to obey him. We have been changed, are 


God’s love and mercy, 
ambassadors. 
ing you for Christ, and in his 


faith, 21. Hath made him. , , who knew no sin. 


be reconciled, bu 
offered peace and shown the love of God. The ministry of reconciliation 


and to repent so that he can forgive their trespasses, 
We have God's message, are his authorized messengers 
name, to be reconciled to God by repe 


As all have died 


Thus Paul lived. His life was a con- 
secrated life. 16. Wherefore we henceforth know no man after the flesh, 


to 


Greeks or Scythians, but all are 
Yea, though we have known 
s our Lord is not in the flesh, and 


anew creature. Because, crucified with Christ (Rom. 
we have died with Christ (verse 14), and risen to walk in a new 


Born anew, we are new creatures 
ctions, the motives, the 


thoughts, 
These h 


ave all come from God 
to himself by Jesus Christ. Before we were 
Through Christ we have been brought 


new creatures. 
ciliation. The gospel, the object of which is to transform men, and to brin 


19. That God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself. 


at 


to love God, to love his 
The ministry of recon- 
& them to peace with God. 


This explains more fully the 


t the world. In Christ it is 
is to persuade men to accept 
20. Then we are 


, and speak for God, beseech- 


ntance and the obedience 


of 


AS a sinless substitute he suffered for 


7 


Chovi.] II. CORINTHIANS. 


143 





CHAPTER VI. 


The Apostolic Ministry. 

SUMMARY.—An Exhortation to Believers. The Blameless Ministry of 
Paul and His Fellow-Workers. Their Endurance of Trials. Their 
Unselfish Self-Denial. An Appeal for Greater Love. The Intimate 
Association With Unbelievers Forbidden. Saints the Temple of God. 
1 We then, as? workers together with him, be- 

seech you also, that” ye receive not the grace of 

God in vain. 

2 (For he saith,° I have heard thee in a time 
accepted, and in the day of salvation have I suc- 
coured thee: behold, now zs the accepted time; 
behold, now zs the day of salvation.) 

3 Giving? no offence in any thing, that the min- 
istry be not blamed: 

4 But in all things approving ourselves as® the 
ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, 
in necessities, in distresses, 

5 In stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in 
labours, in watchings, in fastings; 

6 By pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, 
by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, 

7 By‘ the word of truth, by? the power of God, 
by the armour of righteousness on the right hand 
and on the left, 

8 By honour and dishonour, by evil report and 
good report: as deceivers, and yet true; 





CHAPTER VI. 


And working together 1 
with him we intreat also 
that ye receive not the 
grace of God in vain (for 2 
he saith, 

At an acceptable time I 
hearkened unto thee, 
And in a day of salva- 
tion didI succour thee: 

behold, now is the accept- 
able time; behold, now is 
the day of salvation): giv- 3 
ing no occasion of stumb- 
ling in anything, that our 
ministration be not blam- 
ed; butineverything com- 4 
mending ourselves, as 
ministers of God, in much 
patience, in afflictions, in 
necessities, in distresses, 
in stripes, in imprison- 5 
ments, in tumults, in la- 
bours. in watchings, in 
fastings; in pureness, in 6. 
knowledge, in longsuffer- 
ing, in kindness, in the 
Holy Ghost, in love un- 
feigned, in the word of 7 
truth, in the power of 
God; by the armour of 
righteousness on the right 
hand and on the left, by 8 
glory and dishonour, by 
evil report and good re- 
port; as deceivers, and yet 








a1Cor. 3:9; 2Cor.5:20. 6 Heb. 12:15. cIsa. 49:8. 'd1Cor.9:12. e1Cor.4:1, f1Cor.2:4. g2 Tim. 4:7. 








our sins, that our sins might thus be atoned for, the law satisfied, and we be forgiven and accounted 
righteous. Since we die with Christ, in him we pay the penalty, and are justified. 

1-8. We then. Paul and Timothy especially (1: 1), and other ministers associated with them. As 
workers together. Not only fellow-laborers, but workers with Christ. See conclusion of last 
chapter. That you receive not the grace of God in vain. The grace (favor) of God meant is 
the gospel, the ministry of reconciliation. To receive it in vain would be to receive it and then fall 
away. Compare 1Cor. 15:2. 2. Forhe saith. Isaiah 44:8, The prophecy is an offer of salvation to 
the Gentiles, to whom the Corinthians belonged. The point is that God has offered the salvation, but 
that now is the accepted time, and it is not safe to neglect it. 3. Giving no offence in any-= 
thing. The participle ‘‘giving” refers to “we” (verse 1). Paul describes the manner of life of him- 
self and fellow-ministers. They were careful that the ministry be not blamed. It matters not. 
what be the talents of a minister, if there be no confidence in his purity of life his influence will be 
neutralized. Every one should be anxious that his life hinder not the gospel. 

4-10. In all things approving ourselves as ministers of God. Living lives that show 
that we are holy ministers, consecrated to God. Paul next gives some details of the apostolic life. 
In much patience. Rather, in steadfast constancy and endurance, holding out under trials. Some 
of these trials are now given. Afflictions. The first three details are general. 5. In stripes. See 
11: 23, 24. In imprisonments. He was imprisoned at Philippi, Jerusalem, Caesarea and Rome, at 
least. In tumults. See Acts 14: 19; 16: 22; 19: 29; 21: 30. 6. Verses 4 and 5 show what Paul suffered 
at the hands of men. He now tells his manner of life under such persecution. In pureness. Living 
aholy life. Chaste. By knowledge. His knowledge goes hand in hand with purity of life. By the 
Holy Spirit. Showing forth its influence and power. 7. By the. word of truth. By preaching the 
gospel with power. By the power of God. Shown in his great activity and unparalleled success 
(4:7). By the armor of righteousness on the right hand and on the left. See Eph.6:11. On 


144 II. CORINTHIANS. 


. 


[Ch. VI. 





9 As unknown, and? yet well known;” as dying, 
and, behold, we live;° as chastened, and not killed; 

10 As sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing; as poor, yet 
making many rich; as having nothing, and yeé pos- 
sessing all things. 

11 O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, 
our heart is enlarged. 

12 Ye are not straitened in us, but* ye are strait- 
ened in your own bowels. 

13 Now, for a recompence in the same, (I speak 
as unto my children,) be ye also enlarged. 

14 Be* ye not unequally yoked together with unbe- 
lievers;* for what fellowship hath righteousness 
with unrighteousness? and what communion hath 
light with darkness? 

15 And what concord hath Christ with Belial? or 
what part hath he that believeth with an infidel? 

16 And what agreement hath the temple of God 
with idols? for? ye are the temple of the living God: 
as God hath said," I will dwell in them, and walk in 
them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my 





true; as unknown, and yet 9 


well known; as dying,and 
behold we live; as chas- 
tened, and not killed; as 
sorrowful, yet always re- 
joicing; as poor, yet mak- 
ing many rich; as having 
nothing, and yet possess- 
ing all things. 

Our mouth is open unto 
you, O Corinthians, our 
heartis enlarged. Ye are 
not straitened in us, but 
ye are straitened in your 
own affections. Now for 
a recompense in like kind 
(Ispeak as unto my chil- 
dren), be ye also enlarged. 

Be not unequally yoked 
with unbelievers: fo: what 
fellowship have righteous- 
ness and iniquity? or what 
communion hath light and 
darkness? And what con- 
cord hath Christ with Be- 
lial? or what portion hath 
a believer with an unbe- 
liever? And what agree- 
ment hath a temple of 
God with idols? for we are 
atemple of the living God; 
even as God said, I will 
dwell in them, and walk 
in them; and I will be 
their God, and they shall 


10 


11 
12 


I3 


people. 





a2Cor. 5:11. 61Cor.4:9. CBee: ae @2 Cor. 12:15. e Deut. 7:2.3. f1Sam.5:2; Eph.5:7. g1Pet. 


h Ley. 26:12; Jer. 31: 33; 82: 38. 

the left hand was the shield; in the right the sword. Protected by the shield of faith, Paul used the 
sword of the Spirit. 8. By honor and dishonor. A series of contrasted situations, nine in number, 
are now given. Sometimes “honored,” sometimes treated as an outcast; sometimes well spoken of, 
sometimes slandered. As deceivers, and yet true. Sometimes represented as artful impostors, yet 
true in life, word and deed. 9. As unknown, yet well known. Obscure in the great, indifferent 
world, but well known in the church and to God. As dying. Always exposed to death, and yet pre- 
served, and having eternal life. Chastened, and not killed. See Psalm 118:18. Though many a 
‘blow fell upon him, his life was spared. 10. As sorrowful. His sufferings caused him grief, yet he 
rejoicedin hope. Poor. Without worldly wealth, but carrying the riches of Christ to men. Possess- 
ing all things. Compare 1 Cor. 3: 21. 

11-18. Our mouth is open to you. I speak freely to,you, my Corinthian brethren. Our heart 
is enlarged. Filled with affection for you. 12. Yearenotstraitenedin us. Our heart is large 
enough to embrace you all. It is you who are straitened; your hearts are confined so that you do not 
give me free admission. After the noble portraiture of what he suffered for them, he proceeds to affec- 
tionate entreaty. 13. Now for arecompense. In return for his openness and tender affection, let 
there be areciprocation of his love for them. He speaks as their spiritual father in paternal tender- 
ness. 

14-18. Be not unequally yoked with unbelievers. The figure is drawn from the prohibition 
of Deut. 22: 10 and Ley. 19:19. The meaning is that Christians are not to pair off with unbelievers. All 
intimate associations are forbidden. The primary reference is to intermarriage and to association in 
heathen festivals. All close fellowship with unbelievers is included. Saints should choose Christian 
alliances and associations. 15. What concord hath Christ with Belial? Belial, a heathen god 
like Beelzebub, is used as asynonym for Satan. See Matt. 12:24. As Christ has nothing in common 
with Satan, how can a believer in him have a close intimacy with one who is still under the dominion of 
the prince of this world? 16. What agreement hath the temple of God with idols? As God’s 
temple has nothing in common with an idol temple, so the saints are to be separated from idolators. 
For ye are the temple of the living God. The Christian is himself the sanctuary of the Lord, as is 
proved by the passage quoted from Ley. 26:12. God dwells in his people as the Shekinah dwelt 
between the cherubim. 1'7. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, 
‘etc. Quoted from Isaiah 52:11. A call to Israel to cleanse itself from pagan pollutions. 18. And I 








Ch VEieb °- II. CORINTHIANS. 145 





le. Wherefore 1 
17 Wherefore,* come out from among them, and | Goo ° oe” on teem 


be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the| mons them, and be 
unclean thing ; and I will receive you, saith the Lord, 


18 And? will be a Father unto you, and ye shall| “?ingnc> 7° "nclean 


B5, : 
be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. | 4nd {will receive che Ue 


Father 
And ye ‘shall be to me 


CHAPTER WAU sons and daughters, 


saith the Lord Almighty, 
The Effect of Paul’s First Letter at Corinth. 


SUMMARY.—Paul’s Freedom of Speech to the Corinthians. His Anxiety 
Until Titus Came. The Consolation of the News from Corinth. His 
Letter Produced Sorrow; Then Repentance. His Severe Words not 
Due to Ill- Will for the Offender, nor for Them, but to Lead Them to CHAPTER VII. 
Clearing Themselves. 


Having therefore these 


1 Having*® therefore these promises, dearly be- promises, beloved, let us 1 
loved, let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of | Gefitement of flech and 


e oa s s aes gy | Spirit, perfecting holiness 
the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear | spit, perfecting || 


of God. Open so hearts to us: 2 
2 Receive us: we have wronged no man, we have | corruptedno man, we took 


7 advantage of no man. 13 
corrupted no man, we have defrauded no man. pl hse eons oh 
3 I speak not this to condemn you: for I have |} fort have said before, that 
e are in our near 
said before, that ye are in our hearts to die and live | {seiner and live tozother 
with you Great is my boldness of 4 
"i speech toward you, great 
4 Great is my boldness of speech toward you, |is my glorying on your be- 


half: I am filled with com- 
great’ 7s my glorying of you:° I am filled with com- | sort, 1 eee ee in 


fort, Iam exceeding joyful in all our tribulation. all our affliction. 





alsa. 52:11; Rey. 18:4. bJer. 31:1,9; Rev. 21:7. clJohn3:38. @1Cor.1:4. e Phil. 2:17. 


will be a father unto you. Quoted from Jer. 31:1, 9, Isa. 43:6, and other passages. It is a free 
combination of the spirit of several passages. The two passages teach that it is the Divine will that his 
worshipers should be separate from the world; that if they are thus separate he will receive them, and 
will accept them as his own children. Compare Rom. 12: 2, and James 1: 26, 

NOTE ON MIXED MARRIAGES.—‘The unequal yoking’”’ covers the question of marriage between 
Christians and irreligious persons. The whole spirit of the Bible is against the practice. Marriages of 
the “sons of God” with the “daughters of men” caused the sins which brought on the Flood (Gen. 
6:1-7), Alien marriages were forbidden to Israel (Exod. 84: 16; Deut. 7: 3,4); this was the pit into 
which Samson fell (Judges 14: 3); to this cause was due the fall of Solomon (1 Kings 11: 1-10); Ezra 
made the Jews put away alien wives (Ezra 9: 10), and in the discussion of the subject in 1 Corinthians, 
chapter 8, the whole implication is that intermarriage with unbelievers was out of the question. The 
widow is only allowed to marry a Christian (1 Cor. 8: 39). 

1. Having therefore these promises. Those named in the 17th and 18th verses of the preceding 
chapter. This verse is properly in that connection, and should not have been separated by the chapter 
division. Let us cleanse ourselves. See 6:17 above. From all filthiness of the flesh. All 
sensual sins, such as those to which the Corinthians were addicted. And of the spirit. The spirit 
of aman is defiled by such sins as those named in Gal. 6: 20. Perfecting holiness. Every Christian 
in purifying himself should strive for greater holiness and constantly seek to attain to the ideal of 
which Christ is the example. \ 

9-4. Receive us. Make room in your hearts for us and our admonitions. Compare 6: 11-13. We 
wronged no man. In the severe charges of his first letter. We corrupted no man. Probably 
this is an answer to the evil insinuations of his adversaries at Corinth. 8. I say not this to con- 
demn you. I do not accuse you of making these charges against me, Yet he knew we!l that they had 
pbeen made by Judaizers and others at Corinth. I have said before. See 6: 11,12. What follows is 
an expression of undying affection. 4. Great is my boldness of speech, etc. This verse declares 
that he is overflowing with joyful feeling. The next section explains its cause. 

10 








146 II. CORINTHIANS. 


(Ch VII.. 


Ca oe et oe ee ee es Oe ee eS ee 


5 For,? when we were come into Macedonia, our 
flesh had no rest, but we? were troubled on every 
side; without® were fightings, within were fears. 

6 Nevertheless,’ God, that comforteth those that 
are cast down, comforted us by the coming of Titus; 

7 And not by his coming only, but by the conso- 
lation wherewith he was comforted in you, when he 
told us your earnest desire, your mourning, your 
fervent mind toward me, so that [rejoiced the more. 

8 For though I made you sorry with a letter, I do 
not repent, though® I did repent: for I perceive 
that the same epistle hath made you sorry, though 
zt were but for a season. 

9 Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but 
that ye sorrowed to repentance: for ye were made 
sorry after a godly mamner, that ye might receive 
damage by us in nothing. 





For even when we were 5 
come into Macedonia, our 
flesh had. no relief but we 
were afflicted on every 
side; without were fight- 
ings, within were fears. 
Nevertheless he that com- 6- 
forteth the lowly, even 
God, comforted us by the 
coming of Titus; and not 7 
by his coming only, but 
also by the comfort where- 
with he was comforted in 

ou, while he told us your 
onging, your mourning, 
your zeal for me; so that 
I rejoiced yet more. For 8: 
though I made you sorry 
with my epistle, I do not 
regret it, though I did re- 
gret; for I see that that 
epistle made you sorry, 
though but for a season. 
Now I rejoice, not that ye 9 
were made sorry, but that 
ye were made sorry unto 
repentance: for ye were 
made sorry after a godly 


sort, that ye might suffer _ 
loss by us in nothing. For 16 
godly sorrow worketh re- 
pentance unto salvation, a 
repentance which bringeth 
no regret: but the sorrow 
of the world worketh 
death. For behold, this 11 
selfsame thing, that ye 
were made sorry after a 
godly sort, what earnest 


10 For? godly sorrow worketh repentance to sal- 
vation not to be repented of :* but the sorrow of the 
world worketh death. 

11 For, behold, this self-same thing, that ye? 
sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it 
wrought in you, yea, what clearing of yourselves, 


a@2Cor. 2:18. 62 Cor. 4:8. ¢ Deut. 32:25. d@2Thes. 2:16. e€2Cor.2:4. f2 Sam. 12; Jer. 31: 18, 20. 
g Matt. 27:4,5. Ader. 50:4,5; Zech. 12:10. 





5-7. For when we were come into Macedonia. He first came from Ephesus to Troas (2: 12), 
and expected to meet Titus there with word from Corinth concerning the effect of his first letter. Not 
meeting him, he went on to Macedonia in great distress of mind. Our flesh had no rest. Compare 
with this 2:13, Without were fightings. Conflicts with enemies of Christ. Within were fears. 
Lest the church at Corinth might make shipwreck. 6. Nevertheless God comforted us 
by the coming of Titus. Titus brought to him the joyful news of repentance and reformation at 
Corinth. This news turned his affliction to joy. '7. Not by his coming only. He rejoiced to meet 
again a well-beloved fellow laborer, but rejoiced still more over the news which he brought. Your 
earnest desire. To cleanse themselves from fault. Your mourning. Over the reproof of their 
sins. Your fervent mind toward me. Affection for and zeal to please me. 

8-11. I do not repent. ‘Regret,’ asin the Revision. The Greek word rendered repent in this 
verse is not the one rendered repentance in verses 9 and10. The Revision preserves the distinction 
throughout. His first letter made them sorry, and at one time he regretted sending it, because he 
feared it would not work the result he wished, but since it had, he did not regret that he sent it. 
9. Now I rejoice. Not because they were made sorry, but that their sorrow brought repentance. 
Observe, (1) That.regret is not repentance; (2) that sorrow is not repentance; (3) that godly sorrow 
(verse 10) works repentance, or, in other words, repentance results from godly sorrow, or sorrowing im 
a way pleasing to God. 10. Godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation, not to be 
repented of. The steps are (1) godly sorrow; (2) repentance as a result of godly sorrow; (3) salva- 
tion secured by repentance; (4) this effect of repentance is never regretted. See Revision. The differ- 
ence of repentance from sorrow and regret is seen when we bear in mind that it means the change of 
mind and heart wrought by godly sorrow for sin. The state implied by repentance always leads to a 
change of life. The Common Version here and elsewhere has made confusion by translating two Greek 
words which mean different things by the same English term. One, rendered by the Revision “regret,” 
is found in Matt. 27; 3,5; the other, properly rendered “repent,” is found in Acts 2: 38. The sorrow of 
the world. Not godly sorrow, but remorse. The sorrow of Judas was remorse. In the case of many 
besides Judas it has resulted in despair, which has led to destruction of life, or to eternal death. 
11. For behold this self-same thing. Here is the proof that they “sorrowed after a godly sort.’” 
They repented and brought forth the fruits of repentance. What earnest care. No indifference 


Ch. VIT.] II. CORINTHIANS. 





yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what ve- 
hement desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge! 
In all things ye have approved yourselves to be clear 
in this matter. 

12 Wherefore, though I wrote unto you, 1 did tt 
not for his cause that had done the wrong, nor for 
his cause that suffered wrong, but that our care for 
you in the sight of God might appear unto you. 

13 Therefore we were comforted in your comfort; 
yea, and exceedingly the more joyed we for the joy 
of Titus, because his spirit was refreshed? by 
you all. 

14 For if I have boasted any thing to him of you, 
Iam not ashamed: but as we spake all things to you 
in truth, even so our boasting, which J made before 
Titus, is found a truth. 

15 And his inward affection is more abundant 
toward you, whilst he remembereth” the obedience 
of you all, how with fear and trembling ye received 
him. 

16 I rejoice therefore that® I have confidence in 
you in all things. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


The Grace of Giving. 


SUMMARY.—The Liberality of the Macedonian Brethren. Exhortation to 
the Corinthians to Abound in the Same Grace. The Example of 
Christ. The Spiritual Blessing of Liberal Giving. Titus and Another 
Brother Sent to Corinth to Aid and Encourage Them. 

1 Moreover, brethren, we do you to wit of the 
grace of God bestowed on the churches of Mac- 
edonia; 





147 


care it wroughtin you,yea, 
what clearing of your- 
selves, yea, what indigna- 
tion, yea, what fear, yea, 
what longing, yea, what 
zeal, yea, what avenging! 
In everything ye approved 
yourselves to be pure in 
the matter. So although I 
wrote unto you, ZI wrote 
not for his cause that did 
the wrong, nor for his 
cause that suffered the 
wrong, but that your ear- 
nest care for us might be 
made manifest unto you 
in the sight of God. There- 
fore we have been com- 
forted: and in our comfort 
we joyed the more exceed- 
ingly for the joy of Titus, 
because his spirit hath 
been refreshed by you all. 
For if in anything I have 
gloried to him on your be- 
half, I was not put to 
shame; but as we spake 
all things to you in truth, 
so our glorying also,which 
I made before Titus, was 
found to be truth. And his 
inward affection is more 
abundantly toward you, 
whilst he remembereth the 
obedience of you all, how 
with fear and trembling 
ye received him. I rejoice 
that in everything I am of 
good courage concerning 
you. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Moreover, brethren, we 
make known to you the 
race of God which hath 
een given in the church- 


a 


12 


15 


16 


@ Rom. 15:32. 06% Cor. 2:9; Phil. 2:12. c2Thes. 3:4; Phil. 8: 21. 





any longer. What clearing of yourselves. From all responsibility for the sins of the incestuous 
person (1 Cor. 5:1, 2; 2 Cor.2:6-8). Whatindignation. Against the deed that disgraced the church. 
What revenge. What punishment of the offense committed, 

12-16. Though I wrote unto you,etc. The language that follows in this verse has caused 
some confusion. Paul evidently means to say that he did not write his stern charge, in1 Corinthians, 
chapter 5, so much on account of the wrong doer, the incestuous person, nor on account of the person 
he had injured (his father), as to manifest his earnest care for the welfare of the church. 18. There- 
fore we were comforted in your comfort. He still pours forth his joy over the happy change in 
the church, a joy due to his great affection for it. 14. For if I have boasted anything to him 
of you. If he had done so, their prompt repentance showed that his boasting was well founded. 
15. And his inward affection, etc. He had not been received with distrust or coldness or stub- 
born disobedience, but ina humble and repentant Christian spirit, which had greatly increased his 
affection. 16. I rejoice therefore that I have confidence in you. Rather, that I am greatly 
encouraged concerning you. 

1-5. We make known to you the grace of God (Revision), Paul now introduces the great col- 
lection of which he spoke in 1 Cor. 16:1, and Rom. 15:26. See also Acts 11:29; Acts 24:17. It had always 
been the custom of the Jews in foreign lands to send up to Jerusalem contributions for the temple 
treasury, but Paul-urges the cantributions for God’s spiritual temple, the poor saints. The mother 


148 II. CORINTHIANS. 


2 How that in agreat trial of affliction, the abun- 
dance of their joy,? and their deep poverty, abound- 
ed unto the riches of their liberality. 

3 For to their power, (I bear record,) yea, and 
beyond their power, they were willing of themselves; 

4 Praying us with much entreaty that we would 
receive the gift, and take upon us the fellowship of 
the ministering to the saints. 

5 And this they did not as we hoped; but first® 
gave their own selves to the Lord, and unto us by 
the will of God: 

6 Insomuch that* we desired Titus, that as he had 
begun, so he would also finish in you the same grace 
also. 

7 Therefore, as® ye abound in every thing, in 
faith, and utterance, and knowledge, and én all dil- 
igence, and zm your love to us, see that ye abound 
in this grace also. 

8 If speak not by commandment, but by occasion 
of the forwardness of others, and to prove the sin- 
cerity of your love. 

9 For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ,® that, though he was rich, yet for your sakes 
he became poor, that ye through his poverty might 





[Ch. “VIII. 


es of Macedonia; how that 2 
in much proof of affliction 
the abundance of their joy 
and their deep poverty 
abounded unto the riches 
of their liberality. For ac- 3 
cording to their power, I 
bear witness, yea and be- 
yond their power, they 

ave of their own accord, 

eseeching us with much 4 
intreaty in regard of this 
grace and the fellowship 
in the ministering to the 
saints: and this, not as we 5 
had hoped, but first they 
gave their own selves to 
the Lord, and to us by the 
will of God. 
that we exhorted Titus, 
that as he had made a be- 
ginning before, so he 
would also complete in 
you this grace also. But 7 
as ye abound in eyvyery- 
thing, in faith, and utter- 
ance, and knowledge, and 
im all earnestness, and in 
your love to us, see that ye 
abound in this grace also. 
I speak not by way of com- 8 
mandment, but as proving 
through the earnestness of 
others the sincerity also of 
your love. For ye know 9 
the grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, that, though he 
was rich, yet for your 
sakes he became poor, 
that ye through his pover- 


Insomuch 6 





be rich. 


eee eee ee ee 
@ Mark 12:44, 6 Acts 11:29; 24:17; Rom. 15:25; 1 Cor. 16:1,3,4. c Matt. 25:40; Phil. 4:18; Heb. 18:6. d@2Cor. 12:18. 


é1 Cor. 1:5; 12:13. f1Cor. 7:6. g Matt. 8:20; Luke 9:58; Phil. 2: 6,7. 





church was in need and the abundance of the saints elsewhere was to be her supply. The cause of the 
‘destitution of the Jerusalem Christians is easily found in the times. Famine (Acts 11:29) had stricken 
the land; this had been followed by the troubles and unsettled state of affairs which were leading to the 
Jewish war. The uneasiness of the public mind, as well as the tumults, disturbed business and labor. 
The result would necessarily be close times and destitution. The lesson of this great collection is that 
distance does not diminish the claims of suffering brethren for help. Churches of Macedonia, The 
Roman province of Macedonia embraced all Grecian countries north of the province of Achaia. The 
churches of Philippi, Thessalonica, and Berea, founded by Paul, and probably many others, were in 
‘this province. 2. How thatina great trial of affliction. The language seems to imply persecu- 
tion. This might have been an excuse for not giving, if they had sought one. See Acts 17:6 and 
Thess. 2:14. But, still, their joy in the gospel and their poverty combined so that they contributed with 
great liberality, 8, For to their power. It was not the greatness of their contribution, but the 
fact that they gave not only up to, but even beyond their ability, which made their liberality so rich. 
The widow who gave her mite did more than the rich men who cast in out of their abundance. Willing 
of themselves. Required nourging. 4, Praying us with much entreaty. They insisted on doing 
more than the apostle felt that they ought todo. 5. Andthis . + » notas wehad hoped. The 
thought is that they exceeded our hope. They consecrated themselves, and hence, held that all they 
had was the Lord’s. When church members give their own selves, there will be no complaint that 
*heir money is withheld. 

6-9. We desired Titus, that as he had begun. This faithful fellow laborer of Paul, when he 
had gone to Corinth when Paul’s first epistle was sent, had begun the collection which it commanded 
in1Cor. 16:1. Now Paul directs that he return and complete the collection before the arrival of Paul 
(Acts 20:1-3). Grace. The grace of giving. 7. As ye abound in everything. Instead of Mace- 
donia setting the example to Corinth, the latter ought to have led. Their church was rich in gifts. See 
1Cor.1:5. 8. Ispeaknot by commandment. He levies no tax by command. The giving must be 
free and cheerful in order to be blessed. He encourages them by the forwardness of others; the 
example of the Macedonian brethren, and by that of Christ. 9, For ye know the grace of our Lord 


Ch. VIII.] II. CORINTHIANS. 149 
re 

10 And herein? I give my advice: for this is» ex- Prieur pecome rich And, 29 
pedient for you, who have begun before, not only to | ment: for this is expedient 


do, but also to be forward a year ago. ee ee 


11 Now therefore perform the doing of it; that | year ago, not only to do, 
: : 7 ut also to will. But now it 
as there was a readiness to will, so there may be a/ complete the doing also; 


performance also out of that which ye have. tides toreilt covhere ered 


oF ili j tt a . | be the completion also out 
12 For’ if there be first a willing mind, 7¢ 7s ac Ct echy Gene bee nods 


cepted according to that a man hath, and not reidiness is there, iis ac- 
according to that he hath not. mndn hath, not accorting as A 

> / ‘ he hath not, For J say no 

13 For J mean not that other men be eased, and Mer than Dike ee 


you burdened; eased, and ye distressed: 


14 But by an equality, that now at this time your | Rbundsnes denug'a soyply 


i jy | at this present time for 
abundance may be a supply for their want, that their ater eee 
abundance also may be a supply for your want; that) abundance also may be- 


ov i ° come a supply for your 
there may be equality: want; that thors may be 


it is i d equality: as it is written, 15 
15 As it is written, He that had gathered much Ge hn Sea een EeS 
had nothing over; and he that had gathered little | nothing over; and he that 


athered little had no lack. 
had no lack. Bat thank! be. tor God, 16 


re 1 which putteth the same 
16 But thanks de to God, which put the same eo Ter 


earnest care into the heart of Titus for you. the heart of Titus. For in- 17 


Fi 6 ted : 
17 For indeed he accepted the exhortation; but, | 1oefation ber bones hia. 


i is self very earnest, he went 
being more forward, of his own accord he went unto | s¢lf very ¢ SORTA 
you. accord, And we have sent 18 


. ts t th ith hi th 

18 And we have sent with him the® brother, brother whose cee in 

i ro 7 the gospel is sprea 

whose praise 7s in the gospel throughout all the|the hee ee 
churches; 


al1Cor. 7:25. 6 Matt. 10:42; 1 Tim. 6:18; Heb. 13:16. c Mark. 12: 43,44; Luke 21:3. dEx. 16:18. e2Cor. 12:18. 











Jesus Christ. This is the chiefest of motives to giving. Our Lord gave up ali for us. He became poor 
that we might be rich in heavenly riches. If he gave himself for us, what shall we give for him? Com- 
pare Phil. 2:7. Christ parted with riches and took poverty; with glory and took humiliation; with bliss 
and took suffering, all for our sakes. The passage compares Christ’s pre-existent state with that he had 
on earth. 7 

10-15. HereinI give myadvice. Not a‘“commandment” (verse 8) but advice. This is, that it is 
expedient to complete the work begun “‘a year ago,” or as we would say, “last year.” 11. Therefore, 
perform the doing of it. Finishit up. As there was “a readiness to will” let there be ‘‘a perform- 
ance” by giving out of what “you have.” 12. For if there be first a willing mind. The willing 
‘mind had been shown in the readiness “to will.” The willing mind is essential to the acceptance of 
the gift. If there be this pre-requisite, then God accepts the gift and measures it according to a man’s 
means. 18. I mean notthat other,men be eased. I wish all to give according to what they have, other 
’ ehurches as well as you. Nor doI mean to burden you that the saints at Jerusalem may be at ease. 
14, But by anequality. There is a lack at Jerusalem; let your abundance supply it. So, too, if you 
be in want, they must supply it if they have abundance. The church is a band of loving brethren. 
Where one lacks others should supply, that all may be equally provided. 15. Itis written. In Ex- 
odus 16:18. When the manna, fell, whatever each individual gathered, there was found to be, on 
measuring, “‘an omer toa man.” So brotherly love is to effect such a distribution that no saint will be 
in want, and none have what is superfluous. 

16-21. Butthanks beto God. Because Titus is ready to return to Corinth and help inthe work. 
17. For indeed he accepted the exhortation. Readily accepted the work when Paul suggested it; 
nay more, of his own accord, he desired and chose it. 18. We have sent with him the brother. 
Two brethren are sent with Titus. These are not named, and we can only conjecture who they were, 
As verse 19 says that he “was chosen of the churches to travel with us in this grace,” and as Acts 20:4 
says that the Macedonian brethren, Sopater, Aristarchus and Secundus did travel with him to Jerusa- 
lem, one of these is probably meant. Many have held that Luke was the person, noris it improbable. 


150 II. CORINTHIANS. 


(Chen LX. 





19 And not that only, but who was also chosen? 
of the churches to travel with us with this grace, 
which is administered by us to the glory of the 
same Lord, and declaration of your ready mind: 

20 Avoiding® this, that no man should blame us 
in this abundance which is administered by us: 

21 Providing’? for honest things, not only in the 
sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of men. 

22 And we have sent with them our brother, 
whom we have oftentimes proved diligent in many 
things, but now much more diligent, upon the great 
confidence which J have in you. 

23 Whether any do enquire of Titus, he is my 
partner and fellow-helper concerning you; or our 
brethren be enquired of, they are® the messengers of 
the churches, and the glory of Christ. 

24 Wherefore shew ye to them, and before the 
churches, the proof of your love, and of our boast- 
ing on your behalf. 


CHAPTER IX. 


Liberal and Cheerful Giving. ‘ 


SUMMARY.—The Reason for Sending Titus to Corinth. Giving a Sowing. 
An Abundant Harvest to the Cheerful and Liberal Giver. The Un- 
speakable Gift. 

1 For as touching? the ministering to the saints, 
it is superfluous for me to write to you: 

2 For I know® the forwardness of your mind,® 
for which I boast of you to them of Macedonia,i 
that Achaia was ready a year ago; and your zeal 


hath provoked very many. 





and not only so, but who 19 
was also appointed by the 
churches to travel with us 
in the matter of this grace, 
which is ministered by us 
to the glory of the Lord, 
and to shew our readiness: 
avoiding this, that any 20 
man should blame us in 
the matter of this bounty 
which is ministered by us: 
for we take thought for 21 
things honourable, not 


only in the sight of the 


Lord, but also in the sight 

of men. And we have sent 22 
with them our brother, 
whom we have many 
times proved earnest in 
many things, but now 
much more earnest, by 
reason of the great confi- 
dence which he hath in 
you. Whether any inquire 
about Titus, he is my part- 
ner and my fellow- worker 
to you- ward; or our breth- 
ren, they are the messen- 
gers of the churches, they 


23 


|are the glory of Christ. 


Shew ye therefore unto 24 
them in the face of the 
churches the proof of your 
love, and of our glorying 
on your behalf. 


CHAPTER IX. 


_ For as touching the min- 1 
istering to the saints, it is 
superfluous for me _ to 
write to you: for I know 2 
your readiness, of which I 
glory on your behalf to 
them of Macedonia, that 
Achaia hath been prepared 
for a year past; and your 
zeal hath stirred up very 





@1Cor.16:3. 62Cor. 4:15. c Eph. 5:15. 


Rom. 15:26; 1 Cor. 16:1; Gal. 2:10. g2Oor. 8:19. 


ad Prov. 3:4; Phil 4:8;1Pet. 2:12.° 
h2 Cor. 8:24. 


é Phil. 2:25. 


Acts 11: 29; 
22 Cor. 8:10. “ : 





19. Chosen of the churches. Paul desired, for the reasons given in verses 20 and 21, that the 
churches should send along messengers in charge of their gifts. 20. Avoiding this. There were 
evil minded persons who might charge that the apostle had used the gifts for his own advantage unless 
the messengers could report just how the funds were used. Paul was careful (21) to provide what was 
honest, in the sight of God, for his conscience’s sake, and in the sight of men for his work’s sake, 

22-24. We have sent with them. With Titus and the brother named in verse 18, The brother 
referred to here and commended so highly is nowhere named. 28. Whether any do inquire of 
Titus. The commendation given of these three brethren is official. Titus had long been a fellow la- 
borer, and had recently visited Corinth. The other two were messengers of the Macedonian churches. 
Not only of the churches, but of the glory of Christ, the Lord’s messengers to show forth his glory ina 
great work of mercy. 24, Therefore, shew ye to them. Since these are representative men, 
delegates of the churches, and of Christ, receive them cordially. Give proof of your love, and show 
that when we have boasted of your excellencies that our boasting was not empty. An ill reputation 
would not only reflect upon the churches but upon Paul himself. 

1,2. The ministering to the saints. Contributions to supply their needs. It is superfluous. They 
were fully instructed, and had begun the work. Yet he does write and explain why in verse 3. 2. I 
know the forwardness of your mind. This is why it seemed superfluous to write. Achaia was 
ready ayearago. The churches of the province of Achaia, of which Corinth was the capital. The 
province embraced all southern Greece, including Athens and Cenchrea, They had begun the collection 
“‘a year ago (8:10).” 


Ch. EX: | II. CORINTHIANS. 





3 Yet? have I sent the brethren, lest our boasting 
of you should be in vain in this behalf; that, as I 
said, ye may be ready: 

4 Lest haply if they of Macedonia come with me, 
and find you unprepared, we (that we say not, you) 
should be ashamed in this same confident boasting. 

5 Therefore I thought it necessary to exhort the 
brethren, that they would go before unto you, and 
make up beforehand your bounty, whereof ye had 
notice before, that the same might be ready, as 
a matter of bounty, and not as of covetousness. 

6 But? this Z say, He which soweth sparingly 
shall reap also sparingly; and he which soweth 
bountifully shall reap also bountifully. 

7 Every man according as he purposeth in his 
heart, so let him give ;° not grudgingly, or of neces- 
-sity: for? God loveth a cheerful giver. 

8 Ande God is able to make all grace abound 
toward you; that ye, always having all sufficiency in 
_all things, may abound to every good work: 

8 (As it is written,* He hath dispersed abroad; 
he hath given to the poor: his righteousness re- 
maineth for ever. 

10 Now he that® 
both minister bread for your 
your seed sown, and increase the fruits 
righteousness ; ) 

11 Being enriched in every thing to all bountiful- 
ness, which causeth through us thanksgiving to 
God. 


.a2 Cor. 


ministereth seed to the sower, 
food, and multiply 
of » your 









6:7,9. ¢ Deut. 15:7. 


b Prov. 11:24; 19:17; 22:9; Gal. 
g Isa. 55: 10. 


8:6, 17. 
é Prov. 28:27; Phil. 4:19. f Psa. 112: 9. 


3-5. Yet have I sent the brethren. 
~ prepared when he came. 4. Lest haply 





h Hos. 10:12; Matt. 6:1. 


151 


many of them. But I have 
sent the brethren, that our 
glorying on your behalf 
may not be made void in 
this respect; that, even as 
Lsaid, ye may be prepared: 
lest by any means, if there 
come with me any of Mac- 
edonia, and find you un- 
prepared, we (that we say 
not, ye) should be put to 
shame in this confidence. 
I thought it necessary 
therefore to intreat the 
brethren, that they would 
go before unto you, and 
make up beforehand your 
afore - promised bounty, 
that the same might be 
ready, aS a matter of 
bounty, and not of ex- 
tortion. 

But this J say, He that 
soweth sparingly shall 
reap also sparingly; and 
he that soweth bountifully 
shall reap also bountiful- 
ly. Let each man do ac- 
cording as he hath pur- 
posed in his heart; not 
grudgingly, or of necessi- 
ty: for God loveth a cheer- 
ful giver. And God is able 
to make all grace abound 
unto you; that ye, having 
always all sufliciency in 
everything, may abound 
unto every good work: as 
itis written, 


He’ hath _ scattered 
abroad, he hath given 
to the poor; 


His righteousness abid- 
eth for ever. 

And he that supplieth 
seed to the sower and 
bread for food, shall sup- 
ply and multiply your seed 
for sowing, and increase 
the fruits of your right- 


3 


~ 


for) 


7 


9 





d Ex. 25:2; 35:5; Rom. 12: 8; 2 Cor.8:12. 


42 Cor. 4:15. 


See 8:17, 18, 22. Hesent them so that they would surely be 
ifthey of Macedonia. Acts 20:4 named certain brethren 


of Macedonia who did attend him. If these shonld find Corinth unprepared with the collection when 


Paul came, after what he had said, it would fill him with shame. 
it needful to send the brethren that 


5. Therefore. 


Hence, he thought 
the work might surely be conducted td completion, and the col- 


lection ready. Asa matter of bounty. Asa free gift, cheerfully bestowed; not something extorted 


from them (see Revision). 


6-9. He which soweth bountifully. Giving is not a sacrifice, but rather a sowing. <As the farmer 


_gives his seed to the earth, and then reaps as he has sown, 

ing there will be spare reaping ; 
in Exod, 25:2; 1 Chron. 29:14, 17; Ps. 
serously. The next verse teaches how to give. 
-giving must be cheerful. 
wor to secure popular applause, or grudgingly, he is not approved. 
-abound towards you. To 


sto make up all you part with and more. The faithful steward will be trusted with more. 


if liberal sowing, liberal reaping. See the same prin 
102:9; Luke 6:38; Acts 20:35, The lesson of this verse is, give gen- 
”, Every man according as he purposeth. The 
It is the cheerful giver whom the Lord loves. Where one gives by compulsion, 
8. God is able to make all grace 
bestow upon you every blessing, temporal as well as spiritual. He is able 


9. As it 


so giving is a sowing. If there is a spare sow- 
ciple expressed 


is 


written. In Ps. 112:9. Itis said there of the man who feareth the Lord; He does not hold tightly but 


dispenses abroad by giving to the poor. His righteousness, 
ever. That is, he is supplied with means to keep it up. 
10-14. He that ministereth seed to the sower. 


or right doing in giving, remaineth for- 


God, who can, and does, bless charitable giving, 





152 II. CORINTHIANS. (Gb, xX. 
seers . . : | eousness: ye beingenrich- 11 

12 For the administration of this service not| ea'in everything unto all 
only supplieth the want of the saints, but is abun- titocae to CMe 
dant also by many thanksgivings unto God. to God. For the ministra- 12 

€ s . s ag ° 1 oO 1 rv1c no 

13 Whiles by the experiment of this ministration | oniy fietn mee pipe! ten 
they glorify? God for your professed subjection pe ne Wane oS eee 
unto the gospel of Christ, and for your liberal dis- through many shankegiy- 

é 3 s unto God; s 
tribution” unto them, and unto all men ; through the proving of you 

14 And by their prayer for you, which long after Pep ORN Come OR eee 
you for the exceeding grace of God in you. ence of your confession 

15 Thanks de unto God? for his unspeakable gift. | UM? for the liberality of 

your contribution unto 
om ne yi ree while 14 
they themselves also, with 
CHAPTER X. He) pao bs your bee 
3 t 
Judaizing False Teachers Rebuked. reason of the exceeding 
SUMMARY.—Paul’s Personal Appeal. His Weapons Spiritual. What was Wicets oe cara. ta 15 
Said of His Bodily Presence. What He will be When Present. Con- | unspeakable gift. 
cerning Boasting. The Saint May Glory in the Lord Only. CHAPTER X. 
Now I Paul myself in- 

1 Now* I Paul myself beseech you by the meek-| treat'you by the meakness = 
ness and gentleness of Christ, who in presence am rey peemer aane y 
base among you, but being absent am bold toward lowly among oe hate 

é ing absen am oO goo 
you: courage toward you: yea, 2 

2 But I beseech you,® that I may not be bold ey eer cn Bao es 
when I am present with that confidence wherewith courage with the confi. 
I think to be bold against some, which think of us to be pale Gone 

: wcly which count of us as if we 
as if we walked according to the flesh. walled seaman a. 


@ Matt. 5:16. 6 Heb. 18:16. cJames1:17. dIsa. 42:2. 





é1 Cor. 4:21. 





will do so in the case of the Corinthians. The fruits of their righteousness will be increased, for 
their means will be increased. 11. Being enriched. This explains how the fruits of righteousness 
are increased. As they are enriched it tends to bountifulness, and this causeth thanksgiving to 
God. 12. For the administration of theservice. Two things result from the bountiful giving. 
(1). The wants of the saints are supplied. (2), Their thanksgiving for the relief glorifies God. 18. They 
glorify God. That the Corinthians had become subject to the gospel and God’s means of succoring 
their temporal wants. Some Judaizing Christians at Jerusalem doubted whether the Gentile churches 
were really churches of Christ. Such a gift would tend to open their minds and remove their prejudices, 
an object very dear to the heart of Paul. 14. And by their prayer for you. Thus, filled with affec- 
tion for you, and longing for you on account of the proof they had of God’s grace to you, they glorify 
God by prayer for you. 

15. Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift. The Corinthians were asked to give; they 
were cited to the example of Christ (8:9); but now Paul bursts out in thanksgiving to God for his gift, 
which language cannot describe—Jesus Christ and his gospel. It was that gift which broke down the 
old enmity and bound together Jew and Gentile in love, so that Jewish Christians would pray, thank 
God for, and long for Gentile Christians like those at Corinth. 

1,2. Now I, Paul. Thus farin this epistle Paul has associated himself with Timothy (1:1) and 
his fellow-laborers. He has spoken in the plural. Now he uses the singular, and there will be seen in 
the 10th and 11th chapters a tone of severity contrasted with the gentleness and love of those that pre- 
cede. Those chapters are addressed to the church which had as a body cleared itself of fault. There 
was, however, a faction who opposed him, who disparaged his claims as an apostle, and he now speaks. 
for the benefit of these. This accounts for the change of style and tone. Since the Opposition was to 
him personally, he speaks in person. Lrepeat what has been before said, that this opposition came 
mainly from the Judaizing Christians who thought Paul had gone wrong in not requiring Gentile Chris- 
tians to come under the bondage of the Jewish law. Who in presence am base. Lowly. His first 
letter had been stern (see 1 Cor.5). The opposers said that he was very gentle when present, but bold 
when absent. 2. I beseech you. He asks that, when he comes, he may not have to exercise that 


Che Xx. ] * II. CORINTHIANS. 153: 


flesh. For though we walk 3 
in the flesh, we do not war 
according to che flesh (for 4 
the weapons of our war- 
fare are not of the flesh, 
but mighty before God to 
the casting down of strong 
holds); casting down im- 5 
aginations, and every high 
thing that exalted 
against the knowledge of 
God, and bringing every 
thought into captivity to 
the obedience of Christ; 
and being in readiness to 6. 
avenge all disobedience, 
when your obedience shall 
be fulfilled. Ye lookat the 7 
things that are before your 
face. If any man trusteth 
in himself that he is 
Christ’s, let. him consider 





3 For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war 
after the flesh; 

4 (For* the weapons of our warfare are not car- 
nal, but mighty through God” to the pulling down 
of strong holds;) 

5 Casting® down imaginations, and every high 
thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of 
God, and bringing into captivity every thought to 
the obedience of Christ; 

6 And®* having. in a readiness to revenge all diso- 
bedience, when your® obedience is fulfilled. 

7 Do ye look on things after the outward appear- 
ance?! If any man trust to himself that he is 





Christ’s, let him of himself think this again, that as 
he is Christ’s, even so are we® Christ’s. 

8 For though I should boast somewhat more of 
our authority, which the Lord hath given us for 
edification, and not for your destruction, I should 
not be ashamed; 

9 That I may not seem as if I would terrify you 
by letters. 

10 For Ais letters (say they) are weighty and pow- 
erful; but® his bodily presence 7s weak, and his 
speech! contemptible. ‘ 

11 Let such an one think this, that such as we 
are in word by letters when we are absent, such 
will we be also in deed when we are present. 

12 For) we dare not make ourselves of the num- 
ber, or compare ourselves with some that commend 
themselves: but they, measuring themselves by 
themselves, and comparing themselves among them- 
selves, are not wise. 


—_— 





c1 Cor. 1:19; 3:10. d@2 Cor. 13:2. 


h Gal. 4:18. 


6 Jer. 1:10. 
g 2 Cor. 11:23. 


aEph. 6:13; 1 Thes. 5:8. 
1 John 4:6. 





this again with himself, 
that, even as he is Christ’s, 
so also are we. For though 
I should glory somewhat 
abundantly concerning 
our authority (which the 
Lord gave for building you 
up, and not for casting you 
down), I shall not be put 


8 


to shame: that I may not 9 


seem as if I would terrify 
you by my letters, 


weighty and strong; but 
his bodily presence is 
weak, and his speech of no 
account. Let such a one 
reckon this, that, what we 
are in word by letters 
when we are absent, such 
are we also in deed when 
we are present. For we 
are not bold to number or 
compare ourselves with 
certain of them that com- 
mend themselves: but they 
themselves, measuring 
themselves by themselves, 
and comparing themselves 
with themselves, are with- 





e2Cor. 7:15. f1 Cor. 14:37; 
41Cor.1:17. j2 Cor. 5:12. 





For, 10 
-| His letters, they say, are 


11 


boldness which he fears he will have to use in censuring some opposers. He desires that all may so 
act that he can be lowly and gentle when present. As if we walked according to the flesh. Were 
led by worldly motives. 

8-6. We walk in the flesh. He is in the body, but though in the flesh does not use fleshly 
weapons in his warfare. 4. For the weapons of our warfare. Since these were not carnal, the 
might was not in human strength, but in God who gave them power to overcome the strongholds of sin. 
5. Casting down imaginations. The sophistries of philosophy. By these weapons the soul is 
rescued, delivered, and brought to the obedience of Christ. 6. To revenge all disobedience. 
These spiritual weapons are ready to punish all disobedience at Corinth, when time has been given for 
all who are disposed to be obedient to show it. 

"”-11. Do ye look on things after the outward appearanceP The Revision omits the ques- 
tion. Perhaps his opposers claimed some external advantages, that they were from Judea, had been 
disciples of Christ on earth, ete. If such an one claimed to be Christ’s on this, or any ground, Paul had 
equal claims. 8. Though I should boast, ete. A comparison of claims to privilege and authority 
would not put him to shame. Not for your destruction. His power and authority were given to: 
save men; he desires not to have to use them to fulminate censures. 9, 10. ThatI may not seem, 


etc. His enemies said that his letters were weighty and stern, but his presence was very different. In 


(154 II. CORINTHIANS. 


13 But we will not boast of things without our 
Measure, but according to the measure of the rule 
which God hath distributed to us, a measure to 
reach even unto you. 

14 For we stretch not ourselves beyond our meas- 
ure, as though we reached not unto you;* for we are 
come as far as to you also in preaching the gospel of 
Christ: 

15 Not boasting of things without owr measure, 
that is,” of other men’s labours; but having hope, 
when your faith is. increased, that we shall be en- 
larged by you according to our rule abundantly, 

16 To preach the gospel in the regions beyond 
you, and not to boast in another man’s line of 
things made ready to our hand. 

17 But? he that glorieth, let him glory in the 
Lord. 

18 For’ not he that commendeth himself is ap- 
proved, but® whom the Lord commendeth. 





CHAPTER XI. 


Paul and His Antagonists. 


‘-SUMMARY.—Compelled by His Opposers to Indulge in Folly. His Jeal- 
ousy for the Corinthians. Compelled to Recount His Claims. His 
Unparalleled Sufferings. A Boast in Infirmities. 


1 Would to God ye could bear with me a little int 
‘my folly: and indeed bear with me. 





@1Cor.9:1. 6 Rom. 15:20. c Isa. 65:16; Jer. 9:24; 1 Cor. 1:31. 


1 Cor. 4:5. 2 Cor. 5:18. 





d@ Proy. 27:2; Luke 18:10. 


[Ch. XI. 


out podestane But 13 
we will not glory beyond 
our measure, but accord- 
ing to the measure of the 
province which God ap- 
portioned to us as a meas- 
ure, to reach even unto 
you. For we stretch not 
ourselves overmuch, as 
though we reacbked not 
unto you: for we came 
even as far as unto you in 
the gospel of Christ: not 
glorying beyond our meas- 
ure, that is, in other men’s 
labours; but having hope 
that, as your faith grow- 
eth, we shall be magnified 
in you according to our 
province unto further 
abundance, so as to preach 16 
the gospel even unto the 
parts beyond you, and not 

to glory in another’s prov- 
ince in regard of things 
ready to our hand. But he 17 
that glorieth, let him glory 

in the Lord. For not he 18 
that commendeth himself 

is approved, but whom the 
Lord commendeth. 


14 


15 


CHAPTER XI, 


Would that ye could1 
bear with me in a little 
foolishness: nay indeed 





é Rom. 2:29; 





other words, he terrified by empty threats. 


11. Let such an one think this. Let all who make 


such statements know that when I come I will in presence do just as I have written. 
12-18. We dare not make ourselves of the number. This no doubt ironically alludes to 


teachers who had come to Corinth making lofty claims, to whom repeated allusions are made. These 
set themselves up as the standard by which all Christian teachers were to be tried. 18. We will not 
boast of things without our measure. Will not, like those just alluded to, suffer our boasting to 
carry us beyond all bounds. But according to the measure. We confine ourselyes simply to the 
line of action assigned to us by the Lord. To reach even unto you. The line assigned by the Lord 
(Gal, 2: 7-9) sent Paul to the Gentiles. 14. For we stretch not ourselves beyond our measure. 
‘This verse renders clearer the thought in those preceding. The Judaizers said that Paul had exceeded 
his commission in coming to Corinth, that he had no authority there. He asserts that not he, but they, 
had gone beyond the measure. Others were apostles to the circumcision; he and Barnabas to the 
‘uncircumcision. When he came to Europe he was sent by the Spirit (Acts 16:9). 15. Not boasting 
of other men’s labors. It was Paul’s uniform course to preach where no one before him had 
preached the gospel. Having hope, etc. The passage expresses the hope that his success at Corinth 
and the support of the church will enable him to carry the gospel beyond. That city, at this time, was 
the western limit of his work. The thought is made clear by verse 16. To preach the gospel. =. 
beyond you. Where no man has yet preached. 17. He that glorieth, let him, etc. Quoted 
from Jer. 11: 23. It gives the true rule of boasting. Let the Lord be our boast, for we are nothing. 
18. He whom the Lord commendeth is the one who hath approval; not he who commends himself; 
a hint to every disciple and preacher. Let our works and life speak for us, not our lips. 
1-4. Bear with me a little in my folly. The disparagement of his claims by the false 
‘teachers rendered it necessary that he should speak of himself in self-defense, One so forgetful of 


Ch. XI.) II. CORINTHIANS. 

2 For I am? jealous over you with godly jealousy: 

for» I have espoused you to one husband, that* I 
may present you? as a chaste virgin to Christ. 
_.3 But I fear, lest by any means, as the® serpent 
beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds? 
should be.corrupted from the simplicity that is in 
Christ. 

4 For if he that cometh preacheth another Jesus, 
whom we have not preached, or ¢f ye receive anoth- 
er spirit, which ye have not received, or another® 
gospel, which ye have not accepted, ye might well 
bear with him. 

5 For I suppose I was not a whit behind the very 
chiefest apostles. 

6 But though JI be rude in speech, yet not in® 
knowledge: but we have been throughly made man- 
ifest among you in all things. 

7 Have I committed an offence in abasing! myself 
that ye might be exalted, because I have preached 
to you the gospel of God freely? 

8 IL robbed other churches, taking wages of them, 
to do you service. 

9 And when I was present with you, and wanted,! 
I was chargeable to no man: for that which was 
lacking to me* the brethren which came from 
Macedonia supplied: and in all things I have kept 
myself! from being burdensome unto you, and so 
will I keep myself. 








eCol.1:28. d Lev. 21:13. 
i Acts 18:3. j Acts 20:33. 


a Gal, 4:17. 
Heb. 13:9. 


6 Hos. 2:19; 1 Cor. 4:15. 
g Gal. 1:7,8. h Eph. 3:4. 





155 


bear with me. For I am 2 
jealous over you with a 
godly jealousy: for I es- 
poured you to one hus- 
and, that I might present 
you as a pure virgin to 
Christ. ButI fear, lest by 3 
any means, as the serpent 
beguiled Eve in his crafti- 
ness, your minds should 
be corrupted from the sim- 
plicity and the purity that 
is toward Christ. For if 4 
he that cometh preacheth 
another Jesus, whom we 
did not preach, or if ye 
receive a different spirit, 
which ye dic not receive, 
ora different gospel,which 
ye did not accept, ye do 
well to bear with him. For 5 
I reckon that I am not a 
whit behind the very 
chiefest apostles. But 6 
though 7 be rude inspeech, 
yet am I not in knowl- 
edge; nay, in every thing 
we have made #t manifest 
among all men to you- 
ward. Or did I commit a7 
sin in abasing myself that 
ye might be exalted, be- 
cause I preached to you 
the gospel of God for 
nought? I robbed other 8 
churches, taking wages of 
them that I might minister 
unto you; and when I was 9 
present with you and was 
in want, I was not a bur- 
den on any man; for the 
brethren, when they came 
from Macedonia, supplied 
the measure of my want; 
and in every thing I kept 
myself from being burden- 
some unto you, and so will 





e Gen. 3:4; John 8:44. £1 Tim. 1:33 4:15 
k Phil. 4:10. 22 Cor. 12:14. 


self and consecrated to Christ as Paul could only do this with a sort of sense of shame. Hence he 
apologizes for doing so, though compelled. 2. For Iam jealous over you. His course was induced 
because of his jealousy for them, not in behalf of himself, but of Christ. He had espoused them to 
Christ, the Bridegroom, of whom the church is the bride (Rev. 21: 2). He‘has a fear lest this bride may 
be led astray. 8. ButI fear. As Eve was seduced from God by the serpent (Gen. 3:1), so he fears 
that the Corinthian brethren may be led from the simplicity (single-minded devotion) that is in 
Christ. 4. For if he that cometh. Most critics think that the verse is ironical. Gal. 1:6 shows 
that the Judaizers so perverted the gospel that it was really another gospel. Hence Paul is supposed 
to say that if these men preach another Jesus, another Spirit, and another gospel than those you 
received, which they do, you might well bear with them! Perhaps, however, he only means to say that 
these men discredit me, but have no new gospel, Spirit or Christ to offer than what you have received 
through me. This harmonizes better with what follows. ‘ 

5, 6. I suppose I am not a whit behind the very chiefest apostles. The Greek (see 
Revision in the margin) implies that these men claimed to be apostles, Paul says he is not behind these 
“pre-eminent apostles’—a stroke of sarcasm. 6. Though I be rude in speech. He had not the 
rhetoric of a Corinthian orator, but he was not wanting in divine knowledge. See 1Cor.1: 1%, and 
2:4, His revealed knowledge had been manifest among them. 

7-12. Have I committed an offense, etc. He had at Corinth supported himself in part by his 
own labor (Acts 18:3). See note on 1 Cor. 9:13, Yet these false apostles seemed to have charged that 
he did not dare to ask for the support which was due an apostle. 8. I robbed other churches, 
Other churches sustained him when he came to Corinth. This seems to have been the usual custom, 
Philippi aided him more than once while preaching in Thessalonica (Phil. 4:16), The churches of 
Macedonia aided him at Corinth. 9. When I was present with you and wanted, When his 


156 II. CORINTHIANS. 


[ChsXT. 





10 As? the truth of Christ is in me, no man shall 
stop me of this boasting in the regions of Achaia. 

11 Wherefore?® because I love you not? God 
knoweth. 

12 But what I do, that I will do, that I° may cut 
off occasion from them which desire occasion; that 
wherein they glory, they may be found even as we. 

13 For such are false apostles, deceitful workers, 
transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ. 

14 And no marvel; for Satan himself is trans- 
formed into‘ an angel of light. 

15 Therefore ¢¢ 7s no great thing if his ministers 
also be transformed as the ministers of righteous- 
ness; whose® end shall be according to their works. 

16 I say again, Let no man think me a fool: if 
otherwise, yet as a fool receive me, that I may boast 
myself a little. 

17 That which I speak,‘ I speak z¢ not after the 
Lord, but as it were foolishly,® in this confidence of 
boasting. 

18 Seeing" that many glory after the flesh, I will 
glory also. 

19 For ye suffer fools gladly, seeing ye yourselves 
are wise. 


I keep myself. As the truth 10: 
of Christ is in me, no man 
shall stop me of this glo- 
rying in the regions of 
Achaia. Wherefore? be- 11 
cause I love you not? God 
knoweth. But what I do, 12 
that I will do, that I may 
cut off occasion from them 
which desire an occasion; 
that wherein they glory, 
they may be found even 
as we. For such men are 13 
false apostles, deceitful 
workers, fashioning them- 
selves into apostles of 
Christ. And no marvel; 14 
for even Satan fashioneth 
himself into an angel of 
light. Itis no great thing 15 
therefore if his ministers 
also fashion themselves as 
ministers of righteous- 
ness; whose end shall be 
according to their works. 
I say again, Let no man 
think me foolish; but if ye 
do, yet as foolish receive 
me, that I also may glory 
a little. That which 117 
speak, I speak not after 
the Lord, but as in foolish- 
ness, in this confidence of 
glorying. Seeing that 18 
nian glory after the flesh, 
I will glory also. For ye 19 
bear with the foolish glad- 
ly, being wise yourselves. 
For ye bear with a man, if 20: 


16, 


he bringeth yon into bond- 
age,if he devoureth you, 
if he taketh-you captive, if 
he exalteth himself, if he 


20 For ye suffer,' if a man bring you into bond- 
age, if a man devour you, if a man take of you, if a 
man exalt himself, if a man smite you on the face. 











@Rom. 9:1. 62 Cor. 7:3. ¢1Cor.9:12. d mach rar ne Phil. 8:19. f1Cor. 7:6. g2 Cor. 9:4. A Phil. 3:3. 
4 Gal. 2:43 4:9. 





supplies fell short, he worked at tent-making until Silas and Timotheus came from Macedonia with. 
supplies (Acts 18:5). These were the brethren which came from Macedonia. 10. No man 
shall stop me of this boasting. As he has done, so he will do. It shall be his boast that his gospel 
was freely preached in Achaia. 11. Wherefore? Why this course in Achaia? Not because he does 
not love them, but (verse 12) that I may cut off occasion, etc. One reason that he did this 
was to give no excuse to these opposers to call on the church to maintain them. He would force them 
by his example to be found even as we, that is, to maintain themselves. 

13-15. Such are false apostles. He now tears off the mask. These men are not real, but false 
apostles, deceitful workers, pretending to be Christ’s apostles. 14. And no marvel. Is it said that 
they appear to be Christ’s ministers? Even Satan can take the shape of an angel of light. He always 
seeks to destroy by coming in a false guise. 15. Therefore itis no great thing if his ministers, 
etc. It is not strange if persons really doing Satan's work should appear as ministers of righteousness, 
The sorest wounds of the church are not from without, but from agents of Satan within. 

16-21. Let no man think me a fool. Even though he should boast, let no one regard him 
foolish (see verse 1), since he is compelled to by the disparagement of his labors. Whether he be 
regarded as foolish or wise, let his words be received. 17. That whichI speak. What he is about 
to say, with an appearance of boasting, is not compromising Ohrist. The folly, if there be folly,-is his 
own. 18. I will glory also. This is the folly for which he apologizes. He will show that he is not 
behind those who have been claiming so much credit at Corinth. 19. For ye suffer fools gladly. 
See 1 Cor. 4:10. It was a part of their superior wisdom to tolerate fools. This is perhaps said in 
derision. It is explained in the next verse. 20. For ye suffer. They must “suffer fools gladly,” 
for they let men bring them into bondage to the law (Gal. 2: 4); to devour their property by their 
greed for gain; to take them by the cunning snares laid for them; to exalt themselves unduly. 
Smite you on the face. This perhaps refers to an actual case of violence. 21. I speak by way 


Ch. XI.] II. CORINTHIANS. 


157 





21 I speak as concerning reproach, as* though we 
had been weak. Howbeit, whereinsoever any is 
bold, (1 speak foolishly,) I am bold also. 

22 Are they Hebrews?” soamI. Are they Isra- 
elites? soamI. Are they the seed of Abraham? 
so am I. 

23 Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as a 
fool,) I am more; in labours more abundant,° in 
stripes above measure, in prison more frequent, in 
deaths oft. 

24 Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes* 
save one. 

25 Thrice was I® beaten with rods, once was If 
stoned, thrice? I suffered shipwreck, a night and a 
day I have been in the deep; 

26 In journeyings often, in perils of waters, in 
perils of robbers," in perils of mine own coutrymen,’ 
in perils by the heathen, én perils in the city, an 
perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in 
perils among false brethren; 

27 In weariness and painfulness, in watchings 
often), in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in 








smiteth you on the face. I 21 
speak by way of disparage- 
ment, as though we had 
been weak. Yet whcerein- 
soever any is bold (I speak 
in foolishness), I am bold 
also. Are they Hebrews? 22 
soamI, Are they Israel- 
ites?soamI, Are they the 
seed of Abraham? soam I. 
Are they ministers of 23 
Christ? (I speak as one be- 
side himself) I more; in la- 
bours more abundantly, in 
prisons more abundantly, 
in stripes above measure, 
in deaths oft. Of the Jews 24 
five times received I forty 
stripes save one. Thrice 25 
was I beaten with rods, 
once was I stoned, thrice 
I suffered shipwreck, a 
night and a day have I 
been in the deep; in jour- 26 
neyings often, in perils of 
rivers, in pois of robbers, 
in perils from my country- 
men, in perils from the 
Gentiles, in perils in the 
city, in perils in_ the wil- 
derness, in perils in the 
sea, in perils among false 
brethren; im labour and 27 
travail, in watchings oft- 
en, in hunger and thirst, 
in fastings often, in cold 


and nakedness. Beside 28 
cold and nakedness. 








d Acts 22:3; Rom. 11:1. c Acts19:6. d Deut. 25:3. e Acts 16:22. f Acts 14:19. 


g Acts 27:41. 
h Acts 9:23; 13:50; 14:5; 17:5; 21:81; 28:10. ¢@ Acts 19:23. j1Cor. 4:11. 


a@2Cor. 10:10. 


ree ee ae een Das i ee ee ee ee ee ee eee 
of disparagement. The opposers had said that “his bodily presence was weak” (10:10). They had 
suffered what he had described in verse 20, but he had never been so bold. Yet, wherein any were bold, 
he had the right to be bold also. He next states grounds which he might have for boasting. 

22-27. Are they Hebrews? Of pure Hebrew stock? So was Paul. See Phil. 345. Israelites. 
He was of the seed of Jacob, and the heir of the promises to Israel. Of the seed of Abraham. Not 
only of the fleshly, but of the spiritual seed of Abraham. 23. Are they ministers of Christ P 
Speaking foolishly, that is, commending himself (see verse 1), he is more; not only a minister, but a 
pre-eminent sufferer for Christ. To show how much he exceeded them, he gives some account of his 
sufferings. In labors more abundant. The record of Acts shows how his labors abounded. In 
stripes above measure. See verses 24, 25. In prisons more frequent. Clement, who wrote 
about the close of the first century, says in his Epistle to the Corinthians that Paul was imprisoned 
seven times. In Acts only one occurrence is named before the date of this letter, that at Philippi.  Itis 
evident from this enumeration that Acts is only a part of the history of his labors. In deaths oft. 
Often in peril of death. 24. Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. See 
Deut. 25:3. The Jews were not allowed to exceed this number. 25. Thrice wasI beaten with 
rods. This was the Roman scourging. Only one of these instances is reported in Acts, that in Acts 
16:20. Once was Istoned. See Acts 14: 19. Thrice I suffered shipwreck. No account elsewhere 
The shipwreck, on the way to Italy, was of later date. A night and a day I have 
In an open boat, or on driftwood, after a shipwreck. 26. In perils of waters. 
In crossing swollen rivers. In perils of robbers. In his travels he was often exposed to danger 
from this source. In perils by mine own countrymen. The Jews, who constantly persecuted 
him. See verse 24. By the heathen. The Gentiles. See verse 25, as an illustration, In perils in 
the city. Damascus, Jerusalem, Antioch in Pisidia, Lystra, Philippi and Corinth will at once occur as 
instances. 27. In weariness and painfulness. Often weary and in pain. The verse shows the 
self-denial made necessary in preaching the gospel. Often in want, hungry, naked and cold. Why 
should all these have been endured? Nothing but overwhelming conviction and love could have led 
him to thus sacrifice hiinself. : 

28-31. Beside those things that are without. His physical sufferings and labors were not all, 
‘There was constant care and anxiety for the churches. 29. Who is weak? His sympathy for the 


is given of these. 
been in the deep. 


158 II. CORINTHIANS. 


(Ch. XII. 


a 


28 Besides those things that are without, that 
which cometh upon me daily,* the care of all the 
churches. 

29 Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is 
offended, and I burn not? 

30 If I must needs glory, I will glory of the 
things which concern mine infirmities. 

31 The God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ,” which is blessed for evermore, knoweth 
that I lie not. 

32 In* Damascus the governor under Aretas the 
king kept the city of Damascus with a garrison, 
desirous to apprehend me; 

33 And through a window in a basket was I let 
down by the wall, and escaped his hands. 


CHAPTER XII. 


Paul’s Revelations and Thorn in the Flesh. 


SUMMARY.—Visions and Revelations. Caught Up into Paradise. The 
Thorn in the Flesh. God’s Answer to Prayer. Weakness Made 
Strength. The Signs of an Apostle. Coming Now the Third Time to 
Corinth. Paul’s Unselfish course at Corinth. 

1 It is not expedient for me doubtless to glory: I 
will come to visions and revelations of the Lord. 

2 I knew a man? in Christ above fourteen years 
ago, (whether in the body, I cannot tell; or wheth- 
er out of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;) 
such an one® caught up to the third heaven. 





@ Acts 20:18; Rom. 1:14. 








those things that are with- 
out, there is that which 
presseth upon me daily, 
anxiety for all the church- 
es. Who is weak, and I 29 
am not weak? who is made 

to stumble, and I burn 
not? If I must needs glo- 30 
ry, I will glory of the 
things that concern my 
weakness. The God and 31 
Father of the Lord Jesus, 
he who is blessed forey- 
ermore, knoweth that I 
lie not. In Damascus the 32 
governor under Aretas the 
king guarded the city of 
the Damascenes, in order 

to take me: and through a 33 
window was I let down in 

a basket by the wall, and 
escaped his hands, 


CHAPTER XII. 


I must needs glory,1 
though it is not expedient; 
but I will come to visions 
and revelations of the 
Lord. I know a man in 2 
Christ, fourteen years ago 
(whether in the body, I 
know not; or whether out 
of the body, I know not; 
God knoweth), such a one 
caught up even to the 





6 Rom. 9:5. ¢ Acts 9:24. d Rom. 16:7; 2 Cor. 5:17; Gal. 1:22. e Acts 22:17. 





churches was so great that if they suffered he suffered with them. 30. If I must needs glory. If 


compelled to boast, this boast will be of his own infirmities 
just narrated. 81. The God and Father knoweth, etc. 
catalogue of suffering. Yet, God knows that every word is true. 


and sufferings for Christ, such as he has 
He has given an astonishing 


‘82, 38. In Damascus. This seems to be cited to show that the very beginning of his Christian 


career was amid peril. See Acts 9: 23-25, 
of Petra, and the father-in-law of Herod Antipas. 


He defeated Herod, and became embroiled with the Romans, 
fell into his hands fora time. The language, Kept the City Ss ve 


The governor under Aretas the king. Aretas was king 
Damascus was usually, at these times, under Roman 
rule. Aretas engaged in war with Herod because he sent off his daughter 


and took Herodias for a wife. 


It is likely that in the contest Damascus 
witha garrison, shows that it 


was war times. The Jews, who were very strong in Damascus, doubtless induced the governor to try 
to seize Paul. 88. Through a window ina basket was I let down. Houses in these Oriental 
walled cities are built against the walls with windows looking out over them. It was, no doubt, from 


such a window that he was let down and thus escaped. 


Dean Stanley says that the catalogue of sufferings given in this chapter shows that Paul’s life was 
then without precedent in the history of the world. The only explanation of such a life, continued now 


for more than fourteen years, is that given by himself: 


“The love of Christ constraineth us.” 


1-5. Itis not expedient for me, doubtless, to glory. It was distasteful for him to speak of him- 


self, and he could only doit when compelled by the disparagement of adversaries. 


I will come to 


visions and revelations of the Lord. Supernatural things revealed to the spiritual eye and diyine 


truths revealed to the human spirit. 


2. I know (not knew) aman above fourteen years ago. 


knows the man and could name him, since the man was himself. See verse.7, Above fourteen years ago 


this man was caught up, etc. This letter Was written A. D. 57, 


The being caught up was then in A, D, 


Cha Xi] II. CORINTHIANS. 159» 


3 And I knew such a man, (whether in the body, ' third heaven, And I know 3 
such a man (whether in 


or out of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;) | the body, or apart from 


i a eS the body, I know not; God 
4 How that he was caught up into* paradise, and iowetlc how tHEr Ront 


heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for | was caught up into Para- 

a man to utter. Hotarie whoniei acs 
5 Of such an one will I glory: yet of myself | @wit|fors man to utter. . 

will not glory, but in mine infirmities. will I glory: but on mine 
6 For? though I would desire to glory, I shall not ae ae 


: , : ° : 7 For if I should desire to 6 
be a fool; for I will say the truth: but now I glory; Esa noe be tools 


forbear, lest any man should think of me above that pe ee ee 
E ruth: bu r, les 
which he seeth me ¢o be, or that he heareth of me.| any man should account 


= ’ +a | of me above that which he 
7 And lest I should be exalted above measure Pachieaatoue oile soul 


through the abundance of the revelations, there fro nimae) And scan 
S s oe) e exceeding greatness 
was given to me a! thorn in the flesh, the® messen-| of therevelatione—where 


J, fore, that I should not be 
ger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted | fox, that? should not be 


above measure. was given to me a thorn 
in the flesh, a messenger 


8 For‘ this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that | of satan to buffet me, that 


G oes 5 I should not be exalted 
it might depart from me. overmuch, Concerning 8 


9 And he said unto me,’ My grace is sufficient for | this thing I besought the 
Lord thrice, that it might 


thee; for my strength is made perfect in weakness. | depart from me. And he 9 
4 7 . a hath said unto me, y 

Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my | >a! & suticientfon tice. 
infirmities, that the? power of Christ may rest | for my power is made per- 
fect In weakness. Most 

upon me. gladly therefore will I 


i 7 7 ‘+7 1 rather glory in my weak- 
10 Therefore* I take pleasure in infirmities, in | ratte ey the wireceth 














a Luke 23:45. 62 Cor. 11:30. ¢c2Cor. 10:8. d@ Ezek. 28:24; Gal. 4:18. eJob2:7; Luke 13:16. f Deut. 3:23; 
Matt 26:44. g Eccl. 7:8; 1 Cor. 10:18. Al Pet. 4:14. ¢@ Rom. 5:3; 2 Cor. 7:4. 





43, This is about the time that Paul was at Antioch with Barnabas, or at Tarsus (Acts 9:29, 30). It could © 
not have been at conversion, for that was about twenty years earlier than A. D.57, nor could it be the 
trance in the temple (Acts 22:17) for that was too late. Whether in the body or, etc. A person could 
then be caught up, see and hear, without his body, in Paul’s view. Hence the human spirit is not ma- 
terial. Thethird heaven. A Jewish expression for that heaven which was beyond (1) the air, and ~ 
(2) beyond the sun and stars; the secret place of the Almighty. 3, Iknowsuch aman. Why does 
he not use the first person? Because it would seem more like he was glorying in his own exaltation. 
4. Hewas caught up into Paradise. Paradise and “the third heaven” evidently mean the same, 
The term is applied to a blessed abode beyond this life in Luke 23:43 and Rev 2:7. Heard unspeakable 
words. Words that it would be neither right nor possible to reveal in human speech. 5, Of such 
an one willl glory. One so favored had ground for boasting, but of himself personally he will not 
glory, save in his infirmities. See note on 11:30. While he glories of such an one, if he glories of him- 
self it will be in his weaknesses. 

6-9. For though I would desire to glory, I should not be a fool. He could declare things - 
truthfully that would show that his boast was not empty vanity. '7. Lest I should be exalted, etc. 
This verse shows that verse 2 refers to himself. There was given me athorn in the flesh. Gen- 
erally supposed to be some painful physical infirmity. See Gal. 4:13,14. A messenger of Satan. All 
physical evils are due to sin and hence are ascribed to Satan. This thorn was (1) in the flesh; (2) it 
buffeted, or assailed him; (3) it was permitted to prevent undue exaltation, hence must have been hu- 
miliating. 8. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice. Prayed thrice that the thorn might be 
removed. 9. My grace is sufficient for thee. The Lord answered his'prayer, not by removing the 
thorn, but by giving grace to bear it, and by the assurance that Paul’s sense of weakness, caused by it, 
fitted him to receive the divine strength. Most gladly, therefore, will I rather glory in infirmi- . 
ties. Because his infirmities fit him to enjoy the power that Christ bestows. What was true of Paul is 
true of every saint. It is when we feel our weakness that God strengthens us. 

10-18. Therefore I take pleasure, etc. The unparalleled distress, sufferings and persecutions, de- 
scribed 1n 11:24-27, even give him pleasure because they bring him toa sense of his helplessness and 
then God makes him strong. 11, Iam become a fool in glorying. As he looks back on what he has . 


160 II. CORINTHIANS. 


reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in dis- 
tresses, for Christ’s sake: for? when I am weak, 
then am IJ strong. 

11 Lam become a fool in glorying; ye have com- 
pelled me: for I ought to have been commended of 
you; for” in nothing am I behind the very chiefest 
apostles, though I be nothing. 

12 Truly* the signs of an apostle were wrought 





among you in all patience, in signs and wonders, 
and mighty deeds. 

13 For’ what is it wherein ye were inferior to 
other churches, except z¢ be that I® myself was not | 
burdensome to you? forgive me this wrong. 

14 Behol d‘ the third time I am ready to come to 
you; and I will not be burdensome to you; for? I 
seek not yours, but you: for the children ought 
not to lay up for the parents, but the parents for 
the children. 

15 And'I will very gladly spend and be spent for 
you; though) the more abundantly I love you, the 
less I be loved. 

16 But be it so* I did not burden you: neverthe- 
less, being crafty, I caught you with guile. 

17 Did! I make a gain of you by any of them 
whom I sent unto you? 

18 I™ desired Titus,and with himI sent a brother: 
did Titus make a gain of you? walked we not in the 
same spirit? walked we not in the same steps? 

19 Again," think ye that we excuse ourselves 





unto you?? we speak before God in Christ: but we 
do all things, dearly beloved, for your edifying. 


@2Cor. 13:4. 6 Gal. 2:6. 


ce Rom. 15:18; 1 Cor. 9:2. @1 Cor. 1:7. 
h1 Cor. 4:14. 


¢1Thes. 2:83 Phil. 2:17. j2 Gor. 6:12. 
n2 Cor. 5:12. 


#2 Cor. 11:9. 
o Rom. 9:13 2 Cor. 11:31. p1 Cor. 10 


e1 Cor. 9:12. 


(Ch. XII. 


of Christ may rest upon 
me. Wherefore I take 10 
pleasure in weaknesses, 
in injuries, in necessities, 

in persecutions, in dis- 
tresses, for Christ’s sake: 
for when I am weak, then 
am I strong. 

Iam become foolish: ye 11 
compelled me: for I ought 
to have been commended 
of you: for in nothing was 
I behind the very chiefest 
apostles, though I am 
nothing. Truly the signs of 12 
an apostle were wrought 
among you inall patience, 
by signs and wonders and 
mighty works. For what 13 
is there wherein ye were 
made inferior to the rest 
of the churches, except i¢ 
be that I myself was not a 
burden to you? forgive me 
this wrong. 

Behold, this is the third 
time I am ready to come 
to you; and I will not be a 
burden to you: for I seek 
not yours, but you: for the 
children ought not to lay 
up for the parents, but the 
parents for the children. 
And I will most gladly 15 
spend and be spent for 
your souls. If I love you 
more abundantly, am I 
loved the less? But be it 16 
so, I did not myself burden 
you; but, being crafty, I 
caught you with guile. Did 17 
I take advantage of you 
by any one of them whom 
I have sent unto you? I 18 
exhorted Titus, and I sent 
the brother with him. Did 
Titus take any advantage 
of you? walked we not by 
the same Spirit? walked we 
not in the same steps? 

Ye think all this time 19 


| that we are excusing our- 





72 Cor. 18:1. g Acts 20:38. 


22 Cor.7:2. m2 Oor. 8:6. 
733. 





written he finds that he has done what he condemned as folly, commended himself; compelled to;a 
thing that ought not to have been necessary, for the Corinthians ought to have commended him. Be- 
hind the chiefest of the apostles. The false teachers who had claimed at Corinth to be leading 
apostles. 12. Truly the signs of an apostle were wrought. While preaching at Corinth he dem- 
onstrated his apostleship. 18. What is it wherein ye were inferior, etc.P They had enjoyed every 
privilege of the most highly favored churches, and, perhaps, complained that he had preached without 
charge tothem. See notes on 11:7-12. If this was a wrong, he asked forgiveness. 

14,15. The third time Iam ready to come to you. Then he had been there twice before; once 
when he founded the church; once while preaching at Ephesus, of which visit Acts gives no account. 
See also 13:1, and notes on 2:1. And I will not be burdensome to you. As before, he will maintain 
himself this third time. For the children, etc. As parents do with children, so will he, their spirit- 
ual father, do. He does not ask them to provide for him, while he feeds them the bread of life. 15. I 
will gladly spend, etc. As a loving father, he will gladly spend and be spent for them; even without 
the return of his love. 

16-18. But beit so, I did not burden you, ete. It was charged that evenif he did not burden 
them, there was guile about it and in some other way he would secure their substance. Hence he asks: 
17. Did I make gain by any of the messengers or helpers I sent you? Did they demand anything? 
He then specifies: 18. I desired Titus. He sent Titus and another brother, but they asked no gain. 


Ch. XTII.] II. CORINTHIANS. 


20 For I fear, lest, when I come, I shall not find 
you such as I would, and ¢hat* I shall be found 
unto you such as ye would not; lest there be de- 
bates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whis- 
perings, swellings, tumults: 

21 And lest, when I come again, my God will”! 
humble me among you, and that I shall bewail many 
which have sinned already, and have not repented 
of the uncleanness, and° fornication, and lascivious- 
ness, which they have committed. 











CHAPTER XIII. 


Concluding Words. 


SUMMARY.—Severity Threatened to All Who Do Not Repent. He Will 
Display the Apostolic Power. Exhorted to Self-Examination; and 
to Reformation Before He Comes. Closing Admonitions. Bene- 
diction. 


1 This zs? the third time I am coming to you.® In 
the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every 
word be established. 

2 It told you before, and foretell you, as if I were 
present, the second time; and being absent, now I 
write to them? which heretofore have sinned, and 
to all other, that, if I come again, I will not spare: 

3 Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in" me, 
which to you-ward is not weak, but is mighty in! 


ou. 

4 Fori though he was crucified through weak- 
ness, yet* he liveth by the power of God: for! we 
also are weak in him, but we shall live with him by 
the power of God toward you. 


62 Cor. 2:1,4; Phil. 3:18. clCor. 5:1. @2 Cor. 12:14. 
hMatt. 10:20. i1 Cor. 9:2. j Phil. 2:7,8; 1 Pet. 3:18. 








a1 Cor. 4:21. e Num. 35 


g 2 Cor, 12:21. 


k Rom. 6:4. 


161 


selves unto you. In the 
sight of God speak we in 
Christ. But all things, be- 
loved, are for your edify- 
ing. For I fear, lest by any 
means, when I come, I 
should find you not such 
as I would, and should 
myself be found of you 
such as ye would not; lest 
by any means there should 
be strife, jealousy, wraths, 
factions,backbitings,whis- 
perings, swellings, tu- 
mults; lest, when I come 
again, my God _ should 
humble me before you,and 
Ishould mourn for many 
of them that have sinned 
heretofore, and repented 
not of the uncleanness and 
fornication and_ lascivi- 
ousness which they com- 
mitted. 


20 


21 


CHAPTER XIII. 


This is the third timeI 1 
am coming to you. At the 
mouth of two witnesses or 
three shall every word be 
established. I have said 2 
beforehand, and I do say 
beforehand, as when I was 
present the second time, 
so now, being absent, to 
them that have sinned 
heretofore, and to all the 
rest, that, if Icome again, 

I will not spare; seeing 3 
that ye seek a proof of 
Christ that speaketh in 
me; who to you-ward is 
not weak, but is powerful 
in you: for he was crucifi- 4 
ed through weakness, yet 
he liveth through the pow- 
er of God. For we also are 
weak in him, but we shall 
live with him through the 
power of God toward you. 


:50; Deut. 19:15. £2 Cor. 10:2. 


72 Cor. 10:3,4. 








19-21. Think ye that we excuse ourselves unto youP He must guard against a misappre- 
hension. He is not defending himself before a human bar. He speaks as before God; says what will 
tend to edify them. His only object is to build themup. 20, ForTI fear, etc. He has been led to 
speak because he feared, unless he spoke plainly, that when he came he would have to rebuke severely 
on account of sins which he enumerates. Debates, etc. The sins here given are those that belong toa 
divided state. 21. Andlest . . my Godwillhumble. Lest he be humiliated by the prevalence 
of sensual sins also. The sins here named are the peculiar Gentile sins which he has rebuked so se- 
verely in both epistles. 

1-4. This is the third time I am coming. See notes on 11:14. In the mouth of two or 
three witnesses. Every case of disorderly conduct will be taken cognizance of, but the trials will be 
strictly legal. Two or three witnesses will establishacharge. 2. I have said beforehand, etc. 
The Revision makes the meaning plain. As he told them, when there the second time, so now he writes 
that when he comes again he will not spare offenders. 3. Since ye seek a proof, etc. Since some 
denied his apostleship, he would give a proof of the might of Christ through him, 4. For though he 
was crucified through weakness. Christ submitted himself unto death, voluntarily choosing the 
weakness of mortality. He “emptied himself” (Phil. 2: 7,8). But by the power of God he was raised 
from death to life. Soitshallbe with us. His life is reproduced inus., Those who suffer and die with 


jhim shali live with him through the Divine power. 
1 


162 II. CORINTHIANS. 


[Che XTi: 








5 Examine* yourselves whether ye be in the faith ; 
prove your own selves: know ye not your own 
selves,” how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye 
be* reprobates? 

6 But I trust that ye shall know that we are not 
reprobates. 

7 Now I pray to God that ye do no evil; not that 
we should appear approved, but that ye should do 
that which is honest, though? we be as reprobates. 

8 For we can do nothing against the truth, but 
for the truth. 

9 For we are glad,* when we are weak, and ye 
are strong: and this also we wish, even‘ your per- 
fection. 

10 Therefore I write these things being absent, 
lest being present I should use sharpness, accord- 
ing to the power which the Lord hath given me to 
edification, and not to destruction. 

11 Finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfect, be of 
good comfort," be of one mind, live in peace; and 
the God of love’ and peace shall be with you. 

12 Greet one another with an holy kiss. 

13 All the saints salute you. 

14 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the 
love of God, and the communion of the Holy 
Ghost, de with you all. Amen. 


The second epistle to the Corinthians was written from Philip- 
pi, a city of Macedonia, by Titus and Lucas. 





c1 Cor. 9:27. 


a1Cor. 11:28. 6John 17:23; Rom. 8:10; Gal. 4:19. 


g Titus 1:13, 





ad 2 Cor. 6:9. 
h Rom. 12: 16; 1 Cor. 1:10; 1 Pet. 3:8. «Rom. 15:38. 


Try your own _ selves, 
whether ye be in the faith; 
Or 


peeve your own selves. 
now ye notas to yourown 
selves, that Jesus Christ 
isin you? unless indeed ye 
be reprobate. ButI hope 
that ye shall know that 
we are not reprobate. Now 
we pray to God that ye do 
no evil; not that we may 
appear approved, but that 
ye may do that which is 
honorable, though we be 
as reprobate. For we can 
do nothing against the 
truth, but for the truth. 
For we rejoice, when we 
are weak, and ye are 
strong: this we also pray 
for, even your perfecting. 
For this cause I write 
these things while absent, 
that I may not when pres- 
ent deai sharply, accord- 
ing to the authority which 
the Lord gave me for 
building up, and not for 
casting down. 

Finally, brethren, fare- 
well. Be perfected; be 
comforted; be of the same 
mind; live in peace: and 
the God of love and peace 
shall be with you. Salute 
one another with a holy 
Kiss. 

All the saints salute you. 

The grace of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and the love 
of God, and the commun- 
ion of the Holy Ghost, be 
with you all. 


5 


for) 


o ® 


11 


12 


15 
14 


e1Cor. 4:10. #1 Thes. 3:10. 





5-9. Examine yourselves. Let there be self-examination. 
Know ye not, etc. 


be seen in the power of a Christian life. 


See whether you are in Chris{ 
Christ must dwell in them unless they are reprobate. If Christ is in them it will 


6. I trust ye shall know, etc. Christ is in those who are 


not reprobates, but the power of Christ (verse 3), that he will display when he comes, will show that he 


is not reprobate. 


7. Now I pray, etc. If they should do evil, Paul’s display of power would show 


that he was not a reprobate (verse 6), but he prays that their freedom from eyil may leave him without 


that proof. 


The next verses show that he desires only to promote the truth. 


10. Therefore I write these things, etc. He writes in order that he may not have to use sharp- 
ness when he comes, or the power which God has given for upbuilding, not for destruction. 


) 11-14. Finally, brethren, farewell. This verse contains a parting admonition. 


one another, etc. See notes on Rom, 16: 16, and 1 Cor. 16: 20. 14. 


12. 


Salute 
The grace of the Lord Jesus 


Christ, etc. This verse contains the apostolic benediction. Observe the three blessings pronounced;, 
grace, love, communion; and the three sources invoked, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. 


INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. 


This Epistle differs from most of those written by Paul, in that it is not addressed 
specially to the church in some great city, but to the churches throughout a district of 
the Roman Empire. Galatia will be seen on any map of the empire in the apostolic 
period in the interior of the great peninsula cailed Asia Minor, which was the theatre of 
so large a part of the labors of Paul. The people were-of the Gallic stock, had 
marched from the Rhine to Greece, and thence into Asia about B. C. 280, and had 
conquered a home in the interior of Asia Minor, which henceforth took a new name 
from the people (Galli, or Gauls) who made it their seat. They learned the Greek 
language, but retained in part their old tongue and the traits of their race. Omsar 
describes the Gauls as restless and changeable, characteristics still of the French, and 
this epistle shows that the Galatians were not unlike their European kinsmen. 

It was on Paul’s second great missionary tour, about A. D. 51, that he in company 
with Silas and Timothy passed through from Lycaonia into Phrygia and Galatia, and 
planted the seeds of the Christian faith (Acts16:6). On his third missionary journey, 
about A. D. 54 or 55, he ‘‘ went over all the country of Galatia and Phrygia in order, 
strengthening all the disciples” (Acts 19:23). The gospel was received with great 
readiness; and the apostle himself welcomed as ‘an angel of God” (Gal. 4:14). A 
part of the converts were no doubt Jews of whom, according to Josephus, there were 
many in Galatia, but the greater part were Gentiles. 

The Epistles of Paul were mostly called out by evils in the churches which he had 
planted which called for correction. That to the Galatians is not an exception. Ata 
period not long after his second visit tidings came to him that excited his alarm and 
indignation. That restless wing of the church which clung to Judaism ag well as 
Christianity, which had troubled the church at Antioch (Acts 15:1), which had made 
necessary the council at Jerusalem (Acts 15: 5-30), whose evil work at Corinth we note 
in both Epistles, but especially in the second, whose continual warfare made one of 
Paul’s sorest afflictions ‘‘ perils from false brethren,’ had sent its emissaries into Galatia 
and had taught that it was needful that the Gentile Christians be circumcised and 
submit to the law of Moses in order to be saved. In order to carry their end they also 
insisted that Paul was not a true apostle, or was at least inferior to the original Twelve 
who had seen Christ and been instructed by him in person. It is true that in the Coun- 
cil at Jerusalem they had been defeated, but they kept up their work, and it required a 
life long struggle on the part of Paul to emancipate the church from Judaism. These 
men seemed to follow him everywhere, and a considerable part of his epistles is devoted 
to correcting the errors due to their influence. 

The Galatian letter is an indignant protest against and refutation of the Judaizing 
teachers. In the first two chapters he shows that his apostleship was not derived from 
the other apostles, but from Christ; that the gospel that he taught was not revealed to 
him by them, but by his Lord; that he had never met them as an inferior, but on an 

(163) 


164 INTRODUCTION TO GALATIANS. 


equal footing; that it was agreed between them that Peter, James and John would 
devote their labors to the Circumcision, while he and Barnabas should go to the 
Uncircumcision, and that on one occasion it was needful for him to rebuke and correct 
Peter on the very question of the proper attitude towards Gentile Christians. 

In the Second Part of the Letter, chapters 3 and 4, he contrasts the free gospel salva- 
tion by a living faith in Christ with the slavish legalism of the false teachers who 
would virtually place Moses in the stead of Christ. The Third Part, the 5th and 6th 
chapters, is devoted mainly to practical duties which grow out of the gospel. 

The Place where written and the Date of the Epistle can be determined only approx- 
imately. It must have been written after Paul’s two visits to Galatia, the last of which 
was in A. D. 54 or 55. See note on Gal. 4:13. It must have been written not very long 
after the second visit. See note on Gal.1: 6. There are many points of resemblance 
between this Epistle and that to the Romans which indicate that they were written 
nearly at the same time; since this epistle is the less elaborate it was probably written 
first. There are also points of resemblance to Second Corinthians which indicate that 
they belong to the same period. All these facts point to the last year of the Third 
Missionary Journey, or to about A. D.57. As we learn from Acts that this period was 
spent in Ephesus, Macedonia and Corinth, it must have been written at one of these 
places. 

It only remains to say concerning its Genuineness, ‘‘ that the internal evidence of 
the authorship of Paul is so strong that no sane divine has ever denied or even doubted 
it’? (Schaff). There is no other writer of the early church who could have written it. 
It bears the Pauline stamp in every line. 





THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE 


GALATIANS. 


CHAPTER I. 


Paul’s Apostleship of God, Not of Men. 


SUMMARY.—Greetings. Paul’s Wonder That the Galatians had Swerved 
from the Gospel They Had Received. Anathemas on Those Who |]. 
Preach Another Gospel. The Gospel Communicated to Paul by 
Christ Himself. Paul’s Early Life. A Persecutor. Christ Revealed. 
Goes Not Then to Jerusalem. After Three Years, Abode With Peter 


i . Then Preached in Cilicia. 
Fifteen Days. Then Preached in Cilicia CHAPTER I. 
Paul, an apostle (not 1 


le, (not of men, neither by man 
i Paul, ie apost Z ( 4 y > | from men, neither through 


but? by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who 
raised him from the dead,) 

2 And all the brethren” which are with me,° unto 
the churches of Galatia: 

3 Grace? be to you, and peace, from God the Fa- 
ther, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, 


man, but through Jesus 
Christ, and God the Fa- 
ther, who raised him from 
the dead), and all the 2 
brethren which are with 
me, unto the churches of 
Galatia: Grace to you and 3 
peace from God the Fa- 
ther, and our Lord Jesus 


Christ, who gave himself 4 
for our sins, that he might 
deliver us out of this pres- 
ent evil world, according 
to the will of our God and 
Father: to whom be the 5 
glory for ever and ever. 
Amen. 

I marvel that ye areso 6 
quickly removing from 
him that called you in the 
grace of Christ unto a dif- 


4 Who® gave himself for our sins, that he might 
deliver ust from this present evil world, according 
to the will of God and our Father: 

5 To whom @e glory for ever and ever. Amen. 

6 I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him 
that called you into the grace of Christ unto an- 
other gospel: 


6 Phil. 2:22. 





a Acts 9:6. e1Cor. 16:1. d@1Cor.1:3. elJohn2:2. f Isa. 65:17; John 15:19; 17:14. 





1-5. Paul, an apostle, not of men, neither by man. This verse is the text of the first two 
chapters. In the Introduction I have pointed out that this Epistle was written on account of the dis- 
turbance made among the churches of Galatia by false teachers. These teachers sought to prepare a 
way for their doctrines by discrediting Paul. If they admitted that he was an apostle at all, they 
claimed that he was inferior to Peter and the Twelve; that he had received his gospel from them, and 
hence all must look to Jerusalem for the true gospel. Hence Paul here begins by declaring that his 
apostleship is not from man, but directly from Christ. The other apostles did not convert, choose, or 
appoint him, but Christ came from heaven to commission him, 2. And all the brethren with me. 
lis fellow-laborers, such as Timothy, Titus, Silas, Luke, etc., some of whom at least were with him at 
this time. The word “all” implies that a number were with him, Unto the churches of Galatia. 
The inference from the language is that there were a considerable number scattered through the 
province. 8. Grace . and peace. The salutation is a benediction, a petition that the blessings 
of Father and Son may be bestowed upon them. 4, Who gave himself for our sins. The name 
of Christ causes the utterance of a grand truth, of which the heart of Paul was always full, and which 
needed at this time to be impressed on the Galatian brethren. It was not Moses, but Christ who gave 
himself for them. This present evil world. The existing state of things, where sin and death 
reign. 5. To whom be glory. This doxology is an indirect rebuke to those who were exalting 
Moses to share the glory of Christ. 


6-10. I marvel that ye are so soon nomees) from him that called you. Paul abruptly 
5 


166 GALATIANS. 


[Ch. 


Ry 





7 Which? is not another; but there be some? that 
trouble you. and would pervert the gospel of Christ. 

8 But though® we, or an angel from heaven, 
preach any other unto you than that which we have 
preached unto you, let him be accursed. 

9 As we said before, so say I now again, If any 
man preach any other gospel, unto you® than that ye 
have received, let him be accursed. 

10: For® do I nowt persuade men, or? God? or do 
Iseek to please men? for if I yet pleased men, I 
should not be the servant of Christ. 

11 But" I certify you, brethren, that the gospel 
which was preached of me is not after man. 

12 For I neither received it of man, neither was 
I taught ¢¢, but by! the revelation of Jesus Christ. 

13 For ye have heard of my conversation in time 
past in the Jews’ religion, how that) beyond meas- 
ure I persecuted the church of God, and wasted* it; 

14 And profited in the Jews’ religion above many 
my equals in mine own nation,! being more exceed- 
ingly zealous™ of the traditions of my fathers. 

15 But when it pleased God," who separated me 
from my mother’s womb, and called me by his 
grace, 

@2Cor. 11:4. 6 Acts15:1. c¢1Cor. 16:22. 


FiJdohn3:9. gJas. 4:4. A1Cor. 15:1. 
m Jer. 9:14; Mark 7:5. 


d Deut. 4:23 12:32; Prov. 30:6; 
“Eph. 3:3. j1 Tim. 1:13. 





k Acts 8:3. 
n Isa. 49:1,53 Acts 9:15; 13:2; Jer. 1:5. 


ferent gospel: whichis not 
another gospel: only there 
are some that trouble you, 
and would pervert the gos- 
pel of Christ. But though 
we, or an angel from heay- 
en, should preach unto 
you any gospel other than 
that which we preached 
unto you, let him be anath 
ema, As we havesaid be- 
fore, so say I now again, 
If any man preacheth unto 
you any gospel other than 
that which ye received, let 
him be anathema. For am 
Lnow persuading men, or 
God? or am I seeking to 
please men? if I were still 
pleasing men, I should 
not be a servant of Christ. 
For I make known to 
you, brethren, as touching 
the gospel which was 
preached by me, that it is 
not afterman. Forneither 
did I receive it from man, 
nor was I taught it, but i 
came to me through revela- 
tion of Jesus Christ. For 
ye have heard of my man- 
ner of life in time past in 
the Jews’ religion, how 
that beyond measure I 
| eee the church of 
od, and made hayock of 
it: andI advanced in the 
Jews’ religion beyond 
many of mine own age 
among My countrymen, 





Rev. 22:18. e¢1 Thes. 2:4. 
7 Phil. 3:6. 


7 


14 


springs into the midst of his subject. With the fickleness of their race, they had so soon swerved from 
“him that called” them. The analogy of Paul’s language (compare 1: 15; 1 Cor. 1:9; Rom. 8: 30) would 
show that he refers to God. The call was a divine one. Paul was only the instrument that God used. 
Into the grace of Christ. The gospel privileges. Called into these, they had “removed” unto 
another gospel, one of a different kind, not worthy of the name. ‘7. Which is not another. Is 
not a gospel at all, but only a perversion of the only gospel of Christ, due to false teachers. 8, But 
though we, or an angel from heaven, etc. He supposes an impossibility in order to make his 
statement emphatic. These false teachers said, “Our gospelis of Peter, or of James.” Paul replies, 

'“#Hyen though they, or we, or even an angel, preach another gospel, let him be accursed.” He who 
corrupts divine truth is an enemy of God, and is under the curse. Accursed. Anathema; given over 
to the judgment of God, See 1Cor. 16:22. 9. As we said before. This refers, it is generally sup- 
posed, to Paul’s last visit to Galatia, mentioned in Acts 18: 23, at which time he had warned the brethren 
against the Judaizers. This strong language shows how great a sin it is to pervert the gospel or Bible 
truth. 10. For do I now persuade men, ete. Is this his motive, or to please God? If he sought 
to please men he would never have become the servant of Christ. By so doing he had displeased all 
his own nation and brought on himself the hatred of men. See 2 Cor. 11: 23. 5 

11,12. The gospel which was preached of me is not after man. It is not preached to 
please man, nor is it of human origin. 12. For I neither received it of man, etc. It could not be 
of man, for it did not come to him from man. No preacher or apostle taught it to him, but it came by a 
direct revelation of Christ, The first revelation was on the way to Damascus (Acts 26: 13-18), There 
were no doubt successive revelations (2 Cor. 12:1). ; 

13,14. Yehave heard of my manner of life. While he was still aJew. In order to show that 
his gospel did not come from man, he cites his history, of which they knew something. I persecuted 
the church of God. See Acts 9:21. He made a determined effort to destroy Christianity, Compare 
Acts 22:4; 26:10,11. 14. Profited in the Jews’ religion. Made progress in it. He was a Pharisee 
was well educated, exceedingly zealous, and reached a high degree. Traditions of my fathers. 
Not only the law of Moses, but the traditions handed down which were taught so assiduously. See 
Matt. 15: 2; Mark 7; 3,13. Our Lord condemned these Jewish traditions. 


Ch. 1.) GALATIANS. 








16 To? reveal his Son in me, that I might preach 
him among the heathen; immediately I conferred 
not? with flesh and blood: 

17 Neither went Lup to Jerusalem to them which 
were apostles before me; but I went into Arabia, 
and returned again unto Damascus. 

18 Then, after three years, I went up to Jerusa- 
lem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days. 

19 But other of the apostles saw I none, save* 
James the Lord’s brother. 

20 Now the things which I write unto you, be- 
hold, before God, I lie not. 

21 Afterwards I came into the regions of Syria 
and Cilicia; 

22 And was unknown by face unto the churches 
of Judea which were in Christ: 

23 But they had heard only, 
cuted us in times past, now 
which once he destroyed. 

24 And they glorified God in me. 


that he which perse- 
preacheth the faith 


a2Cor.4:6. bMatt.16:17. c1Cor.9:5. d Matt. 13: 55. 





167 


being more exceedingly 
zealous for the traditions 
of my fathers. But when 
it was the good pleasure 
of God, who separated me, 
even from my mother’s 
womb, and called me 
through his grace, to re- 
veal his Son in me, that I 
might preach him among 
the Gentiles ; immediately 
Iconferred not with flesh 
and blood: neither went I 
up to Jerusalem to them 
which were apostles be- 
fore me: but IT went away 
into Arabia; and again I 
returned unto Damascus. 
Then after three years I 18 
went up to Jerusalem to 
visit Cephas, and tarried 
with him fifteen days. But 19 
other of the apostles saw 
I none, save James the 
Lord’s_ brother. Now 20 
touching the things which 
I write unto you, behold, 
before God, I lie not. Then 21 
I came into the regions of 
Syria ana Cilicia. And I 22 
was still unknown by face 
unto the churches of Ju- 
daa which were in Christ: 
but they only heard say, 23 
He that once persecuted 
us now preacheth the faith 
of which he once made 
hayock; and they glorified 24 
God in me. 





15 


e Acts 9: 30. 





be ee SSS ea 

15-17. But when it pleased God. The language that follows implies that, like Moses, John the 
Baptist, Isaiah (Isa. 49: 1) and Jeremiah (Jer. 1:5), Paul was destined to his work from birth. 16. To 
reveal his Soninme. It was one thing to call him, as was done on the way to Damascus ; another te 
reveal Christ to him. This was needful that he should be a witness of the resurrection to the Gentiles. 
I conferred not with flesh and blood. He did not go to men to learn more, or for counsel. 


17. Neither wentI .. . to them which were apostles. 
apostles before him at Jerusalem to be taught. 


this fact is mentioned. 


He did not seek those who were 
I went into Arabia. 
Like Moses and Elijah, he spent a season, perhaps for reflection, communion 


This is the only place where 


with God, and preparation, amid the Arabian solitudes. He, then returned to Damascus. Here he 


probably did his first preaching (Acts 9: 23). 
vicinity of Damascus. 


18-24. Then after three years. Three years after conversion. 


Arabia lay south and east of Palestine, extending to the 


This journey to Jerusalem, 


hurried by persecution at Damascus (2 Cor. 11: 32), was probably A. D. 40. To see Peter. He had 


probably never met him before. 


He desired to form his acquaintance and to counsel over their great 


work. He then remained fifteen days, not long enough to have been taught the gospel by Peter, if 


that had been his object. 
probably absent among churches of Judea (Acts 9:31). 


19. Other of the apostles saw I none. 
Save James. 


The other apostles were 
Not James the brother of 


John, an apostle, but James, «the brother of the Lord,” named in Acts 12: 17; 15: 13; 22: 18. This James 
was not one of the Twelve, but rose to great dignity and influence in the church at Jerusalem. He is 
called here “the brother of the Lord,” to distinguish him from “James, the son of Zebedee,” and “James, 


the son of Alpheus,” who were of the Twelve. 


See Introduction to Epistle of James. 


20. Behold, 


pefore God, Ilie not. This statement, an important one in view of the declarations of the Judaizers, 


Paul makes very solemnly. 21. Afterwards I came into . . 


Syria and Cilicia. See Acts 


9:30. He was forced to leave Jerusalem by the attempt of the Jews to kill him. 22. And was 
unknown by face, etc. The churches of Judea had heard of him, but few had seen him. 23. They 
had heard. Rather, they kept hearing. That he was busy planting churches in Syria and Cilicia at 
this time we know from the fact that we find them in existence soon after (Acts 15: 41), 24. They 


glorified God in me. 
success of their work was unknown to the early church. 


Glorified God for the work I was doing.. The idea of glorifying men for the 


168 GALATIANS. [Ch.IT. 





CHAPTER II. 
The Gospel Not Bondage to the Law. 


SUMMARY.—Paul’s Later Journey to Jerusalem. The Object of the Visit, 
Titus With Him, but Uncircumcised. Peter, James and John Apostles 
to the Circumcision; Paul and Barnabas to the Uncircumcision. The 
Right Hand of Fellowship. The Rebuke of Peter at Antioch. Justi- 
fied by Faith in Christ; Not by Works of the Law. CHAPTER It. 


1 Then fourteen years after? I went up again to : Then after the space of I 
Jerusalem with Barnabas, and took Titus with again to Sy enedaiencneure 
‘ arnabas, taking Titus 

me also. also with ie And I went 2' 


2 And I went up by” revelation, and communi-|up by revelation; and I 


= ; h z 
cated unto them that gospel which I preach among pelner Weamnaen ie 


© oy | the Gentiles, but privately 
the Gentiles, but privately to them which were of petore ho ee 


reputation, lest by any means* I should run, or had | repute, lest by any means 
I ) 


. : I should be running, or 
run, 1m vain. hadrun,in vain. But not 3 


3 But neither Titus, who was with me, being a| even Titus who was with 

x ‘ me, being a Greek, was 

Greek, was compelled to be circumcised: compelled to be circum. 
- A cised: and that because of 4 

4 And that because of false brethren unawares | the false brethren privily 

brought in, who came in privily to spy out our® lib- | brought in, who came in 

6 3 sees es privily to spy out our lib- 

erty which we have in Christ Jesus,® that they erty (which we have im 

° = : A . ris esus, that the 

might bring us into bondage: might bring uainto bond, 


5 To whom we gave place by subjection, no, not age. “ton whom We gaye s 
Fs place in the way of sub- 
for an hour, that the truth of the gospel might con-| jection, no, not for an 


3 S hour; that the truth of the 
tinue with you. gospel might continue 


@ Acts: 15:2. 6 Acts 19:21. c Phil. 2:16. qd Gal. 3:25. eGal. 4:8, 9. 











1. Then fourteen years after I went up again to Jerusalem. “Three years after’ his con- 
version he went up to Jerusalem (1:18) ; fourteen years after, he went up again. If his conversion took 
place about A. D. 37, as is generally supposed, the visit now spoken of was in A. D. 51. At that time we 
find that Paul and Barnabas and “certain others” went up to Jerusalem to see the apostles and elders 
about this very question of the relation of the Gentile Christians to Judaism. See Acts 15. That this is 
the visit Paul means, is evident (1) because it is the right date; (2) the right persons are present, viz: 
Paul, Barnabas, Peter and James, and (3) the right question is the one discussed. The visit of Gal. 1:10. 
is mentioned in Acts 9:23 and took place in A. D. 40. Another, to carry relief at a time of famine, took 
place in A. D, 44 (Acts 11:30; 12:35); and the third, here referred to, took place in A. D. 50, or 51. Took 
Titus with me. Titus is not named in Acts 15:2, but only that “certain other” went with Paul and 
Barnabas. 

2-5. AndIwentup by revelation. Because Christ revealed to me that I ought to go. Com- 
municated to them that which I preach among the Gentiles. For at least ten years he had been 
preaching among the Gentiles with great success, calling upon them to obey the gospel; not the law of 
Moses. He now explained to the Jerusalem Christians the gospel which he had preached, privately 
to them who were of reputation, tosuch men as Peter and James, so that there would be a full un- 
derstanding before the public meeting described in Acts 15. Lest, perchance, Ishould run, Lest 
his apostolic labor should be made fruitless by the action of the Jewish Christians. 8. But neither 
Titus, etc. Though Titus, a Gentile Christian and a minister, was with him, he was not compelled to 
be circumcised. 4, And that because of false brethren. In the case of Timothy (Acts 16:3) Paul 
had circumcised him, not as a matter of obligation, or out of deference to the views of Jewish Christ- 
ians, but so that he could reach unconverted Jews better, who would not listen to a Gentile. The 
apostles might have recommended the circumcision of Titus, Paul here intimates, not as a matter of 
duty, but of prudence, had it not been made an issue by the false brethren, He could not yield to such 
a demand without a sacrifice of principle. Unawares broughtin. These false brethren were really 
Jews who had slipped into the church. To spy out our liberty. Really enemies in the guise of friends 
whose object was to take away the freedom of the gospel, and subject Christians to the bondage 
of the Jewish law. 5. To whom we gave place, no, not for an hour. We refused to yield 


Ch. 11] GALATIANS. 





6 But of those? who seemed to be somewhat, 
whatsoever they were, it maketh no matter to me:? 
God accepteth no man’s person: for they who 
seemed ¢o be somewhat in® conference added nothing 
to me: 

7 But contrariwise,? when they saw that the gos- 
pel of the uncircumcision was® committed unto me, 
as the gospel of the circumcision was unto Peter; 

8 (For he that wrought effectually in Peter to the 
apostleship of the circumcision,* the same was 
mighty in me toward the Gentiles: ) 

9 And when James, Cephas, and John, who 
seemed to beé pillars, perceived" the grace that was 
given unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the 
right hands of fellowship, that we should go unto 
the heathen, and they unto the circumcision. 

10 Only they would that. we should remember the 

oor;! the same which I also was forward to do. 

11 Buti when Peter was come to Antioch, I with- 
stood him to the face, because he was to be blamed. 


c2Cor. 12:11. d Acts 13: 46. 


aGal. 6:3. 0 Acts 10: 34; Rom. 2:11. 
h Rom. 1:5; 12:3. 


26:17. g Matt. 16:18; Rey. 21: 14. 





e1Thes. 2:4. 


169 


with you. But from those 6 


who were reputed to be 
somewhat (whatsoever 
they were, it maketh no 
matter to me: God accept- 
eth not man’s person)— 
they,I say, who were of 
repute imparted nothing 
to me: but contrariwise, 
when they saw that I had 
been intrusted with the 
gospel of the uncircum- 
cision, even as Peter with 
the gospel of the circumcis- 
ion (for he that wrought 
for Peter unto the apostle- 
ship of the circumcision 
wrought for me also unto 
the Gentiles;) and when 
they perceived the grace 
that was given unto me, 
James and Cephas and 
John, they who were re- 
puted to be pillars, gave 
to me and Barnabas the 
right hands of fellowship, 
that we should go unto the 
Gentiles, and they unto 
the circumcision; 
they would that we should 
remember the poor; which 
very thing I was also zeal- 
ous to do. 


=| 


only 10: 


But when Cephas came if 


to Antioch, Lresisted him 








to any of their demands. See Acts 15:5. Paul sternly opposed their demands in order to preserve 
The motive of his firmness was to make the future safe. 


the truth of the gospel among the Gentiles. 
Had he yielded a jot, advantage would have been taken of it. 


6-10. Butthose who seemed to be somewhat. »Who held high positions in the church; the: 
apostles at Jerusalem; Peter, James and John, who are mentioned below. 
However high their position, that does not alter the facts. They who seemed 
to be somewhat in conference. The leaders in the conference described in Acts 15. Added nothing” 
tome. They gave me no new instructions or authority. They had no change to suggest in the gospel 
They perceived that I had been sent to the Gentiles, as Peter had. 
the leading part in preaching to the Jews. 8. For he that wrought effectually in Peter. As Christ 
knowledge and power needful to establish the church among the Jews, so he had 
fully endowed Paul for a similar work among the Gentiles. 9. And when James, Cephas and John. 
See John 1:42. The rest of the apostles were probably absent 
Who seemed to be pillars. Chief men; supports of the 
They gave tome and Barnabas the right hand of 
at Paul and Barnabas should have supervision of the work 
among the Gentiles, and as a pledge of that agreement their hands were given. 10. Only they would 
ontinue the collections in the Gentile churches for the poor 
work (1 Cor. 16:1). 
derstand this epistle and parts of others, the reader must keep in mind the two 
the Jew and the Gentile. Of the Jewish, Peter, James and John 
These leaders were in full harmony, but the two 


maketh no matter. 


I preached. '7. When they saw. 


gave Peter the wisdom, 


Cephas is the Hebrew name of Peter. 
from Jerusalem at the time of this visit. 
church. Perceived the grace. See verse ae 
fellowship. An agreement was made th 


that we should remember the poor. Cc 
at Jerusalem. We have seen Paul constantly active in this 

NotTEe—In order to un 
great divisions of apostolic Christianity, 
were the leaders; of the Gentile, Paul and Barnabas. 


Whatsoever they are, it 


Ff Acts 9:15; 13: 2; 22: 215. 
4 Acts. 11:30; 24:17. j Acts 15: 35. 


sections of the church were not equally harmonious. The Jewish Christians, as a rule, still kept the: 
Jewish law, and hoped for the conversion of the whole Jewish nation, until the destruction of Jerusa- 
lem; one extreme wing of them insisted that the Gentiles should keep the Jewish law, also. It is with 
this wing that Paul comes im conflict. Here in this chapter, and also in Acts 15, we have accounts of the: 
conflict. After Jerusalem was destroyed, the temple in ruins, and the church removed elsewhere, the: 
Jewish Christians gradually gave up the Jewish law, and the two divisions welded into one body in which. 
there was neither Jew nor Gentile, but all one in Christ. 

11-14, But when Peter came to Antioch. It is not certainly known when this event occurred, 
but probably not farfrom A, D. 51. Paul narrates it to show that Peter had no superiority over him, as 


170 GALATIANS. [Ch. HI. 


for y ‘ 7 ; a to the face, because he 
12 For, before that certain came from James,’ he oO the ates Ree 


did eat with the Gentiles: but when they were | fore that certain came 
. . ° from James, he did eat 
come, he withdrew, and separated himself, fearing | XO Jfmes; he did eat 


, . ye 1Q] when they came, he drew 

them which were of the circumcision. ‘| Baek and Seog wee 

13 And the other Jews dissembled likewise with | seit, fearing them that 

. Ly g vere Oo le e1rcu 1s10n, 
him; insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away | Yo" the rest of the Jews 18 

7] ir dissi ati dissembled likewise wit 
with their dissimulation. , nine Rae ee @ 
14 But when I saw that they walked not upright-| Barnabas was carried 


: : : yith their dissimu- 
ly,” according to the truth of the gospel, I said unto | #¥ay, With ther 4 Taek 


5 5 } c 7 j gf | that they walked not up- 
Peter before them all, If thou, being a Jew, livest ghtly acer, woe 


after the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the truth of the gospel, I said 
$ u s B e mm 

Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as all, If thou, being a Jew, 
C va? livest as do the Gentiles, 

do the Jews! A and not as do the Jews, 
15 We! who are Jews by nature, and not? sinners | how compellest thou the 


4 Gentiles to live as do the 
of the Gentiles, Jews? We being Jews by 15 


RG j f i 7 i + nature, and not sinners of 
16. Knowing’ that a man is not justified by the qe Getties. sorters ae 


works of the law, but by® the faith of Jesus Christ, | that a man ig not justified 


. . . cs of the | 
even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we |>y¥ the works of the law, 


might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not | Christ, even we believed 


on Christ Jesus, that we 
by the works of the law: for" by the works of the| might be justiticd by faith 


law shall no flesh be justified. : Porn ee 


17 But if, while we seek to be justified by Christ, Be eer tee ee pao of 
we ourselves also are found sinners,‘ zs therefore But if, while we sought to 17 
Christ the minister of sin? God forbid. Oudbelree ike rere (oa 

18 For if I build again the things which I de-| simners, is Christ a minis- 

: 5 ter of sin? God forbid. For 18 
stroyed, I make myself a transgressor. : if I build up again those 














@ Acts 10:28. 6Hecl. 7:20. c Acts 11:3; 1Tim. 5:20. d Acts 15: 10. é Matt. 9:11; Eph. 2:3. 7 Acts 18: 38. 
g Rom. 1: 17; 8:3; Heb. 7:18. h Psa. 143:2. ¢1John3:8. 





the Judaizers claimed, and as the Romanists still assert. Peter did a wrong thing and he rebuked him 
forit. 12. Before certain came from James. Men sent from Jerusalem by James, who stood now 
at the head of that church. He did eat with Gentiles. See Acts 11:3. Peter had no seruples about 
eating with Gentile Christians, but many of the Jewish Christians did. Hence he did before the mes- 
sengers came from James what he refused to do after they came, ‘“‘separating himself” from the Gentile 
Christians at Antioch. 18. And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him. The other 
Jewish Christians at Antioch. To change their course thus, because of fear of these men from Jeru- 
salem, was to dissemble. Even Barnabas, Paul’s long-time companion in labor, was infected. 14. But 
when I saw. It was time to act decisively. Antioch was a great center. It was important that no 
wrong influences go forth from that center. Hence Paul administered the stern rebuke to Peter which 
follows. Before them all. The rebuke was ona public occasion. If thou, being a Jew, livest 
after the manner of Gentiles. He had, right there in Antioch, lived with the Gentile Christians 
according to their customs (verse 12). Why compellest thou the Gentiles, etc. Now, he insisted, 
at least by his example, that the Gentile Christians should become Jews. He virtually refused to fel- 
lowship them. 

15-21. We. You and I. Both Paul and Peter were Jews by birth, and not Gentile sinners, as 
Jews were wont to call the Gentile heathen. 16. Knowing. There were certain facts that both of 
them knew. One of them was that men were justified (that is, forgiven) not by works of the law 
(of Moses), but by the faith of Jesus Christ; that is, by the gospel. Both had believed on Christ 
in order that they might be justified. For by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified. 
This passage, quoted in Rom. 3: 20, is found in Psalm 143: 2. 17. Butif ... . we were found 
sinners. We, Pauland Peter. Wecame to Christ for justification, because the gospel revealed to us 
that we were sinners, though professing to keep the law of Moses. Is therefore Christ the minis- 
ter of sinP Did Christ make us Jews sinners? No, but when the knowledge of the gospel comes, they 
find that they are and have been sinners like the Gentiles. Christ only reveals to them their sinful 


Ch. III.] GALATIANS. Le 


19 For I* through the law” am dead to the law, | things which 1 destroyed, 
?|I prove myself a trans- 


that I might* live unto God. gressor. For I through the 18 
a $ o eri aw died unto the law 
20 I am® crucified with Christ: nevertheless I) that 1 might live unto 


live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me: and the life | Goa: dhave bees crucified 20 
with Christ; yet I live; and 


which I now live in the flesh® I live by the faith of | ye¢no longer I, but Christ 


the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself | ¥en t now live in the 


for me. on: I live. im faith, the 
3 aith which is in the Son 
21 Ido not frustrate the grace of God: for? if |of Goa, who loved me, and 


righteousness come by the law, then Christ is dead gove buniee see ae 


G ey of God: for if righteous- 
In Vain. ness is through the law, 
then Christ died for 


CHAPTER III. nought, 
Justification Belongeth to Abraham’s Children by Faith. 


SuMMARY.—The Spirit Imparted to Galatian Christians Through the 
Gospel. This, too, Before They Knew of the Works of the Law. 
Abraham Justified by Faith, While Yet Uncircumcised. Those of All 
Nations, Who Believe, Blessed With Abraham. All Condemned by 
the Law Since All Are Sinners. Christ, Whom It Slew, Redeemed Us 
From Its Curse. The Covenant With Abraham Which Included the 
Gentiles Made Before the Law. The Law Cannot Disannul It. It 
Included Christ. All Believers Having Put on Christ, the Seed of 
Abraham, Become Abraham’s Children. CHAPTER III. 


1 O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, | ,.© foolish Galatians, who 1 

i i you, before 
that ye should not obey the truth,® before whose | whose eyes Jesus Christ 
eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently set: forth, (se shear evzon hank 
crucified among you? 


aRom.8:2. 0 Rom. 6:14. cHeb.9:14. d Rom. 6: 6. e2Cor. 5:15. fHeb.7:11. g1Cor. 1% 93. 




















state. 18. If I build up again those things which I destroyed. Go back from Christ to 
Moses, and teach others to do the same. I make myself atrausgressor. For thus I teach men to 
trust in the works of the law which cannot justify. 19. ForI through the law am dead to the 
law. Compare Rom. 7: 4-6, and see notes there; also Col. 2: 20. When the knowledge of Christ came, 
and he saw his faulty obedience to the law, he realized that he was dead in sin, slain by the law. But 
having died, he was freed from the law, when he became a new creature in Christ. 20. Ihave been 
crucified with Christ. By faith Paul was crucified at his conversion, cru cified in thé flesh, died to 
the old life with Christ. Now he lives, or rather, Christ liveth in him. The old life is laid aside, and 
the new life is a Christlike life, due to the spirit of Christ. He is now merged in Christ. Live by 
faith. Faith is the bond that binds him to Christ and enables him to live the new life. 21. Idonot 
frustrate the grace of God. He would do so, if he went back to the Jewish law, and trusted in it. 
If it gave righteousness, then the gospel was not needed, and Christ died in vain. 

Nortr.—The account in this chapter of Paul’s visit to Jerusalem, and of his controversy with Peter, is 
utterly inconsistent with the Romish doctrine of the supremacy of Peter. No pope could or would 
allow a bishop or cardinal to “rebuke him openly,” as Paul did Peter. So, too, the reference of the 
controversy in Acts 15, to “the apostles and elders,” instead of to Peter, and the final judgment of James, 
which was ‘received, contradict the Vatican system. Indeed, the doctrine of popedom is utterly incon- 
sistent with the whole tenor of the Acts, and the Pauline Epistles. . .. + This meeting at Antioch 
is the last between Peter and Paul of which the New Testament gives record. Barly church tradition, 
however, reports that they met once more in Rome, where they were tried and condemned on the same 
day, and then parted, Peter to be crucified on the hill of the Janiculum, and Paul, the Roman citizen, to 
pe beheaded at the Three Fountains on the Ostian Way. Could we rely upon this tradition it would 
seem fitting that the two greatest apostles, of the Circumcision and of the Uncireumcision, should lay 
down their burdens together and go side by side to report their work to their common Lord. 

1-5. Who hath bewitched you? That they, Gentiles, instructed in the gospel, should virtually 
deny Christ’s death by seeking justification by the law was inexplicable. Were they bewitched? 
Before whose eyes Christ hath been evidently set forth. Paul, while among them, had so faith- 


172 GALATIANS. 


(Ch. HI. 





2 This only would I learn of you, Received ye? 
the Spirit by the works of the law,” or by the hear- 
ing of faith? 

3 Are ye so foolish?* having begun in the Spirit, 
are ye now made perfect by4 the flesh? 

4 Have® ye suffered so many things in vain? if 
at be yet in vain. 

5 He therefore that ministereth to you the Spirit, 
and worketh miracles among you, doeth he it by the 
works of the law, or by the hearing of faith? 

6 Even as Abraham believed God, and it was 
accounted to him for righteousness. 

7 Know ye therefore that® they which are of 
faith, the same are the children of Abraham. 

8 And the scripture, foreseeing that God would 
justify the heathen through faith, preached before 
the gospel unto Abraham, saying," In thee shall all 
nations be blessed. 

9 So then they which be of faith are blessed with 
faithful Abraham. 

10 For as many as are of the works of the law 
are under the curse: for it is written,! Cursed zs 
every one that continueth not in all things which 





fied? This only would I 2 
learn from you, Received 
ye the Spirit by the works 
of the law, or by the hear- 
ing of faith? Are ye so3 
foolish? having begun in 
the pee are ye now per- 
fected in the flesh? Did ye 4 
suffer so many things in 
vain? if it be indeed in 
vain. He therefore that 5 
supplieth to you the Spirit, 
and worketh miracles 
among you, doeth he it by 
the works of the law, or 
by the hearing of faith? 
Evenas Abraham believed 6 
God, and it was reckoned 
unto him for righteous- 
ness. Know therefore that 7 
they which be of faith, the 
same aresons of Abraham. 
And the scripture, foresee- 8 
ing that God would justify 
the Gentiles by faith, 
reached the gospel be- 
orehand unto Abraham, 
saying, In thee shall all 
the nations be blessed. So 9 
then they which be of faith 
are blessed with the faith- 
ful Abraham. Foras many 10 
as are of the works of the 
law’are under a curse: for 
itis written, Cursed is ey- 
ery one which continueth 
not in all things that are 
written in the book of the 


are written in the book of the law to do them. 


@ Acts 2:38; Heb. 6:4. 6 Rom. 10:16. ¢Gal.4:9. d@Heb.7:16. e2John8. f2Cor.3:8. gJohn8: 39. 
- h Gen. 12:38. %@ Deut. 27:26; Jer. 11:3. 





fully and vividly preached Christ crucified, that it might be said that he was pictured before their eyes. 
Yet, if they were justified by the law, Christ was crucified in vain. 2. Received ye the Spirit by 
the works of the lawP Let them answer this. He had preached Christ to them, they had heard, 
believed and obeyed; not a word was said of the works of the law; yet God had acknowledged the work 
by imparting his Spirit. 8. Are ye so foolishP They had begun with a spiritual religion, and 
received the Spirit. Did they expect to be made perfect by the fleshly ordinances of the law? 4. Have 
ye suffered so many things in vain? If they turned from the cross to the law for salvation, all 
that they had suffered for Christ was in vain. If it be indeed in vain. I take this to mean, “If it be 
possible that you do turn to the law and make your sufferings vain.” 5. He therefore that minis- 
tereth to you the Spirit. Did God bestow spiritual gifts and miraculous powers among you as the 
result of works of the law, or of the hearing of faithP Were these bestowed through the law, or the 


gospel? 
6-9. Even as Abraham believed God, etc. The Galatians would have to reply to the questions. 
of-verse 5, “By the hearing of faith.” ‘Yes,’ says Paul, “Even as Abraham, who was accepted as right- 


eous by faith without the law.” See Gen. 15:6. This passage is quoted in Rom. 4: 3, 9, 21, 22, and in 
James 2:23, '7, Know ye therefore. Paul now states his great argument. Abraham’s faith made 
him righteous; he is the spiritual father of believers. Those who believe upon Christ, the promised 
seed of Abraham, are the spiritual children of Abraham and the heirs of the promise. 8. The Scrip- 
ture, foreseeing. Looking forward to the salvation of the heathen who believe on Christ. Preached 
before the gospel unto Abraham, Announced it in anticipation, in a great Messianic promise. In 
thee shall, etc. See Gen. 12:3. Observe (1) that this promise is made to Abraham long before he was: 
circumcised, (2) It is a promise of a blessing for the Gentile nations through him. (3) It is a promise 
of Christ, and hence the gospel in promise before the law existed. 9. So then. Then this promise. 
embraces Gentile believers. They are blessed as believing Abraham was blessed. See verse 6. 

10-12. For as many as are of.the works of the law. Having just shown that believers through 
Christ are justified, he next shows that all under the law are in condemnation. It is written. See 
Deut. 27: 26. Compare Rom. 3: 19, 20, Not only those under the law fail of justification, but the curse 
rests upon them, for all fail to obey all the things in the law. See Rom. 3:23, 11. The just shall live 


0 an 0 GALATIANS. 


173 





11 But that no man is justified by the law in the 
sight of God, 7 7s evident: for, The* just shall live 
by faith. 

12 And® the law is not of faith: but, The man*° 
that doeth them shall live in them. 

13 Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the 
law, being made a curse for us: for it is written, 
Cursed® 7s every one that hangeth on a tree: 

14 That? the blessing of Abraham might come on 
the Gentiles through Jesus Christ; that we might 
receive thet promise of the Spirit through faith. 

15 Brethren, I speak after the manner of men: 
Though zt de but a man’s covenant, yet ¢f zt be con- 
firmed, no man disannulleth, or addeth thereto. . 

16 Now to Abraham and his seed were the prom- 
ises made. He saith not, And to seeds, as of many; 
but as of one, And to thy seed, which is® Christ. 

17 And this I say, thaé the covenant, that was 
confirmed before of God in Christ, the law! which 
was four hundred and thirty years‘after, cannot 
ae that it should make the promise of none 
effect. 


a Hab. 2:4; Heb. 10:38. 6 Rom. 4:43 11:6. 
Ezek. 11:19; Joel2: 28. gHeb.9:17. 41Cor. 12:12. 





by faith. To seek righteousness by the law 





law, to do them. Now that 
no man is justifled by the 
law in the sight of God, is 
evident: for, The righteous 
shall live by faith; andthe 
law is not of faith; but, He 


il 


12 


that doeth them shall live » 


in them. Christ redeemed 
us from the curse of the 
law, having become a 
curse for us: for it is writ- 
ten, Oursed is every one 
that hangeth on a tree: 
that upon the Gentiles 
might come the blessing 
of Abraham in Christ Je- 
sus; that we might receive 
the promise of the Spirit 
through faith. 

Brethren, I speak after 
the manner of men: 
Though it be but a man’s 
covenant, yet when it hath 
been confirmed, no one 
maketh it void, or addeth 
thereto. Now to Abraham 
were the promises spoken, 
and to his seed. He saith 
not, And to seeds, as of 
many; but as of one, And 
to thy seed,which is Christ. 
Now this Isay, A cove- 
nant confirmed before- 
hand by God, the law, 
which came four hundred 
and_ thirty years after, 


13 


17 


c Ley. 18:5. d@ Deut. 21:28. e Rom. 4:9. Fisa. 82:15; 44:35 
4 Ex. 12:40. j Rom. 4:13, 14. 


is also contrary to the prophets, for Habakkuk 2: 4 says 


that the just shall live by faith, not by the works of the law. 12. The law is not of faith. Is nota 


system of faith, but proclaims life by doing the law, rather 


18:5. But since none can keep it perfectly, all are under the curse (verse 10). 


18, 14. Christ hath redeemed us from the curse. 
redeemed us by suffering for us. Being made a cursé for us. 


than by faith, The quotation is from Lev. 


From the curse of the law Christ hath 
He took our curse on himself and 


suffered in our stead. For it is written. In Deut. 91:23. Compare Matt. 20: 28; 1 Tim. 2:6; 1 Cor. 
5:20; 7:23; Titus 2:14,etc. 14, That the blessing of Abraham. Christ took the curse upon him- 


self that we might be blessed with the believing Abraham (verse 6). 
the promise of justification, and of the Spirit. 
Spirit came by the faith, rather than by the law. 


15-18. I speak after the manner of men. 


Hence Gentiles who believe have 
Compare verses 2and5. There it is shown that the 


I will make a comparison with human affairs. 


Though it be but a man’s covenant. A covenant, or agreement among men, after it is ratified, can- 


not be annulled or altered without the consent of both parties. 


16. Now to Abraham and his seed 


were the promises made. The covenant with its promises was made with Abraham and his seed. 


There were promises spoken on several occasions. See Gen. 12: 3, 7; 
of the covenant were to the seed, as well as to 
He saith not, To seeds, as of many, but .. - 
criticism. Many have thought that Paul made a grammatical mistake. 
brother Paul, this argument won’t stick.” 

he knew just the meaning of sperma (Rom, 4: 18; Onl) 9 
of spiritual meaning. Paul does not mean 
unity. Not the word “children” or 


The criticism is that sperma, 
“seed,” is a collective noun and may include all Abraham’s descendants. 

but the question here is not one of grammar, but 
that sperma (seed) excludes plurality, but that it implies 
“descendants” is used. This would embrace the children of 


13:16; 15:5; 17:7. The promises 
Abraham, and hence did not terminate with his death, 
to thy seed. This passage has excited much 
Even Luther says: 
the Greek word rendered 


“My dear 


Paul elsewhere shows that 


Ishmael, of Esau, and of Keturah. But there is a seed to whom the promise is given; a seed that 


embraces many, but is one. 
whole spiritual seed of Abraham concentrates in Christ. 
Paul understood Greek as well as 
returns to the argument introduced in verse 15. 


his critics, and also knew what he meant. 17. And this I say. 
That the covenant. He has just shown that this 


That seed is Christ the head, and all in Christ. See 1 Cor. 12:12. The 
The promise is to Christ and all in Christ. 
He 


covenant was not only with Abraham, but with his spiritual seed, and hence must continue in effect 


174 GALATIANS. 


- 18 For if* the inheritance be of the law, ¢é 7s no 
more of promise: but? God gave 7¢ to Abraham by 
promise. 

19 Wherefore then serveth the law? It* was added 
because of transgressions, till the seed should come 
to whom the promise was made; and it was‘ or- 
dained by angels in the hand of a® mediator. 

20 Now, a mediator is not a mediator of 
but God is one. 





one;* 





(Ch. III. 





doth not disannul, so as 


to make the promise of 


none effect. For if the in- 
heritance is of the law, it 
is no more of promise: but 
God hath granted it to 
Abraham by promise. 
What then is the law? It 
was added because of 
transgressions, till the 
seed should come to whom 
the promise hath been 
made; and it was ordained 
through angels by the 


18 


19 


hand of a mediator. oy 20 

j ?/|a mediator is not a medi- 

21 Js the law then against the promises of God? | 2,medi Sata aor ne 
God forbid: for if there had been a law given which | one, Is the law then 21 


could have given life, verily righteousness should 
have been by the law. 

22 But the scripture hath concluded all under 
sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might 
be given to them that believe. 

23 But before faith came, we were kept under the 
law, shut up unto the faith which should afterwards 
be revealed. 

24 Wherefore® the law was our schoolmaster fo 
bring us unto Christ, that® we might be justified by 
faith. 


a Rom.8:17. 6 Rom. 4:14. e John 15: 22; 1 Tim. 1:9. d@ Acts 7:53; Heb. 2:2. 


z f Rom. 3:29. g Matt. 5:17. h Acts13: 39. 





against the promises of 
God? God forbid: for if 
there had been a law given 
which could make alive, 
verily righteousness 
would have been of the 
law. Howbeit the script- 
ure hath shut up all things 
under sin, that the prom- 
ise by faithin Jesus Christ 
might be given to them 
that believe. 

But before faith came, 
we were kept in ward un- 
der the law, shut up unto 
the faith which should 
afterwards be revealed. So 
that the law hath been our 





é Ex. 20: 19; Deut. 5: 5. 





until Christ came. 
disannul it. The covenant made with Abraham is still in force. 


23 


24 


Hence the law, made over four centuries after the covenant was given, could not 
Four hundred and thirty years 


after. According to Usher’s Chronology, the promise was made to Abraham B. C. 1921; the law was 


given at Sinai B. C. 1491; the interval is 430 years. 
because in Exod. 12: 12 it said the Hebrews were in 
The Septuagint Version of the Old Testame 


But some have held that Paul made a mistake,, 
Egypt 430 years. The matter is easily explained. 
is the one usually followed by Christ and his apostles. 


Its translators, following the Hebrew copy before them, render Exodus 12: 12, “The sojourning of the 


children of Israel who dwelt in Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, 
Whether this is right, or our Hebrew text, does not matter. 


was four hundred and thirty years.” 
Paul gave the usually received statement. 


His point was simply that the law was given many ages after the covenant with Abraham, 18. If the 


inheritance be of the law. 
itance by law, 


inheritance was given to Abraham by promise; and ours depends on the promise. 


Law and promise exclude each other. The legal heir receives his inher- 
if there be no will; one nota legal heir may receive it by the promise ofa will. The 


19-23. Wherefore then serveth the law? What was its object then? It was added in order to: 
restrain transgressions among men, and especially among the fleshly race of Abraham, until the prom- 
ised seed, to whom the promise was made, even Christ, should come. It was therefore only to last. 
until that seedcame. Ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator. Communicated through 
the means of angels to the mediator between Israel and God; that is, to Moses. See Acts 7: 53; Heb. 
2:2; Deut. 33: 2, and Deut. 5:5. 20. Now a mediator is not of one. A mediator implies two: 
parties between whom he acts. But God is one. The idea is that when God makes a promise by his 
sovereign power no mediator 1s required. God acts alone. Thus it was when the promises were made: 
to Abraham. God, too, is One, the same, always, and hence the law is not due toa change of the divine 
mind. 21. Is the law then against the promises? No. The law does not give life at all. If it 
did, and could impart righteousness, then it might be said to be opposed to the promises of righteous- 
ness by faith. 22. But. But none became righteous by the law. The Scriptures place all under sin, 
that the promise should be to them only who believe through Christ. All hope is in the gospel. See 
Rom. 11: 32. 28. Kept under the law. Before the faith was revealed we were confined under the 
law, as it were in prison, in a state of preparation tor the faith that was to be revealed. The law was 
“added” (see verse 19) in order to do a work of preparation until the gospel was revealed. 

24-29. Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster. “Tutor,” in the Revision. In Roman 
families a trusted slave, a pedagogue, had charge of children, preserved them from harm, and took them. 


Ch. IV.] GALATIANS. 





25 But after that faith is come, we are no longer 
under a schoolmaster. 

26 For ye? are all the children of God by faith in 
Christ Jesus. 

27 For as many of you as have been baptized into 
Christ have put on Christ. 

28 There® is neither Jew nor Greek, there is 
neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor 
female: for ye are all° one in Christ Jesus. 

29 And* if ye de Christ’s, then are ye Abraham’s 
seed, and® heirs according to the promise. 


CHAPTER IV. 


The Two Covenants. 


SUMMARY.—Children, While Minors, Not Free. So the Israelites Under 
the Bondage of the Law Until Christ Came. Christ Frees From This 
Bondage. The Folly of: Gentiles Seeking This Bondage. How the 
Galatians Had Once Welcomed the Gospel. The Two Covenants, 
Hagar, and Sarah, and Their Significance. 


1 Now I say, That the heir, as long as he is a 
child, differeth nothing from a servant, though he 
be lord of all. 

2 But is under tutors and governors until the 
time appointed of the father. 





175 





tutor to bring us unto 
Christ, that we might be 
justified by faith. But now 25 
that faith is come, we are 
no longer under a tutor. 
For ye are all sons of God, 26. 
through faith, in Christ 
Jesus. For as many of you 27 
as were baptized into 
Christ did put on Christ. 
There can be neither Jew 28 
nor Greek, there can be 
neither bond nor free, 
there can be no male and 
female: for ye all are one 
man in Christ Jesus. And 29 
if ye are Christ’s, then are 
ye Abraham’s seed, heirs 
according to promise. 


CHAPTER IV. 


But I say that so long as L 
the heir is a child, he dif- 
fereth nothing from a 
bondservant, though he is 
lord of all; but is under 2’ 
guardians and stewards 
until the term appointed 


aJohn1:12. 6 Rom. 10:12, cJohn 10: 16; 17:21. d Gen. 21:10. e Rom. 8:17. 








to school. The law is such a tutor; not a schoolmaster, but a guide to lead us to the school of Christ. 
There we are justified by faith. 25. After thatfaithis come. When once brought to Christ we 
do not need the tutor any longer. We are no longer underhim. 26, For ye are all the children of 
God. Faith has come to all of you. You are all God’s children by faith in Christ. Hence you are 
under the schoolmaster no longer. 2'7. For. He now shows how their faith acted to bring them into 
Christ. As Dr. Schaff says, ‘“‘Faith always implies surrender.”’ Faith leads to obedience. The believer 
is baptized into Christ, and being found in him has put on Christ. Being in Christ, a member of 
his body, a part of the Son, the believer becomes a child of God. Compare Rom. 6: 3; 1 Cor. 10: 2, and 
Matt. 28:19. “The baptized is surrounded by Christ and covered by his merits. . . The figure of 
putting on Christ as a new dress afterwards gave rise to the custom of wearing white baptismal gar- 
ments.”—Schaf, inloco. 28. There is neither Jew nor Greek. In Christ the old, worldly lines of 
separation are all blotted out. All one. One person as it were, ‘one new man” (Eph. 2: 15), of which 
Christ is the head. All, without regard to race, blended into one whole. 29. If ye be Christ’s. As 
Christ is the seed of Abraham, all in Christ become the spiritual seed of Abraham, and hence heirs of 
the promise to Abraham’s seed. 

Norep.—In the study of this Letter, it is well to keep in mind that the term faith is used by Paul often 
in a sense that means more than the act of belief. When it is put in contrast with the law, it is used in 
the sense of The Faith, that is, The Gospel. It comprehends what is believed, believing, and the results 
of believing. The fact that the apostle so often places the definite article before the word faith, so that. 
in the Greek he speaks of The Faith, leaves no doubt of his meaning. It is unfortunate that the trans- 
lators have obscured the meaning by omitting the article. Thus in this chapter the Greek gives the 
definite article before the word (the faith) five times where it is omitted in the Common Version. The 
examples are verse 14, verse 23 (twice), verses 25 and 26. 

1-8. That the heir, aslong as heisachild. In the last verse of ehapter 3, Paul speaks of heirs.. 
He now shows why the bondage of the Jewish law preceded the gospel. Even an heir is not free when 
achild. It is needful that he be controlled, even as though he were a servant. He is kept (verse 2) 
under tutors andgovernors. The tutors had charge of his person; the governors were stewards who 


176 GALATIANS. 


[Ch. IV. 


hw SSSA 


3 Even so we, when we were children, were? in 
bondage under the elements of the world: 

4 But? when the fulness of the time was come, 
God sent forth his Son, made of¢ a woman,* made 
under the law, 

5 To® redeem them that were under the law,! 
that we might receive the adoption of sons. 

6 And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth 
the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, 
Father. 

7 Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a 
son;* and if a son, then an heir of God through 
Christ. 

8 Howbeit then® when ye knew not God, ye! did 
service unto them which by nature are no gods. 

9 But now,! after that ye have known God, or 
rather are known of God,* how turn ye again to the 
weak! and beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire 
again to be in bondage? 


of the father. So we also, 3 
when we were children, 
were held in bondage 1n- 
der the rudiments of the 
world: but when the ful- 4 
ness of the time came, God 
sent iorth his Son, born of 
a woman, born under the 
law, that he might redeem 5 
them which were under 
the law, that we might re- 
ceive the adoption of sons. 
And because ye are sons, 6 
God sent forth the Spirit 
of his Son into our hearts, 
erying, Abba, Father. So 7 
that thou art no longer a 
bondservant, but a son; 
andif a son, then an heir 
through God. 

Howbeit at that time, 8 
not knowing God, ye were 
in bondage to them which 
by nature are no gods: but 9 
now that ye have come to 
know God, or rather to be 
known of God,how turn ye 
back again to the weak 
and beggarly- rudiments, 
whereunto ye desire to be 


in bondage overagain? Ye 10 


observe days, and months, 





10 Ye™ observe days, and months, and times, and 
years. 
a Col, 2:8: Heb. 9:10. 6 Gen. 49:10; Dan. 9:24; Mark 1:15; Eph. 1: 10. 


d@ Matt. 5:17. e Matt. 20:28; 1 Pet.1:18. John 1:12. g Rom. 8:16. hk Eph, 2:12. 
g1Cor. 8:3. Col. 2:20. 7 Heb. 7:18. m Rom. 14:5. 








ec Gen. 38:5; John 1:14; Heb. 2:14. 
t Rom. 1:25; 1 Thes. 1:9. 





managed his estate. These had control until the time appointed by his father in his will, that he should 
be free and have full charge. 8. Even so we. Both Jews and Gentiles. We were minors, children, 
not yet delivered from bondage, since the time had not come appointed by the Father. Under the ele- 
ments ofthe world. The law of Moses and whatever law might be diffused among the heathen. The 
law of Moses was a temporal law, having temporal promises. 

4-6. When the fulness of time. The time appointed by the Father. See verse 2. Made of 
woman, made under the law. Not only taking upon himself the nature of humanity, but also sub- 
jecting himself to our legal conditions. To redeem them that were under the law. Those under 
bondage need redemption in order to secure freedom. Paul has shown that those under the law were in 
bondage. From this bondage Christ came to redeem us. How the redemption was wrought is shown in 
3:13. That we might receive. This “adoption of sons” is bestowed as a gift. We cannot have it, and 
stillbe in bondage, 6. Because yearesons. The spirit is bestowed not to make us sons, but be- 
cause we have become sons by the faith. See John 1:12, Crying Abba, Father. See notes on Rom. 
8:15. Abbais simply the Syriac for father. It is found also in Mark 14:36, This spirit of adoption helps 
the son to realize that he is a son, and to look up to God and to address him, if a Semitic, as Abba; if a 
Greek, as Pater; ifan Anglo-Saxon, as Father. 

7-9. Wherefore, thou art no moreaservant., Because redeemed, adopted as a son, having re- 
ceived the spirit of adoption. Ifa son,then an heir. Compare Rom. 8:17. Heirs of a heavenly in- 
heritance. 8. Howbeit, then. These Galatian brethren had been idolators, and had worshiped idols 
which were not gods at all. At that time they knew not God, the true God, at all. 9. But now, 
after that ye have known God. Having learned the knowledge of the true God. Or rather, are 
known of God. God, himself, had sought them through the gospel, and had offered them eternal life. 
They knew God because God had taken note of them and sent them the gospel. How turn ye again. 
How can they, known of God, called from the bondage of those that are not gods (verse 8), turn back 
again to bondage? The bondage referred to is that of the law. They had been delivered from the bond- 
age of idolatry, but were relapsing into another bondage. Weak and beggarly elements. Weak, be- 
cause they have no spiritual power to strengthen us; beggarly, because they have no rich promises like 
the gospel; elements, because they belong to a rudimentary condition, to an undeveloped state, to the 
‘childhood of the race. 

10-11. Yeobserve days. These are specifications of how they were “turning back” to the Jewish 
Jaw. Compare Col. 2:16. The days are the Jewish Sabbaths. The months are the new moons; the times 


Ch. IV.] GALATIANS. | 


11 I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon 
you labour in vain. 

12 Brethren, I beseech you, be as* lam; for I am 
as ye are: ye have not injured me at all. 

13 Ye know how,” through infirmity of the flesh, 
I preached the gospel unto you at the first. 

14 And my temptation, which was in my flesh, ye 
despised not, nor rejected; but received me® as an 
angel of God, even® as Christ Jesus. 

15 Where is then the blessedness ye spake of? 
for I bear you record, that, if ¢¢ had been possible, 
ye would have plucked out your own eyes, and have 
given them to me. 

16 Am I therefore become your enemy, because 
I tell you the truth? 

17 They’ zealously affect you, éu¢ not well; yea, 
they would exclude you, that ye might affect them. 

18 But z¢ zs good to be zealously affected alwasy 
in @ good thing, and not only when I am present 
with you. 

19 My? little children, of whom I travail in birth 


177 


and seasons, and years. I 11 
am afraid of you, lest by 
any means I have bestow- 
ed labour upon you in 
vain. 

I beseech you, brethren, 12 
be as I am, forI am as ye 
are. Ye did meno wrong: 13 
but ye know that because 
of an infirmity of the flesh 
I preached the gospel unto 
you the first time: andthat 14 
which was a temptation to 
you in my flesh ye despis- 
ed not, nor rejected; but 
ye received meas an angel 
of God, even as Christ Je- 
sus. Where then is that 15 

ratulation of yourselves? 

or I bear you witness, 
that, if possible, ye would 
have plucked out youreyes 
and given them to me. So 
then am I become your en- 
emy, because I tell you 
the truth? They zealously 17 
seek you in no good way; 
nay, they desire to shut 
you out, that ye may seek 
them. But it is good to be 18 
zealously sought in a good 
matter at all times, and 
not only when I am pres- 
ent with you. My little 19 
children, of whom I am 


again in trayail until Christ 
be formed in you, yea, I 20 
could wish to be present 
with you now, and to 
change my voice; for Iam 
perplexed about you. 


again until Christ be formed in you, 
20 I desire to be present with you now, and to 
change my voice; for I stand in doubt of you. 











@ Gal. 6:14. 61Cor.2:3. ¢Gal.1:6. d2Sam.19:27. e Matt. 10:40. fRom. 10:2. g1Cor. 4: 15. 





are the Jewish festivals ; the years are the Sabbatical years. In observing these there was legal bond- 
age to an obselete system, 11. Invain. See notes on 2:2. 

12-16. Brethren, I beseech you, be as Iam. Literally: “Become as I am.” Come to my ground. 
For Tamasyeare. Rather, 1 become as yeare. Igaveup my bondage to Judaism, the religion of 
my fathers, and made myself as a Gentile to Gentiles. Ye did me no wrong. My complaint against 
you is not on personal grounds. You have not wronged me. 18. Ye know how, through infirm- 
ity, etc. The Revision is clearer. Some fact, not explained to us, but well known to the Galatians, is 
referred to. It 1s implied that some physical weakness caused him to preach in Galatia the first time. 
Perhaps he was passing through and was stopped by an infirmity that prevented him from travelling. 
The first time. This implies he had preached there more than once. The Acts speak of two visits to 
Galatia. 14. And mytemptation, which was in my flesh. The Revision follows the best manu- 
scripts: “Your temptation, which was in my flesh.” His “‘inflrmity” is meant. It was probably some 
malady which hindered his work—might have disfigured him, and been a temptation to the Galatians to 
ridicule and despise him. Probably 2 Cor. 12:7 refers to the same afiliction. Both these allusions show 
that the infirmity was one that he severely felt But the Galatians despised him not, nor rejected 
him on that account, but received him heartily, even as an angel of God, God’s messenger. 15. 
Where, then, is the blessednessP They then congratulated themselves that Paul had come to them 
with the gospel. Ibear yourecord. So great was then their joy and sense of obligation, that they 
could not do enough to show their gratitude. Why, they would even have given him their own eyes !— 
a proverbial expression denoting very strong devotion. 16. Am I, therefore, _ become your 
enemy, etc. Then, you were so devoted to me; has the fact that I tell you the truth alienated you? It 
is probable that he refers to truth told on his second visit. 

17-20. They zealously seek you. The false, Judaizing teachers are meant. They showed great 
zeal for them, but were not seeking their good. They would exclude you. Exclude you from the 
great body of Gentile believers and bind you to their clique. 18. It is good to be zealously affected. 
‘To exhibit zeal and feeling is a good thing. It was good to show this feeling when he was present 
with them. But now it was changed in respect of himself. It was only when he was present. 
19. My (13). children. He addresses them very tenderly as their spiritual parent. Of whom I 

(12) 


178 GALATIANS. 


[Ch. IV. 





21 Tell me, ye that desire to be under the law, do 
ye not hear the law? 

22 For it is written, that Abraham had two sons;* 
the one by a bond maid,” the other by a free 
woman. 

23 But he who was of the bond woman was? born 
after the flesh; but* he of the free woman was by 
promise. 

24 Which things are an allegory: for these are 
the two covenants; the one from the mount Sina, 
which gendereth to bondage, which is Agar. 

25 For this Agar is mount Sina in Arabia, and 
answereth to Jerusalem which now is, and is in 
bondage with her children. 

26 But® Jerusalem which is above is free, which 
is the mother of us all. 

27 For it is written,’ Rejoice, thou barren that 
bearest not; break forth and ery, thou that travail- 
est not: for the desolate hath many more children 
than she which hath a husband. 

28 Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the® 
children of promise. 





aGen. 16:15. 6Gen,21:2. cRom.9:7,8. d Gen. 18:10. 


g Rom. 4: 16. 





Tell me, ye that desire 21. 
to be under the law, do ye 
not hear the law? For it is 22 
written, that Abraham had 
two sons, one by the hand- 
maid, and one by the free- 
woman. Howbeit the son 23: 
by the handmaid is born 
after the flesh; but the son 
by the freewoman is born 
through promise. Which 
things contain an allego- 
ry: for these women are 
two covenants; one from 
mount Sinai, bearing chil- 
dren unto bondage, which 
is Hagar. Now this Hagar 25. 
is mount Sinai in Arabia, 
and answereth to the Je- 
rusalem that now is: for 
she is in bondage with her 
children. But the Jerusa- 26 
lem that is above is free, 
which is our mother. For 27 
itis written, 

Rejoice, thou barren that 

bearest not; 

Break forth and cry, 
thou that travailest 
not: 

For more are the chil- 
dren of the desolate 
than of her which hath 
the husband. 

Now we, brethren, as Isaac 28: 
was, are children of prom- 


24- 


é Isa. 2:2; Heb. 12:22; Rev. 3:12; 21:2. jfIsa. 54:1. 





travailin birth again. He is more than a father; he travails for them as a mother. He had done so 
when they were converted; he did now again until they were so matured in Christ that they would cling 
to the gospel. 20. I desire to be present. When present (verse 18) they had shown warm feeling” 
forhim. He would now that they were face to face. To change my voice. To speak, not severely, 
as a letter would sound, but tenderly. I stand in doubt. Is perplexed by what he hears, and filled 
with fears. 

21-31. Tell me, ye that desire, etc. What troubled him was their tendency to accept the obso- 
lete law of Moses. He now addressed all such a question. Will they hear the law itself? 22. Itis 
written that Abraham had two sons. A bondmaid. Hagar, whose child was Ishmael. 
A freewoman. Sarah, whose child was Isaac. 28. Was born after the flesh. The son of the 
bondwoman was born in the ordinary course of nature. Was by promise. The son of Sarah vas a 
child of promise, born when she was long past the age of bearing children. See Gen. 18: 10, 14; also 
21:1,2; Heb. 11:11, 24. Which things are an allegory. Though literally true, the facts had an 
allegorical interpretation. The two women and their children were types. Are two covenants. 
One, the bondwoman, represents the covenant given at Sinai, the covenant of bondage. The other, the 
freewoman, represents the covenant of Christ, the gospel. 25. For this Agar is Mount Sinai. 
Represents Sinai. This Mount Sinai is in Arabia, the very home of Ishmael and his race. Some also 
add that one name of the mountain is Hagar, but this is not certain. Answereth to. Represents the 
earthly Jerusalem, under bondage, bondage to the law herself, and also her children, as Hagar and her 
child were under bondage. 26. But Jerusalem which is above is free. The freewoman and her 
free child represent the heavenly Jerusalem, the church of Christ. Our mother. The mother of those 
in Christ. 27. For it is written. Isaiah 54:1, In that connection the prophet speaks of the 
Babylonian bondage, of Abraham and Sarah, and then of the deliverance, looking onward to the 
glorious deliverance in Christ. Chapter 53 is all concerning Christ, and chapter 54 speaks of the great 
deliverance. Thou barren. Sarah, the type of the church, long childless. The desolate. Sarah, or 
rather the church, that has more children by far than the children of the old covenant. 28. Now we, 
brethren. As Isaac was the child of promise, so are we, Gentile and Jewish Christians, of the promise 
to Abraham of a Seed in which all nations should be blessed. 29. As he then that was born after 
the flesh persecuted. See Gen. 21:9, Ishmael persecuted Isaac. So the Jews still persecuted God’s 
spiritual children, the heirs of the promise. Paul “of the Jews had five times received forty stripes... 


Ch. V..] GALATIANS. 


29 But as then* he that was born after the flesh 
persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even 
so it is now. 

30 Nevertheless, what saith> the scripture? Cast 
out the bond woman and her son: for® the son of 
the bond woman shall not be heir with the son of 
the free woman. 

31 So then, brethren, we are not children of the 
bond woman, but of the free. 








CHAPTER V. 


The Fruits of the Flesh and of the Spirit. 


SUMMARY.—To Fall Under the Law is to Lose Christ. Circumcision 
Avails Nothing, but Faith Working by Love. Love the Fulfilling of 
the Law. The Warfare Between the Flesh and the Spirit. The 
Works of the Flesh. The Fruits of the Spirit. 


1 Stand fast therefore in® the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made us free, and be not entangled 
again with® the yoke of bondage. 

2 Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be cir- 
cumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. 

3 For I testify again to every man that is circum- 
cised,® that he is a debtor to do the whole law. 


6 Gal. 3:8. 





a Gen. 21:9. c John 8:35. d John 8:82. 








179 
ise. But as then he that 29 
was born after the flesh 
 eepry him that was 
orn after the Spirit, even 
so itisnow. Howbeit what 30 
saith the Scripture? Cast 
out the handmaid and her 
son: for the son of the 
handmaid shall not inher- 
it with the son of the free- 
woman. Wherefore,breth- 31 
ren, we are not children of 
a handmaid, but of the 
freewoman, 


CHAPTER V. 


With freedom did Christ 1 
set us free: stand fast 
therefore, and be not en- 


‘tangled again in a yoke of 


bondage. 

Behold, I Paul say unto 2 
you, that, if ye receive cir- 
cumcision, Christ will 
profit you nothing. Yea,I 3 
testify again toevery man 
that receiveth circumcis- 
ion, that he is a debtor to 





e Acts 15:10. f Acts 15:1. 


g Gal. 3:10. 





save one.” 80. Cast out the bondwoman and herson. The allegory will hold good still further. 
Abraham, when it was impossible that the two families should get along in peace, cast out the bond- 
woman and herson. See Gen. 21:10. So, too, the Jews, the children of the old covenant, had lost the 
divine favor, and the children of the promise, whether Jews or Gentiles, made heirs. 81. So then, 
brethren. This, then, is the conclusion. We Christians are not children of the bondwoman, and are 
not under the bondage of the law. Dr. Schaff contrasts the two covenants as follows: 


SARAH AND ISAAC—CHRISTIANITY. 


The New Covenant. 

The Gospel. 

Spiritual Birth. 

Mount Sion Above. 

The Heavenly Jerusalem. 
Freedom. 

Persecuted. 

Heirs of the Inheritance. 


HAGAR AND ISHMAEL—JUDAISM. 


The Old Covenant. 

The Law. 

Natural Birth. 

Mount Sinai in Arabia. 
The Earthly Jerusalem. 
Bondage. 

Persecuting. 

To be Cast Out and Off, 


1. Stand fast therefore. Compare Eph. 6:14; Thess. 2:15. This verse is connected in meaning 
with the last chapter, where it is shown that the gospel is freedom, but the Mosaic law is the covenant 
of bondage. Hence Paul bids them to cling to their freedom in Christ, and not to be brought again 
under the yoke by being drawn under the Jewish law. Again. Once they had been under bondage to 
a heathen yoke (4: 8); to accept the Jewish yoke would be a second bondage. 

2-6. Behold, I Paul. He makes emphatic what he is about to say, by repeating his name, so 
familiar to his own converts. If ye be circumcised. Their circumcision, under the circumstances, 
would be the sign of their submission to the law of Moses. They, Gentile Christians, could not thus 
become Jews and remain Christians. It would be a proof of trust in Moses rather than Christ, in the 
law rather than in the gospel. 8. I testify again. He shows them that if one becomes circumcised 
to keep the law of Moses, that he is placed under obligation to keep the whole law, since other com- 
mandments are equally binding. 4. Christ is become of no effect unto you. If you be circum- 














180 GALATIANS. (Ches¥. 
4 Christ* is become of no effect unto you, whoso- cGamed oer =e 4 
ever of you are justified by the law; ye® are fallen | who would be justified by 
the law; ye are fallen 
from grace. ie a away from grace. For we 5 
5 For we through the Spirit® wait for the hope) rcs bs iopear ee 
of righteousness by faith. ; gousness. For in Christ 6 
6 For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision avail- RVALICEN anything, nor un. 
4 1 iQ] 5 e fay j circumcision; ut fait 
eth anything, nor uncircumcision; but® faith which working (negnen ieee a 
worketh by love. ere cunning wells wie 
7 Ye? did run well; who did hinder you, that ye should not obey the rote? 
should not obey the truth? of Hi Gee caen oe ye 
8 This persuasion cometh not of him that calleth | tittle leaven leareneck the 
whole lump. JI have confi- 10 
you. pence i Metcabiclird in the 
r ord, that ye wi enone 
9 A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. cote a ne 
10 I* have confidence in you through the Lord, that troubleth you shall 
that ye will be none otherwise minded: but® he that avers bas Bet? oto 
i 1a 4 ren,if I still preach cir- 
troubleth you shall‘ bear his judgment, whosoever pamelion ane oe ee al 
he be. aah as eae neat the 
11 Andi I, brethren, if I yet preach circumcis- oes bas cee ee 
G k . ; 3) jal would that they which un- 
ion,* why do I yet suffer persecution? then is! the ratio von Soe ey 
offence of the cross ceased. themselves off, be 
1 0 ? ? 
12 I™ would they were even" cut off which trouble Gelted: for freadom! ony 
use not your freedom for 
you. y an occasion to the flesh 
13 For, brethren, ye have been called unto liber-| bat through love be ser- 
ty; only°® wse not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, 
but by love serve one another. 
a Rom. 9:31. 6 Heb. 12:15. cRom. 8:24. dCol. 3:11. e 1 Thes. 1:3; Jas. 2:18. #1 Cor. 9:24. g 2 Cor. 8:22. 
AGal. 1:7. ¢2Cor. 10:6. j Gal. 6:12. &£1Cor. 15:30. 21 Cor. 1:28. m1Cor. 5:18. n Acts 15:1. 01 Pet. 2:16. 





cised in order to keep the Mosaic law. See notes on verse 2. Ye are fallen from grace. 
5. For we. We Christians, who trust in the gospel. 
Not through carnal ordinances, but strengthened by the Spirit we wait for thef 


to the law for salvation. 


which righteousness by faith instead of the law insures to us. 
no difference in the sight of God whether a Christian was 
tile. Both stood on the same footing. It did make a 
became circumcised in order to keep the law (verse 2). 





By resorting 
Through the Spirit. 
ulfillment of the hope 
6. For in Christ Jesus, etc. It made 
a circumcised Jew or an uncircumcised Gen- 
great difference, though, if the Gentile Christian 
It is true Paul circumcised Timothy, but it was 


not to keep the law. See notes on 2:3. But faith availeth—the faith in Christ; the faith which uses 


love as its medium and method of working. 
7-10. Ye did run well. A figure from the Grecian games. 


There is first faith in Christ; then the love of Christ. 
Compare 2: 2; 1 Cor. 9: 24; Heb. 12: 1. 


Who did hinder? So as to stop your running. They had ceased to run by turning from the truth, 


8. This persuasion. To obey not the truth. 


sometimes work a great mischief. 10, I have confidence. 
minded than himself. He that troubleth you. All these false 
demnation, whoever they may be. 


It was not of him that called them, 
should turn fromit. 9. <A little leaven, etc. A proverb which condenses a sermon. 
one or two Judaizers had done all this evil work in Galatia, A very little thin 


God, that they 
Probably only 
g in the beginning will 
That they will be none otherwise 
teachers shall be brought to con- 


11,12. AndI, brethren, if I yet preach circumcision. Perhaps the Judaizers, in order to pro- 


mote their doctrine, urged that Paul also taught circumcision in some places, 


They might even quote 
the case of Timothy (see notes on Acts 16: 3). If this charge was true, why did the Jews everywhere 
persecute him? Then is the offense of the cross ceased. The great offense of the cross to the 
Jews was that Christ is the atonement for sin, and that the whole Jewish system of ordinances perished 
at the cross. Of course, if Paul taught obedience to the law, he rejected the doctrine $f the cross, 
i2. I would they were even cut off. These men are seeking to make the mark of bondage by cut- 
ting your flesh. I would that they would cut themselves off (see Revision). I take it that he means, 
«Cut themselves off from the church so as to have nothing more to do with it.” 





Ch. Vi} GALATIANS. 181 
14 For all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in | vants one to another. For 14 
. . 1 
this,* Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. in one word, even in this; 
15 But if ye bite and devour one another, take|powras thyselh, Bat sire 15 
heed that ye be not consumed one of another. Low opine fy Seo een 
. , . Gault , e 
16 This I say then,” Walk in the Spirit, and ye | not consumed one of an- 
shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh. Prt I aap s Walk by the 16 
17 For’ the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and | $pitit, and ye shall not 
the Spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary | For the | flesh lusteth 17 
ae a agains e Spirit, and the 
the one to the other; so? that ye cannot do the) sfiritagainstthe flesh ; for 
things that ye would. these are contrary the one 
nies aes to the other; that ye may 
18 But® if ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not) not do the things that ye 
under the law ro worege ye are led 18 
: : y the Spirit, ye are not 
19 Now’ the works of the flesh are manifest, | 2™4er the law. Now the 19 
: 5 : works of the fiesh are man- 
which are these: Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, ifest, which are these, for- 
ofthe nication, uncleanness, las- 
lasciviousness, : ; civiousness, idolatry, sor- 20 
20 Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emula- | ery; cnmities, strife, jeal- 
tions, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies divisions, heresies, envy- 21 
; fan 4 3 2 : ings, drunkenness el 
21 Envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, | tings, and such hike: of the 
and such like: of the which I tell you before, as [| which I forewarn . you, 

c 5 ? ; even as I did forewarn 
have also told you in time past, that® they which you, that they which prac- 
do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of |jhhent’ the Eingdom of 
God. ue ae the fruit of the 22 

; ie, ‘ pirit is love, joy, peace, 
22 But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, | longsuffering, “Eindness, 
goodness, faithfulness, 





long-suffering,' gentleness, goodness,! faith, 








a Lev. 19:18. 6 Rom. 6:12. c Rom. 7:23. d Rom. 7:15. eRom. 6:14. f1Cor. 3:3; Eph. 5:35 Jas. 3:14. g Rev- 
22:15. hJohn 15:2. ¢Jas. 3:17. j1 Cor. 13:7. 





18-15. Ye have been called to liberty. The liberty of children of God. Use not liberty for 
an occasion to the flesh. Do not think that because you are free you are free to do evil. Let not 
liberty become license. But by love serve, etc. But love each other so well that there will be 
mutual service and helpfulness. 14. For all the law is fulfilled. The essence of the law is com- 
prehended in a smgle command—that of loving your neighbor. See notes on Rom, 13:8; also compare 
Matt. 22: 39, and Lev. 19:18. 15. But if ye bite and devour. Bite in sudden anger, and devour in 
continued hatred. Take heed. Mutual anger and hate must result in mutual destruction. 

16-18. Walkinthe Spirit. Under its guidance, as it directs. We have its directions in the words: 
of Christ and the apostles. He who is guided by the Spirit will not obey the lusts of the flesh. 
17. The flesh lusteth against the Spirit, etc. The desires of the flesh and the Spirit are in con- 
flict. They war withm us. One would lead in one direction, and the other in another. So that ye 
cannot. The Greek is not so strong as this. It implies that the two wills within us hinder us from 
doing as we would by their conflict. 18. But if ye be led of the Spirit. If the desire of the Spirit 
prevails. Those “led of the Spirit are the sons of God” (Rom. 8: 14), and are free from the law. The 
law with its carnal ordinances in Paul’s view was adapted to a fleshly condition. 

19-21. Now the works of the flesh are these. The tree is known by its fruits. * We 
show by our fruits whether we are of the flesh or Spirit. The works of the flesh are first given. Paul 
names (1) Three sins of sensuality; (2) two spiritual sins of false religion; (3) sins against our fellow- 
men, of which nine are specified; (4) sins of intemperance, of which two are named. The sins of 
. sensuality were sanctioned by the heathen religion in the worship of Venus, and sanctioned by the 
purest heathen moralists. Christianity had to breast the current of the whole world. It differs from 
heathen morality as day from night. 20. Witchcraft. Sorcery or magic, whether a superstition or 
deception, was prevalent in all the ancient world. See notes on Acts 19:19. 21. Drunkenness. A 
common sin of all ages. Revellings. Any kind of riotous or unseemly conduct; carousals. As I 
have told youintimes past. As before, when in Galatia, so now he tells them again that none who: 
do these things can expect to be saved. ; 

22, 23. But the fruits of the Spirit. The fruits named are not our fruits, but of the Spirit in us.. 
If we bear these fruits we show that we have the Spirit. There are four groups: (1) Love, the Christian 


182 GALATIANS. 


Se ee ee 


23 Meekness, temperance: against such there is 
no law. 

24 And they that are Christ’s have? crucified the 
flesh, with the affections and lusts. 
P 25 If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the 

irit. 

06 Let us not be desirous of vain-glory, provok- 

ing one another, envying one another. 


CHAPTER VI. 


Concluding Admonitions. 


SUMMARY.—Restoring the Stumbling. Humility Commended. The Law. 
Reaping and Sowing. Paul’s Superscription. Glorying in the Cross. 
The Marks of Jesus Christ. 








[Ch. VI. 


meekness, temperance: 
against such there is no 


23 


law. And they that are of 24 


Christ Jesus have cruci- 
fled the fiesh with the 
passions and the lusts 
thereof. 

If we live by the Spirit, 
by the Spirit let us also 
walk. Let us not be vain- 
glorious, provoking one 
another, envying one an- 
other. 





25 
26 


CHAPTER VI. 
1 Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye?|_ Brethren, even if aman 1 
: sien ie h in thee be overtaken in any tres- 
which are spiritual restore such an one in the Pass, ye which are spirit- 
17 qe 7 7 d ual, restore such a one in 
aed uo Hee ay a considering thyself,? lest thou a spinitof meekness “look: 
aiso be tempted. ing to thyself, lest thou 
2 Beare Pp her’s burd d fulfil also be tempted. Bear ye 2 
ear® ye one another’s burdens, and so fu one another's burdens and 
i so e lawo rist. 
the law of Christ. ‘ : ' For if aman thinketh him. 3 
3 For’ if aman think himself to be something, self to be something, when 
when he? is nothing, he deceiveth himself. echuiisel’ “Betlerc ne 
i s n “| man prove his own work, 
4 But? let every man prove his own work, and |™ then shall he wave nat 
then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and | glorying in regard of him- 
-¥ self alone, and not of his 
not in? another. : neighbor. For each man 5 
5 For* every man shall bear his own burden. shall bear his own burden. 
@Col.3:9. 61 Cor. 2:15. 2 Thes. 3:15. d1Oor. 7:5. e Rom. iG He fF John 18:14. g Rom. 12:3. h2 Cor. 8:5. 


72 Cor. 13:5. j Luke 18:11. & Rom. 2:6. 





grace which works out the whole law. (2) Joy and peace, which are the normal state of the Christian. 


(8) The graces which relate to others, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, fidelity (faith), 


(4) The last fruit looks to oneself, temperance, or self-control. 


meekness, 
It implies not only abstinence from 


injurious drinks and foods, but control of the temper, the tongue, the desirés, the passion for money or 


power. Against such there is no law. 
them. 


Those who bear these fruits find no law interfering with 


‘24-26. They that are Christ’s. They cannot walk after the flesh because they have crucified 


their lusts. Have died with Christ, been buried, and risen, not to live their own lives, but Christ's. 


Romans 6: 2-6, Baptism is supposed to mark 
Christian life. 
it by walking in obedience to the Spirit. 
probably a well-known fault of the Galatians. 

1,2. Ifaman be overtaken ina fault. Not gone into sin as 
surprised by it. 


seeking to cut them off, seek lovingly to lead them back from their error. 


ourselves may be caught by temptation and sin. Let us bear in mind th 


judge others gently. 2. Bear ye one another’s burdens. 


See 
a complete separation between the old life of sin and the 
25. Walk in the Spirit. If we are born again, and have a spiritual life, let us show 
26. Let us not be desirous of vain glory. This was 


a result of sinful premeditation, but 
Those intending well are sometimes caught unawares. 


Ye which are spiritual. 
Who have continued to walk in the Spirit. Restore such an one. Instead of judging severely and 
Considering thyself. We 
at we are not infallible, and 


Help each other, sustain each other; if 


you see one about to stumble under his burden, hold him up. So fulfill the law of Christ. The law 


of love. See John 13: 34, 

38-6. Ifaman think, ete. If he thinks he is strong, needs no help, 
he deceiveth himself. 4, But let every man prove his own work. 
the weaknesses of others, let him test his own work. If his work stands 
it alone, not because he is superior to another, 
This seems at first to conflict with verse 2. The 


will never need sympathy, etc., 
Instead of commenting upon 
the test, then he can rejoice in 

5. For every man shall bear his own burden, 
meaning of verse 2 is, “Bear ye one another’s burden of 


Ch. VI.] GALATIANS. 


6 Let? him that is taught in the word communi- 
cate unto him that teacheth in all good things. 

7 Be” not deceived;* God is not mocked: for* 
whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. 

8 For he that soweth to his flesh, shall of the 
flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to® the 
Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. 

9 And? let us not be weary in well-doing; for in 
due season we shall reap,® if we faint not. 

10 As" we have therefore opportunity, let! us do 
good unto all men, especially unto them who are of! 
the household of faith. 

11 Ye see how large a letter I have written unto 
you with mine own hand. 

12 As many as desire to make a fair shew in the 
flesh, they constrain you to be circumcised; only 
lest* they should suffer persecution for the cross of 
Christ. 

13 For neither they themselves who are circum- 
cised keep the law; but desire to have you circum- 
cised, that they may glory in your flesh. 

14 But God forbid that I should glory, save in the 
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world 
is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. 





b1 Cor. 6:9. ¢Job. 13:9. d Luke 16:25. 


41 Tim. 6:18. j Eph. 2:19. 


a@ Rom. 15:27. eJas. 3:18. f2 


& Phil. 3:18 





trial and suffering;” of verse 5, “Every one must bear his own burden of responsibility.” The first is 
the second is the burden of our account before God. 


aiding to bear the burden of another’s infirmities ; 


‘| well - doing: 





183 


But let him that is tanght 
in the word communicate 
unto him that teacheth in 
all good things. Be not de- 
ceived; God is not mock- 
ed: for whatsoever a man 
soweth, that shall he also 
reap. For he that soweth 
unto his own flesh shall of 
the flesh reap corruption; 
but he that soweth unto 
the Spirit shall of the Spir- 
it reap eternal life. And 
let us not be weary in 
for in due 
season we shall reap if we 
faint not. So then, as we 
have opportunity, let us 
work that which is good 
toward all men, and espe- 
cially toward them that 
are of the household of 
the faith. 

See with how large let- 
ters I have written unto 
you with mine own hand. 
‘As many as desire to make 
a fair show in the flesh, 
they compel you to be cir- 
cumeised; only that they 
may not be persecuted for 
the cross of Christ. For 
not even they who receive 
circumcision do them- 
selves keep the law; but 
they desire to have you 
circumcised, that they 
may glory in your flesh. 
But far be it from me to 
glory, save in the cross of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, 
paGage which the world 
hath been crucified unto 
me, and I unto the world. 


6 


7 


8 


9 


11 


14 








Thes. 3:18. g Matt. 24:13. AJobn 9:4. 
18. 


The Greek has two different words for burden in the two verses; it is unfortunate that the Versions do : 
not represent this difference by two words in the English. 6. Let him that is taught. Let those 
who are taught by the preachers and teachers sustain those who instruct them, 


7-10. Benot deceived. Men often are. 
law of the spiritual kingdom shows that he is not. 


They do fancy that God may be mocked. The immutable 
Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also 


reap. A law not only of the vegetable world, but of our bodies and spirits. Habit is only an illustra- 


tremens on the one hand, 
Soweth to his flesh. 


tion of this law. The delirium 
are due to the action of this law. 8. 


and the purity of the aged saint on the other, 
He who thus sows will reap a crop of 


fleshly lusts and ills. His carnal indulgence will end in moralruin. Soweth tothe Spirit. He shall 


reap spiritually, 
be weary in well doing. 
we are sure to reap in due season. 
doing; i. e., sowing to the Spirit. The 
cherish and help the brethren. 

11-14. Ye see how large a letter. 
in letter writing, 
epistles. See Rom, 16; 22, and Col. 4:18. Some have supposed that his 
ness of the eyes which rendered it difficult for him to write. 


In sowing to the Spirit. 


12. As many as 


and as a final harvest the spiritual life beyond, the life everlasting. 9. Let us not 
Because, if we hold out faithful, and faint not, 
10. As we have therefore opportunity. Doing good is well 

Christian rule is to do good to all, but above all others to love, 


Rather as in the Revised Version. Paul used an amanuensis 
but the superscriptions were written in his own hand to show the genuineness of his 
“thorn in the flesh’’ was a weak- 
desire to make a fair 


shew in the fiesh. To comply with the worldly demands. They desire to have you circumcised, 


because, if you are not, and they fellowship you, 
they themselves. They do not keep 
may boast of their Gentile proselytes. 
marks in your flesh, 14, But God forbid. 


the Jews will persecute them. 18. For neither 
the law in allits details, but want to bring you under it that they 
Glory in your flesh. Glory because circumcision has made 


Not only will he not glory in what does away with the 


184 GALATIANS. [Ch. VI. 


1 j j ire iQ] j]-| For neither is circumcis- 15 
15 For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avail ice any ee 


eth anything, nor uncircumcision, but? a new creat- cumcision, but a new 
creature. And as many as 16 
ure. shall walk by this -rule, 


16 And as many as walk according to this rule, | Peace be upon them, and 


mercy, and upon the Israel 

L 7 b ~ 

LC u he Israel | of God. 

peace de on them, and mercy, and upon? the Israe ee Wena caeate 


of God. . . man trouble me: for I 
17 From henceforth let no man trouble me: for® Pee body 

I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. The grace of our Lord 18 
18 Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ acu bee eee 


be with your spirit. Amen. 





Unto the Galatians written from Rome. 





a2Cor. 5:17. 6 Psa. 125:5. ¢ Col. 1:24. 





cross (5: 11), but God forbid that he should glory in anything but the cross. By whom. By this cross 
he also is crucified, so crucified that he is dead to the world, It is separated from him. 

15-18. In Christ Jesus. See note on5:6. Circumcision in itself is a matter of indifference. To 
be a new creature, neither Jew nor Gentile, but a child of God is essential. 16, This rule. The one 
just named in verse 15. A benediction is pronounced upon allsuch. And upon the Israel of God. 
Rather, Zven upon, etc. The Greek word often means even, and does here, as the Israel of God does 
not differ from those who follow “this rule.” 17. From henceforth let no man trouble me. Dis- 
pute my apostolic authority. I bear in my body the marks, ete. He bore on his body too many 
evidences of what he had suffered for Christ. As slaves were often branded by their master’s name, so 
he had the brand of Christ upon him in his scars. Compare 2 Cor. 11: 24, 25. 18. Brethren. This is 
his parting benediction. It rests not upon the flesh against which he had warned them, but upon the 
highest part of their being, the spirit. 


INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 


Critical students of the New Testament are not in agreement concerning the Epistle 
upon the study of which we now enter. Their difference is not concerning its right to 
a place in the sacred Scriptures, nor concerning its authorship, but whether it was 
addressed by Paul to the church at Ephesus, or to some other church. 

The reasons which have suggested a doubt are briefly as follows: One of the three: 
most ancient and trusted manuscripts, the Vatican, omits at Ephesus in the first verse ; 
the heretic, Marcion, in the third century, ascribes it to the Laodiceans; Basil, in the 
fourth century, speaks of the absence of the words at Ephesus in the manuscripts; in. . 
chapter 1: 15, Paul speaks as if his knowledge of the Ephesians had been gained by 
report rather than by personal acquaintance; and in Col. 4:16, Paul speaks of an 
Epistle to the Laodiceans, which has been lost unless this be the Epistle of which he 
speaks. These facts had such weight with the authors of Conybeare and Howson’s 
Life of Paul that they affirm the ‘one thing certain to be that the Epistle was not 
directed to the Ephesians.”’ 

On the other hand, in the Vatican, as well as in all other most valued manuscripts, 
the heading is The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Ephesians; in the Vatican the words. 
at Ephesus, wanting in verse 1 in the body of the manuscript, are supplied in the 
margin; no manuscript is in existence which supplies these words by any other name; 
in the second century, at a time when there could have been no doubt about the facts, it. 
is spoken of by the Fathers as ‘‘The Epistle to the Ephesians,’ as though the matter 
was not under discussion; the remark of Paul in 1: 15, about hearing of their faith, has 
an exact parallel in Philemon 5, and yet Philemon was his own convert (verse 19), and 
is entirely natural when we remember that several years had passed since he had last 
seen them; the absence of at Ephesus in a few manuscripts of the fourth century, and in 
the Vatican, as well as all other difficulties, can be explained without the necessity of 
denying that the Epistle was addressed to the Ephesians. Hence the great majority of 
critics have agreed in following the authority of existing manuscripts and of the ancient 
church in the statement that the Epistle was addressed to the great congregation 
founded by its writer in the capital of proconsular Asia, which had enjoyed his apos- 
tolic labors for a longer period than any other of which a record has come down to us. 

The city of Ephesus, a Grecian city on the Asiatic coast almost exactly east of Athens, 
was a great commercial metropolis in the first century, and the capital of the Roman 
province which was called by the name of Asia. Its greatest distinction hitherto had 
been, not its commercial pre-eminence, but the splendid temple of Diana, which was 
counted one of the Seven Wonders of the world. ‘The city lay upon the edge of a plain, 
which extended to the sea, and in its artificial harbor were seen the ships from all the 
ports of the Eastern Mediterranean. In our times, half-buried ruins are the only relics 
of its former greatness. The only inhabitants I saw upon its site in 1889 were the occu-. 
pants of two black tents, who were pasturing their flocks upon the alluvial plain. We: 
can still, however, see the proofs of its former magnificence in the outlines of the great 
theater (Acts 19: 29), and in the ruins cis a temple of Diana (Acts 19:27). The 


186 INTRODUCTION TO EPHESIANS. 


‘modern Turkish village of Agasalouk, a wretched hamlet, is nearly two miles distant 
from the site of the Ephesus of the times of Paul. 

The Ephesian church was virtually founded by Paul. About the close of his second 
missionary journey (Acts 18: 19-21) he paused at Ephesus on his way to Jerusalem and 
preached in the Jewish synagogue. Leaving Priscilla and Aquila to follow up the 
impression which he had made, he went on, but returned on his third missionary jour- 
ney (Acts 19: 1), at which time he spent about three years (Acts 20: 31), preaching the 
gospel with a success which threatened to effect an entire revolution in the city and 
province (Acts 19: 17-20), and finally stirred up the avaricious fears of certain trades 
which profited by the old superstitions to such an extent that a commotion was 
aroused which caused him to leave the city. Since that date he had not seen Ephesus, 
though he had met the elders of the church at Miletus when on his way to Jerusalem 
(Acts 20: 17). ; 

It is not possible to determine the date of this Epistle with exactness. It was written 
- ata time when Paul was a prisoner (6: 20), and hence must have been written either at 
Cresarea or at Rome. Meyer inclines to the first place, but the general consensus of 
opinion is that it belongs to the group of Epistles which were sent forth from his 
Roman prison. Tychicus was the messenger to whom, on the same journey, were 
entrusted both this (6: 21) and the Epistle to Colosse (Col. 4: 7). 

It was probably written to meet certain difficulties which were arising in the church. 
It was asked why the imperfections of J udaism, end the errors of the Gentile religions 
existed so many ages before the Gospel was revealed? Was the Gospel an after- 
thought of God? Probably the leading thought is that, ‘‘The church of Jesus Christ, 
in which Jew and Gentile are made one, is a creation of the Father, through the Son, 
in the Holy Spirit, decreed from eternity, and destined for eternity.’’ In chapters 1-3, 
he shows that the church was foreordained of God, that it has been redeemed, and that 
Jew and Gentile have been made one in Christ. In chapters 4-6, the Apostle enters 
upon a practical application, enforcing unity, love, newness of life, walking in the 
strength of the Lord, and in the armor of God. 


THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE 


EPHESIANS: 


CHAPTER I. 


The Foreordination of the Church. 


SUMMARY.—The Salutation. Our Electionand Adoption by Grace. This 
the Source of Salvation. The Mystery Made Known. The Inheritance. 
Prayer that Wisdom and Knowledge Be Given to the Saints. 


1 Paul, an apostle of Jesus Chfist by the will of 
God, to the saints which are at Ephesus,* and to the 
faithful in Christ Jesus: 

2 Grace? be to you, and peace, from God our 
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. 

3 Blessed¢ de the God and Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual 
blessings in heavenly places in Christ; 

4 According as‘ he hath chosen us in him? before 
the foundation of the world, that we should‘ be 
holy and without blame before him in love: 

5 Having’ predestinated us unto the” adoption of 
children by Jesus Christ to himself,' according to 
the pleasure of his will, 








CHAPTER I. 


Paul, an apostle of1 
Christ Jesus through the 
will of God, to the saints 
which are at Ephesus, and 
the faithful in Christ Je- 
sus: Grace to you and 2 
peace from God our Fa- 
ther and the Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

Blessed be the God and 3 
Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, who hath blessed 
us with every spiritual 
blessing in the heavenly 
places in Christ: evenas he 4 
chose us in him before the 
foundation of the world, 
that we should be holy 
and without blemish be- 
fore him in love: having 5 
foreordained us unto 
adoption as sons through 
Jesus Christ unto himself, 
according to the good 


(el ON ee ee eee Se eee ee eee 
a Col. 1:2. 6 Titus1:4. ¢ Psa. 72:17. d1Pet.1:2. e1Pet. 1:20. fLukel:75. g Rom. 8:29. hJohn1:12. 


4 Luke 12:32. 





1, 2. Paul, an apostle. It was always the custom anciently to place the name of the writer at the 
beginning rather than at the end as with us. By the will of God. Emphasis is placed in most of 
Paul’s epistles upon the fact that he was not an apostle by the appointment of man, but by the will of 
God. To the saints at Ephesus. All Christians were called saints in the early church. See the sal- 
utations of other Epistles. And to the faithful. The same as the saints. There is no article in the 
Greek before faithful. A literal translation is, ‘To the saints dwelling in Ephesus and faithful in Christ 
Jesus.” 2. Grace. For note on the salutation, see Rom. 1: 7, 

8-6. Blessed be the God. The word rendered “blessed” is the one from which our word eulogize 
is derived. It means, therefore, primarily, to praise. ‘‘Praised be the God,” etc., gives the idea. Who 
hath blessed us. The blessed is here from the same root. The word means, as above, “‘to praise,” 
or to “speak” good things of one; then to speak good things to, or bestow blessings, as a secondary 
meaning. This is the meaning here. With all spiritual blessings. All came from God, and he has 
withheld none from those in Christ. In the heavenly. In the kingdom of heaven. 4. According 
as. “Eyen as,” in Revision. Chosen us in him before the foundation of the world. This does 
not affirm that God chose some individuals and rejected others, but that before the world was, before 
there was Jew or Gentile, God chose to have a people for himself, the whole church of Christ, a cove- 
nant people confined to no one earthly race. Holy and without blame. God chose them that they 
might be holy. Holiness is the proof that a church is achosen church. 5. Having predestinated 
us. Foreordained that we, the church of Jesus Christ, should be adopted as his children. The whole 
line of argument is general instead of particular. God foreordained a church which should be com- 
posed of those adopted as his children. cabin et) the good pleasure of his will. The act of 


predestination was due simply to God’s sovereign will. His will was the cause. 





188 EPHESIANS. (Ch. I. 
NRT 5 TaD yin are ERIS Ee ERT Te eel gone pee 
6 To* the praise of the glory of his grace, where- Re net 
in he hath made us accepted in the® Beloved; grace, which he freely be- 
7 In* whom we have redemption through his | (toe in whom we have 7 
blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to® the his blood, the forgiveness 
i i . ° of our trespasses, accord- 
riches of his Breese os ing to the. riches of his 
8 Wherein he hath abounded toward us in all grace, which he made to 8 
wisdom and prudence; Pe ees 
: x! wisdom an prudence, 9 
9 Having* made known unto us the mystery of | having made known unto 
: 5 . é g hich h us the mystery of his will, 
his will, according to his good pleasure® whic e according to his good 
7 1 Q ° easure Whic. e purpos- 
hath urposed In himself: . éd in him unto @ dispancaea@ 
10 That in the dispensation" of the fulness of | tion of the fuiness of the 
> i : * 1 all thi times, to sum up all things 
times,' he might gather together in one! a INS | in Christ, the things in the 
in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are Too il eau ee 
on earth, even in him: race ee qere 
11 In* whom also we have obtained an inherit-| 2,pentage. , according to 
ance, being predestinated according to the purpose! RE bee ieee 
of him who worketh all things after the counsel of | the counsel of his will; to 12 
. : the end that we should be 
his own will; unto the Lite ed me go 
1 iQ njry, we who ha efore 
12 That™we should be to the praise of his glory, hoped in Obcistt ia whew: 18 
who first trusted in Christ. ye also, having beard the 
> me 
13 In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard | pei ot your salvation in 
the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation: in ME ess Sie Hee 
whom also, after that ye believed, ye° were sealed | thé ffoly Spirit of promise. 
with that Holy Spirit of promise. 
a@Isa. 43:21. 6 Rom.3:24. c¢Matt.17:5. d Heb. 9:12. e Rom. 3:24. fCol. 1:26. g2Tim.1:9. h Hed 9:10. 
#1 Cor, 8:22. j Phil. 2:9. & Rom. 8:17. JIsa. 46:10. m2 Thes. 2:13. nm Jas. 1:18. 02 Cor. 1:22. 


6. To the praise of 


the glory of his grace. To the end that his grace in adopting us as children may redound to his 
praise and glory. In the beloved. InChrist. See Matt. 3: 175 \Ool. 1s 13; 

7-12. In whom we have redemption through his blood. (1) We are in bondage to sin; 
(2) Christ redeems us; (3) the price paid is his blood. Compare Matt. 20: 28; 26: 28; Acts 20: 28; Gal. 
3:13; Heb. 9: 22; 1 Peter1: 19. Those redeemed are forgiven. 8. Which he madeto abound. The 
grace of God (see verse 7). It abounded in all wisdom and prudence. These attributes, ascribed to 
God, are fully shown in his grace and mercy. 9. Having made known unto us. To all who 
receive the adoption of Christ. The mystery of his will. The word “mystery” is used in the sense 
of something beyond human comprehension until revealed. This “mystery of his will” is revealed and 
is declared in the next verse. According to his good pleasure. See verse 5. 10. He now states 
the mystery which God has revealed. In the dispensation of the fulness of times. In the last 
dispensation which came in the fulness of time; when the times were full, or ripe. Fulness of time is 
often applied to the period of Christ’s coming. See Gal. 4:4; Heb. 1:2; Heb.9: 10; 1 Peter 1:20. That 
he might gather together in one all things in Christ, That the scattered families and tribes of 
men, both Jews and Gentiles, should all be gathered and united under one head, Christ. Nay, not only 
men, but angels, all things in heaven and earth, all should be united under Christ as head, so that 
he should be “all and in all.” See Rey. 5: 13. Compare Matt. 28: 18, and many other passages which are 
parallel in thought. 11, In whom we were made aheritage. See the Revision. We are in Christ 
made the heritage of God, or God’s part. Having been predestinated,. According to his will he 
predestinated us, the church, to the adoption of sons, and to be his heritage. 12. We should be to 
the praise of his glory. This is the final result of our predestination and adoption. We who first 
trusted in Christ. Jewish believers like Paul who had the Christian hope before (see Revision) the 
Gentiles, 

18,14. In whom ye also trusted. The “we” of verse 12 refers to Jewish believers; the “ve” to 
Gentile believers, like most of the Ephesians, who also trusted, after that they heard, ete. They not 
only hoped, but believed. That is, they became believers, by trusting obedience; then they were 
sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise. After they were converted, the Holy Spirit was bestowed 


Oh. Ey> EPHESIANS. 189 


Thich? 7 . j i b | which is an earnest of our 14 
14 Which? is the earnest of our inheritance,” | which is an earnest of our 


until the redemption of the purchased possession, | demption of God’s own 
unto the praise of¢ his glory. gr Ree aad dea 

. a 7 For this cause I also, 15 
_ 15 Wherefore I also, after I heard of your faith], For Ws cause T alse: 
in the Lord Jesus, and love unto all the saints, in the Lord Jesus which is 


16 Cease not to give thanks’ for you, making | oy yon an ach ee 


mention of you in my prayers; baegek ae ca ay 16 


17 That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the | of you in my prayers; that 17 


. ae the God of 
Father of glory, may4 give unto you the spirit of | Gisce ie Rathecot plo 


wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him: aay any ke ou ene 

° . 5 of wisdom and reyelat'on 

18 The® eyes of your understanding being enlight- in the knowledge of him; 
ened; that ye may know what is the hope of his heart enlightened, that ye # 

i iQ j]n-| may know whatis the hope 

calling, and what the riches of the glory of his in-| Hine what the 

heritance in the saints, -| riches of the glory of his 


19 And what zs the exceeding greatness of his | a whnt’ the ttcceding 19 


power to us-ward who believe,* according to the | steatness of his power to 
working of his mighty power, cording to that working of 
20 Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised | whien he wrought in 20 


1 5 , 7 7 Christ, when he raised him 
him from the dead, and set him at his own right | pent sea: and made 


hand in the heavenly places, him to sit at his right hand 


a@2Cor. 5:5. 6 Rom. 8:23. c Acts 20:28. @Col.1:9. e Acts 26:18. / Col. 1:29. 





apon them. It was a “promise” (Acts 1:4). The seal was attached to a letter or legal document to 
authenticate it to the world. The Holy Spirit, the Spirit of adoption, was God’s authentication to the 
world that the converts to Christ were accepted as his children. The presence of the new Spirit was 
shown by a new life exhibiting the fruits of the Spirit (Gal. 5:22). 14. Which is the earnest of our 
inheritance. The “earnest” money was a small part of the purchase money given in hand to bind the 
bargain. Paul says that the Holy Spirit given to God’s children is such earnest of the inheritance that 
he will bestow, a small part given now as a proof to his adopted children. Until the redemption, 
ete. Rather, “Unto,” etc. This “earnest” given is looking unto the final and complete redemption from 
the graye of the purchased possession, the children of God bought with Christ’s blood. 

15,16. AfterI heard of yourfaith. This verse has been thought to show that Paul was not per- 
sonally acquainted with those to whom he wrote, and hence that this letter could not be addressed to 
the Ephesians; but he used similar language of Philemon, one of his own converts. See Philemon 5. 
The language is natural if Paul left Ephesus in the spring of A. D. 57, and wrote this letter about the 
close of A. D. 62 (Conybeare and Howson), more than five years after. During this period he could only 
know of the faith and love of the Ephesians by what he heard. 16. Cease not to give thanks. 
Because he heard so favorable a report. 

17-19. That. This introduces the things for which he prayed God in their behalf. The Father of 
glory. The source of all spiritual glory. Give unto you the Spirit of wisdom. A gift of the Spirit. 
See notes on 1 Cor. 12:8. Divine wisdom works wisdom in believers. And revelation. The Spirit 
that reveals a knowledge of God and spiritual mysteries. This Spirit would enable them to better com- 
prehend the “mystery” of God, the divine plans for human redemption in a better knowledge of him. 
18. The eyes of your understanding being enlightened, “Heart,” in the Revision. The moving 
of the Spirit gives light. See Gen.1:2. This would follow if they were given “‘the Spirit of wisdom,” 
etc. That ye may know. Havea fuller comprehension, The hope of his calling. The hope of 
eternal life to which God had called them. Theriches, etc. See Col. 1:27. The heavenly inheritance 
given in the saints, rich beyond our conception. See Acts 20: 32; 26:18. 19. The exceeding great- 
ness of his power. He prays that they may have greater knowledge of three things: (1) Of eternal 
life (the hope); (2) of the glorious inheritance, and (3) of God’s mighty power towards believers. This 
mighty power works to raise them from sin, as it worked to raise Christ from the dead. However the 
power works, it is the same power that raised Jesus. 

20-28. Which he wrought in Christ. God’s power wrought in Christ in the tomb so that he 
came forth living. -At his own right hand. The Scriptures represent Christ. at God’s right hand, 
‘See Mark 16: 19; Heb. 8:1; 10:12; 12:2; Col. 3:1. His seat there indicates his glory, and also that the 


190 EPHESIANS. 


(Ch. II. 


ee 


21 Far* above all principality, and power, and 
might, and dominion, and every name that is nam- 
ed, not only in this world, but also in that which is 
to come; 

22 And” hath put all things under his feet, and 
gave him® ¢o be the head over all things to the 
church. 

23 Which? is his body, the fulness of him that® 
filleth all in all. 


CHAPTER II. 


The Church Redeemed in Christ. 

SUMMARY.—Onr Spiritual Condition in a State of Nature. God’s Saving 
Mercy. Salvation by Grace Through Faith. No Longer Aliens and 
Strangers. Peace Between Jew and Gentile Through Christ. All 
Built into the Lord’s Holy Temple. 

1 And? you hath he quickened, who were dead in 
trespasses and sins; 

2 Wherein® in time past ye walked according to 
the course of this world, according to the prince of 
the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh 
in® the children of disobedience: 





in the heavenly places, far 21 
above all rule, and author- 
ity, and power, and domin- 
ion, and every name that 

is named, not only in this 
world, but also in that 
which is to come: and he 22 
put all things in subjection 
under his feet, and gave 
him to be head over all 
things to the church, 
which is his body, the ful- 22 
ness Of him that filleth all 

in all. 


CHAPTER II. 


And you did he quicken, 1 
when ye were dead 
through your trespasses 
and sins, wherein afore- 2 
time ye walked accordin 
to the course of this world, 
according to the prince of 
the power of the air, of the 
spirit that now worketh in 
the sons of disobedience; 


@ Phil. 2:9. 6 Matt. 28;18. cHeb.2:7. d Rom. 12:15. eJohnl: 14, 16; 1 Cor. 12:6; Col. 8:11. fJohn5:24. 


glJohn5:19. h Col. 3:6. 





work of redemption has been wrought. 


21. Far above all principality, and power, 





and might, 


and dominion. Above all the angelic hierarchy. See Rom. 8: 38; 1 Peter 3: 22; also Eph. 3:10. The 


same terms are applied in 6: 12 to evil Spirits, 


Christ is above all angels, good or evil. Above every 


name. Every person, office and dignity, whether in this present state, orin that tocome. 22. And 
hath put all things under his feet. All power was given into his hands when he was raised from 


the dead (Matt. 28: 18). He is the rightful ruler of all. 
when raised from the dead (verse 20), exalted to be the ruler of all 


And gave him to be the head, etc. He was, 
things and made the Head of the 


church; not merely its ruler, but the Head of the Body, which derives its life from the Head. Compare 
1 Cor. 10:17; 12: 27. Note that this exaltation is after the cross and the resurrection, definitely showing 
that Christ’s church was not organized until after our Lord’s suffering. 28. Which is his body. His 


spiritual body, living by union with the Head, pervaded by the life of Christ. The 
The church is a manifestation of the fulness of Christ, the body filled by his life, who 
Filleth all things with his majesty and power. The object of the last four verses is to 


fulness of him. 
filleth allin all, 
describe Christ’s 


glories. These are: (1) His resurrection; (2) His Exaltation to God’s Right Hand; (3) His Supreme 


Dominion; (4) His Headship to the Church, his Body, filled with His Fulness. 


his stooping unto the death of the cross. 


He abased himself that he might be exalted, 


These glories all follow 
“For the joy 


that was set before him he endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of 


the throne of God.” 


1-3. And you hath he quickened. In the closing part of chapter 1 Paul has described the mighty 


working of the Divine power in raising Christ from 


the dead, and his exaltation to the right hand of 


God. He now turns from this mighty exhibition of power to another not less striking—the resurrection 


of those who were spiritually dead to a new and holy life. 


Dead in trespasses and sins. Spiritual 


death is meant. By their trespasses and sins they were separated from God. Tobe without God is to 
be in death. Trespasses are thought to refer to breaking known laws; sins, to the corrupt state which. 


leads to a constantly sinful life. 


2. According to the course of this world. You lived in tres- 


passes and sins, in accordance with the spirit of the world. The prince of the power of the air. 
Called elsewhere the prince of this world, Satan. Why he is called “prince of the power of the air” is. 
not certain; various explanations are given, Probably his subtle influences and whisperings pervade: 
the air, and come upon us as unconsciously as the vital fluid we breathe. The Jews held that the 


atmosphere was the abode of evil angels. 


The spirit that now worketh. This spirit, that of the: 


Ch. II.) EPHESIANS. 191 


& 
a i among whom we also all 3 
3 Among* whom also we all had our conversation | 4mong whom we also all 


in times past in the” lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the | our flesh, doing the desires 


3 . h 
desires of the flesh and of the mind;* and were by | Stind°and were by nature 


5 | children of wrath, even as 
nature the children of wrath, even as others. ip prea oes neae | 


4 But God,‘ who is rich in mercy, for his great | rich in mercy, for his great 


love wherewith he loved us, EE A ie ae 


e wl 1 1 f iclc-| dead through our tres- 
5 Even® when we were dead in sins, hath? quick- | roa ent oned us to. 


ened us together with Christ; (by grace ye are|gether with Christ (by 

d es grace have ye been saved), 
saved ;) Ga eh with a 6: 

iQ and made us to sit wit 

6 And hath raised us up together, and made ws | {in wi the heavenly places, 


sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; in Christ Jesus: that in 7 
7 That in the ages to come he might shew the ex-| shew the exceeding riches 


i i i i ; i 3 of his grace in kindness 
ceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness toward | ft his stace th Rindmess 


us through Christ Jesus. __| for by grace have ye heen 8 
0 s ce: 
8 For by grace are ye saved through? faith; and | that not of yourselves: it is 


that not of yourselves: zt 7s the gift of God: 





a 
a Titus 3:3. 5 Gal. 5:16. ¢ Psa.51:5. d@ Rom. 10:12. eRom. 5:6. fRom 6:4. g Rom. 4:16; Phil. 1:29. 














world, of the power of the air, is the one which inspires thgse who live in disobedience. 38. Among 
whom also we all had our conversation. In verses 1 and 2 the second person is used, meaning the 
Ephesians; here the person is changed to the first. Meyer thinks that “ye” refers to Gentile Christians ; 
“‘we?? to Paul and his Jewish brethren. The Gentile Christians had been dead in trespasses and sins; 
nor had the Jewish Christians differed in this respect. Fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of 
the mind. Not only fleshly desires, but the impulses of a sinful mind, such as malice, envy, pride, ete. 
And were by nature the children of wrath, even as others. This declares that “we,” now 
Jewish Christians, were once, when in a state of nature, under condemnation, just as the “others,” the 
rest of the world, or the Gentiles. Some have held that this passage teaches innate, hereditary 
depravity. Iam sure that this was not in the apostle’s mind. (1) Two classes are spoken of, ‘‘you”’ and 
“we,” Gentiles and Jews. (2) Both were equally sinful; the first ‘dead in trespasses and in sins,” and 
the second “by nature the children of wrath, even as the others.” (3) The passage then simply affirms 
that Jews and Gentiles alike, before conversion, were dead in trespasses and sins, and under the divine 
condemnation. However, “by nature” is supposed to teach that the depravity is innate, and that all 
are born under the wrath of God. Such an interpretation would put the passage in conflict with Paul’s 
teaching elsewhere, and with that of Christ. For instance, Matt. 18:3 and 19: 14 are inconsistent with 
the view that little children are born “under the wrath of God.” Indeed, it is taught m this passage 
that both classes have been brought into this state of condemnation by walking in sin, not by their 
birth. But does not by nature imply that all are born “children of wrath?” The word rendered ‘by 
nature” is found in Rom. 2: 14; 1 Cor. 11: 14; Gal. 2: 15; Gal. 4:8. In only one of these passages can it. 
refer to natural birth at all, and there it refers to race (Gal. 2:15). In not one passage does it describe 
what is innate. It does describe custom, practice, and unconverted state. No one would say that the 
Gentiles, who “do by nature the things of the law,” do so because it is innate. It means that they do so 
without the revelation. In a similar sense is it used here, and means that “we,” as well as others, 
before we were converted by the gospel, were dwelling in sin like others, and were like them, ‘“‘the 
children of wrath.” The state of nature is the unconverted state. 

4-7, Having shown that both Jews and Gentiles were spiritually dead, Paul now declares the 
spiritual resurrection of the saints. This lifting up from death to a new life is due to God, rich in 
mercy, and on account of the great love wherewith he loved us. The next verse affirms the fact. 
5, Hath quickened us together with Christ. As he quickened Ohrist and raised him, so when we 
were dead in sins he gave us spiritual life by the gospel and lifted us to anew life. ‘“‘We were planted 
in the likeness of his death and resurrection” (Rom.6:5). By grace ye are saved. Not by works of 
the law, as he has shown so fully in the Galatian letter. 6. And hath raised us up together. 
Buried into the death of Christ, we are risen with Christ (Col. 2:12). We are risen as new creatures to 
walk with the Risen Christ, with our minds on heavenly things (Col. 3:1). To sitin heavenly places 
is in our present state to have our minds above (Col. 3:2). 7, That in the ages to come. In all 
coming time. The exceeding riches of his grace. In saving, purifying and blessing his children. 

8-10, For by grace are ye saved through faith. Lest they might forget the doctrine that he 


192 EPHESIANS. 


ee 





(Ch. II. 


a ake % ) the gift of God: not of 9 
9 Not® of works, lest any man should boast. Oe ee should 
10 For we are his workmanship, created in Christ glory. | For we are his 10 
. workmanship, 
Jesus unto good works,” which God hath before or-| (eth Jesus for good 
dained that we should walk in them. ble a saat 
11 Wherefore remember, that ye being in time walk i Chenets 8 eee 
. ° * reto. ’ 
past Gentiles in the flesh, who are called Uncircum-! ¢\’. aforetime ye, the Gen. 
27Qq] 7 c 1 1Q] 1 tiles in the flesh, who are 
cision by that which is called® the Circumcision in polled Uapmsenceea te 
the flesh made by hands; that which is called. Cir- 
. . . umcision, in sh, 
12 That4 at that time ye were without Christ,¢ | "™° by hands; that ye 12 
7 7 A ape were at that time separate 
being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and Pont Chsint plenee he 
strangers from‘ the covenants of promise, having? the commonwealth of Is- 
: : rael, and strange rom 
no hope, and without God in the world: the covenants of the pron 
13 But now,? in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes Si Reh e Fac poe 
were far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. But now in Christ Jesus 13 
i e e€ at once were far o 
14 For' he is our peace, who hath made both one, are made nigh in the blood 
‘ i it? of rist. For he is our 14 
and hath broken down the middle wall of partition heace who mann oe. 
between us ; nue oho down the Bid a 
. “a0 ae ° . artitio ‘5 - 
15 Having abolished) in his flesh the enmity, even ing we olckea 4a tis flesh 
a ; . o M - | the enmity, even the law 
the law of commandments contained in ordinances; | ‘h EY ee a 
for to make in himself of twain* one new man, so | tained in ordinances ; that 
making peace; : he might create in himself 
. 3 


of the twain one new man, 








@ Rom. 3:20. 6 Eph. 1:4. ¢c Rom. 2:28. dCol. 1:21. eJohn 10:16. J Rom. 9:4,8. g1Thes. 4:18. hk Gal. 3:28. 
t Micah 5:5. j Col. 1:22. &2 Cor. 5:17. 





ever preached, he reminds them that works of the law never saved them ; that they were saved by God’s 
grace shown in the gospel; that this salvation was obtained through the faith. The definite article is 
found before faith in the Greek, showing that the faith, or the gospel, is meant. Itis the gift of God. 
The salvation is not due to ourselves, but is God’s gift. The grammatical construction of the Greek 
does not allow us to make “faith” the subject of the last clause. It is not “faith,” but salvation through 
the faith, whichis the gift of God. So says John Wesley in his Notes: “This refers to the previous 
clause, That you are saved, etc.” 9. Not of works. The salvation is not due to works of law, or to 
our own merit; hence there is no ground for boasting. 10. For we are his workmanship, It is 
God who saved us; as new creatures, he has made us through the gospel. We are not sayed by works, 
but are his workmanship, created unto good works, designed henceforth to abound in them. 
‘Which God hath before ordained. It is his ordination that all who believe the gospel and are 
Saved should practice good works. God has graciously quickened us, saved us, made us new creatures, 
and prepared us unto good works. 

11-18. Wherefore remember. Remembrance of all that God had done would awake gratitude. 
The Uncircumcision. Gentiles were so called by the Jews, who were the Circumcision. In the 
flesh. There was a circumcision not in the flesh, not made with hands, but of the Spirit, and in the 
heart (Rom, 2: 28, 29). 12. Without Christ. The past state of the Gentile Christians is described, 
when they had no knowledge of Christ. Aliens from the commonwealth of Israel. Not being of 
the race of Abraham, who were in covenant relation with God. Strangers from the covenants. 
The various covenants made with the patriarchs which contained the promise of Christ, of which they 
were ignorant, and hence not partakers of the hope. Having no hope. No hope in the promises or in 
Christ. Without God. Walking without the knowledge of the true God. 18. But now in Christ 
Jesus. Once so far off, separated from God, they have been brought nigh, and the means that brought 
them is the blood of Christ. ; 

14-18. For heis our peace, It is the Crucified Christ that brought you nigh, for he, he only, is our 
peace. The creator of peace between Jew and Gentile; between alienated man and God. Who hath 
‘made both one. Jew and Gentile one. The old distinctions are destroyed. All are on the same foot- 
ing before God. Hath broken down, etc. Having broken down, or ended, the law of Moses which 
built up a wall between the Jews and Gentiles. 15. Having abolished in his flesh the enmity. 
While he was in the flesh the law condemned him and nailed him to the cross. In so doing it destroyed 
itself. The old covenant ended at the cross, when the new covenant was dedicated by the blood of 
‘Christ. Hence, the law, the wall between Jew and Gentile, “the enmity,” was taken away. To make 


Ch. JIT.] EPHESIANS. 


193 





16 And that he might reconcile both unto God in 
one body by the cross, having slain the enmity 
thereby; 

17 And* came and preached peace to you which 
were afar off, and to them that were nigh. 

18 For through him we both have access by one 
Spirit unto the Father. 

19 Now therefore ye are no more strangers and 
foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and 
of the household of God; 

20 And are built? upon the foundation of the* 
apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being 
the® chief corner-stone ; 

21 In whom all the building, fitly framed togeth- 
er, groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord: 

22 In whom ye also are builded together for® an 


so making peace; and 16 
might reconcile them both 
in one body unto God 
through the cross, having 
slain the enmity thereby: 
and he came and preached 17 
peace to you that were far 
off, and peace to them that 
were nigh: for through 18 
him we both have our ac- 
cess in one Spirit unto the 
Father. So then ye are no 
more strangers and s0- 
journers, but ye are fel- 
low - citizens with the 
saints, and of the house- 
hold of God, being built 20 
upon the foundation of the 
apostles and _ prophets, 
Christ Jesus himself being 
the chief corner stone; in 21 
whom each several build- 
ing, fitly framed together, 
groweth into a holy tem- 
ple in the Lord; in whom 22 
ye alsoare builded togeth- 
er for a habitation of God 


19 





in the Spirit. 


habitation of God through the Spirit. 


+ CHAPTER III. 


Paul’s Office as Apostle to the Gentiles. 


SUMMARY.—The Hidden Mystery Revealed to the Apostle. The Gentiles 
to Be Fellow-Heirs. Paul’s Mission to the Gentiles. The Prayer in 
Behalf of Gentile Christians. That They May Know the Surpassing 
Love of Christ. 9 


1 For this cause I Paul,* the prisoner of Jesus 
Christ* for you Gentiles, 


6 Matt. 16:18; Rev. 21:14. 
e John 17:23. jf Acts 21:3. 


CHAPTER II. 


For this cause I Paul,the 1 
prisoner of Christ Jesus 
in behalf of you Gentiles, 











ce 1Cor. 12:28. d Psa. 118:22; Isa. 28:16; Matt. 21:42. 


Isa. 27:19; Zech. 9:10. 
oc : g2 Tim. 2:10. 





‘in himself of twain one. Thus, the difference between Jew and Gentile being destroyed, both are 
made in the church one new race, “a royal priesthood, a chosen nation, a peculiar people,” at peace 
among themselves. 16. That he might reconcile both to God. First, the cross makes peace 
between Jew and Gentile; and second, the blood of the cross cleanses both before God, and makes 
peace between them and God. Having slain the enmity. Not only of Jew for Gentile, but of the 
sinner for God, When the sinner once fixes his mind on the bleeding Savior, the “goodness of God 
leads him to repentance.” 17. Preached peace . . afar off . were nigh. The Gentiles 
were “afar off; the Jews, “nigh.” To both Christ preached peace with each other and with God. 
18. We both have access by one Spirit. The Spirit of adoption enables both to cry, “Abba, 
Father.” Both pray to one Father; hence, all are brethren. 

19-22. Therefore ye arenomore strangers. Gentiles have been brought nigh, and are fellow- 
citizens of the kingdom of God with the saints. 20. Built upon the foundation. They have been 
built into the temple of the Lord. The word of God, declared by apostles and prophets, is the founda- 
tion of their faith, Christ being the chief corner-stone. The corner-stone was a stone of double 
size at the corner, which became a part of both walls and joined them together. So he had joined the 
Jews and Gentiles in the building. He is the foundation-stone on which the building rests, and the 
stone of union. Compare Isaiah 28: 16; Matt. 21: 42; Acts 4:11; 1 Peter2:7. 21. Inwhom, In Christ 
himself. All the building fitly framed together. The several parts, or buildings, are united in 
‘him, so as to form one holy temple. That is, all races, Jews and Gentiles, are compacted in one church. 
22. In whom ye also. The Ephesian Christians. For a habitation of God. The Shekinah 
descended and dwelt in the tabernacle between the cherubim; but God, by means of the Spirit, dwells 
in the spiritual temple, in the hearts of believers. This temple is composed of living stones (1 Peter 
‘2: 5), has a holy priesthood, and spiritual sacrifices. 

1. Forthis cause. This refers to the glorious work of the cross in “making peace and bringing the 





194 EPHESIANS. (CRAIIT. 
4 iq j —if so be that ye have 2 
2 (If ye have heard of* the dispensation of the |i! s° be | ee Es 
grace of God which? is given me to you-ward: of that grace of God which 
. c ‘ was given me to you- ward; 
3 How that by revelation® he made known unto | pow that by revelation was 3 
me the mystery, as I wrote afore in few words; arena oe unio, mee Ghe 
4. Whereby, when ye read, ye may understand my in ow 9 Words, whereby, 4. 
: : e r - 
knowledge* in the mystery of Christ, ceive my understanding in 
7 | ‘ e mystery o Tist; 
5 Which® in other ages was not made known | (he 7 et ae 
unto the sons of men, as it is now revealed unto his was not made known unto 
oh As e son men, asl a 
holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit; _ now been revealed unto 
6 That the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of te in Ree et She 
the same body, and‘ partakers of his promise in | wit, that the Gentiles are 
Christ by the gospel: sgnihecean pi 4 er. 
° : members 0 e body, an 
7 Whereof I was made a minister, according to | open Partaa nist’ Jens 
the gift of the grace of God given unto me by® the through the gospel, where- 7 
. . C0) was made a minister, 
effectual working of his power. according to the. gift of 
8 Unto me, who am less than the least of all Leen eR es ae 
saints, is this grace given, that I should preach the working of his power. | 
. Z ° ntome,wHo am less an o- 
among the Gentiles" the unsearchable riches of | the least of all saints, was 
Christ; this grace given, to preach 
’ z 5 unto the Gentiles the un- 
9 And to make all men see what és the fellowship searchable riches of | 
‘ * ‘ F irist; and to make a 
of the mystery, which! from the beginning of the| men sée what is the dis- 
world hath been hid in God, who) created all | Pensation of the mystery 


things by Jesus Christ: 








which from all ages hath 
been hid in God who cre- 





c Rem. 16:25. d@1Cor. 4:1. e Acts 10:28. f Gal. 3:14. 


a Rom. 1:5; Col. 1:25. 6 Acts 9:15. 
4 Rom. 16:25; 1 Cor. 2:7. j Psa. 33:6; John 1:3; Col. 1:16. 


g Rom. 15:18. 
h Col. 1:27. 


Gentiles nigh,” described in chapter 2. I, Paul. The verb of which “I, Paul,’ is the subject, is not 
given until verse 14is reached. The intervening verses are parenthetic. At verse 14 Paul repeats the 
first clause of verse 1, and then gives the verb. The prisoner of Jesus Christ. A prisoner at Rome 
when this was written, on account of the gospel of Jesus Christ. For you Gentiles. It was the: 
hatred of the Jews towards him, on account of his apostleship to the Gentiles, which caused his seizure. 
See Acts 21: 33, and 28: 17, 20. 

2-8. If ye have heard. This is not designed to express doubt, but to remind them that they had 
heard of the dispensation, or office, that had been given him in reference to the Gentiles. See Acts 
22:21. 83. How that by revelation he made known unto me. See Gal. 1:12. The mystery. 
. This mystery was revealed by God to him. A mystery is a truth, or fact, or purpose, which is hidden 
until it is revealed. This mystery is declared in verse 6. As I wrote aforeinfew words. In1:9, 
and 2:11-183. 4. Whereby, when yeread. When they read what he wrote above (afore), and what 
he writes now, they can perceive his knowledge of this mystery. 5. Which. The mystery. It was in 
past ages hidden from men, but now revealed by the Spirit to apostles and prophets. Not the old 
Hebrew prophets, but the prophets in the church. Some of the Hebrew prophets might have hada 
glimpse of Gentile salvation, but they did not understand their own language as well as we do in the 
light of the gospel. 6, That. The mystery long hidden, but at last revealed, is now given. The: 
Gentiles are fellow-heirs. The wall of partition broken down, Jews and Gentiles equally received, 
heirs alike of the gospel, fellow-members of the church, fellow-partakers of the gospel promises. Com- 
pare Acts 10: 34; 11:18; 13: 46-48. '7. WhereofI was made aminister. A minister to make known 
this mystery; God’s gracious purpose to the Gentiles. According to the gift of the grace. The 
apostolic office with all the accompanying signs of apostleship, 8. Unto me, who am less than the 
least of allsaints. A mighty trust granted to one so unworthy as he deems himself. He was ever: 
humbled by remembering that he had been a persecutor. See 1 Cor. 15:9; Phil. 3:6. Compare 1 Tim. 
1:18, This grace, so glorious and so full of blessedness to the world, was the apostleship to the Gen- 
tiles. See Gal. 2: 7, 8. 

9-13. And to make all men see, Jews as well as Gentiles. What is the dispensation of the 
mystery. The office or stewardship of this mystery. It was demonstrated in his apostleship to the. 
Gentiles. Hath been hid, It was from the beginning God’s purpose to saye the Gentiles by the 


Ch. ID.) EPHESIANS. 


10 To* the intent that now, unto? the principal- 
ities and powers in heavenly places,° might be 
known by the church the manifold wisdom of God, 

11 According to the eternal purpose which he 
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord: 

12 In whom we have boldness and access with 
confidence by the faith of him. 

13 Wherefore I desire that ye faint not at my 
tribulations for you, which is your glory. 

14 For this cause I bow my knees unto the 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 

15 Of whom? the whole family in heaven and 
earth is named, E 

16 That he would grant you, according® to the 
riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might 
by his Spirit in’ the inner man; 

17 That? Christ may dwell in your hearts by 
faith; that ye, being rooted and grounded in love, 

18 May be able to comprehend with all saints! 
what zs the breadth, and length, and depth, and 
height; 





‘| named, 





195 





ated all things; to the in- 10 
tent that now unto the 
principalities and the pow- 
ers in the heavenly places 
might be made known 
through the church the 
manifold wisdom of God, 
according to the eternal it 
purpose which he purpos- 
ed in Christ Jesus our 
Lord: in whom we have 12 
boldness and access in 
confidence through our 
faith in him. Wherefore 13 
Task that ye faint not at 
my tribulations for you, 
which are your glory. 

For this cause I bow my 14 
knees unto the Father, 
from whom every family 15 
in heaven and on earth is 
that he would 16 
grant you, according to 
the riches of his glory, 
that ye may be strength- 
ened with power through 
his Spirit in the inward 
that Christ may 17 
in our hearts 
through faith; to the end 
that ye, being rooted and 
grounded in love, may be 18 
strong to apprehend with 
all the saints what is the 
breadth and length and 











d@Phil. 2:9. e Phil. 4:19. fCol. 1:11. g Rom.7:22. h John 14:28. 


i Rom. 10:3. 


@1 Pet. 1:12. 61 Pet. 3:22. ¢1Cor. 2:7. 


gospel, but it had been kept hidden. 10. To the intent. The mystery had been hidden during all 
the ages, but was now revealed in order that the manifold wisdom of God might be made known. 
It was made known, (1) To the Gentiles by preaching the gospel. (2) To Jews. This is implied in the 
“all” of verse 9. (3) “To principalities and powers in heavenly places;” that is, to angelic beings. See 
1 Peter1:12. By the church, As the fruit of God’s wisdom revealed in the gospel, and especially by 
the union of Jews and Gentiles in one body. 11. According to the eternal purpose. The purpose 
which God had in all the ages proposed to fulfill through Jesus Christ. 12. In whom. In Jesus 
Christ, all, both Jew and Gentile alike, can come boldly to God. Without the revelation of Christ we 
could hardly know of God as a God of love, who loved to have us come to him. 13. Wherefore. 
Seeing that I have revealed this glorious mystery to you. I desire that ye faint not. Do not 
become discouraged. At my tribulations for you. At his sufferings, a prisoner on account of the 
Gentiles. Which are your glory. The plural (see Revision) shows that “which” refers to tribula- 
tions. These tribulations all came in his work as the apostle of the Gentiles. Hence, they all suffered 
in a work which made them heirs of eternal glory. 

14,15. For this cause I. See verse 1. He now resumes the thought of that verse. Bow my 
knees. Inthe attitude of prayer. Unto the Father. The Fountain of all mercies. 15. Of whom. 
The Father is referred to. The words, “Of our Lord Jesus Christ,” are not found in the best manu- 
scripts, and are omitted in the Revision. The whole family in heaven and earth. In the Revision, 
“very family.” The idea is that the Father is the Father of all the families of his children, whether 
Jews or Gentiles on earth, orin heaven. He is “Our Father in heaven” to the believer of every race, in 
this world or the world to come. All, as far as creation is concerned, derive their being from him, like 
children from a parent, and all the good are his spiritual children, 

16-19. That he would grant you. Paul now states the things for which he so earnestly prays in 
behalf of those to whom he writes. According to the riches of his glory. In a degree which 
would correspond. To be strengthened. That their spirits might be strengthened by God’s spirit 
and endowed with the might of spiritual gifts. 17. That Christ may dwell. This is the second 
petition. That they may so lay hold of Christ by faith that he will be to them a present Savior, in their 
hearts. That ye, being rooted and grounded inlove. The third petition relates to the love of 
Christ. 18. May be able to comprehend. Unless they were “rooted and grounded in love,” and 
the “love of God shed abroad” in their hearts, it would be impossible for them to comprehend the 
exceeding riches of the love of Christ. This is the climax of the prayer, the point to which the other 


196 EPHESIANS. [Ch: IV. 


5 ; _| height and depth, and to 19 
19 And to know the love of Christ, which pass-| height and depth, and to 


eth knowledge, that ye might be filled* with all the | which passeth knowledge, 
that ye may be filled unto 
fulness of God. all the fulness of God. 


20 Now, unto him that is able to do exceeding able ty do caeecta s 


abundantly above all that we ask or think, accord-| abundantly above all that 
Bs k th * we ask or think, according 
ing to the power that worketh in us, tothe power that wie 


21 Unto him de” glory in the church by Christ | i= 2s, unto him be the glo- 21 


’ ; ry in the church and in 
Jesus throughout all ages, world without end. | Ghrist Jesus unto all gen- 


erations for ever and ever. 
Amen. Amen. 


CHAPTER IV. 


The. Unity of the Church. 


SUMMARY.—The Exhortation to Unity. The Seven Bonds of Unity. The 
Various Gifts Given to the Church. The Offices for Its Edification. 
‘The Church Compacted in Christ. The Gentiles Called from Their 
Former Lives. A New and Holy Life Commanded. CHAPTER IV. 


4 I therefore, the prisoner 1 
1 I Therefore, the prisoner of the Lord,) be-| in the Lord. beseech you 


seech you* that ye walk worthy of the vocation | (Wai, Worthily of the 


as rec called, with all lowliness 2 
wherewith ye are called, and meekness, with long- 


2 With* all lowliness and meekness, with long- suffering, forbearing one 
suffering, forbearing one another in love; woe Vaiigered bo copie 
3 Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirite | of the Spirit in the bond 


2 of peace. There is one 4 
in the bond of peace. body, and one Spirit, even 
4 There* is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye | #8 28° Ye rere called in 


; : one hope of your calling; 
are called in one hope of your calling; 











a John 1:16; Col.2:9. 61Tim.1:17. cCol. 1:10. d Gal. 5:22. e Col. 3:14. J Rom, 12: 5. 








petitions tend. Indeed, from the beginning of the Epistle, he has been declaring what love Christ has 
shown for the Gentile world. 19. And to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge. 
‘This 1s one of Paul’s paradoxes, like 1 Tim. 5:6. They could know something of the love of Christ, but 
we can never fully comprehend the infinite. Filled with all the fulness of God. Filled with God’s 
grace to the full. : 

20, 21. Now unto him. He has offered a prayer, and closes it witha doxology. According to 
the power that worketh in us. They knew something of the mighty working of the Spirit, and 
therefore of the Divine power. But God was able to do for them beyond all that they could conceive. 
21. Unto him be glory inthe church. Let the church in all ages manifest his glory by its light. 
‘Throughout all ages. Literally, ‘Unto all the generations of the age of ages.” The idea is, through 
ithe endless succession of ages, or through all time. 

1-3. I, therefore. Practical duties are now urged which grow out of their glorious privileges in 
‘Christ. The prisoner of the Lord. See 3: 1, and note. Compare Philemon 1:9. He was a prisoner 
because he was a servant of the Lord. Walk worthy of the calling. They, had been called to a 
glorious callig, as he has shown in chapter 3. The Christian has been called to the highest calling 
with which man has ever been honored. 2. With all lowliness and meekness. Walk in humility 
and gentleness of spirit. These are characteristics of walking worthily. Others are long-suffering 
and forbearance. To take offense easily, and to seek to “pay back” any fancied injuries, are the Oppo- 
‘site of these quahties. In love. If the heart is filled with love, the other qualities will be shown 
iforth. Read 1 Corinthians, chapter 13. 8, Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit. For- 
Ybearance and long-suffering are essential to unity and peace, The unity of the Spirit. The unity of 
those who have the same Spirit, not merely an outward unity. In the bond of peace. An outward 
unity, which does not secure peace, cannot be the unity of the Spirit, 

4-6. Thereis onebody. The Unity commanded has a basis in seven unities which then existed in 
the church, and should exist in it in all ages. There was then only one body, the church, the body of 
Christ; not a Gentile body and a Jewish body. Modern denominations were unknown. Compare Rom, 
12:5; 1 Cor. 12: 12,13; Eph. 2; 16. And one Spirit. The same Spirit bestowed upon Jew and Gentile, 


Ch. IV.] EPHESIANS. 197 


a ; b 7 one Lord, one faith, one 5 
5 One* Lord, one faith, one” baptism, Pee an Ged eAee e 


6 One® God and Father of all, who ¢s above all, | ther of aul, who is over all, 


and‘ through all, and in you all. ail. Bet uato cach ono. ot? 


, aq] 7 7 - | us was the grace given ac- 
7 But unto every one of us is given grace accord. | 7o as ne Brace arene ot 


ing to the measure of the gift of Christ. the gift of Christ, Where- 8 
8 Wherefore he saith,? When he ascended up on | *When ‘he "ascended on 


high,’ he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto| Bigh, be led caphvity 
men. , And gave gifts unto men. 


9 (Now® that he ascended, what is it but that he Oa err pee ee 


i ~ descended into the lower 
also descended first into the lower parts of the | Sestented into ne. He 10 


earth? waa descended is pee 
A s t 
10 He that descended is the same also that" as-| dhove all the heavens, that 


: he might fill all things.) 
cended up far above all heavens, that he might fill | fo Mey tee Some ne be 11 


all things.) | apostles ; and some, proph- 

11 And he gave! some, apostles; and some, proph- aie ae re 
ets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and 
teachers; 


alCor. 8:6. 6 Heb. 6:6. c Psa. 83:18; Mal. 2:10. d Rom. 11:35. e Psa. 68:18. Col. 2:15. gJohn3:13. 
h Acts 1:9; Heb. 4:14; 7:26; 8:1; 9:24; 1 Tim. 3:16. 71 Cor. 12:28. 




















and upon allsaints. Called in one hope. Wherever called and from whatever state, all were filled 
with one hope, that of immortality. 5. One Lord. Christ, the Head of the church (1 Cor. 1: 13; Eph. 
1:10). All saints haye one Master. One faith. One Lord who is the object of faith, and whom both 
Jews and Gentiles lay hold upon by faith in him. One baptism. All had been baptized into the “one 
Lord” upon the profession of the “one faith” by one rite. It would be utterly inconsistent with the 
Apostle’s argument, if there could be anything divisive about baptism, as three different ways of admin- 
istering it. He is showing that there is unity in each one of seven essential features of Christianity,. 
and hence all should seek to “keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.” 6. One God. Not 
gods many, but one God for all; “The Father of all, above all, through all, in all.”” Meyer, upon this 
passage, says that the elements of church unity are: (1) The church itself constituted as aunity: One 
Body, one Spirit, one Blessed Hope. (2) The means by which this united church is builé up: One Lord, one 
Faith, one Baptism, (3) Over all one Supreme Ruler, the God and Father of all. Bishop Pearson, on 
the creed, notes ‘Points of Unity of the Church.’? He enumerates, (1) Unity of the Head; (2) Unity of 
the Spirit dwelling in it; (3) Unity of hope; (4) Unity of faith; (5) Unity of ordinance for admission; 
(6) Unity of the one Father; (7) Unity of organization, one Body. 

7-10. But unto every one ofus. While all named above is common, the Lord has given grace to. 
each one according to the measure of the gift of Christ. That is, there are special offices, and 
special gifts, that Christ deals to each. 8. Wherefore he saith. The citation is from Psalm 68: 19, 
It is cited to show that Christ gives. When he ascended on high. Paul applies this to Christ’s. 
ascension to heayen. Led captivity captive. The captives, led captive by Christ, are sin, the curse 
of the law, and death. Gave gifts unto men. As a conqueror, returning in triumph, was wont to 
distribute gifts, so Christ signalized his ascension by gifts. 9. Now that he ascended. Paul, in 
applying this to Christ, shows that it imphes that he must have descended from heaven, before his 
ascension to heaven. This must necessarily follow, if the one ascending is divine, and has a home in 
heayen, as the psalm indicates. 10. Above all heavens. The one who descended is now exalted 
to the right hand of God. God’s throne is represented above the heavens, as God is above all. Com- 
pare Heb. 4:14; 7:26. That he might fill all things. And hence reach every place with his grace 
and glory. 

11-18. And he gave. It has just been shown that Christ “‘gave gifts to men” (verses 7,8). Of these: 
gifts were various offices. The object of all these offices was to promote “the unity of the faith” (verse 
13), Christ has appointed the offices, and gives the men in the church who are fitted for these offices. 
In the matter of those offices that continue, it is the duty of the church to recognize and call out the 
men who meet the conditions Christ has given. Some to be apostles. The apostles were all chosen 
by Christ. All had to be witnesses of his resurrection (Acts 1: 22), They, therefore, could have no suc- 
cessors, but their own office continues. They still remain teachers and in authority by their writings. 
and example. And some, prophets, An inspired office, essential in the church for its teaching untik 


198 EPHESIANS. 


[Ch. IV. 





12 For the perfecting of the saints, for the work 
of the ministry,* for the edifying of the body of 
Christ: j 

13 Till we all come in the unity of the faith,° and 
of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a per- 
fect man, unto the measure of the stature of the 
fulness of Christ: 

14 That we henceforth be no more children, toss- 
ed to and fro, and carried about with every4 wind 
of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning 
eraftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; 

15 But, speaking the truth in love, may grow up 
into him in all things, which is the head, even 


and teachers; for the per- 
fecting of the saints, unto 
the work of ministering, 
unto the building eh had 
the body of Christ: till we 
all attain unto the unity 
of the faith, and of the 
knowledge of the Son of 
God, unto a fullgrown 
man, unto the measure of 
the stature of the fulness 
of Chrict: that we may be 
no longer children, tossed 
to and fro and carried 
about with every wind of 
doctrine, by the sleight of 
men, in craftiness, after 
the wiles of error; but 
speaking truth in love, 
may grow up in all things 
into him, which is the 
head, even Christ; from 


12 


13 


whom all the body. fitly 
framed and knit together 
through that which every 
joint supplieth, according 
to the working in due 
measure of each several 
part, maketh the increase 
ot the body unto the build- 
ing up of itself in love. 


Christ: 

16 From® whom the whole body, fitly joined to- 
gether, and compacted by that which every joint 
supplieth, according to the effectual working in the 
measure of every part, maketh increase of the) 
body, unto the edifying of itself in love. 


@1 Cor. 14:26. 6 Col. 1:24. ¢ Col. 2:2. 











d@ Matt.31:7. ¢e Col. 2:19. 





the New Testament was completed. And some, evangelists. Such as Philip (Acts 8: 4-12; 21: 8), 
Timothy, Titus, etc. This office is to preach the gospel, and will be necessary as long as the church 
continues on earth. As this office did not require extraordinary gifts, itis permanent. Pastors and 
teachers. These were not distinct offices. Bishops or elders, and especially those “who labored in 
word and doctrine,” came under this head. A pastor should always be an elder, but it is not certain 
that a teacher was always an elder. These offices were all given for purposes indicated in the next 
yerse. 12. For the perfecting of the saints. Helping them to higher and holier lives. For the 
work of the ministry. For carrying on the various works assigned to the ministry. For the edify- 
ing of the body of Christ. All was intended to minister to the upbuilding of the church, within and 
without, 18. Till we all come. These offices are given in order that all may come to a goal that is 
named just below. They must be continued in some form until that goalis reached. Unto the unity 
of the faith. This is one of the great objects to be attained through these offices. In verse 2, Paul, as 
an apostle and a prophet, exhorts to the same end. As an apostle and prophet, he so exhorts still. 
Every evangelist and pastor who is under God’s spirit should labor to the same end. Not only “unity 
of the faith,” but unity of the knowledge of the Son of God is aimed at. Full unity of the faith will 
be found when all alike know Christ. Unto a full-grown man (Revision). The second end to be 
attained is a noble manhood, fully developed, after the modes of life furnished in Christ Jesus. This 
sust be the aim of all teaching, and of all living. If we cannot attain fully to it in the flesh, we cer- 
tainly can aim at it and grow more and more into Christ’s likeness. 

14-16. That we henceforth be no more children. This should be the aim; to reach a stature 
such that we are no more froward children. Children are feeble, inexperienced, and easily deceived. 
Tossed, Tossed about as a wave by every wind of doctrine. It is “doctrines,” in great part, which 
have broken up unity. By the sleight of men. Their tricks. And cunning craftiness. Craft and 
cunning, employed by teachers of false doctrine in order to deceive. There can be little doubt that - 
Paul refers to the false teachers against whom he warned the Ephesian elders in Acts 20: 30. 
15. Speaking the truth in love. Truth is never to give way to false doctrines, but it must be 
spoken in love. Some cling to the truth tenaciously, but forget to speak itinlove. May grow. This 
continues the characteristics of those ‘who are no longer children.” They should grow up into him 
in all things. In all their growth there should be a growth of Ohrist’s traits, a growth into his like- 
ness. 16. From whom, The Head of the body, the church. He is the source of all life, power and 
growth in the body. Fitly framed together, The body of Christ, composed of many individuals, is 
one, like a building composed of many parts framed together. Through that which every joint 
supplieth. As in the body every joint and part does its work towards compacting the body into a har- 
monious whole, and towards its growth, so in the body of Christ every member deriving life from the 
Head is to work in his place, and harmoniously, for the merease of the body. 


Ch. IV.] EPHESIANS. 


199 





17 This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, 
that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, 
in the vanity of their minds; 

18 Having the understanding darkened,’ being 
alienated from the life of God through the ignor- 
ance that is in them, because of the blindness of 
their heart: 

19 Who,” being past feeling, have given them- 
selves over unto lasciviousness, to work all unclean- 
ness with greediness. 

20 But ye have not so learned Christ; 

21 If so be that ye have heard him, and have 
been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus: 

22 That ye put off, concerning the former con- 
versation, the old man, which is corrupt according 
to the deceitful lusts; 

23 And¢ be renewed in the spirit of your mind; 

24 And that ye put on the new man, which after 
God is created in righteousness and true holiness. 

25 Wherefore, putting away lying, speak every 
man truth with his neighbour: for we are members 
one of another. 

26 Be ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun go 
down upon your wrath: 

27 Neither give place to the devil. 

28 Let him that stole steal no more: but rather 





This I say therefore, and 17 
testify in the Lord, that 
ye no longer walk as the 
Gentiles also walk, in the 
vanity of ther mind, being 18 
darkened in their under- 
standing, alienated from 
the life of God because of 
the ignorance that is in 
them, because of the har- 
dening of their heart; who 19 
being past ea | gave 
themselves up. to lascivi- 
ousness, to work all un- 
cleanness with greediness. 
But ye did not so learn 20 
Christ; if so be that ye 21 
heard him, and were 
taught in him, even as 
truth is in Jesus: that ye 22 
put away, as concerning 
ue former manner of 
ife, the old man, which 
waxeth corrupt after the 
lusts of deceit; and that 23 
ye be renewed in the spir- 
it of your mind, and put 24 
on the new man, which 
after God hath been cre- 
ated in righteousness and 
holiness of truth, 

Wherefore, putting away 25 
falsehood, speak ye trut 
each one with his neigh- 
bor: for we are members 
one of another. Be yean- 26 
gry, and sin not: let not 
the sun go down upon your 
wrath: neither give place 27 
to the devil. Let him that 28 
stole steal no more; but 





a Acts 26:18; Gal.4:8. 6 Rom. 1:24; 1 Tim. 4:2. ec Rom. 12:2; 2 Cor.2:10, 11. dJames 4:7. 





17-19. This I say, therefore. Now, after the statement of the great principles named in verses 
3-16, Paul returns to the exhortation of verses 1-3. Walk not as other Gentiles. Having come out 
from the heathen and abandoned all their sins. The vanity of their mind. Vanity of mind means 
what is a waste of life. 18. Having the understanding darkened. He shows how the Gentiles 
walkin vanity. They are in darkness, unenlightened by the gospel. Alienated. Without the spiritual 
life that comes from knowing God. Because of blindness of heart. The idea is a wilful blindness. 
19. Who being pastfeeling. Having trampled conscience under foot until it 1s ealloused. Having 
silenced its admonitions, they give themselves to licentiousness and evil. This description is not over- 
drawn. Purity of life was not even considered a virtue among the Gentiles of that period. 

20-24. But ye have not so learned Christ. You are Gentiles by birth, like those just described, 
but you have learned otherwise from Christ. 21. Ifsobethat ye have heard him. This does not 
express a doubt that they had heard and been taught by Christ. The ideais: If ye have heard, ete., as 
I know you haye, you have been taught the truth in Jesus, that (verse 22) ye put off concerning your 
former manner of life the old man and his deeds. “The old man” is the old sinful life, in contrast 
with “the new man,” or new life in Christ. 23. And be renewed. Thatis, be made new by haying 
anew mind, or spirit. See Rom. 12: 2. 24. Andthat ye put on the new man. He who has a new 
mind within him is anew man. He who is born anew, “of water and of the Spirit” (John 3: 5), is newly 
created in righteousness. This is still part of what they were taught (verse 21). The new creation 
described took place at conversion. 

25-28. Wherefore. Since you were so taught, putting away falsehood, speak the truth. We are 
members one of another. All members of one Christian household; hence every member has a right 
tothe truth. 26. Be ye angry, and sin not. Quoted from Psalm 4: 4, Septuagint Version. Do not 
sin through anger, is the thought. Lf circumstances arouse your indignation, do not be led astray. Let 
not the sun go down upon your wrath. Let there be no long continuance of your wrathful mind, 
27. Neither give place to the devil. By cherishing anger. A-person under the dominion of anger 
is in a fit state to be tempted to evil deeds. 28. Lethimthat stole. All sorts of sinners had been 


200 EPHESIANS. 


‘let him labour, working with Ais hands the thing 
which is good, that he may have to give to him that 
needeth. 

29 Let no corrupt communication proceed out of 
your mouth, but that which is good to the use of 
edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hear- 
ers. 

30 And* grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, 
whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption. 

31 Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and 
clamour, and evil-speaking, be put away from you, 
with all malice: 

32 And be ye kind one to another, tender-heart- 
ed, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ’s 
sake hath forgiven you. 





CHAPTER V. 


Duties Which Become the Children of God. 


SUMMARY.—Walking in Love. Flee All Impurity. Let Speech Be Pure. 
Covetousness a Species of Idolatry. No Fellowship with the Wicked 
in Their Deeds. Enjoyment to be Sought in the Spirit Rather than in 
Wine. The Mutual Duties of Wives and Husbands. The Mystery of 
the Marriage Union and of Christ with the Church. 


1 Be” ye therefore followers of God, as dear 
children; 

2 And° walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us, 
and hath given himself for us an offering and a sac- 
rifice to God4 for a sweet-smelling savour. 

3 But fornication, and all uncleanness, or covet- 











[Ch. V- 


rather let him labour, 
working with his hands 
the thing thatis good, that 
he may have whereof to 

ive tohim that hath need. 

et no corrupt speech pro- 
ceed out of your mouth, 
but such as is good for ed- 
ifying as the need may be, 
that it may give grace to 
them that hear. And grieve 
not the Holy Spirit of God, 
in whom ye were sealed 
unto the day of redemp- 
tion. Let all bitterness, 
and wrath, and anger, and 
clamour, and railing, be 
put away from you, with 
all malice: and be ye kind 
one to another, tender- 
hearted, forgiving each 
other,even as God also in 
Christ forgave you. 


CHAPTER V. 


Be ye therefore imitators 
of God, as beloved chil- 
dren; and walk in love, 
even as Christ also loved 
you, and gave himself up 
for us, an offering and a 
sacrifice to God for an 
odour of a sweet smell. 


29 


31 


32. 


£ 


2 


But_ fornication, and all 3 


uncleanness, or covetous- 





a Isa. 63:10; Rom. 8:28. 6 Matt. 5:45; Luke 6:36; 1 Pet. 3:15. c 


Ley.1:9; 2 Cor. 2: 16; 1 Thes. 4:3 


John 13: 34; 1John3:11. d Gen. 8:21; 





converted among the Gentiles, even thieves. 
deeds” (verse 22), this class is embraced also by name. Let him labor. 
dote to a dishonest life. 
that which he can give. 


In this exhortation, “To put off the old man and his 


Honest labor is the best anti- 
Every man is to labor in order that he may not only supply his needs, but have 


29-32. Let no corrupt communication. What is rotten. Anything that will demoralize others. 


Obscene, licentious, or immoral language is forbidden. All that the Christi 


which is good to the use of edifying; 
Holy Spirit. Such sins as those described above grieve the Holy 


an earnest, a proof, an assurance of the final redemption. 


in the bond of peace,” plain, every-day duties of life. 
are positive. 

1,2. Be ye therefore. 
Literally, imitators, ‘forgiving one another as God 
dren. As beloved children seek to do like their father. 
and Christ who gave himself for us. 
offerings which were not sacrifices. 
smelling savour. See Gen. 8: 21; Lev. 1: 9; 2 Cor. 2: 15. 
to God. 


8-5. But. Sundry sins are now forbidden which were utterly opposed to the duties just com- 


building the hearers up in Ohrist, 


an speaks should be that 
80. Grieve not the 
Spirit, nor will he continue to dwell 
in those addicted to them. Sealed unto the day of redemption. The sealing of the Holy Spirit is 
See 1:13. If we grieve him away the seal 
willbe gone. 81, 82. These verses enforce sundry duties essential to keeping “the unity of the Spirit 


Those of verse 31 are negative; those of verse 32 


Therefore refers to God's kindness spoken of in 4: 32. Followers of God. 

hath forgiven you” (4: 32). As dear chil- 
2. And walk in love. Thus imitate God, 
An offering and a sacrifice. In the Jewish temple there were 
Christ gave himself as an offering and was sacrificed. A sweet- 
An expression denoting an offering grateful. 


Ch. V.] EPHESIANS. 


20L 





ousness, let it not be once named among you, as 
becometh saints; 

4 Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jest- 
ing,* which are not convenient; but rather giving of 
thanks. 

5 For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor! 
unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idol- 
ater, hath> any inheritance in the kingdom of 
Christ and of God. 

6 Let® no man deceive you with vain words; for 
because of these things cometh the wrath of God 
upon the children of disobedience. 

7 Be not ye therefore partakers with them. 

8 For’ ye were sometimes darkness, but now® are 
ye light in the Lord: walk as children? of light; 

9 (For the fruit of the Spirit zs in all goodness, 
and righteousness, and truth; ) 

10 Proving? what is acceptable unto the Lord. 

11 And® have no fellowship with the unfruitful 





ness, let it not even be 
named among you, as be- 
cometh saints; nor filthi- 4 
ness, nor foolish talking, 
or jesting, which are not 
befitting: Dut rather giving 
of thanks. For this ye 5. 
know of a surety, that no 
fornicator, por unclean 
person, nor covetous man, 
which is an idolater, hath 
any inheritance in the 
kingdom of Christ and 
God. Let no man deceive 
ou with empty words: for 
ecause of these things 
cometh the wrath of God 
upon the sons of disobedi- 
ence. Be not ye therefore 7 
partakers with them;, for 8’ 
ye were once darkness, but 
are now light in the Lord: 
walk as children of light 
(for the fruit of the light 9 
is in all goodness and 
righteousness and truth), 
proving what is well- 10 
pleasing unto the Lord; 
and have no fellowship 11: 
with the unfruitful works 
of darkness, but rather 


6 


even reprove them; forthe 12- 
things which are done by 
them in secret itisa shame 
even to speak of. But all 13. 
things when they are re- 
proved are made manifest 
by the light: for every- 
thing that is made mani- 


works of darkness, but rather! reprove them. 

12 For it is a shame even to speak of those things 
which are done of them in secret. 

13 Buti all things that are reproved are made 
manifest by the light: for whatsoever doth make 
manifest is light. 





dIsa. 9:2. f Luke 16: 8. 


# Lev. 19: 17. 


e John 8:12; 1John2:9. 


c Jer. 29:8; Matt. 24:4. 
j Heb. 4:18. 


6 Rev. 22:15. 
hi Cor. 5:9. 


a Rom. 1: 28. 
g Phil. 1: 10. 





mended. Fornication. This was hardly accounted a sin among the Gentiles. Uncleanness. Every 
kind of impurity. Or covetousness. This sin is emphasized. The Greek term means, ‘“‘Greediness 
for more.’ It implies an insatiable desire for wealth and for the things which gratify appetite. It is. 
therefore a greed which leads to many sins. Let it not be once named. Such sins must be banished’ 
not only in deed, but in word. 4. Neither filthiness. All kinds of indecency. Foolish talking. 
Buffoonery. Jesting. Wit of doubtful morality, words and suggestions of doubtful and double mean- 
ing. Are not convenient. Are not becoming. It is more becoming to Christians to engage in 
thanksgiving. 5. No fornicator. No person of licentious life, words or thoughts. Nor covetous: 
man, who is anidolater. See note on verse 3. The covetous man gives his heart to the object of his 
greed rather than to God, and hence is virtually anidolater. Hath any inheritance. None of these 
are heirs of the kingdom, and hence have no promise of heaven. 

6,'7. Let no man deceive you with vain words. With artful pleas that sinful things are not 
sinful. For. Because of just such sins as they excuse, God’s wrath will be visited upon all who live in 
(the children of) disobedience. '7. Partakers. Have no share with them in their sins. 

8-10. Yewere once darkness. Not only lived in darkness, but gave off no light and darkened 
others. Now are yelight. Shining with the light that comes from Christ. 9. For the fruit of the 
Spirit. To walk as children of the light is to bear the fruit of the Spirit. This is shown by goodness 
and righteousness. See Gal. 5:22. 10. Proving. Showing by walking in the light what is acceptable 
to God. 

11-18. And have no fellowship. See verse 7. Works of darkness are those which please the 
powers of darkness. The Christian must have nothing whatever to do with these. We must not coun- 
tenance any sinful device, but rather reprove it. This would prevent the patronage of many things 
which the world countenances. 12. For the things which are done by them in secret. In the 
works of darkness are many secret sins, some too shameful evento be named. 18. But all things: 
that are reproved. These works of darkness are to be reproved by Christians (verse 11) that their 
true character may be brought to light. If the light is thrown upon them they willbe seen. Every~ 


202 EPHESIANS. 


(Ch. V. 





14 Wherefore he saith,* Awake thou that sleep- 
est, and? arise from the dead, and Christ shall give 
thee light. 

15 See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as 
fools, but as wise, 

16 Redeeming the time because the days are evil. 

17 Wherefore® be ye not unwise, but understand- 
ing what? the will of the Lord 7s. 

18 And be not drunk with wine, wherein is 


fest is light. Wherefore 
he saith, Awake, thou that 
sleepest, and arise from 
the dead, and Christ shall 
shine upon thee. 

Look therefore carefully 
how ye walk, not as un- 
wise, but as wise; redeem- 
ing the time, because the 
days are evil. Wherefore 
be ye not foolish, but un- 
derstand what the will of 
the Lord is. And be not 
drunken with wine,where- 
in is riot, but be filled with 


14 


15 
16 
17 


18 


the Spirit; speaking one to 19 
another in psalms and 
hymns and spiritual songs, 
singing and making melo- 
dy with your heart to the 
Lord; giving thanks al- 
ways for all things in the 
name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ to God, even the 
Father; subjecting your- 21 
selves one to another in 
the fear of Christ. 

Wives, be in subjection 22 
unto your own husbands, 
as unto the Lord. Forthe 23 
husband is the head of 
the wife, as Christ also is 
the head of the church, 
being himself the saviour 


excess; but be filled with the Spirit; 

19 Speaking to yourselves‘ in psalms, and hymns, 
and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in 
your heart to the Lord; 

20 Giving® thanks always for all things unto God 
and the Father in the name of the Lord Jesus 
‘Christ; 

21 Submitting" yourselves one to another in the 
fear of God. 

22 Wives, submit yourselves unto your own hus- 
bands, as unto the Lord. 

23 For the husband is the head of the wife, even 
as Christ is the head of the church; and he is the 
saviour of the body. 


20 





e Col. 4:5. d Rom. 12:2. 
A Phil. 2:8. «Gen. 3:16. 


alsa. 60:1. bJohn 5:25; Rom. 6:4, 5; Col. 3:1. 


etd Res e1Thes. 4:3. fJames5:13. 
g Job 1:21; Psa. 34:1. 





thing that is made manifest is light. Whatever is brought to light is light. Even if wicked, when 
itis brought to light it enlightens men by revealing its real nature, 

14. Wherefore he saith. Who says, or where, is uncertain. There is a similar thought in Isaiah 
60:1, 2, and Isaiah 26:19. He probably means that God, in substance, says. Awake, thou that 
sleepest. The sleeper represents one not converted. Arise from the dead. From death in sin 
(2:1). Conversion is often described as a spiritual resurrection (Rom. 6: 4-6; Col. 2:12). Ana Christ. 
‘Christ gives light to all who come to him. The Greek quotation is in verse, and has been translated, 


Sleeper, awake; rise from the dead, 
And Christ on thee his light shall shed, 


15-17. Walk circumspectly. The Revision makes the meaning clear. 16,” Redeeming the 
time. Using every opportunity; buying them by giving up present enjoyment. 17. Be ye not 
unwise. That is, so foolish as to not understand the will of the Lord. 

18-21. Be not drunk with wine. Wine was at that time the usual intoxicating liquor. The pas- 
sage forbids intoxication, which was a common vice of the times. Excess. “Riot,’’ in the Revision. 
How true! Enjoyment is not to be sought, as the world seeks it, in wine, but rather be filled with the 
Spirit. Then your songs will not be bacchanahan, 19, Speaking to yourselves in psalms, 
Under the influence of the Spirit when together you will sing psalms, such as those of the psalmist. 
Andhymns. Songs of praise. Spiritualsongs. Songs which express Spiritual emotions. We tind 
Christian hymns in the church at a very early period. Singing and making melody. While the lips 
sing, the heart must join in the melody by an uplifting to God. Too much Singing in the churches is 
only of the lips. 20. Giving thanks always. This is often donein songs. In the name. All our 
worship is in the name of Christ. 21. Subjecting yourselves. Filled with the Spirit, we “speak in 
psalms,” etc. (verse 19), ‘‘give thanks” (verse 20), and submit ourselves to each other in the fear of 
God, This last duty belongs to the relations of life. One of these relations is of husbands and wives 
(verses 22-32) ; another of children and parents (6: 1-4); another still of servants and masters (6: 5-9), 

22-24. Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands. Mutual duties are named. The 
husband should “love his wife as Christ loved the church,” and the wife should submit to this loving 
husband “as unto the Lord.” The husband is the “head” of the family, but must be Willing to give him- 
self forit. 28. The husband is the head of the wife. Every organization must have a head. The 


EPHESIANS. 


24 Therefore as the church is subject unto 
Christ, so Je¢ the wives be to their own husbands in 
every thing. 

25 Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ 
also loved the church, and gave himself for it; 

26 That he might sanctify and cleanse* it with 
the washing of water” by the word; 

27 That he might present it to himself a glorious 
church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such 
ane ; but that it should be holy and without blem- 
ish. 

28 So ought men to love their wives as their own 
bodies: he that loveth his wife loveth himself. 

29 For no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but 
nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the 
church, 

30 For we are members of his body, of his flesh, 
and of his bones. 

31 For this cause shall a man leave his father and 
mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, and they 
two shall be one flesh. 

32 This is a great mystery: but I speak concern- 
ing Christ and the church. 

33 Nevertheless, let every one of you in particu- 
lar so love his wife even as himself; and the wife 
see that she reverence Her husband. 

a John 3:5; Heb. 10:22; 1John 5:6. 


Ch. V.] 











203 


of the body. But as the 24 
church is subject to Christ, 
so let the wives also be to 
their husbands in every- 
thing. Husbands, love 25 
your wives, even as Christ 
also loved the church, and 
gave himself up for it; 
that he might sanctify it, 26 
having cleansed it by the 
washing of water with the 
word, that he might pre: 27 
sent the church to himself 
a glorious church, not hay- 
ing spot or wrinkle or any 
such thing; but that it 
should be holy and with- 
out blemish. Evensoought 28 
husbands also to love 
their own wives as their 
own bodies. He that loy- 
eth his own wife loveth 
himself: for no man ever 29 
hated his own flesh; but 
nourisheth and cherisheth 
it, even as Christ also the 
church; because we are 30 
members of his body. For 31 
this cause shall a man 
leave his father and moth- 
er, and shall cleave to his 
wife; and the twain shall 
become one flesh. This 32 
mystery is great; but I 


‘speak in regard of Christ 


and of the church. Never- 33 
theless do ye also several- 

ly love each one his own 
wife even as himself; and 
let the wife see that she 
fear her husband. 


6 John 15:3; 17:17. 








head of the family can only rule the wife in the most devoted love (verses 25 and 33). 


24. As the 


ehurch, etc. The relation of the wife to the husband is like that of the church in Christ, a close, tender 
relation, in which there is no bondage, but freedom, because the service is that of the heart. 
25-27. Husbands, love your wives. We have here not only the duty, but the measure of the 


duty. 
fare. 
and loving obedience on the other. 
church, his bride, is shown as an example to Christian husbands, 


The union of husband and wife here described is ideally perfect. 


As Christ loved the church. So well as to be willing to give all things, even life, for her wel- 
The tenderest love on one side, 
26. That he might sanctify it. The great love of Christ for the 
Christ gave himself for the church. 


His object was to sanctify it, make it holy. In order to do this 1t was needful to cleanse it with the 
washing of water by the word. All commentators of repute in all bodies refer this to baptism. All 
in the church pass through the waters of baptism. But the washing of the water would be of no avail 
without the word. The power is in the word of the Lord which offers the gospel and commands bap- 
tism. 27. That he might present it to himself a glorious church. <A church cleansed from sin ; 
a bride without a blemish. 

28-80. So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. The church is the Bride of the 
Lamb, but it is also Christ’s body. As he loved his body, so every husband ought to love her who by 
the mystery of the marriage tie has become “bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh” (Genesis 2: 23). 
29. Noman ever yet hated his own flesh. Or his own body. Yet, wife and husband are ‘one 
flesh” (verse 31). 80. We are members of his body. We are all members of Christ’s body, the 
church, But the church is his Bride. Hence the language of Gen. 2: 23, where Adam declares that his 
wife “‘is bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh,” applies to our relation to Christ. 

31-33. Forthis cause. This verse is quoted from Gen. 2: 24. It speaks not only a fact of the mar- 
riage state, but also implies that Christ left the Father for the sake of his mystical Bride. 82. This is 
agreat mystery. The wonders of this marriage tie, but especially that the marriage of the first Adam 
should prefigure the relation between the second Adam and the church. 388. Nevertheless. With- 
out regard to the mystery, let every one, etc. The rest of the verse states the mutual duties already 


so tenderly explained. 


204 EPHESIANS. 


[Ch. VL. 





CHAPTER VI. 


The Christian Warfare. 


SUMMARY.—Mutual Duties of Children and Parents. 
Masters. The Warfare of the Saints. 
of the Spirit. 
1 Children,* obey your parents in the Lord: for 

this is right. 

2 Honour? thy father and mother, (which is the 
first commandment with promise, ) 

3 That it may be well with thee, and thou mayest 
live long on the earth. 

4 And,° ye fathers, provoke not your children to 
wrath: but’ bring them up in the nurture and 
admonition of the Lord. 

5 Servants, be obedient to them that are your 
masters according to the flesh, with fear and trem- 
bling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ; 

6 Not with eye-service, as men-pleasers; but as 
the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from 
the heart; 


Of Servants and 
The Armor of God. The Sword 
Constant Prayer Commended. Benediction. 


CHAPTER VI. 


Children, obey your par- 1 
ents in the Lord: for this 
is right. Honour thy fa- 2 
ther and mother (which is 
the first commandment 
with promise), that it may 3. 
be well with thee, and 
thou mayest live long on 
the earth. And, ye fathers, 4 
provoke not your children 
to wrath: but nurture them 
in the chastening and ad- 
monition of the Lord. 

Servants, be obedient 5 
unto them that according 
to the flesh are your mas- 
ters, with fear and tremb- 
ling, In singleness of your 


; heart, as unto Christ; not 6 


in the way of eye-service, 
as men-pleasers; but as 
servants of Christ, doing 
the will of God from the 


heart; with good will do- 7 
ing service, as unto the 


doing service, as to the Lord, | ing service, as unt et, 
f . 


7 With good-will 
and not to men: 








@Proy. 23:22. 6 Ex. 20:12; Deut. 5:16; 27:16; Jer. 35:18; Matt. 15:4. c¢Col.3:21. d Gen. 18: 19; Deut. 6:7. 








1-8. Children, obey your parents. The duty of obedience to parents is older than Christianity ; 
as old as the parental relation. In the Lord. Unless they require of you things forbidden by the 
Lord. Our duty to Christ is superior, and if parents require us to disobey him, we must still be loyal to 
him, This passage has been thought to imply that all children of Christians are baptized in infancy into 
the church, but the children addressed are surely not babes, but old enough to hear and obey the apos- 
tolic command, and hence old enough to have heard and obeyed Christ. 2. Honor thy father and 
mother. Both of them, both alike. Which is the first. The first of the ten commandments which 
has a promise attached. 8. That it may be well with thee. Quoted from Exodus 20: 12. This is 
the promise. A temporal blessing was conditioned upon the promise to Israel, and to honor parents 
still brings blessing. 

4. And ye fathers. Parents have duties as well as children. Two are named. Provoke not, 
etc. Passionate and unreasonable rebukes, intemperate language, or cruel usage, would provoke 
resentment on the part of children. In the nurture and admonition of the Lord. The Revision 
reads: “Nurture them in the chastening and admonition.” Training and restraining as well as admo- 
nition are imphed. The Lord holds all parties responsible for a Christian training of their children. 

5-8. Servants. The term does not refer so much to hired servants, as slaves, of whom there were 
many millions in the Roman Empire at that time. These were of all races, prisoners taken in war, or 
their children. Christianity did not violently destroy this relation, but regulated, mitigated and under- 
mined it by introducing a new element into human life which would destroy it. Masters according 
to the flesh. Earthly masters whose dominion will go no farther than this world. With fear and 
trembling. Not for fear of punishment, but for fear that the service is not done right. As unto 
Christ. Christ will see and reward your fidelity to duty, even if an earthly master does not. 6. Not 
with eye-service. Service that seems faithful when under the eye of the master, but relaxes when he 
does not see. Such is the usual service of slaves, unless they have a high sense of duty. 7. With 
good will. With a well disposed mind towards the master. As to the Lord. It pleases the Lord, 
whatever may be the relations of life, for us to do our service well. We may engage in very lowly 
duties to the glory of the Lord. 8. Knowing that whatsoever, etc. If aman renders good service 
anywhere, whether he be bond or free, the Lord will see that he is rewarded. 

9. And ye masters. The Roman law allowed masters to treat their slaves as brute beasts, to 
abuse and eyen to murder them, But Christianity at once put Christian masters under restraint. Do 


Che Vin] EPHESIANS. 


205 





8 Knowing? that whatsoever good thing any man 
doeth, the same shall he receive of the Lord, 
whether he de bond or free. 

9 And, ye masters, do the same things unto 
them, forbearing threatening: knowing that your 
Master also is in heaven; neither is° there respect of 
persons with him. 

10 Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, 
and in the power of his might. 

11 Put* on the whole armour of God, that ye 
may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. 

12 For we wrestle not against® flesh and blood, 
but against principalities, against powers, against 
thet rulers of the darkness of this world, against 
spiritual wickedness in high places. 

13 Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of 
God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil 
day, and having done all, to stand. 

14 Stand therefore, having® your loins girt about 
with truth, and having on the breastplate of right- 
eousness; 

15 And® your feet shod with the preparation of 
the gospel of peace; 





@ Rom. 2:6; 2Cor.5:10. 6Col. 4:1. cl Pet. 1:17; 


2:15. f John 12:31; Col. 1:13. g Isa. 59:17. 





d Rom. 13:12; 2 Cor. 6:7; 1 Thes. 5:8. 
h Isa. 62:7. 


knowing that whatsoever g 
good thing each one doeth, 
the same shall he receive 
again from the Lord, 
whether he be bond or free. 
And, ye masters, do the 9 
same things unto them, 
and forbear threatening: 
knowing that both their 
Master and yours is in 
heaven, and there is no 
respect of persons with 


1m. 

Finally, be strong in the 10 
Lord, and in the strength 
of his might. Put on the il 
whole armour of God, that 
ye may be able to stand 
against the wiles of the 
devil. For our wrestling 
is not against flesh and 
blood, but against the 
principalities, against the 
powers, against the world- 
rulers of this darkness, 
a eM the spiritual hosts 
of wickedness 1n the heavy - 
enly places. Wherefore 
take up the whole armour 
of God, that ye may be 
able to withstand in the 
eyil day, and having done 
all, to stand. Stand there- 14 
fore, having girded your 
loins with truth, and hav- 
ing put on the breastplate 
of righteousness, and hay- 15 
ing shod your feet with 
the preparation of the gos- 


12 





e Rom. 8: 38; Col. 





‘the same things to them. Acton the same principles towards them, that the Lord requires of them 
towards you. There must be mutual good will and mutual service. Forbearing threatening. The 
habit of cruel masters. Knowing that your Master. That you have a Master who sees you, to 
whom your slave is just as dear as you are, and who will hold you to account if you wrong him. 

10. Be strong in the Lord. He comes to his final admonition. They are engaged in a fearful 
warfare (verse 12). They need to be equipped for it. Let them be strong by using the armor, weapons 
and means which are named in the next section. 

11-18. Put on the whole armor of God. The ancient soldier was not equipped for war until he 
had put on his armor. Paul was at that time a prisoner, probably living near the pretorian camp in 
Rome, as he was by the Roman customs under the charge of the pretorian prefect. It is possible that 
the figure was suggested by the sights he so often witnessed. Against the wiles of the devil. The 
great enemy. The armor was designed not only to protect, but there were weapons also with which to 
assail him. 12. For we wrestle. Fights then were a hand to hand grapple. Not against flesh 
and blood. While flesh and blood may seem to assail us, the real enemies are evil spiritual powers. 
Principalities and powers. These terms designate different ranks of evil spirits. These were 
fallen angels. In 1: 21, the same terms are applied to the different ranks of holy angels. Against the 
rulers of the darkness of this world. Satan is described as the ruler of this world (John 12: 31; 
14: 30; 16: 11) and the god of this world (2 Cor. 4: 4). He uses for his dominion not only evil spirits, but 
wicked men, and his sway is darkness rather than light. Spiritual wickedness. See the Revision. 
It is likely that the meaning is the same as in2:2. The high places, the air, is a dwelling-place and 
medium of these evil influences. 18. Wherefore, take unto you. Seeing you have such enemies, 
arm! Put on the whole armor of God. In the evil day. The day of peril and assault. To stand. 
"To stand the assault, and to stand victorious, when it is beaten back. 

14-16. Stand therefore .. . girt. He next gives the armor that must be worn. The Roman 
soldier wore a girdle, breast-plate, shoes with iron nails, a helmet to protect his head, and carried a 
-great shield on his left arm which was thrown in front of his body. His weapon was the sword. It was 
-with the sword, not the spear as other nations, that the Romans conquered the world. And these rep- 
‘resent parts of the Christian’s spiritual armor. About with truth. The girdle kept the armor in 


206 EPHESIANS. 

16 Above all, taking? the shield of faith, where- 
with ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of 
the wicked. 

17 And take the helmet of salvation, and the? 
sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God: 

18 Praying always with all prayer and supplica- 
tion in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all 
perseverance and° supplication for all saints; 

19 And for me, that utterance may be given unto 
me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make 
known the mystery of the gospel, 

20 For which I aman ambassador in bonds ; that 
therein‘ I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak. 

21 But that ye also may know my affairs, and 
how I do, Tychicus,¢ a beloved brother and faithful 
minister in the Lord, shall make known to you all 
things: 

22 Whom I have sent unto you for the same pur- 
pose, that ye might know our affairs, and that he 
might comfort your hearts. 

23 Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith, 
from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. 





oo CEE Te 


pelof peace; withal taking 16 
up the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall! be able 

to quench all the fiery 
darts of the evil one. And 17 
take the helmet of salva. 
tion, and the sword of the 
Spe which is the word 

of God: with all prayer 18 
and supplication praying 
at all seasons in the Spirit, 
and watching thereunto in 
all perseverance and sup- 
plication for all the saints, 
and on my behalf, that ut- 19 
terance may be given unto 
me in opening my mouth, 

to make known with bold- 
ness the mystery of the 
gospel, for which I am an 20. 
ambassador in chains; that 

in it I may speak boldly,as 

I ought to speak. 

But that ye also may 21 
know my affairs, how I do, 
Tychicus, the beloved 
brother and faithfnl min- 
ister in the Lord, shall 
make known to you ail 
things: whom I haye sent 22 
unto you for this very pur 
pose, that ye may know 
our state, and that he may 
comfort your hearts. 

Peace be to the brethren 23: 
and love with faith, from 
God the Father and the 





a@1John5:4. bHeb. 4:12; Rey.1:16. ¢ Phil. 1:4. @1 Thes. 2:2, 


e Acts 20:4; 2Tim. 4: 12; Titus 3:12. 


place and supported the sword. So truth holds the Christian armor and supports the sword of the 


Spirit. Breast-plate of righteousness. 


The breast-plate was over the lungs and heart. If Christ’s 


righteousness is over our hearts they can hardly suffer harm. 15, And your feet shod. Not with 
shoes, but with the preparation to carry the gospel of peace, to be a messenger of good tidings 
(Isaiah 52:7). 16. Above all, taking the shield of faith. The Roman oblong shield, four and a 


half feet long, covered the whole body, and was a protection of itself, 
trusts in God and never doubts, is the best of all defenses. 
whisperings and evil suggestions of the wicked. Fiery 
hand, and very dangerous unless stopped by the shield. 


So faith, the faith that fully 


It will quench, stop, put out all the doubts, 
darts. These were missiles hurled by the. 


17. Take the helmet of salvation. The Roman soldier wore on his head a metallic cap to protect 


it from blows, called a helmet. Isaiah 59: 17 says: 
1 Thess. 5:8. Salvation, the consciousness that we have a Savior 
gives the Christian soldier courage for the conflict. 
described is to protect; the sword to assail. 
Spirit. That is, the Spirit conquers through 
quered on Pentecost, and Paul in his labors. 
filled with the Spirit must ‘preach the word.” 
18-20. Praying always. 
prayer. In the Spirit. As spiritual men. For all saints. 
selves only, but for all the people of God. 19, And for me. 
plication of his own spiritual children. He was in bonds and 


See Heb, 4: 12, 


“He put a helmet of salvation on his head.” See also: 
“able to save unto the uttermost,” 
And the sword of the Spirit. The armor before 
It is the Christian soldier who is to wield the sword of the 
him. The sword is the word of God. Thus Peter con- 
Thus always and everywhere. The Christian soldier 


No one can wield the sword of the Spirit rightly without constant 
Our supplications are not to be for our- 
He especially felt the need of the sup- 
enduring fiery trials. Yet he does not. 


desire prayers in behalf of his life or comfort, but for the gospel’s sake, that though a prisoner he may 


still open his mouth boldly. Mystery of the gospel. 
which. The gospel. An ambassador in bonds. 


See notes on 1:9 and 3:9. 20, For 
As an ambassador is sent to a foreign court to 


declare the will of the king, so he, though in chains, was Christ’s ambassador sent to Rome to declare 


the will of his King. 


21, 22. Tychicus. He is named in Acts 20: 4. See also Col. 4:7; 
probably carried this letter, and could tell the brethren at Ephesus and As 


condition. He was “a faithful minister,” 
state, but could comfort them. 


Titus 3:12; 2 Tim. 4:12. He 


ia Minor about Paul’s present 
and could not only satisfy their longing te know of Paul’s. 


Chi Vi. j EPHESIANS. 207 


24 Grace 6e with all them that love our Lord | Lord Jesus Christ, Grace 24 
We < ° s e with ali them that love 
Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen. 








our Lord Jesus Christ 1p 
uncorruptness. 


Written from Rome unto the Ephesians by Tychicus. 








28, 24. As was his custom he closes wth a benediction. Compare those of the preceding Epistles. 

Norr.—Some have urged that the absence of individual salutations is a proof that this letter could not 
have been addressed to the Ephesians where he was so well acquainted. The same argument might 
apply to the Corinthian, Galatian and Philippian letters also, and indeed his letters to all the churches 
which he founded. It rather implies that his acquaintances were so numerous that he could hardly 
haye space to single out individuals, and sent his personal salutations by the messenger, Besides, there 
are reasons for the opinion that the Ephesian letter was intended also for other churches of ‘“‘Asia.”” 


INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS. 


The Letter to the Saints at Philippi differs in some respects from any of the preceding. 
letters of the Apostle Paul. It contains less logic and more of the heart. It is 
distinguished by the absence of didactical reasoning, and by the presence of a tender 
friendship and fatherly affection which is more apparent than in other Pauline letters to 
the churches. The letter to the Romans is the profoundest logic; those to the Corin- 
thians were designed to rebuke certain prevalent sins and necessarily contain more or 
less censure; that to the Galatians rebukes a dangerous heresy which threatened the 
welfare of the Galatian churches; that to the Ephesians is a sublime unfolding of the 
mystery of God in reference to the Gentiles, but this letter is the outpouring of the love 
of the founder of the Philippian Church towards one of the most affectionate, faithful 
and self-forgetful of all the congregations which he had planted. It has been remarked 
that there is no breath of censure for the Philippian saints, except in go far as it is 
implied in the tender exhortation to Euodias and Syntyche found in chap. 4:2. The 
history of the origin of the church and the memory of the loving remembrances of the 
Philippians help to explain the affectionate tenderness of the letter. 

The account of the founding of the church at Philippi, which occurred in A. D. 50 or 
51, is given in the sixteenth chapter of Acts. Led by a vision at Troas the apostle, on 
his second great missionary journey, crossed into Europe, landing at Neapolis, and 
proceeding from thence at once to Philippi, ‘“‘which was the chief city of that part of 
Macedonia.” This city had already some claims to a place in history. It received its 
name from Philip of Macedon, the father of Alexander the Great, who added to his 
dominions the little Thracian town which existed there before, rebuilt and fortified it, 
and gave it its new name in the year B. C. 358. InB.Q. 42, about ninety-two years 
before Paul visited it, it was the field of the decisive battle between Brutus and Cassius, 

the leaders of the Republicans, and the Triumvirate of imperialists, one of whom was 
‘subsequently Augustus Cesar. But the place has a higher interest to the Christian 
world from the fact that here was planted the first congregation of Christians that ever 
existed on the soil of Europe. 

It was not only the scene of gospel triumphs but of suffering for the cross of Christ. 
Here it was that Paul and Silas were beaten, cast into the stocks in the inner prison, by 
the grace of God converted and baptized their jailer and his household before the dawn, 
and were honorably released by the magistrates in the morning, as Roman citizens, 
unjustly beaten and imprisoned. When Paul continued his journey westward, the 
recently founded Philippian church followed him with support, contributing more than 
once to his necessities (4: 15, 16), and when the tidings came that he was a prisoner in 
Rome their old affection showed itself still again by sending one of their members, 
Epaphroditus, with the offerings of the church as a provision for his wants (2: 25; 
4: 10-18). It seems to have been the return of Epaphroditus from this ministration of 
their love, to which we are indebted for this letter. ; 

(208) 


INTRODUCTION TO PHILIPPIANS. 209 





It was written from the city of Rome, during the first imprisonment of Paul, and 
probably towards its close, perhaps in the year A. D. 63. The mention of his bonds 
(1:12), of the Pretorian camp, (see Revision in 1: 12), of Czesar’s household (4: 22), 
as well as other allusions (1: 25; 2:24) all show that Paul was in the Roman capital at 
the time of writing. I will not take space to discuss the reasons which seem to point to 
near the close.of his first imprisonment as its date. 

Concerning the genuineness of this epistle there has never been any reasonable doubt. 
It has always been accepted by the church, is Pauline in doctrine and in diction, 
abounds probably to a greater extent than other epistles in personal detailg, and is in 
full agreement with all the historical facts which can be gathered from the history of 
the times, and from the allusions in Acts and the other epistles. It bears every mark of 
having been written by Paul from the scene of his imprisonment to the beloved church 
which he had planted and for which he had suffered. It is not only contained in the 
Canon of Scripture dated A. D. 170, but is mentioned definitely by Polycarp, born in 
A. D. 69, in his own Epistle to the Philippians, and is quoted from in an Epistle of 
Ignatius of about A. D. 107. 

14 


THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE 


PHILIPPIANS. 


CHAPTER I. | 


Greetings from a Roman Prison. 


SUMMARY.—Greetings to the Church and Its Officérs. Reasons for 
Thanksgiving. The Progress of the Gospel in Rome. Different 
Motives for Preaching the Gospel. The Apostle’s Desire to Depart 


and Be With Christ. Exhortations to Unity and Fortitude. CHAPTER L 


Paul and Timothy, ser- y 
vants of Chriss Jesus, to 
all the saints in Christ .Je- 
sus which are at ws ig da 
with the bishops and dea. 
cons: Grace to you and 2 
peace from God our Father 
and the Lord Jesus Christ. 

I thank my God upon all 3 
my remembrance of you, ' 
always in every supplica- 4 


1 Paul and Timotheus, the servants of Jesus 
Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus which are at 
Philippi, with the bishops and deacons: 

2 Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our 
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. 

3 I* thank my God upon every remembrance of 


you, f 
4 Always in every prayer of mine for you all 


tion of mine on behalf of 
you all making my suppli- 


: oy * cation with joy, for your 5 
making request with JOVet = fellowship in Riatherses 
5 For’ your fellowship in the gospel from the | of the gospel from the first 
day until now; being confi- 6 


first day until now; : 
6 Being confident of this very thing, that he 


@ Col. 1:38. 





dent of this very thing, 





62 Cor. 8:1. 











1, 2. Paul and Timotheus, the servants, etc. The belovea 'rimothy was attending and aiding 
Paul at Rome. The name of Timothy appears at the head of severai Epistles. In this letter toa beloved 
church, so devoted to him, Paul does not refer to his apostleship iu his greeting, as in preceding Epistles, 
as one speaking with authority, but exhorts them as a fellow-servant of Christ. To all the saints in 
Christ Jesus. Every one in Christ; 7. e., every Christian was and isa saint. With the bishops and 
deacons. We find two classes of officers in this church organized by an apostle. There wasa plurality 
of each class. All commentators agree that “the bishops” and “the elders” of the primitive church are 
the same, only different names of the same office. Paul calls the “elders” of Ephesus “bishops.” See 
Acts 20: 17 (Revision). Also in Titus 1; 5, 7, he calls an “elder” a “bishop.” For the duties of the Office,. 
see notes on 1 Tim. 3: 2, and Titus 1: 5. The word, “Overseer,” which is a literal translation of the Greek 
word, suggests the nature of the office. The duties of the deacons are supposed to be explained by the: 
work of the “Seven Deacons” ordained in the church at Jerusalem. See Acts, chapter 6. See notes on 
1Tim.3:8. 2. Grace. The usual apostolic benediction, such as we have found in preceding Epistles, 
is conferred. ; 

3-7. I thank my God. Almost all the Epistles open with thanksgiving. How glorious a faith that 
which led him always, even in the darkest hour, to see the hand of God present in blessing! Yet in the 
remembrance of the Philippians there was much to cheer his heart. 4. In every prayer. The 
repeated assurances show us that Paul was wont daily to carry the interests of the churches he had 
planted to God. In the case of this faithful church he did it with joy. 5. For your fellowship in 
furtherance of the gospel. He is thankful and full of joy that from the first they had constantly 
sympathized with him and aided in extending the gospel. It was areally missionary church. Until 
now. See 2: 25, and 4: 10, 18, for illustrations. 6. Being confident. So faithful have they been that 
he is confident that they will be faithful to the mn oy which began a good work. God, who sent. 


Ch. I.] PHILIPPIANS. 


which hath begun a? good work in you, will per- 
form ¢é until the day of our Lord Jesus Christ: 

7 Even as it is meet for me to think this of you 
all, because I have you in my heart; inasmuch as 
both in my» bonds, and in the defence and confir- 
mation of the gospel,° ye all are partakers of my 
grace. 

8 For God is my record, how greatly I long after 
you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ. 

9 And this I pray, that? your love may abound 
yet more and more in knowledge and Zn all judg- 
ment; 

10 That® ye may approve things that are excel- 
lent ;* that ye may be sincere, and without offence, 
till the day of Christ; 

11 Being filled with the fruits of righteousness,® 
which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise 
of God. 

12 But I would ye should understand, brethren, 
that the things which happened unto me have fallen 
out rather unto the furtherance of the gospel; 

13 So that my bonds in Christ are manifest? in all 
the palace, and in all other places ; 

14 And many of the brethren in the Lord, waxing 
confident by my bonds, are much more bold to 
speak the word without fear. 








211 


that he which began a good 
work in you will perfect it 
until the day of Jesus 
Christ: even as it is right 7 
for me to be thus minded 
on behalf of you all, be- 
cause I have you in my 
heart, inasmuch as, both 
in my bonds and in the de- 
fence and confirmation of 
the gospel, ye all are par- 
takers with me of grace. 
For God is my witness, 
how I long after you all in 
the tender mercies of Christ 
Jesus. And this I pray, 9 
that your love may abound 

et more and more in 

nowledge and all discern- 
ment: so that ye may ap- 10 
prove the things that are 
excellent; that ye may be 


a 


; sincere and void of offence 


unto the day of Christ; be- 11 
ing filled with the fruits of 
righteousness, which are 
through Jesus Christ, unto 
the glory and praise of 
God. 


Now I would have you 12 
know, brethren, that the 
things which happened unto 
me have fallen out rather 
unto the progress of the 
eas) so that my bonds 13 

ecame manifest in Christ 
throughout the whole pre- 
torian guard, and to all 
the rest; and that most of 14 
the brethren in the Lord, 
being confident through my 
bonds, are more abundant- 
ly bold to speak the word 








ec Phil. 4: 14. 


6 Eph. 3:1; 6:20; Col. 4:3; 2 Tim. 1:8. 
h Phil. 4:22, 


a John 6: 29. 
g John 15:4. 





d@ Phile. 6. 


é Rom. 12:2. / Acts 24: 16. 





Paul to them with the gospel, began the good work. He will sustain them by his grace. Day of Jesus 
Christ. The day they are called to his presence. 7. Because I have you in my heart. Their 
faithfulness had engraven them on his heart. He shows how that faithfulness had been demonstrated. 
They were all partakers of his grace, the grace of suffering for the gospel and of defending it. In my 
ponds. Hewasa prisoner bound. Asa prisoner he preached and defended the gospel. The Philippians 
sympathized with him, prayed for him, and sustained him by their offerings, thus becoming partakers. 
They not only did this, but defended and suffered for the gospel. See verses 28-30. 5 

8-11. Long after you. Love you and long for your presence. In the bowels of Christ. See 
Revision. With a tender love like that of Christ. 9. This I pray. Not that their love for him should 
abound more, but with the increase of their love there might be fuller knowledge and wiser judgment. 
10. That ye may approve. This increase in knowledge and judgment would lead them to approve 
what is really excellent. How often men approve what does not bless them! How often the judgment 
errs! Without offense. Without leading others to stumble. 11. Being filled with the fruits of 
righteousness. This must follow from being “sincere,” ete. Those who are earnest and sincere 
occupy themselves with works of righteousness, such as are due to faith in Jesus Christ and his help, 
and which are unto the praise and glory of God. Inno way can we glorify God more than by living 
holy, helpful lives. 

12-14. I would ye should understand. No doubt the Philippians grieved greatly that he was a 
prisoner, but he assures them that all things have turned to the furtherance of the gospel. He has been 
given an opportunity to reach those whom otherwise he never could have had access to. 18. So that 
my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the palace. Pretoriuwm in the Greek, rendered by the 
Revision, “Praetorian guard.” The pretorian camp was the great military camp of a body of soldiers 
stationed permanently at Rome, called the pretorian guards. Paul, as a military prisoner, was under 
charge of its commander, the prefect. The necessity of reporting regularly would make him well known, 
and would give him many opportunities to preach Christ there and elsewhere. Compare Acts 28: 16. 





212 PHILIPPIANS. feb. I; 
15 Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and®*| of God without fear. Some 15 
strife; and some also of good will. of envy | and strife; and ~ 
16 The one preach Christ of contention, not SIN-| one doit of love, knowing 
cerely, supposing to add affliction to my bonds; foes oe te ee Sara 
17 But the other of love, knowing that. I am set| the other prociaim Cnrist 
of faction, not sincerely, 
for the defence of the gospel. ; thinking to raise up afilie- 
18 What then? notwithstanding, every way, | tion for me pod fe 
whether in pretence, or in truth, Christ is preach-| every way, whetier in pre- 
i i ; tence or in truth, Christ is 
ed; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice. proclaimed ; and therein I 
n ¢ 7 7 -| rejoice, yea, and will re- 
_19 For I know that this shall turn to my salva rh pee Bs get this 19 
tion” through your prayer, and the supply of the®| shai turn to my salvation, 
PES . through your supplication 
Spirit of Jesus Christ, and the supply of the Spir- 
: = | it of Jesus Christ, accord- 20 
20 According to my earnest expectation and my ing tommy eatnest expects: 
hope, that? in nothing I shall be ashamed, but that tion and. hope, that in 
° s Dn in u O 
with all boldness, as always, so now also Christ shall shame, but that with, aan 
i i r 2, i oldness, as always, so now 
be magnified in my body, whether 7 be by life, or by nso Ouest ae hota 
death. a = a8 a 5 
21 For to me to live zs Christ, and to die ¢s gain. | Py, #°;0% By death. For to 21 





me to live is Christ, and to 


die is gain. But if to live 22 
in the flesh,—if this is the 
fruit of my work, then 
what I shall choose I wot 


22 But if I live in the flesh, this zs the fruit of 
my labour: yet what I shall choose I wot not. 


23 For® I am in a strait betwixt two, having a| Wheattsh i aie ina sieaik o 
) f 1+ ict s 7 ig | betwixt the two, havin 
desire to depart,* and to be with Christ; which is/ betwixt, the Phat pens 


far better: with Christ; for it is very 





@Phil. 2:3. 62Cor.1:11. cRom.8:9. &@ Rom.5:5. e2Cor. 5:8. Jf 2 Tim. 4:6. 








14, Many of the brethren. Taking courage from his boldness, though in bonds, the brethren were 
engaged in preaching the gospel with greater zeal than ever before. See 4: 22, for sc.ue of the results of 
this preaching. 

15-18. Some, indeed, preach Christ even of envy. The motives of all preachers are not pure. 
Some still preach Christ, full of envy for other preachers, and some from a love of strife. Those envious 
of Paul were probably Judaizing Christians. See next verse. 16. The one preach Christ of conten- 
tion. Not from sincere love of the gospel, but from a factious spirit. While preaching, they sought to 
undermine Paul’s influence, supposing to add affliction to his bonds. For an illustration of this 
class, read the first and second chapters of Galatians. 17. The other of love. These are the true and 
earnest preachers. They knew that Paul was not sent to Rome because he was an evil doer, but because 
he was set for the defense of the gospel. God had sent him there to preach it, 18. What thenP 
So anxious is he to have Christ preached, that, whatever may be the motives of men, whether their zeal is 
only a pretence or in truth, still if only Christ is preached, he will rejoice, This is not a sanction of a 
false gospel (see Gal. 1: 8), nor of the men themselves, but rejoicing, if by any means the knowledge of 
Christ is spread. How different this glorious unselfishness, and greatness of spirit, from the narrowness 
of those who higgle over “plans,” and forbid “those who walk not with them! ” 

19-21. For I know that this, etc. All this envy and opposition will tend to promote his salvation. 
He will be delivered by God who will hear their prayers, and who will strengthen and direct him by the 
Spirit. of Jesus Christ. 20. That in nothing shall I be ashamed. Whatever may come, 
whether his bonds lead to death or life, his trust is that the Spirit will give him such boldness that Christ 
shall be magnified. There is no anxiety about himself, only that he may glorify Christ. 21. For to me 
to live is Christ. Should he be suffered to live, his life would be for extending the kingdom of Christ, 
but personally, to die would be gain; a release from sufferings and an entrance upon eternal joys. 

22-26. But ifIliveinthe flesh. In the body; i. e.,onearth. In this state the fruit of his labor is 
Christ. See verse 21. Yet what I shall choose. He can hardly tell whether he would choose the gain 
of death, or to continue to live in order that he may work for Christ. 238. Having a desire to depart. 
His feelings would lead him to choose to depart from the flesh (see verse 24), and to be with Christ. 
Note that with Paul to depart from the flesh, the body, is followed by going immediately to Christ. 
24. Nevertheless. Though it is better to depart and dwell with Christ, the brethren need him in 


Ch. II.] PHILIPPIANS. 


213 





24 Nevertheless to abide in the flesh zs more 
needful for you. 

25 And having this confidence, I know that I 
shall abide and continue with you all, for your fur- 
therance and joy of faith; 

26 That your rejoicing may be more abundant in 
Jesus Christ for me, by my coming to you again. 

27 Only let your conversation be as it becometh 
the gospel of Christ; that whether I come and see 
you, or else be absent, I may hear of your affairs, 
that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striv- 
ing together for the faith of the gospel; 

28 And in nothing terrified by your adversaries: 
which is to them an evident token of perdition, but 
to” you of salvation, and that of God. 

29 For unto you it is given in the behalf of 
Christ,” not only to believe on him, but also to suf- 
fer for his sake; 

30 Having the same conflict which *ye saw in me, 
and now hear fo be in me. 


CHAPTER II. 
Exhortation to a Holy Life. 


SuMMARyY.—Like-mindedness Commended. Lowliness Enjoined. The 
Lowliness and the Exaltation of Christ. Working Out Their Own 
Salvation. Becoming Lights in the World. The Relations of Paul 
and Timothy. Epaphroditus and His Sickness. 

1 If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, 
if any comfort of love, if any fellowship with the 

Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, 








far better: yet to abide in 24 
the flesh is more needful 
for your sake. And having 25 
this confidence, I know 
that I shall abide, yea, and 
abide with you all, for your 
progress and joy in the 
faith; that your glorying 26 
may abound in Christ Je- 
sus in me through my 
le with you again. 
mly let your manner of 27 
life be worthy of the gospel 
of Christ: that, whether I 
come and see you or be ab- 
sent, I may hear of your 
state, that ye stand fast in 
one spirit, with one soul 
striving for the faith of the 
gospel; and in nothing af- 
righted by the adversa- 
ries: whichis for them an 
evident token of perdition, 
but of your salvation, and 
that from God; because to 29 
you it hath been granted in 
the behalf of Christ, not 
only to believe on him, but 
also to suffer in his behalf: 
having the same conflict 30 
which ye saw in me, and 
now hear to be in me. 


CHAPTER II. 


If there is therefore any 1 
comfort in Christ, if any 
consolation of love, if any 
fellowship of the Spirit, if 
any tender mercies and 





alsa. 41:10; Matt. 10:28; Heb. 13:5. 6 Rom. 8:17; 2 Tim. 2:11. c Acts 5:41; Rom. 5:3; Eph. 2:8. 


e Acts 26:19; 1 Thes. 2:2. £2 Cor.13:14. 








d Col. 2:1. 


the flesh. That is the reason why he is in the strait (verse 23). 25. And having this confidence. 
Rather, “Being fully persuaded of this.” Sure that he is needed on earth by the churches, he has no 
doubt but that he will be delivered from his present danger and abide and continue, live to further 
their faith. 26. That your rejoicing. Nay, he is assured that the Philippians will rejoice over a 
visit from him. There is every reason to believe that his confidence was justified; that he was released 
and did again visit Philippi. 

27-30. Only let your conversation. Your manner of life. Whether absent, or present, he wishes 
to know that they are perfectly united. 28. And in nothing terrified by your adversaries. 
Probably there had been another outbreak of heathen violence at Philippi such as Paul and Silas 
endured (Acts 16: 19-24). Which is to them. Your courage. When they see that they cannot terrify 
or overcome you, it will be a token to them of the ruin which will befall them, but an assurance to you of 
your salvation, through the help of God. 29. For to you itis given. Two things were granted: 
(1) The privilege of believing in Christ. (2) That of suffering for Christ. Such was the lot of all ancient 
Christians. See Heb. 12: 3,4, and 1 Peter 4:16. 80. Having the same conflict which ye saw in 
me. You saw when I was at Philippi what I had to endure (Acts 16: 19); you hear that I am now a 
prisoner threatened with death. You must expect similar conflicts and meet them with fortitude. 

1-4, If there be therefore any consolation, etc. The apostle does not doubt that there is con- 
solation, comfort, spiritual fellowship, etc., in Christ, but bases an exhortation on what the Philippians 
knew to be the case. Bowels and mercies. “Tender mercies and compassions,” as in the Revision. 
2. Fulfil ye my joy. Make my joy full. They had already given him much joy (4: 1-10), but he 


214 PHILIPPIANS. 


[Ch. II. 





2 Fulfil? ye my joy,” that ye be like-minded, hav- 
ing the same love, being of one accord, of one 
mind. 

3 Let* nothing be done through strife or vain 
glory; but? in lowliness of mind let each esteem 
other better than themselves. 

4 Look® not every man on his own things, but 
every man also on the things of others. 

5 Let? this mind be in you, which was also in 
Christ Jesus. 

6 Who, being in the form of God, thought it® 
not robbery to be equal with God; 

7 But! made himself of no reputation, and took 
upon him the form! of a servant, and* was made in 
the likeness of men. 

8 And being found in fashion as a man, he hum- 
bled himself, and became! obedient unto death, 
even the death of the cross. 

9 Wherefore God also™ hath highly exalted him, 
and” given him a name which is above every name: 

10 That® at the name of Jesus every. knee should 
bow, of things in heaven, and ¢hings in earth, and 
things under the earth; 

11 And?” that every tongue should confess that 
Jesus Christ ¢s Lord, to the glory of God the Fath- 
er. 











compassions, fulfil ye my 2 
joy, that ye be of the same 
mind,having the same loye, 
being of one accord, of 
one mind; doing nothing 3 
through faction or through 
vainglory, but in lowliness 
of mind each counting oth- 
er better than himself; not 4 
looking each of you to his 
own things, but each of 
you also to the things of 
others. Have this mind in 5 
you, which was also in 
Christ Jesus: who, being in 6 
the form of God, counted 
it not a prize to be on an 
equality with God, but 7 
emptied himself, taking the 
form of a servant, bein 
made in the likeness o 
men; and being found in 8 
fashion as aman, he hum- 
ed himself, becoming 
obedient even unto death, 
yea, the death of the cross. 
Wherefore also God highly 9 
exalted him, and gave unto 
him the name which is 
above every name; that in 10 
the name of Jesus every 
knee should bow, of things 
in heaven and things on 
the earth and things under 
the earth, and that every 11 
tongue should confess that 
Jesus Christ is Lord, tothe 
glory of God the Father. 





a John 3:29. 61Pet 8:8. cJames'3:14. @1Pet.5:5. e1Cor. 10:24. f John 13:15. gIsa. 9:6; Zech. 13:7; 
Jobn 1: 1, 2; 17:5; 2 Cor. 4: 4; Col. 1:15.. h John 5:18; 10: 33. a Psa. 22: 6; Isa. 58:3; Dan. 9:26. 
jisa. 42:1; 58:11. kJohn 1:4; Gal. 4:4. 7 Heb. 12:2. mJohni17:1. nHeb.1:4. o Isa. 45:23; 


Rev. 5:13. p John 13: 13. 


. 





desired one thing more; viz., that they be like-minded, in full agreement, perfect harmony. Having 
the same love, Loving one another with pure hearts fervently. Being of one accord. Of one heart 
and soul. No outward strife. 8. Nothing through strife or vain glory. No party spirit or 
striving for human praise. Let each esteem, ete. Instead of exaltintg himself, each is to exalt others 
_inhisesteem. He that is willing to serve is greatest. 4. Look not every man on his own things. 

Do not look out for your own interests alone, but for the interests of others rather than your own. 

5-8. Let this mind be in you. He points to Christ as the example of humility and consecration 
to the good of others. 6. Who, being in the form of God. He refers to the state of our Savior 
before he took human form, His form was divine. “He hada glory with the Father before the world 
was.” See John 1:1; 2 Cor. 4: 4; Heb. 1: 3, ete. Thought it not robbery to be equal with God. 
The Revision says, “Counted it not a prize.’ The meaning is not entirely clear, but probably is, that, 
“Having a form of glory like God, he did not count it a prize which must be clung to tenaciously, 
especially when he appeared upon the earth, that he should be equal with God, that is, appear in a divine 
form, but was willing to lay aside this glory and make himself a servant.” ‘7. Emptied himself. Of 
the divine form and glory, and took the form of a servant, of our own race, a race whose duty it is to 
serve God. The divine glory was exchanged for human lowliness. 8. He humbled himself. Note 
the infinite condescension: (1) The form of God and sharing the divine glory. (2) He divests himself of 
this. (3) Nor does he then take the divine form, or even the form of an angel, but of lowly, sinful man. 
(4) But this is not all. He not only takes the form of man, but the mortality of the flesh, and dies. (5) Nay, 
more; he dies the most shameful and painful of all deaths, even the death of the cross. 

9-11. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him. His wonderful humility had been shown, 
but it is the law of the universe that he that humbleth himself shall be exalted. Therefore God lifted him 
up from the grave to the heavens, gave all power into his hands (Matt. 28: 18), and gave him a name 
above every name. The idea is an authority, a position, above that of all intelligences. This exalta- 


Ch. II.] PHILIPPIANS. 





12 Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always 
obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much 
more in my absence, work out your own salvation 
with fear and trembling: 

13 For* it is God which worketh in 
will and to do of his good pleasure. 
 i4-Do all things without murmurings and disput- 
ings; 

15 That ye may be blameless and harmless, the 
sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a 
crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine 
as lights in the world; 

16 Holding forth the word of life; that I] may 
rejoice in the day of Christ, that I have not run in 
vain, neither laboured in vain. 

17 Yea, and if I be offered upon the sacrifice and 
service of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with you all. 

18 For the same cause also do ye joy, and rejoice 
with me. 

19 But I trust in the Lord Jesus to send Timo- 
theus shortly unto you, that I also may be of good 
comfort when I know your state. 


you, both to 


a Heb. 13:21. 





tion made the humble name, Jesus, a name above every name. 








215 
So then, my beloved, even 12 
as ye have always obeyed, 
not as in my presence only, 
but now much more in my 
absence, work out your 
own salvation with fear 
and trembling; for itis God 13 
which worketh in you both 
to will and to work, for his 
good pleasure. Do all 14 
things without murmur- 
ings and disputings ; that 15 
e may be blameless and 
armless, children of God 
without blemish in the 
midst of a crooked and 
perverse generation, among 
whom ye are seen as lights 
in the world, holding forth 16 
the word of life; that I 
may have whereof to glor 
in the day of Christ, that 
did not run in vain neither 





‘labour in vain. Yea, and 17 


if 1 am offered upon the 
sacrifice and service of 
your faith, I joy, and re- 
joice with you ail: and in 18 
the same manner do ye also 
Joy, and rejoice with me. 

ut I hope in the Lord 19 
Jesus to send hae 
shortly unto you, that 
also may be of good com- 
fort, when I know your 


10. That at the name of Jesus. 


That name, by the exaltation, has become the name of the King of kings. It is supreme. Hence, every 


knee in all the universe bows to its majesty. Under the earth. 


In the under-world, hades, the abode 


ofthe dead. 11. And that every tongue should confess. All the universe is called to confess him 
as Lord, and thus glorify God. All will yet confess him, either in joy or shame. 


12, 138. Wherefore, my beloved. 
the lessons needed by the Philippian ‘church. 


From the contemplation of Christ’s glory, the apostle turns to 
Work out your own salvation. While Christ is our 


Savior, and the author of our salvation, we must accept him and work together with him. Hence the 


Holy Spirit says, “Save yourselves” (Acts 2: 40), and “work out your own salvation.” 
With fear and trembling. With constant anxiety not to fail. 13. For 
God works in the converted person by his word and Spirit. His 


part Christ cannot save us. 
itis God which worketh in you. 


Spirit is a helper. It does not destroy our free will, for we may resist it (1 Thess. 5: 19). 


Unless we do our 


Both to will 


and to work. God shows his will by his word and Spirit and work inus. We ought to heed it. We 


can work in harmony with the 

‘As seemeth best to him. 
14-18. Do all things without murmurings. 

lives complaining. 15. The sons of God. Those of so high 


divine will, or we may reject to our damnation. His good pleasure. 


Without complaining. Some persons pass their 
estate ought to be harmless, blameless, 


and in the midst of a erooked and perverse generation, a wicked world, they should shine as 


16. Holding forth the word 
they did 


lights by their pure and holy lives. 
in word, in life, and in deed. That was their work. Unless 
may rejoice. Unless they 
accounts, that his labor at Philippi was in vain. 17. Yea, 


of life. Always preaching Christ 
this they were a failure. That AE 
had done so he would be made to feel, in the day of Christ, the day of 
and if I be offered upon the sacrifice, 


etc. He is willing to die asa sacrifice for Christ, martyred because he has preached the gospel to the 


Gentiles, if it will be an encouragement to their faith. He will even 


rejoice in death if it will help the 


cause of Christ. The imagery used was familiar to those who had so often seen victims sacrificed as offer- 


ings in the heathen temples. 18. 
thereby Christ may be glorified. 
19-24. Itrust in the Lord Jesus. 


anion at Rome at this time, his beloved convert and fellow-laborer. See notes on fete 
When he returns from visiting you and shows me your state. 20. 
No one else is here with me who will so well represent my feelings and views when 


of good comfort. 
~man like-minded. 


Rejoice with me. Like me, rejoice in the prospect of death, if 


Through the help of the Lord. Tosend Timothy. His com- 


That I may be 
For I have no 


216 PHILIPPIANS. 


20 For I have no man like-minded, who will nat- 
urally care for your state. 

21 For all seek their own, not the things which 
are Jesus Christ’s. 

22 But ye know the proof of him, that, as a son 
with the father, he hath served with me in the 
gospel. 

23 Him therefore I hope to send presently, so 
soon as I shall see how it will go with me. 

24 But I trust in the Lord that I also myself shall 
come shortly. 

25 Yet I supposed it necessary to send to you* 
Epaphroditus, my- brother, and companion in la- 
bour, and fellow-soldier, but your? messenger, and° 
he that ministered to my wants. 

26 For he longed after you all, and was full of 
heaviness, because that ye had heard that he had 
been sick. 

27 For indeed he was sick nigh unto death: but 
God had mercy on him; and not on him only, but 
on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow. 

28 I sent him therefore the more carefully, that, 
when ye see him again, ye may rejoice, and that I 
may be the less sorrowful. 

29 Receive him therefore in the Lord with all 
gladness; and hold such in reputation: 

30 Because for the work of Christ 
unto death, not regarding his life4 to 
lack of service toward me. 


he was nigh 
supply your 





[Ch. II. 


state. For I have no man 2a 
likeminded, who will care 
truly for your state. For 21 
they all seek their own, not 
the things of Jesus Christ. 
But ye know the proof of 2% 
him, that, as a child serveth 
a father, so he served with 
me in furtherance of the 
posel, Him therefore I 23 
ope to send forthwith, so 
soon as I shall see how it 
will go withme: but I trust 24 
in the Lord that I myself 
also shall come shortly. 
But I counted it necessary 25. 
to send to you Epaphrodi- 
tus, my brother and fellow- 
worker and fellow-soldier. 
and your messenger an 
minister te my need; since 26 
he longed after you all, 
and was sore troubled, be- 
cause ye had heard that he 
was sick: for indeed he 
was sick nigh unto death: 
but God had merey on him; 27 
and not on him only, put 
on me also, that I might 
not have sorrow upon sor- 
row. Lhavesent him there- 28. 
fore the more diligently, 
that, when ye see him 
again, ye may rejoice, and 
that f may be the less sor- 
rowful. Receive him there- 29 
fore in the Lord with all 
joy; and hold such in hon- 
our: because for the work 30: 
of Christ he came nigh unto 
death, hazarding his life to 
supply that which was 
lacking in your service to- 
ward me. 





@ Phil. 4:18. 62 Cor. 8:28. ¢2Cor. 11:9. @1 Cor. 16:1.7; Phil. 4:10. 





he visits you. 21. For all seek their own. Others, who were at hand, were more mindful of their 


Own interests than of Christ’s cause. 
in Rome save Timothy. 22. Ye know the proof of him. 

Timothy had more than once visited Philippi before this (2 Cor. 2: 
Timothy was his convert, and showed him a tender reverence. 28. 


We infer from this that of his faithful fellow-preachers none were 
You have seen him and know him. 
9; 18:3). Asason witha father. 

So soon asI shall see, etc. AS 


soon as there is some decision in his case, showing whether he will be released, or what may be his fate, 
he will send Timothy. 24. But I trust. Yet he expects by the Lord’s help to be released, and to visit. 


them himself. See note on 1: 25, 26. 
25-30. Epaphroditus. He will now send back Epaphroditus, the 
Paul with their offerings, one who had been so welcome, a 


messenger they had sent to 
“brother, a companion in labor, a fellow- 


Soldier.” 26. For he longed after you all. Was very desirous to see you. Full of heaviness. 
Heart-sickness. He had been sick. We thus learn that their messenger had a serious sickness while 


in Rome. Of course the news of this caused great anxiety at home. 27, 
was “nigh to death,” but God in his mercy spared him. Sorrow upon s 
been a great sorrow to Paul, who had already many sorrows. 


God had mercy on him. He 
orrow. His death would have 
28. Ihave sent him the more dili- 


gently. Because his brethren at home were so anxious about him. Their joy in seeing him will bea joy 


to Paul also, so that he will be the less sorrowful over his absence. 
a glad welcome. Hold such as he in high reputation. 30. Because. 


Christ, his refusal to spare himself, his supreme anxiety to supply by his own 


church, which brought on his sickness. 


29. 


‘Receive him. Give him 
Because it was his work for 
Service the absence of the 


. 


Ch TIt.] PHILIPPIANS. 


217 





CHAPTER III. 


Attaining to the Power of the Resurrection. 


SUMMARY.—A Warning Against Judaizing Teachers. Paul’s Grounds for 
Boasting in the Flesh. All Counted as Loss Compared With Christ. 
The Great Aim to Attain to the Glorious Resurrection. Pressing 
Towards the Prize of the High Calling. Enemies of the Cross. At 
the Resurrection Our Present Bodies Changed to the Likeness of the 
Glorified Body of Christ. 


1 Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To 
write the same things to you, to me indeed és not 
grievous, but for you 7 zs safe. 

2 Beware* of dogs, beware of evil workers,” be- 
ware of the concision. 


3 For we are® the circumcision, which worship* 


God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and 
have no confidence in the flesh: 

4 Though I might also have confidence in the 
flesh. If any other man thinketh that he hath 
whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more: 

5 Cirecumcised the eighth day, of the stock of 
Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the 
Hebrews; as touching the law, a® Pharisee; 

* 6 Concerning’ zeal, persecuting® the church; 
touching the righteousness which is in the law, blame- 


less. 
7 But what things were gain to me, those I 





CHAPTER III. 


Finally, my brethren, re- 1 
joice in the Lord. To write 
the same things to you, to 
me indeed is not irksome, 
but for youit is safe. Be- 2 
ware of the dogs, beware 
of the evil-workers, beware 
of the concision: for weare 3. 
the circumcision, who wor- 
ship by the Spirit of God, 
and glory in Christ Jesus, 
and have no confidence in 
the flesh: though I myself 4 
might have confidence even 
in the flesh: if any other 
man thinketh to have con- 
fidence in the flesh, I yet 
more: circumcised the 5. 
eighth day, of the stock of 
Israel, of the tribe of Ben- 
jamin, a Hebrew of He- 

rews;_as touching the 6 
law, a Pharisee; as touch- 
ing zeal, persecuting the 
ehurch; as touching the 
righteousness which is in 
the law, found blameless. 
Howbeit what things were T 
gain to me, these have I 


counted loss for Christ eounted loss for Christ. 











c Deut. 10:16; 30:6; Rom. 2.293;4:11. dJohn 4:23; Rom.7:6. e Acts 23:6.. 


Gal. 5:15. 
a Jf Gal. 1:18. g Acts 8:3. 


6 Rom. 2: 28; Gal. 5:2. 








1. Rejoice in the Lord. See2:5,and4: 4,10. There might be little ground for rejoicing in earthly 
prospects, but they could rejoice in Christ and the blessed hope of the gospel. To write the same 
things. To repeat exhortations made before, either in person, or sent by messengers to them. 

2, 3. Beware of dogs. Those snarling and snapping like dogs. The Judaizing teachers, who so. 
troubled the early churches, are meant. See Galatians, chapter1. Evil workers. So called because 
by their false teaching about the necessity of circumcision they wrought evil. Of the concision. 
Applied to those who called themselves the circumcision. It means simply a “‘cutting,” the class who 
were mutilated. It is contemptuous. 8. We are the circumcision. The true circumcision. See 
notes on Rom. 2: 29, and 4:12. The true circumcision is not in the flesh, but of the heart in the Spirit. 

4-6. Though I might also have confidence in the flesh. The confidence of the Jews was in the 
flesh of Abraham. They said, ““We have Abraham to our father” (Matt. 3:9). But if any man had 
grounds for relying on the flesh it was Paul. 5. Circumcised the eighth day. As enjoined by the 
law (Luke 1: 59). Of the stock of Israel. Descended from Israel (Jacob), who had the birthright of 
Isaac and Abraham. Of the tribe of Benjamin. A tribe descended from the beloved Rachel; a tribe 
that remained faithful when the Ten Tribes of Israel seceded, the tribe on whose soil Jerusalem and the 
temple stood. A Hebrew of the Hebrews. Hebrew by race, by religion, by education, and by cus- 
toms. A Pharisee. A member of the strictest sect in Israel, “after the straitest manner of the sect.” 
6. Concerning zeal. His zeal for Judaism was demonstrated by the fact that he was a persecutor of 
the church. What were his feelings concerning this part of his career is shown by 1 Tim. 1: 13-16. 
Blameless. Keeping the letter of the law so as to be blameless in the eyes of my fellow-Jews. 

7-11. What things'were gain tome. These things which were counted as a gain he now counts as. 
nothing; nay, as loss, instead of gain for Christ. Instead of saving him, a trust in them would have been 
eternalruin. 8. I count all things but loss. In comparison with the inestimable value of the 


218 PHILIPPIANS: 








8 Yea, doubtless, and I count all things but loss! yea verily, and T count all 8 
> Fa Yhric q } things to be loss for the 
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus exerllenc a ee 
my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss* of all edge of Uhrist Jesus my 
things, and do count them but dung, that I may win | the toss of all things, and 
Christ do count them but ung, 
ae , ; ms F ae that I may gain Christ, 

9 And be found in him, not? having mine own and be found in him, not 9 
righteousness, which is of the law, but* that which | mine own, even that which 
s 5 1 ; 1 is of the law, but that 
is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness witch is tlitoseh tail to 
which is of God by faith; Christ,, the righteoumess 

10 That I may know him, and the power of his | that fmay know him, and 10 

, oe 5 d ; 1 ] j . | the power of his resurrec- , 

resurrection, and? the fellowship of his sufferings, Hom oud thedellon hpit 
being made conformable unto his death; his "sufferings, becoming 
; : : ‘ 3 

11 If by any means I might attain® unto the res- if by any means 1 may at= rr 

urrection of the dead. F ; 5 from the dead. Not that I 12 
12 Not as though I had‘talready attained, either have already obtained, or 
Ms i rrect: 
were’ already perfect; but I follow after, if that I) putipresson, if so be that 
; , j .|Imay apprehend that for 
may apprehend that for’ which also 1 am appre-|(ingy e i e sat one 
bended of Christ Jesus. hended by Christ Jesus. 

Brethren, I count not my- 13 


13 Brethren, I count not myself to have appre- 
hended: but this one thing J do, forgetting those 
things which are behind, and reaching forth ® unto 








[ChsIT. 


self yet to have apprehend- 
ed: but one thing JZ do, for- 
getting the things which 
are behind, and stretching 


; ° forward to the _ thi 
those things which are before, pin Bch. wh Sica 








@1sa. 53:11; John 17:3. _ 6 Psa. 143:2; Isa. 64:6; Rom. 10:3. 


c Rom. 1:17; Gal. 2:16; 2Pet.1:1. 41 Pet. 4:13. 
e Luke 20: 35; Acts 26:7. f1 Tim. 6:12. va. 


g Heb. 12:23. h Heb. 6: 





knowledge of Christ, all worldly things are to be regarded asa loss. For whom I have suffered the 
loss of all things. In accepting Christ he gave up all the world holds dear. But he did not long for 
them; nay, he counted them as he would count filth, to be avoided, if only he may win Christ. The one 
word Christ in itself embraces every real blessing. 9. And be found in him. In him “there is no 
condemnation” (Rom. 8:1). Not having mine own righteousness. Those in Christ trust not ina 
legal righteousness, obtained by keeping the law, but in the righteousness which the gospel provides to 
those who accept Christ through faith. That righteousness is the forgiveness of sins, which is of God 
by the faith. Note that, although the definite article is omitted in our Versions before faith, the Greek 
supplies it. “The faith” is equivalent to “the gospel.” It is faith in Christ acted upon, causing an 
acceptance and steadfast obedience to Christ, which secures the righteousness (forgiveness) of which 
Paul speaks. 10. ThatI may know him. By enjoying his presence in the soul; an experimental 
knowledge. And the power of his resurrection. The resurrection demonstrated him to be the Son 
of God with power (Rom. 1: 4). The mighty power that worked in his resurrection works in the saints 
(1) in their resurrection from spiritual death to a new life (Col. 2: 13; Eph.1: 19-23). It is therefore a 
present power. (2) It works also when they are lifted from the dead to eternal life. Consciousness of the 
victory over sin is the earnest of the ultimate triumph over death. And the fellowship of his sufter- 
ings. Christ’s life is the plan of that of the saint. Like him, we take the cross, are crucified with him 
(Rom. 6: 6), are baptized into his death (Rom. 6: 3), are planted in the likeness of his death, and are risen 
with him (Col. 3:1). In all these we look to the suffering Savior, and are conformed to his death. 
Not only do we take the form of his sufferings, but we sympathize with him. If the obedience is from the © 
heart, there isa partaking of his sufferings. 11. If by any means I might attain to the resur- 
rection from the dead. This great consummation of a glorious resurrection to a heavenly life is worth 
attaining by every sacrifice, and by every possible means. 3 
12-14. Not as though I had already attained. Had already obtained the great prize. It still 
requires effort. The prize is at the end of the race. Oram already made perfect. He never claimea 
to have reached such a state; nor does he intimate anywhere that such a state is ever reached on earth. 
But follow after. Press on, as one who must push forward. If sobethatI may apprehend. The 
idea is, I press on in the hope that I shall lay hold upon the prize. That. He will seek to lay hold of 
that for which Christ laid hold of him at conversion, viz., his eternal salvation. 18. I count not 
myself yet, etc, The prize is yet before. Constant effort is still required. This one thing I do. 


Chu IIT. ] PHILIPPIANS. 


219 





14 I* press toward the mark, for the prize of "the 
high calling of God in Christ Jesus. 

15 Let us therefore, as many’ as be perfect, be 
thus minded: and if in anything ye be otherwise 
minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. 

16 Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, 
let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same 
thing. 

17 Brethren, be followers together of me, and 
mark them which walk so, as ye® have us for an 

“ensample. 

18 (For many walk, of whom I have told you 
often, and now tell you even weeping, that they 
are the enemies of the cross.of Christ: 

19 Whose end zs destruction, whose god 7s their 
belly, and whose glory zs in their shame, who mind 
earthly things.) 

20 Fort our conversation is in heaven; from 


which are before, I press 14 
on toward the goal unto 
the prize of the high call- 
ing of God in Christ Jesus. 
Let us therefore, as many 15 
as be perfect, be thus mind- 
ed: and if in any thing ye 
are otherwise minded, even 
this shall God reveal unto 
baie only, whereunto we 16 
ave already attained, by 
that same rude let us walk. 
Brethren, be ye imitators 17 
together of me, and mark 
them which so walk even 
as ye have us for an en- 
sample. For many walk, 18 
of whom I told you often, 
and now tell you even 
weeping, that they are the 
enemies of the cross of 
Christ: whose endis perdi- 19 
tion, whose god is the bel- 
ly, and whose glory is in 
their shame, who mind 
earthly things. For our cit- 20 
izenship is in heaven: from 
whence also we wait for a 
Saviour, the Lord Jesus 


Christ: who shall fashion 21 
anew the body of our hu- 
miliation, that it may be 
conformed to the body of 
his glory, according to the 
working whereby heis able 
even to subject all things 
unto himself. : 


whence also£ we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus 
Christ; 

21 Who? shall change our vile body, that it may 
be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according! 
to the working whereby he is able even to subdue 
all things unto himself. 











dGal.5:10. e1Pet.5:3. fCol. 3:1,38. g1Cor. 


el Cor. 2:63 14:20. 
iIsa. 63:1; Matt. 28:18; Eph. 1:19. 


a2Tim 4:7, 8; Heb. 12:1. 6 Heb. 3:1. 
h Psa. 17:15; Matt. 17:2. 


1:7; 1 Thes. 1:10; 2 Tim. 4:8; Tit. 2:13. 








His whole life is given to one purpose. Forgetting the things which are behind. Especially the 
things which he once counted gain (verse 7), and even all the hardships and sufferings of the apostolic 
lot. And reaching forth. The image is of one so eager for what is before him that hands and body 
are stretched to lay hold of it. 14. Ipressontoward the goal. His eye is upon the goal and he 
presses through every difficulty to reach it. Unto the prize. This is the prize offered to those in the 
high calling of the saints in Christ. A crown was bestowed in an earthly race when the goal was reached. 
This prize is “the resurrection from the dead” (verse 11) and an eternal crown. 

15,16. As many as be perfect. It cannot mean perfect in the absolute sense, for in verse 12 he 
declares that he is not perfect, and surely the Philippians were not in advance of the apostle who admon- 
ishes them. Meyer says the Greek word here (¢eleiot) means mature, well developed, not children in 
Christ. Let such,as are so far advanced be thus minded. Show the spirit indicated in verses 7-14. 
Tf ye be otherwise minded. If you have not the mind to count all else as refuse in contrast 
with Christ, etc., God shall reveal it to you; will bring you to this state of mind. Of course this clause 
shows that he does not address those whom he believes to be ‘nerfect.” 16. Only, whereunto we 
have already attained. The meaning 1s, Those who have not reached the status I have described, let 
them make the right use of all the light, ability and knowledge they have obtained. 

17-21. Be followers of me. Compare 1 Cor. 4; 16; 11:1. Mark them which walk so. Not only 
follow my example, but note those who do follow it. 18. For many walk. There is a class who walk 
far otherwise, who cause him great sorrow. Of whom I have told you often. Probably, when he 
was preaching at Philippi, or visiting there (2 Cor. 2; 13). This class had come into the church, but had 
not left off their pagan vices. Now tell you weeping. Because of the evil such offenders do. 
Enemies. Such persons are the worst enemies of Christ. One church member who arouses a scandal 
can wound the cause of Christ more than a dozen scoffers. 19. Whose end is destruction. Their 
final fate must be eternal ruin (2 Peter 2:3). Whose God is their belly. They obey their sensual 
appetites. Whose glory, etc. They glory in shameful things. Mind earthly things. Instead of 
setting their affections on the things that are above (Col. 3: 1). 20. For our conversation is in 
heaven. Our citizenship. See Revision. We are citizens of heaven itself, our country, from which we 
are now absent, and which we are seeking. Hence we ought to mind heavenly things. There our Lord 





220 PHILIPPIANS. fCh:-IV. 
CHAPTER IV. 
Precepts for Christian Life. 

SumMARy.—Personal Admonitions. Going tothe Lord for Help. Setting 

the Mind on Noble Things. The Supply of His Wants Sent by the 

Philippians. Parting Salutations. ; 

refore, my brethren dearly beloved an 
1 Therefore, my y and CHAPTER IV. 


longed for,* my joy and crown, so stand fast in the 
Lord, my dearly beloved. 

2 I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntyche, that 
they be of the same mind in the Lord. 

3 And I entreat thee also, true yoke-fellow, help 
those women which labored with” me in the gospel, 
with Clement also, and with other my fellow-la- 
bourers, whose names are in the® book of life. 

4 Rejoice in the Lord alway: and again I say, 
Rejoice. 

5 Let your moderation be known unto all men. 
The? Lord zs at hand. 





Wherefore, my brethren, 1 
beloved and jionged for, my 
joy and crown, so stand 
fast in the Lord, my be- 
loved. 

I exhort Euodia, and I 2 
exhort Syntyche, to be of 
the same mind in the Lord. 
Yea, I beseech thee also, 3: 
true yoke-fellow, Heip these 
women, for they laboured 
with me in the gospel, with 
Clement also, and the rest 
of my fellow - w orkers, 
whose names are in the 
book of life. —- 

Rejoice in the Lord al- 4 
way: again I will say, Re- 





@2 Cor. 1:14; 1 Thes. 2:19. 6 Rom. 16:3; Phil. 1:27. 
Rev. 3:55 13: 8; 20: 12; 21:27. 


c Ex. 82:32; 
d1 Pet: 4:7; 


Psa. 69: 
2 Pet. 3: 8; Heb 10: 2: 


pape oe 1; Luke 10: 20; 





dwells, and from thence he will come. 21. Who shall change our vile body. Our lowly body shall 
undergo a change to fit it for heaven. It will take the form of his glorified body, such as was seen at the 
Transfiguration. Compare 1 Cor. 15: 43-52; 2 Cor. 5: 1-4; 1 John 3:2. According to the working. 
This change shall be effected in harmony with that mighty power which shall subdue all things to his 
sway. 

1. Therefore. Because you are citizens of a heavenly country (8: 20). My brethren, etc. The 
words that follow are words of the most tender affection. My joy and crown. A joy to him now on 


account of their faith and affection; a crown of honor to him in the day of accounts, as his converts. So 
stand fast. Be steadfast in the way I have pointed out. 
2, 8. I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntyche. Two good women of Philippi, who had 


apparently been estranged. Women were prominent in the founding of the Philippian church; Lydia was 
the first convert, and her house was a home of the missionaries. Observe the repetition of the word 
“beseech.” It gives it special emphasis. 8. I intreat thee, true yoke-fellow. Some very dear 
brother who had been a fellow-laborer of Paul. The term is applied to the relation of husbands and 
wives, and to that of very intimate friends. The one addressed must have been a companion of toils and 
sufferings. Some have thought that Silas, associated with him in suffering at Philippi (see Acts, chapter 
16), is meant, and that he was at Philippi when this letter was sent, but this is not certain. Help those 
women. As Euodias and Syntyche have just been named, they are those meant. They had zealously 
aided his labors at Philippi. With Clement also. The Clement named is thought to be the same who 
was later a bishop at Rome, and the author of certain extant Epistles to the Corinthians. The name, 
however, was so common that this is uncertain. In the book of life. Compare Rev. 3: 5; 13: 8; 17: 83. 
20: 12. Those are held to have their names in the book of life who are enrolled as the children of God. 
4-7. Rejoice in the Lord alway. Compare 3:1. That a prisoner, soon to be tried for his life, 
should not only rejoice but bid others to rejoice, shows the power of the gospel to comfort one who has 
made Christ all in all. 5. Let your moderation. Your forbearance. The Lord is at hand. A 
special watchword of the early church in time of trouble. It meant practically, ‘Deliverance is near.’’ 
6. Be careful for nothing. See Revision. The meaning is, Have no distressing anxiety about any- 
thing. “Care-ful” used to mean “full of care.” Compare Matt. 6: 25. But in everything, etc. Instead 
of anxiety, just lay the case before God, and trust him to do all things well. Three elements enter 
into the appeal to God: Prayer, the outpouring of the soul; supplication, stating our wants; thanks- 
giving; we must always come to God, not in a complaining spirit, but with thankfulness for present 
mercies. '7. And the peace of God. The peace that comes by putting all in the hands of one who is. 


able and willing to deliver. Whenever we fully trust the Lord there comes a peace that is past the under- 
ry 


Gh LY -i] PHILIPPIANS. 


221 








6 Be® careful for nothing: but in every thing by 
prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let 
your request be made known unto God. 

7 And? the peace of God, which passeth all under- 
standing, shall keep your hearts and minds through 
Christ Jesus. 

8 Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, 
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things 
are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever 
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good re- 
port; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, 
think on these things. 

9 Those things, which ye have both learned, and 
received, and heard, and seen in me, do: and the 
God of peace shall be with you. 

10 But I rejoice in the Lord greatly, that now at 
the last? your care of me hath flourished again; 
wherein ye were also careful, but ye lacked oppor- 
tunity. p 

11 Not that I speak in respect of want: for I 
have learned, in whatsoever state I am,? therewith 
to be content. 

12 Ie know both how to be abased, and I know 
how to abound: every where, and in all things, I 
am instructed, both to be full and to be hungry, 
both to abound and to suffer need. 

13 I can do all thingst through Christ which 
strengtheneth me. 

14 Notwithstanding ye have well done that® ye 
did communicate with my aftliction. 





.a Ppa. 55:22; Prov. 16:3; Matt.6:25; Luke 12:22; 1Pet. 5:7. 


c2Cor. 11:9. d1Tim.6:6. 








joice. Let your forbearance 5 
e known unto all men. 
The Lord is at hand. In6 
nothing be anxious: but in 
everything by prayer and 
supplication with thanks- 
giving let your requests be 
made known unto God. 
And the peace of God, 
which passeth all under- 
standing, shall guard your 
hearts and your thoughts 

in Christ Jesus. 

Finally, brethren, what- 8 
soever t ings are true, 
whatsoever things are hon- 
ourable, whatsoever things 
are just, whatsoever things 
are pure, whatsoever things 
are lovely, whatsoever 
things are of good report; 
if there be any virtue, an 
if there be any praise, 
think on these things. The 9 
things which ye both learn- 
ed and received and heard 
and saw in me, these things 
do: and the God of peace 
shall be with you. 

But I rejoice in the 10 
Lord greatly, that now at 
length ye ave revived 
your thought for me; 
wherein ye did indeed take 
thought, but ye lacked op- 
portunity. Not that Ispeak 11 
in respect of want: for I 
have learned, in whatsoev- 
er state I am, therein to be 
content. I know how to 12 
be abased, and I know also 
how to abound: in every 
thing andinall things have 
I learned the secret both to 
be filled and to be hungry, 
both to abound and to be 
in want. Icandoall things 13 
in him that strengtheneth 
me. Howbeit ye did well, 14 
that ye had fellowship with 


~~] 





elCor. 4:11. fJohn 15:5; 2 Cor. 12:9. 


bIsa.26:3; John 14:27; Rom. 5:1; Col. 3:15. 


g PU. YT. 





standing of those who have never experienced it. Shall keep your hearts. That peace will be a 


guard which will keep the heart and thoughts holy and pure. 

8, 9. Finally, brethren. 
graph. Whatsoever things are true. 
Christ is THE TRUTH. His followers must be truth itself. Honest. 


ever is worthy of reverence. Just. 
and clean hearts and thoughts. Lovely. 
good report. 


A life of which no evil thing can be truthfully said. If there be any virtue. 


As he concludes his letter, he sums up Christian duties into a single para- 
Truth in word, in action, and in thought, must be cherished. 
The Greek is ‘‘reverend.”’ 
Strict justice in all dealings; an upright life. Pure. Chaste lives 
Such deeds as spring from love and inspire love in others. Of 


What- 


Lest he 


may have omitted some excellency he adds, “‘If there be aught else which is virtuous or praiseworthy, let 


these all be the things to which you give your minds.” 


9. The things which, etc. 


He turns from 


precept to example, the best of all teachers, and enjoins that they observe not only what he had taught, 


but what they had seen in his life. 
live. ; 
10-14. I rejoiced in the Lord greatly. 
they sent to him by the hands of Epaphroditus. 
this been careful to supply his needs. 
had always been ready to care for him, but 


there were no systems of exchange, and all money had to be sent by messengers. 
rejoiced because he had been in want, he adds that he had 


of want. Lest they should think that he 


jJearned to be content, whatever was his state. He had Christ, and to him Christ was all in all. 


See verse 16, and 2 Cor. 11:9. Ye lacked opportunity. 
lacked means of communicating with him. In those times 


The God of peace shall be with you. For he is with all who so 


Because of the proof of affection furnished in the relief 
Care of me hath flourished again. They had before 


They 
11. Not that I speak 


12. I 


222 PHILIPPIANS. 





15 Now, ye-Philippians, know also,? that in the 
beginning of the gospel, when I departed from 
Macedonia,” no church communicated with me, as 
concerning giving and receiving, but ye only. 

16 For evenin® Thessalonica ye sent once and 
again unto my necessity. 

17 Not because I desire a gift: but I desire fruit* 
that may abound to your account. 

18 But I have all, and abound: I am full, having 
received® of Epaphroditus the things which were 
sent from you, an odour of a sweet smell,‘ a_ sacri- 
fice acceptable, well pleasing to God. 

19 But my God® shall supply all your need, 
according to his riches in glory, by Christ Jesus. 

20 Now unto God and our Father be glory for 
ever andever. Amen. 

21 Salute every saint in Christ Jesus. The 
brethren which are with me greet you. 

22 All the saints salute you, chiefly® they thatare 
of Caesar’s household. 

23 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ de with 
you all. Amen. 





[Ch.-IV. 


my affliction. And yeyour- 15 
selves also know, ye Phil- 
ippians, that in the begin- 
ning of the gospel, when I 
departed from Macedonia, 
no church had fellowship 
with me in the matter of 
giving and receiving, but 
ye only; for even in Thes- 16. 
salonica ye sent once and 
again unto my need. Not 17 
that I seek for the gift; but 

I seek for the fruit that in- 
creaseth to your account. 
But I have all things, and 18. 
abound: Iam filled, having 
received from Epaphrodi- 
tus the things that came 
from you, an odour of a 
sweet smell, a sacrifice ac- 
ceptable, well-pleasing to 
God. And my God ‘shall 19: 
fulfil every need of yours 
according to his riches in 
glory in Christ Jesus. Now 20: 
unto our God and Father 

be the glory for ever and 
ever. Amen. 

Salute every saint in 21 
Christ Jesus. The brethren 
which are with me salute 
you. All the saints salute 22 
you, especially they that 


are of Cesar’s household. 
The grace of the Lord 23 
Jesus Christ be with your 


spirit. 


It was written to the Philippians from Rome by Epaphroditus. 





@ Acts 11:15. 62Cor. 11:8. ¢c2Thes.3:8. d Rom. 15:28. 


e Phil. 2:25. £2 Cor.9:12; Heb.13:16. g Psa. 23.1: 
Prov. 8:21; 2 Cor. 9:8. 18 : ’ dares 


A Phil. 1:18. 





know both how to be abased, etc. He had experienced all things; want as well as plenty, hunger 
and food in abundance; every variety of condition. 18. I can do all things. He canrise superior to 
every condition through the strength that Christ gives. 14, Ye have done well. Though Christ gave 
him strength to bear want, it was a good thing, a kind deed, that they supported him in his affliction. 
Communicate. Had fellowship with; shared. 

15-20. In the beginning of the gospel. When you first received the gospel (Acts, chapter 16). 
When I departed from Macedonia. Keep in mind that Philippi ‘was a chief city of Macedonia.” 
No church communicated with me. Had fellowship. Those who sustained him were partners of his 
labors. See Acts 17:14. 16, Even in Thessalonica, After leaving Philippi Paul next labored at 
Thessalonica. See Acts, chapter 17. While here the newly-founded church of the Philippians sent to him 
contributions at least twice. They also aided him later while he was in Corinth (2 Cor. 11: 9). 17. Not 
that I seek for the gift. This is not his motive for praising them, but he seeks fruit that increaseth 
to their account. Their gifts will return to them in God’s blessings. 18. An odor of a@ sweet 
smell, The incense offered in the temple worship was very fragrant. Their offerings were like incense, 
like a sacrifice with which God was well pleased. 19. My God shall supply all your need. Since 
you do not forget the needs of his servant, he will not forget yours. 20. Now unto God and our 
Father. A rapturous outburst. All the glory is God’s, He is the Giver. God put their good purposes 
into their hearts. 

21-23. Salute every saint. Where he knew so many he could not single out individuals for special 
greetings, but salutes all. The brethren which are with me. Such brethren as Timothy and other: 
fellow-laborers, who were now in Rome. 22. Chiefly. Especially. The class next named send special 
greetings. Of Ceesar’s household. Amid the vast number who dwelt in the palace as immediate 
attendants of the emperor, amounting to hundreds and perhaps thousands, there were some who had 
become Christians. What was their condition in life is a matter of conjecture. Philippi was a colony 
(Acts 16: 12), a sort of outlying suburb of Rome, populated with Roman citizens. Hence it is possible that 
these would have friends in the Philippian church, who would know well who were meant, and to them. 
they send special greetings. 


INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS. 


At least three Epistles, and probably four, were prepared about the same time by the 
Apostle Paul at his place of imprisonment in Rome, and sent by the same messengers to 
the Roman Province of Asia. One was the Epistle to the Ephesians; a second, the 
present letter; a third, the Epistle to Philemon, who was a resident of Colosse, and the 
fourth is alluded to in this Epistle (4: 16) as the Epistle to the Laodiceans, but has been 
thought by some to be identical with the Ephesian letter. Three cities are named in 
this Epistle which lay contiguous to each other in the bounds of the ancient Kingdom 
of Phrygia, but in the last half of the first century were embraced within the proconsular 
Province of Asia, of which Ephesus was the capital, which had Christian congrega- 
tions, and two of these were honored with Epistles (4:13). The ruins of these cities: 
have been identified, and the close association of Colosse and Laodicea is witnessed by the 
fact that they were only a few miles apart on opposite sides of the valley of the Lycus, a 
short distance above where it enters into the larger river Meander. 

Colosse was a city of considerable size more than four hundred years before the date 
of this letter, when visited” by Xenophon as the Ten Thousand marched up into Central 
Asia, and is mentioned by Herodotus still earlier. At this time, however, it was over- 
shadowed in importance by Laodicea, and at the present the ruins are less imposing 
than those of either Laodicea or Hierapolis. 

We learn in the Sixteenth Chapter of Acts that Paul, on his second missionary 
journey, passed from Cilicia through the pass in the great Taurus chain of mountains, 
which has always been the highway from the coast to the interior; paused a little while 
in Lydia; took Timothy in his train of attendants, and then passed through Phrygia and 
Galatia. And, a second time, after his European tour, he returned and ‘‘went over all 
the country of Phrygia and Galatia, strengthening the disciples” (Acts 18: 23). Yet it 
is probable that he did not personally plant the gospel in Colosse, and possibly did not 
even pass through the valley of the Lycus. The words of Chapter 2: 1, are understood 
to mean that he had never met with the church in person, and indeed there is a marked 
difference between the tone of this letter and the familiar personal appeals of letters 
addressed to churches that he had certainly planted, like those of Philippi and Galatia.. 

Besides, Epaphras seems to be named (1: 7) as the founder, or at least the evangelist, 
of the church. Yet, since Epaphras must have been one of his own converts, and was 
working under his general supervision, Paul held himself responsible for its condition, 
and looked after its welfare, as after all the churches planted within the sphere of his 
labors. 

It is easy to discover from certain portions of the letter why it was written. Phrygia 
was a sort of border land between religions. The light, joyous polytheism of the Greeks 
here met the deep, solemn mysticism of the East. In addition, large colonies of Jews 
had been transplanted from Babylon to this region by one of the Macedonian monarchs 
of Syria, and brought with them a Judaism which had been greatly modified by the 


2 


. 


224 INTRODUCTION TO COLOSSIANS. 





doctrines of Zoroaster. The Epistle gives us ample ground for concluding that there was 
danger of these mongrel philosophies corrupting the simplicity of the gospel of Christ, 
and that Paul’s object was to fortify the church against doctrines which would result in 
evil. In the notes of the passages which refer to these doctrines, this will be discussed 
more at length. 

While there is a marked difference between this Epistle and that to the Ephesians, 
there is in some portions a striking similarity. Indeed there is not only a parallelism in 
the thoughts, but often in the language. The most natural way to account for this is to 
bear in mind that the two letters were written at the same time; were written to the 
same part of the world to congregations surrounded by conditions which were in many 
respects similar, and whose spiritual needs would be much alike. Under such circum- 
stances it would be strange if two letters from the same writer did not bear a strong 
resemblance. It would be interesting to call attention to these parallel or similar 
passages, but the limited space the plan of this work allows will not permit. One who 
is curious to follow this comparison will find it given in full in Paley’s Horae Paulinae. 

Concerning the genuineness of this Epistle, it has always had a place in the New 
Testament Canon, and has never been questioned except by Baur, and some other critics 
of the Tubingen school who have thought that it gave too, high an exaltation to Christ. 
This might be answered by replying that it exalts Christ no more than Philippians and 
other Epistles which are conceded to be of Pauline origin. Their theories have been 
overthrown not only by historical arguments,. but by the internal evidence of the Epistle 
itself. Indeed, as Meyer remarks, ‘‘the forging of such an Epistle as this would be far 
more wonderful than its genuineness.”’ 

It was written at Rome, during Paul’s imprisonment, probably in A. D. 62, the same 
date as Ephesians and Philemon, and was sent to the church by the hands of Tychicus 
(4: 7) and Onesimus (4: 9). 


THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE 


COLOSSIANS. 


CHAPTER I. 


SuMMARY.— Greeting. Thanksgiving for the Faith of the Colossian 
Church. Prayer for Their Progress. Becoming Meet for the Inher- 
itance of the Saints. In the Kingdom of the Son. The Glories of the 
Son. The Work of Christ in Reconciling Men to Himself. Joy in 
Sufferings. The Mystery Among the Gentiles. 


1 Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of 
God, and Timotheus our brother, 

2 To the saints? and faithful brethren in Christ 
which are at Colosse: Grace de unto you, and peace, 
from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. 

3 We give thanks to God and the Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, praying always for you, 

4 Since” we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, 
and of the love which ye have to all the saints; _ 

5 For the hope? which is laid up for you in 
heaven, whereof ye heard before in the word of the 
truth of the gospel; sar 5 

6 Which is come unto you,® as zé zs in all the 
world; and‘ bringeth forth fruit as ¢¢ doth also in 
you, since the day ye heard of 2, and knew® the 
grace of God in truth: 


cHeb. 6:10. @ Matt. 5:12; 1 Pet. 1:45 2 Tim. 4:8. 


« L315. 
cae g2 Cor. 6:1; Eph. 3:2; OS ie! a 


a Eph. 6:21. 


1, 2. Paul, an apostle 


CHAPTER I. 


Paul, an apostle of Christ 1 
Jesus through the will of 
God, and imothy our 
brother, to the saints and 2 
faithful brethren in Christ 
which are at Colosse: 
Grace to you_and peace 
from God our Father. 

We give thanks to God 3 
the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, praying al- 
ways for you, having heard 4 
of your faith in Christ Je- 
sus, and of the love which 
ye have toward all the 
saints, because of the hope 5 
which is laid up for you in 
the heavens, whereof ye 
heard before in the word of 
the truth of the gospel, 
which is come unto you; 6 
even as it is also in all the 
world bearing fruit and in- 
creasing, aS 7 doth in you 
also, since the day ye heard 
and knew the grace of God 











é Matt. 24:14. fJohn 15:16. 


by the will of God. Not by human appointment, but by divine. 


‘Timotheus our brother. The other Epistles written at this time show that Timothy was then in 


Rome. 


He is named seven times in the address of Paul’s letters to the churches; here, in 2 Corinth- 


jians, Philippians, Colossians, 1 Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians and Philemon. 2. To the saints. A 
designation in apostolic ages of all Christians. Two characteristics are named; they were believing 
brethren also. At Colosse. For an account of Colosse, see Introduction to this Epistle. 


3-8. We. Both Paul and Timothy. Give thanks. When offering 


‘sians, as he was 
-we heard of your faith and love. 


prayers in behalf of the Colos- 


wont to do for all the churches under his care, he had grounds for thanks. 4. Since 
He probably heard through Epaphras, a member at 


Colosse (verse 7 and 4: 12), who was at that time with him in Rome. 5. For the hope. He gives 
thanks for their hope of heaven. Laid up. This suggests that they have a treasure laid up in heaven 
which they hope to use. Their treasure is above. Whereof ye heard before. They heard of this 
hope when the gospel was preached to them. 6. Which is come to you. The gospel had come to 
them, being now spread abroad in allthe world. This is not to be taken literally, but affirms the wide 
diffusion of the gospel. Bringeth forth fruit. It always bears fruit in holy lives wherever received. 
7. As ye learned of Epaphras. “Also” in Common Version is not found in the best MSS. They had 
learned of the gospel, its truth, its hope, and fruit from Epaphras, who probably planted the church under 
Paul’s direction. Where he was converted we are 23) informed, but possibly at Ephesus, the capital of 


Pa 


COLOSSIANS. 


7 As ye also learned of* Epaphras, our dear fel- 
low-servant, who is for you a faithful minjster of 
Christ; 

8 Who also declared unto us your love in the 
Spirit. 

9 For? this cause we also, since the day we heard 
it, do not cease to pray for you, and to desire that 
ye might be filled with the® knowledge of his will 
in all wisdom and spiritual understanding ; 

10 That* ye might walk worthy of the Lord® unto 
all pleasing, being* fruitful in every good work, and 
increasing in the knowledge of God; 

11 Strengthened with all might, according to his 
glorious power, unto all patience and long-suffer- 
ing® with joyfulness; 

12 Giving® thanks unto the Father, which hath 
made us meet to be partakers of the! inheritance of 
the saints in hght: 

13 Who hath delivered us from the! power of 
darkness,* and hath translated us into the kingdom 
of his dear Son: 


226 





Ech. I- 


in truth; even as ye learn- 7 
ed of Epaphras our beloved 
fellow -servant, who is a 
faithful minister of Christ 
on our behalf, who also de- 8 
clared unto us your love in 
the Spirit. 

For this cause we also, 9 
since the day we heard it, 
do not cease to pray and 
make request for you, that 
ve may be filled with the 

nowledge of his will inall 
spiritual wisdom and un- 
derstanding, to walk wor- 
thily of the Lord unto all 
pleasing, bearing fruit in 
every good work, and in- 
creasing in the knowledge 
of God; strengthened with 11 
all power, according to the 
might of his glory, unto all 
patience and longsuftering 
with {07% giving thanks 12: 
unto the Fa her, who made 
us meet to be partakers of 
the inheritance of the 
saints in light; who deliv- 13: 
ered us out of the power of 
darkness, and translated 
us into the kingdom of the 
Son of his love; in whom 14 
we have our redemption, 
the forgiveness of our sins: 





14 In whom we have redemption through his 
blood, even the forgiveness of sins: 


6 Eph. 1:15. 





a@ Phile. 23. ¢Rom. 12:2. d@1Thes. 2:12. e1Thes.4:1. fJohn 15:16. g Acts5:41. h Eph. 5:20. 
4Eph. 1:11. 3 Heb. 2:14. £2 Pet. 1:11. 








the province, during Paul’s stay of three years there. Some have held that he is the same as the Epaph- 
roditus of Phil. 2: 25; 4: 18, but this is not probable. He is highly commended here and in 4: 12, and in the: 
latter place is identified with the Colossian church. 8. Whoalso declared tous. He was at the date: 
of the letter attending the apostle at Rome. 

9-12. For this cause. What he had heard, named in the preceding paragraph. Since the day we 
heard. He had heard something which had aroused his solicitude. That ye might be filled with the 
knowledge of his will. This would be their best security against false teaching, and an assurance of a 
faithful life. Wisdom and spiritual understanding. The wisdom and understanding conferred by 
walking as led by the Spirit. See Eph. 1: 3, 8,and1Cor. 12:8. 10. That ye might walk, ete. Thus 
they would be equipped so as to please the Lord in all things in their walk. Being fruitful. Some- 
things are named which please the Lord. The first is to abound in good works. The second is te 
increase in the knowledge of God. 11. Strengthened. Made mighty by the divine power. Unto 
all patience, Nothing requires more grace than patience and long-suffering under wrong, or even 
fancied wrong. Itis especially hard to endure wrong with joyfulness, 12. Giving thanks. In the: 
midst of the trials which call for patience and long-sufferings, still joyful and thankful to the Father that 
he hath made us meet to be partakers. Fit to have a share. Once, then, they were unfit. The- 
inheritance of the saints. God’s infinite love had called them to be children, heirs, and joint-heirs 
with Christ. The heavenly inheritance is meant. To have a share with the saints in light is to be heirs 
of heavenly felicity. Light. Light isa symbol of purity and blessedness. It is in contrast with dark- 
ness below. 

13,14. Who hath delivered us. The language implies that we were captives. We were under 
the power of darkness. Compare Luke 22: 53. Satan is the power of darkness. Those in sin are held 
under his power. Hath translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son. God, through the: 
gospel, had rescued them, and has translated them into Christ’s kingdom. This was effected when they 
were converted. Some teach that Christ’s kingdom is yet future, but this passage shows that it already 
had an existence. The church was its visible form. It was inaugurated at Pentecost. 14. In whom 
we have redemption. We are redeemed from sin. We were in bondage, but have been purchased. 
Satan holds us under bondage until our sins are blotted out, The price paid is his blood. Compare 
Eph. 1: 7. 


Canty COLOSSIANS. 


15 Who is* the image of the invisible God, the 
first-born of every creature: 

16 For” by him were all things created, that are 
in heaven, and that are ia earth, visible and invisi- 
ble, whether ¢hey be thrones or dominions, or prin- 
cipalities, or powers; all things were created® by 
him, and for him: 

17 And“ he is before all things, and by him all 
things consist: 

18 And he is the head of the body, the church: 
who is the beginning,° the first-born from the dead; 
that in all things he might have the pre-eminence: 

19 For it pleased the Father that int him should 
all fulness dwell: ba 

20 And (having made peace through the blood of 
his cross) by him to reconcile all things unto him- 
self; by him, Z say, whether they be things in earth, 
or things in heaven. 








227 


who is the image of the in- 15 


visible God, the firstborn 
of all creation; for in him 
were all things created, in 
the heavens and upon the 
earth, things visible and 
things invisible, whether 
thrones or dominions or 
principalities or powers; 
all things have been cre- 
ated through him, and unto 
him; and he is before all 
things, and in him all 
things consist. And he is 
the head of the body, the 
church: who is the begin- 
ning, the firstborn from the 
dead; that in all things he 
might have the pre-emi- 
nence. For it was the good 
pleasure of the Father that 
in him should all the ful- 


‘|ness dwell; and through 


him to reconcile all things 
unto himself, having made 
peace through the blood of 
his cross; through him, 7 
say, Whether things upon 
the earth, or things in the 


16 


17 
18 


19 


20 





@ John 14:9; 2 Cor. 4:4; Phil. 2:6; Col. 2:9. 0 John 1:3; 1 Pet. 3:22. c Rom. 11:36. dJohn 17:5; 1 Cor. 8:6; 
Heb. 13:8. e Rey. 1:5. f Matt. 28:18; John 1:16; John 3:34. 


Fn a aes a ee 

15-17. Who is the image of the invisible God. He came in order to reveal the Father in his 
own person. See John 14: 10, and Heb. 1:3. The love of God is revealed in Christ. He was the visible 
representative of the invisible God. The first-born of every creature. The thought is that he 
existed before creation began; born of God instead of being created by the divine fiat; born before any 
creature was called into existence. The passage does not say that he was the first created, but the first- 
born. He was before creation. See John1:1,2. 16. By him were all things created. Hence he 
must have existed before any creation. Compare John 1: 3, and Heb. 1:2. As God manifested himself by 
means of the Son in the gospel, so in creation he manifested himself through the Son. The visible 
universe is a manifestation of God through the Son. The Worp is the power that gives all things exist- 
ence that exist. Thrones, dominions, principalities. The angelic hierarchy; different ranks of 
angels, according to the teachings of some of the Jewish doctors. <A heresy had already been proposed. 
that divided these into ranks, assigned them an undue prominence, and held that Christ was only an 
angel. Paul does not pause to say whether these divisions are correct, but declares that Christ is above 
them all, created them, and that they were created for him. One of the heresies he wished to counteract 
was the doctrine of angel worship. 177, And he is before all things. He was before them all in 
time, and through him they came into existence. 

18-20. In verses 15-17, Paul portrays Christ as the center and source of the creation. In this section 
he shows that he is the Head of the new creation. He is the head of the body, the church. In the 
church he is pre-eminent. It is his spiritual body, and he is the supreme head. Compare 1 Cor. 11: 3; 
Eph. 1: 10,22. The beginning. The new creation began from him and in him. He is first of all in time. 
The first-born from the dead. He first conquered death, and not for himself alone, but the great: 
company of those found in him who have been born from the dead. 19. In him should all fulness 
dwell. All power and blessing. Completeness in all things. If limitations were placed upon his power 
to create, to save and to bless, all fulness would not dwell inhim. 20. Having made peace. See 
notes on Eph. 2: 14,17. Christ came to make peace between Jew and Gentile, man and man, man and 
God. The means employed was the blood shed on the cross, Through it the law, the partition wall 
between Jew and Gentile, was removed, and both alike have access to God. By him to reconcile all 
things unto himself. ‘It pleased the Father” (verse 9) “by him (Christ) to reconcile all things 
to himself” (the Father). All who accept Christ, are reconciled to him, and found in him, are reconciled 
thus to God. Whether things in earth. Human beings. Thingsin heaven. Chrysostom explains: 
Christ not only reconciles man on the earth, but raises him, who had been an enemy to God, to heaven and 
gives him a place there at peace with God, so that in the heavens the fruits of reconciliation are seen 
Sorige You, that were some time alienated. In a state of estrangement before conversion. 
Enemies in your mind. Hostile on account of wicked works. A wicked life will fill a man with 


22 COLOSSIANS. 


(Ch. I. 





21 And you, that were sometime alienated, and | 


enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now 
hath he reconciled. 

22 In the body of his flesh through death, to pre- 
sent you holy, and unblameable, and unreprove- 
able, in his sight; 

23 If ye continue in the faith grounded and set- 
tled, and de not moved away from the hope of the 
gospel, which ye have heard, and which was 
preached to every creature which is under heaven, 
whereof I Paul am made a minister: 

24 Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and 
fill up* that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Christ in my flesh for” his body’s sake, which is the 
church; 

25 Whereof I am made a minister, according to 
the dispensation of God which is given to me for 
you, to fulfil the word of God; 

26 H’'ven* the mystery which hath been hid from 
ages and from generations, but now is made mani- 
fest to his saints: : 

27 To whow God would make known what 7s the 


heavens. And you, being 21 
in time past alienated an 
enemies in your mind in 

our evil works, yet now 22 

ath he reconciled in the 
body of his flesh through 
death, to present you holy 
and without blemish and 
unreproveable before him: 
if so be that ye continue in 
the faith, grounded and 
stedfast, and not moved 
away from the hope of the 
gospel which ye heard, 
which was preached in all 
creation under heaven; 
whereof I Paul was made 
a minister. 

Now IL rejoice in my suf- 
ferings for your sake, and 
fill up on my part that 
which is lacking of the af- 
flictions of Christ in my 
flesh for his body’s sake, 
which is the church: 
whereof I was made a 25 
minister, according to the 
dispensation of God which 
was given me to you-ward, 
to fulfil the word of God, 
even the mystery which 26 
hath been hid from all ages 
and generations: but now 
hath it been manifested to 
his saints, to whom God 27 
was pleased to make 


23 


known what is the riches 
of the glory of this mys- 
tery among the Gentiles, 
which is Christ in you, the 
hope of glory: whom we 28 
proclaim, admonishing ey- 


riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gen- 
tiles; which is Christ in you, the hope of glory: 
28 Whom we preach, warning every man, and 





@ Phil. 3:10. 6 Eph. 1:23. ¢ Rom. 16:25. 


hostile thoughts to God. Yet now hath he reconciled. Christ has changed them by the gospel so 
that they are enemies no longer. God needs no change. The change must be wrought in man. 22. In 
the body of his flesh. It is through the sufferings of Christ that they are enabled to come to God. 
Without Christ and the cross there could be no gospel. Through his blood their sins are cleansed, so that 
they are holy in the sight of God. 28. If ye continue in the faith. Their continued acceptance 
depends on their clinging to Christ who redeemed them. Grounded and settled. Having an immoy- 
able foundation, so that they could not be moved from the hope of the gospel by any wind of doc- 
trine. Which was preached, etc. See note on verse 6 above. 24. Who now rejoice. Rather, I 
- now rejoice. My sufferings for your sake. He wasa prisoner and a sufferer because he preached 
the gospel to the Gentiles. And fill up, ete. Christ endured afflictions for us. We must have a fellow- 
Ship of his sufferings (1 Peter 4: 13). Paul also suffers that he might share the afflictions of Christ. Not 
only did he suffer with Christ, but Christ suffers with his afflicted people. See Acts 9:4. Hence, afflic- 
tions suffered for Christ may be called his afflictions. All the suffering required for the sake of the church _ 
. 1s still behind of the afflictions of Christ. 25. According to the dispensation. God made him 
a minister of the church. That ministry was a “stewardship” (dispensation) committed to him. He 
refers to the great responsibility of the apostolic office. He wasa “steward of the grace of God” (Eph. 
3:2). To fulfil the word of God. Not only to do what the word required, but to preach the word 
everywhere. 26. Eventhemystery. The mystery of the gospel, of salvation through Christ, hidden 
from past ages, but now revealed to the saints. A mystery, as Paul uses the term, is a thing hidden in the 
past, but now made known. 27. To whom God would make known. To the saints he would 
reveal the glory of the mystery. The glory of the mystery is Christ in you. Christ dwelling in the 
saved and filling their hearts with the hope of glory. 28. Whom we preach. Christ. Every man. 
Note that this is repeated three times in the verse. The apostle impresses the fact that the gospel is not 
for a few favored ones, but for every one. In all wisdom. In every form of wisdom. Perfect. We 
should all aim at perfection; the apostle aims to bring all to this ideal. The high ideal is before, for 
which all should aim. However, he whose sins are all blotted out will be counted perfect in the great 
day. 29. According to the working. Christ within us isa life and a power. If we conquer the 
flesh and give ourselves entirely up to him he will work mightily. ; 


Ch. IL] COLOSSIANS. 


229 





teaching every man in all wisdom; that we may 
present every man perfect in Christ Jesus: 

29 Whereunto I also labour, striving according 
to his working, which worketh in me mightily. 


CHAPTER II. 


Warnings Against False Theories. 


SUMMARY.—Paul’s Conflict for the Churches. Present with Them in 
Spirit. Exhortation to be Rooted and Grounded in Christ. Warning 
Against Vain Philosophy. The True Circumcision. The Baptismal 
Burial. The Handwriting of Ordinances Removed. Keeping Sabbath 
Days. Angel Worship Forbidden. ~ 


1 For I would that ye knew what great conflict I 
have for you, and for them at Laodicea, and for as 
many as have not seen my face in the flesh; 

2 That? their hearts might be comforted, being 
knit together in love, and unto all riches” of the 
full assurance of understanding, to the acknow- 
ledgment of the mystery of God, and of the 
Father, and of Christ; 

3 In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom 
and knowledge. 

4 And this I say, lest any man should beguile you 
with enticing words. 

5 For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I 
with you in the spirit, joying and beholding your 
order, and the stedfastness of your faith in Christ. 

6 As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the 
Lord, so walk ye in him; 

7 Rooted and built up in him, and stablished in 
the faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein 


with thanksgiving 





a2Cor.1:6. 62 Pet. 3:18. 


1-8. What great conflict. Anxiety. For you. 


sister church only a few miles away. See Intro 
elation. See Rev.3:14. Have not'seen my face. 





The brethren of Colosse. 
duction. Laodicea was one of the Seven Churches of Rey- 
This seems to imply that he had never visited 


ery man and teaching ey- 
ery man in all wisdom, 
that we may present every 
man perfect in Christ; 
whereunto I labour also, 29 
striving according to his 
working, which worketh in 
me mightily. 


CHAPTER II. 


For I would have youl 
know how greatly I strive 


for you, and for them at 


Laodicea, and for as many 
as have not seen my facein 
the flesh; that their hearts 2 
may be comforted, they be- 
ing knit together in love, 
and unto all riches of the 
full assurance of under- 
standing, that they may 
know the mystery of God, 
even Christ, in whom are 3 
all the treasures of wisdom 
and knowledge hidden. 
This Isay, that no one may 4 
delude you with persua- 
siveness of speech. For 5 
though I am absent in the 
flesh, yet am I with youin 
the spirit, joying and be- 
holding your order, and 
the stedfastness of your 
faith in Christ. 

As therefore ye received 6 
Christ Jesus the Lord, so 
walk in him, rooted and 7 
builded up in him, and 
stablished in your faith, 
even as ye. were taught, 
abounding in thanksgiv- 
ing. 


At Laodicea. A 


either of these churches in person. The reasons of his anxiety are revealed in this chapter. They were 


assailed by false teachings. 2. That their hearts. 


forted, . . knit together in love, 


He was deeply anxious that they might be com- 
and enjoy the full assurance of understanding, a clear 


insight that would lead them to know the mystery of God. This knowledge would make them proof 


against the arts of false teachers. 
the treasures, etc., are hidden, and m 
know them. 

4-8. Lest any man should pbeguile you. 
possible. 
having them in mind, being fully informed of the 
with the whole tenor of the New Testament, or 
behold them. The latter is the view of most commentators. 
(1: 7) that he learned their 
believe upon Christ as he w 
out of the soil. As ye have been taught. 


5. For though absent, yet he was present in spirit. .He w 


For “mystery,” see notes on 1: 26, 27. 8. In whom. In Christ all 
ysteries until revealed. The gospel reveals them and those in Christ 


Had they full knowledge (verse 2) this would not be 
as either present in spirit by 
ir state by Epaphras, which I think is more in harmony 
he was enabled by divine power to look upon them and 
If this view is correct, why does he say 
state from Epaphras? 6. Walk ye in him. Continue to live in, obey and 
as first preached to you. 7. Rooted. Your life growing out of him as a tree 
The point of the exhortation is to cling to the gospel as it 


230 COLOSSIANS. 


(Ch. IT. 





8 Beware* lest any man spoil you through phil- 
osophy and vain deceit, after the” tradition of men, 
after the rudiments of the world, and not after 
Christ: 

9 For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the God- 
head bodily. 

10 And? ye are complete in him, which® is the 
head of all principality and power: 

11 In whom also ye are‘ circumcised with the 
circumcision made without hands, in putting off the 
body of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of 
Christ; ‘ 

12 Buried’ with him in baptism, wherein also ye 
are risen with him through” the faith of the opera- 
tion of God, who hath raised him from the dead. 

13 And you, being dead in your sins and the un- 
circumcision of your flesh, hath he quickened 
together with him, having forgiven you all tres- 
passes ; 

14 Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances 
that was against us, which was contrary to us, and 
took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross; 

15 And‘ having spoiled principalities and powers, 








Take heed lest there shall 8 
be any one that maketh 
tes of you through his 
philosophy and vain deceit, 
after the tradition of men, 
after the rudiments of the 
world, and not after Christ: 
for in him dwelleth all the 9 
fulness of the Godhead 
bodily, and in him ye are 10 
made full, who is the head 
of all principality and pow- 
er: in whom ye were also 11 
circumcised with a circum- 
cision not made with 
hands, in the putting off of 
the body of the flesh, in the 
circumcision of Christ; 
having been buried with 12 
him in baptism, wherein 

e were also raised with 

im through faith in the 
working of God, who rais- 
ed him from the dead. And 
you, being dead through 
your trespasses and the 
uncircumcision of your 
flesh, you, ZJ say, did he 
quicken together with him, 
having forgiven us all our 
trespasses; having blotted 
out the bond written in or- 
dinances that was against 
us, Which was contrary to 
us: and he hath taken it 
out of the way, nailing it 
to the cross; having put off 15 
from himself the principal- 


14 





aJder. 29:8; Heb. 13:9. 6 Matt. 15:2. ¢ Isa. 7:14; 9:6; John 1:14; Rom. 9:5. @John 1:16. e€1 Pet 3:22. jfJer. 4:4. 
g Rom. 6:4. A Eph. 3:7. 4Gen. 3:15; Psa. 68:18; Isa. 53:12; Luke 10:18; John 12:31. 








has been taught them. 8. Spoil you through philosophy. Make spoil of you and carry you off as 
booty through some philosophical speculation, or empty deceit. After the tradition of men. By 
appealing, not to the Scriptures, but to human traditions. These traditions probably referred mainly to 
the matters spoken of in verse 18 below. Rudiments of the world. Paul uses this expression else- 
where of Jewish ordinances (Gal. 4: 3). Verse 16 below shows what it refers to. 

9-12. For in him dwelleth all the fulness, ete. You must not be drawn from Christ. He is all 
in ail. In him is the divine fulness (all divine power). In him as revealed was God in bodily form. Com- 
pare John 1: 14. 10. Ye are complete in him, You need nothing more. He supplies every want. 
Head of all principality and power. Heis over andruler of those ranks of angels that some are 
trying to lead you to worship. 11. In whom ye are circumcised. Are there those who say that you 
‘ought to be circumcised? In him is the true circumcision, not done by hands, not the cutting off of a 
little flesh, but the putting off of the entire body of the sins of the flesh. 12. Buried with him in 
baptism. See notes on Rom. 6: 4. Paul teaches that we must re-enact the tragedy of the cross: The 
agony of the garden, the complete submission to the divine will, confession of Christ, crucifixion (Gal. 
2; 20; Rom. 6: 5), death (Rom. 6: 3), burial (Rom. 6; 4; Col. 2; 12), rising with Christ (Rom. 6: 5; Col. 2: 12; 
3: 1); nay, we must ascend and reign with him (Eph. 2: 4-6). Let it be noted that “the putting off of the 
body of the sins of the flesh” (verse 11) is associated with baptism (verse 13). Wherein ye were also 
raised with him (Revision). We are raised from the burial as he was raised from the grave, and we 
rise to a new life through faith, ete. 

18-15. Being dead in your sins. He that is dead in sins is without spiritual or eternal life. To 
be dead ¢o sin is to be delivered from its power. The uncircumcision of your flesh. “The body of 
the sins of the flesh” not having been put off. See verse 11. Hath he quickened. By the power of the 
gospel. Weare buried with Christ, quickened with him, rise with him. Having forgiven. The gospel 
comes with the offer of forgiveness. See Acts 2.38. 14. Blotting out the handwriting. The 
Revision says, “‘The bond.” Thatis, the written law of ordinances; the law of Jewish rites. This was 
“blotted out,” erased, removed. Against us. Especially in the sense that they made Gentiles aliens 
and strangers to the covenant, and without God and hope. Nailing it to his cross. When the Jews 
nailed Jesus to the cross they drove the nails into their own law. The old dispensation was ended; the 
blood of the new covenant was shed from the wounds of the nails. 15. Having put off from himself 


Ch. II.] COLOSSIANS. 
he made a shew of them openly, triumphing over 
them in it. 

16 Let no man therefore? judge you-in meat, or 
in drink, or in respect of an holy-day, or of the 
new-moon, or of the sabbath-days ; 

17 Which® are a shadow of things to come: but 
the body zs of Christ. 

18 Let no man beguile you of your reward in a 
voluntary humility and worshipping of angels, 
intruding into those things which he hath not seen, 
vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind; 

19 And not holding the head, from which all the 
body by joints and bands having nourishment min- 
istered, and knit together, increaseth with the 
increase of God. ; 

20 Wherefore, if ye be dead with Christ from the 
rudiments of the world, why, as though living in 
the world, are ye subject to ordinances, 

21 (Touch not, taste not, handle not, 

22 Which all are to perish with the using, ) after 
the commandments and doctrines of men? 

23 Which things have indeed a shew of wisdom 
in will-worship and humility, and neglecting of the 
body; not in any honour to the satisfying of the 








flesh. 


231 


ities and the powers, he 
made a show of them open- 
ly, triumphing over them 
in it. 

_ Let no man _ therefore 16 
judge you in meat, or in 
drink, or in respect of a 
feast day or a new moon 
or a sabbath day: which 17 
are a shadow of the things 

to come; but the body is 
Christ’s. Let no man rob 18 
you of your prize by a vol- 
untary humility and wor- 
shipping of the angels, 
dwelling in the things 
which he hath seen, vainly 
puffed up by _his fleshly 
mind, and not holding fast 
the Head, from whom all 
the body, being supplied 
and knit together through 
the joints and bands, in- 


-ereaseth with the increase 


of God. % 

If ye died with Christ 20 
from the rudiments of the 
world, why, as though liv- 
ing in the world, do Mu 
subject yourselves to ordi- 
nances, Handle not, nor 21 
taste, nor touch (all which 22 
things are to perish with 
the using), after the pre- 
cepts and doctrines of 
men? Which things have 23 
indeed a show of wisdom 
in will-worship, and humil- 
ity, and severity to the 
body; but are not of any 
value against the indul- 
gence of the flesh. 





a Rom. 14:3. c Heb. 8:5. 


ee el 


6 Gal.4: 10. 





the principalities (Revision). 
triumphed over Satan and all his powers. Madea show of them. 
triumphing over them in his resurrection and ascension. 


He overcame and disarmed the spirits of darkness, the evil angels. He 
Put them to an open shame by 


16-19. Let no man therefore judge you. As the law was nailed to the cross (verse 14), let no man 


compel you to keep its ordinances. 

Jewish law prescribes (Lev. 7: 10-27). 
in respect of a holy day. Such 
observances (Num. 28: 11). Or of the Sabbath day. 
law. 17. Which are a shadow of 


In meat, or in drink. 


By requiring you to eat only what the 
See Rom. 14; 17; 1 Cor. 8: 8; Heb. 9: 
as the Passover, Pentecost, etc. Or of the new moon. The monthly 
The Jewish Sabbath had passed away with the 
things to come. The body, or substance, which casts the shadow 


11. Compare 1 Tim. 4: 3. Or 


is Christ. We are to pay no attention to the shadows since he has come, but to observe what we find in 


him and the gospel. 18. Let no man beguile you. 
do so if you become unworthy of it by a voluntary humility. 
fore is affected rather than real. 

and taught a self-abasement, like 
ing of angels. One feature of 
Rev. 19: 10. Angel worship, 


period Michael the archangel was worshiped. 
(Revision). Claiming special revelations. 
clinging to Christ the Head, from whence the whole body, 
increase. 


Rob you of your reward by his guile. He will 
By a humility that is willed, and there- 
It is probable that the false teachers made a great pretence of humility, 
that of monks clad in sackcloth, or who go barefoot. And worship- 
the heresy against which Paul warned them was angel worship. See 
the worship of saints, dead or living, of pope, or any created thing, is for- 
pidden. ‘Worship God,” said the angel before whom John bowed. Church history states that at 
Dwelling in the things which he hath seen 
He refers to “noman.” 19. Not holding the Head. Not 
the church, derives its nourishment and 


a later 


20-28. Wherefore. Ye died with Christ, died to the world, and to its rudiments, or fleshly ordi- 


nances. See note on verses 8 and 12. Why, then, 
to obsolete Jewish ordinances? 21. Touch not, etc. 
drink which command you to “touch not?” etc. 
applies to ‘things all of which perish in the using ; 
‘ments. These ordinances, whether Jewish traditions, 


as though belonging to the world, should you be subject 
Why are you subject to prohibitions of food and 
22. Which all are to perish. The prohibition 
» 4, e,,to food and drink. After the command- 
or those of ascetics, are dependent upon the 


232 COLOSSIANS. (Ch, IIT. 
Sa a 


CHAPTER III. 
The New Life in Christ. 


SUMMARY.—Fellowship with the Risen Christ. Our Lives with Him. 
Hence, All the Evil Deeds of the Old Life Must Be Put Away. All 
Distinctions Done Away in Christ. Hence, Brotherly Loye Must Be 
Cherished. The Indwelling of Christ’s Word. Concerning Songs. 
Various Duties. 


1 If ye then* be risen with Christ, seek those?” 
things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the 
right hand of God. 

2 Set your affections on things above, not on 
things on the earth. 

3 For® ye are dead,‘ and your life is hid with 
Christ in God. 


CHAPTER III. 


If then ye were raised 1 
together with Christ, seek 
the things that are above, 
where Christ is seated on 
the right hand of God. Set 2: 
your mind on the things 
that are above, not on the 
things that are upon the 
earth. For ye died, and 3 
your life is hid with Christ 
in God. When Christ, who 4 


is our life, shall be mani- 
fested, then shall ye also 
with him be manifested in 
glory. 

Mortify therefore your 5. 
members which are upon 
the earth; fornication, un- 
cleanness, passion, evil de- 
sire, and covetousness, the 
which is idolatry; for & 
which things’ sake cometh 
the wrath of God upon the 


4 When® Christ, who is* our life, shall appear, 
then shall ye also appear with him ins glory. 

5 Mortify therefore your members which are 
upon the earth; fornication, uncleanness, inordi- 
nate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetous- 
ness, which is idolatry: 

6 For which things’ sake the wrath of God 
cometh on the children of disobedience. 


a Eph. 2:6. 








6 Matt. 6:33. ¢ Gal. 2:10. d2Cor.5:7. e1John 3:2. J John 11:25. g 1 Cor. 15:43. 








commands and teachings of men. 28. Which things. The doctrines just condemned. Have a show 
of wisdom. But only ashow. In will-worship. Self-imposed, arbitrary worship. And humility. 
Ostentatious humility. And severity to the body. By starving it and refusing it proper food. This 
implies that these teachers demanded mortifications of the flesh, such as have been always commended in 
the Romish church. But are not of any value. They have no efficacy in overcoming the lusts of the 
flesh. In the first verse of the next chapter we are told the only way of overcoming the flesh. In this. 
chapter can be discovered traces already of the ascetic spirit which a few centuries later became so domi- 
nantin the church. It is well to note that it is placed under the condemnation of the Holy Spirit. 
1-4, If then ye were raised together with Christ. The Revisions correct. A definite act, not: 
a state, is referred to. The definite act is named in 2: 12 above. When they were ‘buried with him in 
baptism,” they were also raised from this burial with him through faith, quickened. Hence here he says, 
. “Tf then ye were raised with him,” if your obedience was from the heart and in faith, if you rose therefore: 
with him (these are the emphatic words), then seek those things which are above. The risen Christ 
ascended; let your aspirations ascend also. Where Christ sitteth, etc. See notes on Eph.1:20, 2. Set. 
your affection on things above. This is a condition of seeking the things above. Our hearts must bein 
heaven with our beloved Lord. 8. For ye died. This is areason for not loving earthly things. We. 
died to the world, crucified with Christ, and were buried. See notes on 2: 12. Also Rom. 6: 2; Gal. 2: 20. 
This death was a definite act, like the burial and the rising, not a state. The Revision is a great improve- 
ment on such passages. Your life is hid. They died, but they are not dead. Yet the world does not: 
see their true life, the eternal principle within. Their life is in Christ, and can never be fully manifested. 
until he shall be manifest; but (verse 4) when he shall be manifested, then the glory and the blessed- 
ness of the life in us shall be shown forth. Like the tree in the winter, not dead, but the life hidden. 
When the Spring comes, its life shows itself in glory. Compare Rom. 8: 19. ; 
5-8. Mortify therefore your members. The Greek word is stronger. It means, “Put to death.” 
Since you died to the world and the flesh, slay also the earthly lusts and passions which belong to the 
flesh. They belong to the old nature, not to the new creature. Uncleanness. Every kind of impure 
act. Inordinate affection, Lustful passion. Covetousness. See note on Eph.5:5. 6. For 
which things’ sake. Because these things are practiced by those who live in disobedience, God’s. 
wrath is coming upon them. 7%. In the which ye also walked. They had been Gentile heathen, and. 
antong them licentiousness was at that time universal. See notes on 1 Cor. 6: 9-11. Even moralists sane- 


Ch-111.] COLOSSIANS. 


7 Inthe which ye also walked sometime, when 
ye lived in them. 

8 But? now ye also put off allthese; anger, wrath, 
malice, blasphemy, filthy communication out of 
your mouth. 

9 Lie,” not one to another, seeing that ye have put 
off the old man with his deeds; 

10 And have put on the new man, which is‘ 
renewed in knowledge after the image of him that 
created? him. 

11 Where there is neither® Greek nor Jew, cir- 
cumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, 
bond nor free: but Christ zs all, and in all. 

12 Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy 
and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humble- 
ness of mind, meekness, long-suffering ; 

13 Forbearing one another, and forgiving one 
another, if any man have a quarrel against any: 
even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. 

14 And above all these things put! on charity, 
which is the bond of perfectness. 

15 And leti the peace of God rule inyour hearts,* 





233s 


sons of disobedience; in 7 
the which ye also walked 
aforetime, when ye lived 
in these things. But now 8 
put ye also away all these; 
anger, wrath, malice, rail- 
ing, shameful speaking out 
of your mouth: lie not one 9: 
to another; seeing that ye 
have ‘ee off the old man 
with his doings, and have 10’ 
put on the new man, which 

is bein renewed unto 
knowledge after the image 
of him that created him; 
where there cannot be 11 
Greek and Jew, circumcis- 
ion and uncireumcision, 
barbarian, Scythian, bond- 
man, freeman: but Christ 
is ali, and in all. 

Put on therefore,as God’s 12: 
elect, holy and beloved, a 
heart of compassion, kind- 
ness, humility, meekness, 
longsuffering: forbearing 13 
one another, and forgiving 
each other, if any man have 
a complaint against any; 
even as the Lord forgave 
you, so also do ye: and 14 
above all these things put 
on love, which is the bond 
of perfectness. And let the 15- 
peace of Christ rule in your 

earts, to the which also 
ye were called in one body: 





to the which also ye are called in! one body; and 
be ye thankful. 


aJas.1:21. 6 Ley. 19:11. 
Phil. 2:1. 








eGal. 3:28. fEph.1:238. g1Pet.1:2. 


h Gal. 5: 225 
k1Cor. 7:15. 7 Eph. 2:16; 4:4. 


ec Rom. 12:2. d Eph. 2:10. 
iRom. 13:8. j Rom. 14:17; Phil. 4:7. 





tioned every kind of unchastity except that of a wife. 8. Also put offallthese. The sins that follow, 
as well as those named above. Anger, wrath, malice. A climax, full of evil to other men. Blas- 
phemy, filthy communication. Sins manifested by the tongue. The Revision says, “Railing, shame- 
ful speaking.” The reference is to low, profane, filthy abuse, due to “‘anger, wrath, and malice.” 

9-11. Lie not. Christ is truth, and they who are of Christ will be truth in word and deed. Seeing. 
Lying would be a proof that the old man (the old fleshly nature, Eph. 4: 22; Rom. 6: 6) with his deeds: 
had not been put off. 10. Have put on the new man. Are born again (John 3: 5) and become new 
creatures in Christ. The new man has a new heart, new thoughts, a new life. Is renewed in knowl- 
edge. With the new man there is a growth, arenewal. He grows continually in knowledge of Christ 
and into hisimage. 11. Where there cannot be Greek, etc. In Christ there can be no distinction 
of race, or of caste. The Greek, when he is converted, becomes a new being; not a Greek, but a Chris- 
tian. So of Jew, Roman, Scythian. They are all naturalized into a new kingdom, that of Christ, and 
belong to a new, holy nation (1 Peter 2: 9). All the old barriers to fraternity are removed. Barbarian. 
The Greeks long called all who were not Greeks barbarians, but in the apostolic age applied it more par- 
ticularly to those who had not accepted the Greek civilization. Bond nor free. The master and the 
slave were on a level in the church. “Humanity is a word which you look for in vain in Plato and 
Aristotle; the idea of mankind as one family, as the children of one God, is an idea of Christian growth.” 
—Max Muller. But Christ is all. He is the life of all the new creation, and in all. 

12-15. Put on, therefore, as the elect of God. As a chosen, holy and beloved nation, put on 
these graces. A heart of compassion (Revision), ete. These are all traits of Christ, and must be 
found in us if heis our life. 18. Forbearing . . . forgiving. How often and earnestly long- 
suffering and forbearance are enjoined! Nor have we grounds for expecting that God will forgive us 
unless we also forgive (Matt. 6: 12). Christ is our example. 14. Above all these things put on 
love. If our souls are imbued with love, like that of Christ, it will be easy then to forbear and forgive. 
The bond of perfectness. All the Christian graces are bound together inlove. It is the source of 
them all. 15. Let the peace of Christ rule. The peace of those who are made brethren in Christ 
and filled with his love. It must reign in the heart, then it will rule in the acts. This is the peace to. 


234 COLOSSIANS. 


(Ch. III. 





16 Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in| 
all wisdom; teaching and admonishing one another 
in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs,* singing 
with grace” in your hearts to the Lord. 

17 And* whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do 
all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving’ thanks 
to God and the Father by him. 

18 Wives, submit yourselves unto your own hus- 
bands, as it is fit in the Lord. 

19 Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter 
against them. 

20 Children, obey your parents in all things: for 
this is well-pleasing unto the Lord. 

21 Fathers,’ provoke not your children to anger, 
lest they be discouraged. 

22 Servants, obey in all things your masters ac- 
cording to the flesh; not with eye-service, as men- 
pleasers; but in singleness of heart, fearing God: 

23 And whatsoever ye do, do 7 heartily, as to the 
Lord, and not unto men; 

24 Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the 
reward of the inheritance: for ye serve the Lord 
Christ. 

25 But he that doeth wrong shall receive for the 
wrong which he hath done: and there is no respect 
of persons. 





@Eph. 5:19. 6 Col. 4:6. ¢1Cor. 10:31. d Rom. 1:8; Hph. 5;20; Col. 2:7. 


and be ye thankful. Let 16 
the word of Christ dwell in 
you richly in all wisdom; 
teaching and admonishing 
one another with psalms 
and hymns and spiritual 
songs, et with grace 
in your hearts unto God. 
And whatsoever ye do, in 17 
word or in deed, do all in 
the name of the Lord Je- 
sus, giving thanks to God 
the Father through him. 

Wives, be in subjection 18 
to your husbands, as is fit- 
ting in the Lord. Hus- 19 
bands, love your wives, 
and be not bitter against 
them. Children, obey your 
parents in all things, for 
this is well-pleasing in the 
Lord. Fathers, provoke not 
your children, that they be 
not discouraged. Servants, 
obey in all things them 
that are your masters ac- 
cording to the flesh; not 
with eye-service, as men- 
pleasers, but-in singleness 
of heart, fearing the Lord: 
whatsoever ye do, work.23 
heartily, as unto the Lord, 
and not unto men; know- 24 
ing that from the Lord ye 
shall receive the recom- 
pense of the inheritance: 

eé serve the Lord Christ. 

or he that doeth wrong 25 
shall receive again for the 
wrong that he hath done: 
and there is no respect of 
persons. 


20 


21 
22 


eEph.6:1. fEph. 6:4. 





which Jew, Gentile, and every race is called in one body. 
factious spirit in the fold. 


There must be no discord, schism, or 


16,17. Let the word of Christ. The word that has been preached to you. Dwell in you, As 
inatemple. Richlyin all wisdom. If we treasure it up richly we will have the divine wisdom in our 
hearts. Teaching and admonishing. Those having the indwelling word would have ability to teach. 
In psalms, etc. Teaching and admonishing were to be present even in song. Song was to have another 
object than to please the ear. It was not for enjoyment, but for edification. The species of song are 

"named here and in Eph. 5:19. For the distinction, see notes there. Singing with grace. With Christ’s 
grace in your hearts; that is, with hearts pervaded by the love of Christ. 177. Whatsoever ye do. 
Whether it be singing, whether it be word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus. Neither in 
worship, nor in his business and pleasures, must the Christian engage in anything that cannot be done in 
Christ’s name; 7. e., by his authority and in prayer to him. This covers the whole life. It applies to con- 
duct, to places of resort, to secular calling. If doubtful, see if you can on your knees ask Christ to £0 
with you and bless youin what you are about to undertake. Giving thanks. The Christian should 
always be thankful, because if he ‘does all in the name of Jesus,” the Lord will always be with him, and 
work out all for good. 

18-21. The section from 3: 18 to 4: 1, is very similar to Eph. 5: 22 to6: 9. Iwill refer the reader to 
Ephesians for fuller notes. Wives, submit yourselves. See notes on Eph. 5: 22. 19, Husbands, 
lgve your wives. See notes on Eph. 5: 25. 20. Children, obey your parents. See notes on Eph. 
6:1. 21. Fathers, provoke not your children. See notes on Eph. 6: 4. 

22-25. Servants, obey. See notes on Eph.6:5,6. 238. And whatsoever ye do. See notes on 
Eph.6:7. 24, Knowing that of the Lord. See note on Eph.6:8. 25. He that doeth wrong. 
Whether master or slave. All will be requited, and before Christ, all, master and slave, stand upon the 
same footing. 


—_, 


Ch lV.] ; COLOSSIANS. 


235 





CHAPTER IV. 
Final Exhortations. 


SumMMARY.—A Charge to Masters. Prayer and Prudence Commended. 
Tychicus, the Bearer of the Letter, Introduced. Onesimus Commended. 
Greetings from Brethren at Rome. The Epistle of the Laodiceans. 


1 Masters,* give unto your servants that which is 
just and equal; knowing that ye also have a Master 
in heaven. 

2 Continue> in prayer, and watch in the same 
with thanksgiving; 

3 Withal* praying also for us, that God would* 
open unto us a door of utterance, to speak® the 
mystery of Christ, for which I am also in bonds: 

4 That I may-make it manifest, as I ought to 
speak. 

5 Walk in wisdom toward them that are with- 
out, redeeming the time. 

6 Let your speech be alway with grace, seasoned ' 
with salt,i that ye may know how ye ought to 
answer every man. 

7 All my state shall Tychicus declare unto you, 
who is a beloved brother, and a faithful minister 
and fellow-servant in the Lord: / 








CHAPTER IV. 


Masters, render unto l 
our servants that which 
is just and equal; knowing 
that ye also have a Master 
in heaven. 

Continue stedfastly in 2 
prayer, watching therein 
with thanksgiving; withal 3 
praying for us also, that 
x0od may open unto us a 
door for the word, to speak 
the mystery of Christ, for 
which I am also in bonds; 
that I may make it mani- 4 
fest, as I ought to speak. 
Walk in wisdom toward 5 
them that are without, re- 
deeming the time. Let your 6 
speech be always with 
grace, seasoned with salt, 
that ye may know how ye 
ought to answer each one. 

All my affairs shall Ty- 7 
chicus. make known unto 
you, the beloved brother 
and faithful minister and 
fellow-servant in the Lord: 


nt 


a Lev. 19:13; Mal. 3:5; Eph. 6:9. 6 Luke 18:1; Rom. 12:12; Eph. 6:18. ¢c2Thes. 3:1. d1Cor. 16:9; 2 Cor. 2:12. 
é Matt. 13:11; 1 Cor. 4:1. fPhil. 1:7. g Eph. 5:15; 1Thes. 4:12. AEccl. 10:12. «Mark 9:50. j 1 Pet. 3:15. 


1. Masters, give unto your servants. See notes on Eph. 6:9. This verse ought to have been 
joined to the section of the preceding chapter in which mutual duties are enjoined, It should be remarked 
that such a charge as this is not found im all the profane writings of antiquity. Even in the pages of the 
moralists a slave was regarded as a chattel with which the master hada right to deal according to his 
will. The Christian rule, at once introduced into the church, was for the master to treat his servants as 
he wished to be treated by his Master in heaven, and to expect the same kind of treatment that he meted 
out. 

a Continue in prayer. Prayer ought to be regular, habitual. The Christian should every day 
have a season of prayer. See Luke 18:1; Acts 1:14; Eph. 6:18. Watch. Watch that you pray aright, 
in earnest, and ask for what you ought. With thanksgiving. Let thanks for mercies given ascend as 
you ask for new mercies. 8. Praying also for us. Note the spirit of this prayer; not a thought of 
his ease, comfort, or even safety, but only that he may be given full opportunity to preach Christ. So 
sublime a self-forgetfulness in a suffering prisoner is almost divine. The mystery of Christ. The 
gospel of Christ. It was a mystery, ¢. ¢., a hidden truth until it was revealed. See 1 Cor. 4:1; Eph. 6: 19; 
Col. 1: 26; 2:2. In bonds. See notes on Eph. 6: 20; Phil. 1: 7. 

5, 6. Walk in wisdom toward them that are without. Let your conduct be prudent and 
sagacious. Do not provoke persecution. Redeeming the time. Using every opportunity and seeking 
time to do them good. Redeeming. Buying by giving up your own pleasure. 6. Let your speech 
be always with grace. Use courteous speech, calculated to attract rather than to repel. Seasoned 
with salt. Food without seasoning is insipid. Let the speech be so seasoned by “grace” that it will not 
be rejected with aversion. That ye may know how, etc. So that your answer to every man may be 
such as the case requires. The idea is to always say what is pertinent and best for the occasion. — 

7-9, All my state shall Tychicus declare. See Eph. 6; 21 for note on Tychicus. He carried the 
Epistle to the Ephesians, and that to the Colossians on the same journey. He was probably a native of 
Ephesus, and was one of Paul’s most trusted evangelists. See Acts 20: 4; 2 Tim. 4: 12; Titus3: 12. It 
should be kept in mind that all Paul’s Epistles were sent by messengers. There were no postal arrange- 
ments for carrying private letters such as exist in our times. 8. Whom I have sent. Not only to 


236 COLOSSIANS. 


(Ch. IV. 


eee eS ee 


8 Whom I have sent unto you for the same pur- 
pose, that he might know your estate, and comfort 
your hearts ; 

9 With? Onesimus, a faithful and beloved broth- 
er, who is one of you: they shall make known unto 
you all things which are done here. 

10 Aristarchus? my fellow-prisoner, saluteth you, 
and Marcus,’ sister’s son to Barnabas; (touching 
whom ye received commandments: if he come unto 
you, receive him;) 

11 And Jesus, which is called Justus, who are of | 
the circumcision. These only are my fellow-work- 
ers unto the kingdom of God, which have been a 
comfort unto me. 

12 Epaphras,‘ who is one of you, a servant of 
Christ, saluteth you, always labouring fervently for 
you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect® and com- 


whom I have sent unto 8 
you for this very purpose, 
that ye may know our es- 
tate, and that he may com- 
fort your hearts; together 9 
with Onesimus, the faith- 
ful and beloved brother, 
who is one of you. They 
shall make known unto 
you all things that are 
done here. 

Aristarchus my fellow- 

risoner saluteth you, and 

ark, the cousin of Barna- 
bas (touching whom ye re- 
ceived commandments; if 
he come unto you, receive 
him), and Jesus, which is 
ealled Justus, who are of 
the circumcision: these 
only are my fellow-workers 
unto the kingdom of God, 
men that have been a com- 
fort unto me. Epaphras, 
who is one of you, a ser- 
vant of Christ Jesus, sa- 
luteth you, always striving 
for you in his prayers, that 


ye may stand perfect and 
fully assured in all the will 
of God. For I bear him 13 
witness, that he hath much 
labour for you, and for 
them in Laodicea, and for 
them in Hierapolis. Luke, 14 
the beloved physician, and 
Demas salute you. Salute 1& 
the brethren that are in 
Laodicea, and Nymphas, 
and the church that is in 


plete in all the will of God. 

13 For I bear him record, that he hath a great 
zeal for you, and them that are in Laodicea, and 
them in Hierapolis. 

14 Luke,‘ the beloved physician, and? Demas, 
greet you. 

15 Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea, 
.and Nymphas, and the church which is in his house. 


@ Col. 1:7. 








a@Phile. 10. b Acts 19:29; 20:43 27:2. ¢ Acts 15:37; 2 ee 4:11. e Matt. 5:4. fLuke 1:2; Acts 1:1. 
g : 


le. 24 





carry letters, but to ascertain the state of the churches, and to instruct and comfort them. He came as 
an evangelist to help them on. 9. With Onesimus,. A peculiar interest is connected with Onesimus. 
because he is the subject of the Epistle to Philemon. He belonged to Colosse, was probably a slave of 
Philemon, had fied to Rome, and now returns as “a faithful and beloved brother.’’ Tychicus bore also at 
this time the letter to Philemon. 

10-13. There follow Christian remembrances from several of Paul’s companions. Aristarchus, my 
fellow-prisoner. A Macedonian from Thessalonica (Acts 19: 29; 20: 4; 27: 2). He accompanied Paul 
from Jerusalem to Rome. He is named in Philemon 24. And Marcus. The old companion of Paul and 
Barnabas on their first missionary tour. Sister’s son to Barnabas. It is now conceded that this 
should be, “Cousin to Barnabas.” Since in this year (probably A. D. 62) Mark attends Paul, it is inferred 
that Barnabas was dead. Touching whom. Mark. Commandments. Commendations. Receive 
him. Perhaps these churches knew that at one time Paul had refused to have Mark in his company 
(Acts 15; 38), and hence would not have received him cordially without such a commendation. 11. And 
Jesus, which is called Justus. We only know of this man that, like Mark, he was a Jewish Chris- 
tian, of the circumcision, and highly commended by Paul. 12. Epaphras. See noteon1:7. Heis 
thought to have founded the church at Colosse. One of you. A member of the Colossian church. For 
you in prayers. In his absence from you he continues to labor fervently for you in his prayers. 
18. Them that are in Laodicea. The sister city near at hand across the valley of the Lycus. 
Hierapolis. Another city close at hand, in which a church had been planted. Probably Epaphras 
planted it also. : 

14,15. Luke. The historian. Note that two, Mark and Luke, were both with Paul at this time. See 
Introduction to Luke. He wasa Gentile. Demas. Named also, and not to his credit, in 2 Tim. 4: 10; 
also in Philemon 24. 15. Nymphas. An inhabitant of Laodicea. The church that is in their 
house. “His” in the Old Version; “her” in the Vatican MS., but the best authority renders it “their 
house; ” 7. e., the house of Nymphas and his family. In the first century no church buildings existed, and 
the Christians met in private houses. A portion, at least, of those in Laodicea met in the house of Nym- 
phas, and are greeted as “‘the church in their house.” See also Rom. 16: 5; 1 Cor. 16: 19; Philemon 2, 


Ch. IV.] COLOSSIANS. 


237 





16 And when* this epistle is read among you, 
cause that it be read also in the church of the 
Laodiceans; and that ye likewise read the episéle 
from Laodicea. 

17 And say to Archippus, Take heed to the® 
ministry which thou hast received in the Lord, that 
thou fulfil it. 

18 The salutations by the hand of me Paul. 
Remember! my bonds. Grace dewithyou. Amen. 


their house. And when 16 
this epistle hath been read 
among you, cause thatit be 
read also in the church of 
the Laodiceans; and that 
ye also read the epistle 
from Laodicea. And say to 17 
Archippus, Take heed to 
the ministry which thou 
hast received in the Lord, 
that thou fulfil it. 

The salutation of me 18 
Paul with mine own hand. 
Remember my bonds. 
Grace be with you. 





Written from Rome to the Colossians by Tychicus and Onesi- 
mus. 


ee ee Re ee ee 
a1iThes. 5:27. 6 Phile.2. c1Tim. 4:6. d Heb. 13:3. 





16-18. Likewise read the Epistle from Laodicea, The Epistles addressed to these contiguous 
churches were for each other. Tychicus no doubt bore also a letter to the Laodiceans. Whether that 
letter was lost, whether it is the Epistle to the Ephesians, or whether the letter was a general letter to the 
churches of Asia, has been much discussed. My own opinion is that more than one copy of the Ephesian 
letter was made, one being delivered to the Ephesian church, and the other to the church at Laodicea. 
Space will not permit of a discussion upon this point. 17. Say to Archippus. He is named in Phile- 
mon 2. He had some important work, and was possibly a preacher. 18. The salutation by the hand 
of me Paul. Paul dictated his epistles to an amanuensis (Rom. 16: 22), but was wont to add a saluta- 
tion in his own hand (Gal. 6: 11; 2 Thess. 3: 17; 1 Cor. 16: 21). Remember my bonds. Three times in 
this chapter he alludes to his chains, in verses 3,10 and 18. The thought is, “Be willing to suffer for the 
wospel even as I do.” 


INTRODUCTION TO THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE 
THESSALONIANS. 


This epistle bears the distinction of being the first in the order of time of the letters 
written by the Apostle Paul which have been preserved. Indeed it is the earliest of any 
of the epistolary Books of the New Testament, the beginning of that body of writing to 
which the churches are so much indebted. It was written at least five or six years before 
the great doctrinal and ecclesiastical treatises known as the Roman, Galatian, and the Cor- 
inthian Letters, and with the Second Letter to the Thessalonians which followed it by only 
a few months, it shares the distinction of being the only epistles that came into existence 
before the beginning of Paul’s third great Missionary journey. These epistles, so long 
antedating the others, differ also from them in character. Written only a short time 
after the church at Thessalonica was founded, and called forth by the trials and needs 
of a young congregation which he felt it in his heart to visit again, but was prevented, 
they illustrate the apostolic instruction given to a newly organized church, composed of 
Gentiles, suffering under the persecution of both Jewish and heathen adversaries. They 
are fresh in allusion to the experiences of Paul while among them, and reveal his deep. 
solicitude when forced away. 

When the apostle, on his third missionary journey, passed into Europe, he first planted 
a church at Philippi, but after a little season was driven from there by heathen persecu- 
tion. Then, attended by Silas and Timothy, he went westward along the great Egnatian 
Way, the Roman road which led through Greece to Macedonia. He did not pause untit 
he reached Thessalonica, nearly a hundred miles westward, the chief city of Macedonia, 
situated around a noble harbor at the head of the Aegean Sea. Its situation on the great 
Roman thoroughfare, its position on the extremity of the sea, and the rich country in its. 
rear, had contributed to make it a great commercial city, with a mixed population of 
Greeks, Romans and Jews, the first being the most numerous. Here, where there was a 
synagogue, the apostle paused, found employment to meet his frugal wants, and began ta 
preach among his own countrymen. ‘‘And some of them believed, and consorted with 
Paul and Silas; and of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not 
a few.” 

But soon after the unbelieving Jews stirred up an uproar which made it necessary for 
Paul and Silas to leave, and the brethren sent them away by night. Going from thence 
to Berea to the southwest, they first labored there, and later the apostolic labors were 
extended to Athensand to Corinth. Shortly after Paul’s departure from Thessalonica the 
persecution which had driven him away turned upon the church (2: 14; 3: 8), a circum- 
stance that made him yearn to return (3:5). Twice he resolved to do so but was prevented 
(2:18). Finally he sent back Timothy from Athens (8: 1,2), and when Timothy 
returned to him at Corinth, to which he had proceeded, the message which he brought. 
was the occasion of this epistle, an epistle full of comfort, instruction and encouragement, 
but withal, containing also the instruction in righteousness so much needed by a congre- 
gation of those so recently heathen and addicted to heathen vices. 

It is interesting to know that this church, honored with the first of the apostolic epis- 
tles, long continued to enjoy a glorious sear It was afterwards visited by the apostle. 


INTRODUCTION TO I. THESSALOIANS. 239 


more than once; and is often mentioned in the history of the church. Though for more 
than four hundred years under the sway of the Turk, the majority of its population has 
always continued to profess the religion of Christ. The city is still great and flourishing, 
in point of commerce the third in the Turkish empire, possessing a population estimated 
all the way from 75,000 to 100,000. Of these about one-half are Greek Christians, and 
the remainder nearly equally divided between Mohammedans and Jews. The excellence 
of the harbor makes it a constant object of eastern diplomacy, and at this time one of the 
obstacles in the way of settling the ‘Eastern Question” is to determine what power shall 
be awarded Thessalonica. 

As to the date of the epistle, it can be nearly determined. About A. D. 52, the church 
here was planted. From thence the apostle went to Bereaand Athens. From the latter, 
probably several months after leaving Thessalonica, he sent Timothy back. Several 
months more would intervene before Timothy could return to him at Corinth. It is 
therefore probable that the letter was written in A. D. 53, perhaps at least a year after 
the planting of the church. It was not written at Athens, as an unauthorized addition 
in the Common Version states. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE 


THESSALONIANS. 


CHAPTER I. 


Introductory Greetings. 


Thanksgiving for the Faith of the Thessalo- 
The Great Change 


‘SUMMARY.—Salutation. 
nians. Commendation for Spreading the Gospel. 
in Their Lives. 


1 Paul and? Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto the 
church of the Thessalonians which is” in God the 
Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ: grace be 
unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and the 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

2 We give thanks to God always for you all, 
making mention of you in our prayers; 

3 Remembering without ceasing your work of¢ 
faith, and‘ labour of love, and patience of hope in 
our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God, and our 
Father; 

4 Knowing, brethren beloved, your® election of 
God. 

5 For’ our gospel came not unto you in word 
only, but also in power, and in* the Holy Ghost, 
and" in much assurance; as ye know! what manner 
of men we were among you for your sakes. 





a2 Cor. 1:19; 2 Thes. 1:1; 1 Pet.5:12. 6 John 14:23; 1 John 1:3. 


d@Heb.6:10. e Col. 8:12; 2 Thes. 2:18. f1Cor. 2:4. g2 Cor. 6:6, 





CHAPTER I. 


Paul, and Silvanus, and 1 
Timothy, unto the church 
of the Thessalonians in 


God the Father and the 


Lord Jesus Christ: Grace 
to you and peace. 

We give thanks to God 2 
always for you all, making 
mention of yowin our pray- 
ers; remembering without 3 
ceasing your work of faith 
and labour of love and pa- 
tience of hope in our Lord 
Jesus Christ, before our 
God and Father; ; knowing, 4 
brethren beloved of God, 
your election, how that 5 
our gospel came not unto 
you in word only, but also 
in power, and in the Holy 
Ghost, and in much assur- 
ance; even aS ye know 
what manner of men we 
shewed ourselves toward 


¢ John 6:29; Gal. 5:6; 1 Thes. 3:6; James 2:17. 
h Col. 2:2 Heb. 2:3. 


22 Thes. 3:7. 





1. Paul, Silvanus and Timothy. Silvanus is the same as the Silas of Acts. 


We learn from Acts 


(chapters 15 to 18) that both Silas and Timothy attended Paul on the second missionary journey during 
which this Epistle was written. Paul does not speak of his apostleship in this salutation, as in later epis- 
tles, because at this early period the Judaizing Christians had not begun to spread doubts whether he 
was an apostle. In God the Father. Hence, separated from the Gentiles. The Lord Jesus Christ. 
Hence, separated from the Jews. 

2-5. We. The plural, perhaps, is used because Silas and Timothy were joined in the greeting, but the 
Epistle is Paul’s, not the joint work of three persons. Give thanks. Almost all Paul’s letters begin 
with thanksgiving. 8. Remembering - your work of faith. He states reasons for thankful- 
ness. Work of faith. Works which result from faith. Labor of love. Toil for others caused by 
love for them and for Christ. Patience of hope. Patient endurance of toil, hardship and persecution 
through a hope in Christ. Probably a hope that soon these would cease with the coming of Christ. The 
Thessalonians, as we learn, expected his speedy coming. 4. Knowing your election of God. 
That you are of the elect, the “chosen nation.” All Christians were the elect, and the expression is 
another way of saying, ‘“Knowing that you have become Christians.” 5, For our gospel came not 
unto you in word only. God gave the spoken word power, the power of the Holy Spirit which 
‘dictated it. Observe that the ‘‘power” is referred to the preachers. Ye know. Ye know what was the 
life, the earnestness and the power in the Holy ne 40) while we were preaching among you. 


Ch. II.] I. THESSALONIANS. 


241 





6 And ye became followers of us, and of the 
Lord, having received the word in much affliction, 
with joy of the Holy Ghost: 

7 So that ye were ensamples to all that believe in 
Macedonia and Achaia. 

8 For from you? sounded out the word of the 
Lord not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in 
every place your faith to God-ward is spread 
abroad; so that we need not to speak any thing. 

9 For they themselves shew of us what manner 
of entering in we had unto you, and how ye turned 
to God from idols, to serve the living and true God. 

10 And to” wait for his Son* from heaven, whom 
he raised from the dead, even Jesus, which deliver- 
ed us from‘ the wrath to come. 


CHAPTER II. 


Paul’s Ministry at Thessalonica. 


‘SSUMMARY.—How the Gospel was Brought to Thessalonica. The Manner 
of Paul’s Preaching. His Manner of Life. His Exhortations. Their 
Persecutions. His Desire to Return to Comfort Them. 


1 For yourselves, brethren, know our entrance in 
unto you, that it was not in vain: 

2 But even after that we had suffered before, 
and were shamefully entreated, as ye know, at® 
Philippi, we were bold in our God* to speak unto 
you the gospel of God with much contention. 

3 For our exhortation was not of deceit, nor of 





you for your sake. And ye 6 
ecame imitators of us, 
and of the Lord, having 
received the word in much 
affliction, with joy of the 
Holy Ghost; so that ye be- 7 
came an ensample to all 
that believe in Macedonia 
and in Achaia. For from 8 
you hath sounded forth 
the word of the Lord, not 
only in Macedonia and 
Achaia, but in every place 
your faith to God-ward is 
gone forth; so that weneed 
not to speak any thing. 
For they themselves report 9 
concerning us what man- 
ner of entering in we had 
unto you; and how ye 
turned unto God from 
idols, to serve a living and 
true God, and to wait for 10 
his Son from heaven,whom 
he raised from the dead, 
even Jesus, which deliver- 
eth us from the wrath to 
come, : 


CHAPTER II, 


For yourselves, brethren, 1 
know our entering in unto 
ou, that it hath not been 

ound vain: but having 2 
suffered before, and been 
shamefully entreated, as ye 
know, at Philippi, we wax- 
ed bold‘in our God to speak 
unto you the gospel of God 

in much conflict. For our 3 
exhortation és not of error, 


° * nor of uncleanness, nor in 
uncleanness, nor in guile: 











a@ Rom. 10:18. 6 Rom. 2:7; Phil. 3:20; Titus 2:18. ¢ Acts1:1l. d@1Thes. 5:9. e Acts 16:22. f Acts 17:2. 








6, '7. Yebecame followers of us. Followed them as they followed the Lord. Having received 
the word in much affliction. In the midst of opposition and persecution. See Acts, chapter 17. 
With joy of the Holy Ghost. With rejoicing as soon as they accepted the gospel. 7. So that ye 
were ensamples. Their earnestness was such that they were worthy of imitation by all who had 
become Christians. Macedonia. The great Roman province, of which Thessalonica was the capital, 
lying north of the Aigean Sea. Achaia. The Roman province of which Corinth was the capital. It 
embraced most of Greece. 

8-10. For from you sounded out. The effect of the gospel in Thessalonica was so striking that 
the report of it went through all Macedonia and Greece, and awakened inquiry, so that a knowledge of 
the gospel was thus spread abroad. So that we need not to speak anything. Wherever he went 
che found that the news of the church in the great city of Thessalonica had preceded him, so that he did 
not need to tellit. 9. For they themselyes. The people ‘“‘every place” (verse 8). How ye turned 
to God from idols.’ Most of them had been heathen. See the accounts in Acts17: 4. 10. And to 
wait for his Son from heaven. The apostles saw the Lord ascend, but he left a promise that he 
would return, with the time wholly unrevealed. Hence, in preaching the gospel, they made his return to 
the world yery prominent, and perhaps believed themselves in his speedy coming. Until after Jerusalem 
was destroyed the churches waited, as though the Lord would soon be revealed. We should still wait, 
‘watch and pray.” We know not the hour when he may either come, or we be called to him. 

1-4. Our entrance . .. was not invain. The existence of the flourishing church, where none 
‘had before existed, was proof Of that fact. 2. Were shamefully entreated at Philippi. 
See Acts 16: 19-24. Even after such cruel treatment at the first place in Europe where they preached the 


242 I. THESSALONIANS. 


(Ch. IL. 


a _ 


4 But as* we were allowed of God to” be put in 
trust with the gospel, even so we speak; not as 
pleasing men, but God, which trieth our hearts. 

5 For neither at any time used we flattering 
words, as ye know, nor a cloak of covetousness; 
God zs witness: j 

6 Nor‘ of men sought we glory, neither of you, 
nor yet of others, when we might have been bur- 
densome, as the apostles of Christ. 

7 But we were gentle among you, even as a nurse 
cherisheth her children: 

8 So, being affectionately desirous of you, we 
were willing? to have imparted unto you, not the 
gospel of God only, but also our* own souls, 
because ye were dear unto us. 

9 For ye remember, brethren, our labour and 
travail: for labouring night and day, because® we 
would not be chargeable unto any man of you, we 
preached unto you the gospel of God. 

10 Ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily, 
and justly, and unblameably, we behaved ourselves 
among you that believe: 

11 As ye know how we exhorted and comforted, 
and charged every one of you, (as a father doth his 
children, ) 

12 That® ye would walk worthy of God, who 
hath called you unto his kingdom and glory. 

13 For this cause also thank we God without 








uile: but even as we have 4 

een approved of God to be 
intrusted with the gospel, 
so we speak; not as pleas- 
ing men, but God which 
proveth our hearts. For 5. 
neither at any time were 
we found using words of 
flattery, as ye know, nora 
cloke of covetousness, God 
is witness; nor seeking 6 
glory of men, neither from 
you, nor from others, when 
we might have been bur- 
densome, as apostles of 
Christ. But we were gen- 
tle in the midst of you, as 
when a nurse cherisheth 
her own children: even so, 
being affectionately desir- 
ous of you, we were well 
pleased toimpart unto you, 
not the gospel of God only, 
but also our own souls, be- 
cause ye were become very 
dear tous. For ye remem- 
ber, brethren, our labour 
and travail: working night 
and day, that we might not 
burden any of you, we 
preached unto Pe the gos- 
pel of God. e are wit- 
nesses, and God also, how 
holily and righteously and 
unblameably we behaved 
ourselves toward you that 
believe: as ye know how 
we dealt with each one of 
you, as a father with his 
own children, exhorting 
you, and encouraging you, 
and testifying, to the end 
that ye should walk wor- 
thily of God, who calleth 
you into his own kingdom 
and glory. 

And for this cause we 13: 





a1Cor. 7:25;1 Tim. 1:11. 6 Tit. 1:3. et 17:3. dJohn 5:41. 


e Rom. 1:11; 
h Col. 1:10; 1 Pet. 


1:15. 


15:29. f2 Cor. 12:15. g2 Cor. 





gospel, they were no less bold in . .« God to speak . 


the gospel at Thessalonica, the second. 


place they labored, though with much contention. With fierce opposition. See Acts17:13. 8. For 
our exhortation was not of deceit. The message they preached did not spring from deceit, or 
unclean lives, or guile. It was in all sincerity, and hence they were bold. 4. So we speak. God had 
given them the gospel as a trust. They “were stewards of the mysteries of God.” They spoke as those: 
faithful to a trust, seeking to please God instead of men. 

5-8. Flattering words. He would haye used these if he had sought to please men, but he told them 
plainly of their sins. Nor acloke of covetousness. Nor did he have a covetous motive and conceal 
it by fair pretences. 6. Nor sought we glory. Enemies of the cross sought some motive to: 
explain the devotion of the apostles to the work. When all others failed, they named the desire of glory, 
as though men would make themselves “offscouring” for the sake of glory. When we might, etc. 
They might have demanded glory, and stood on the dignity of the apostles’ office, and required pecuniary 
support. Instead, they worked at Thessalonica with their own hands for a support (see verse 9). 
”. Were gentle. Instead of throwing ourselves on our dignity as apostles. 8. But also our own 
souls. You were so dear to us that we not only were willing to impart the gospel, but would have given 
our lives to you and for you. ; 

9-12. Ye remember, brethren, our labor and travail. There was hard and exhausting labor, 
‘night and day.” The apostle was not willing to be chargeable to them; hence, while preaching “in. 
season and out of season,” he labored at his trade for a support. To this day the weaving of black cloths. 
for tents is a great industry at Thessalonica. 10. Ye are witnesses. How holy and blameless were 
our lives. 11. Asafather doth his children. As tenderly andearnestly. 12. Hath called you 
unto his kingdom. The kingdom of Christ, visible as the church on earth. 

13-16. Not as the word of men. They had received the gospel preached by Paul as the word of 


Ch. II.] I. THESSALONIANS. 


243 








ceasing, because, when ye received the word of 
God, which ye heard of us, ye received 7t* not as 
the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of 
God, which effectually worketh also in you that 
believe. 








also thank God without 
ceasing, that, when ye re- 
ceived from us the word of 
the message, even the word 
of God, ye accepted it not 
as the word of men, but, as 
it is in truth, the word of 
God, which also worketh 


14 For ye, brethren, became followers of the” Ye, brethren, became im es 
1 | ators of the churehes o 
churches of God which in Judea are in Christ | {ate See eae earenes of 
Jesus: for® ye also have suffered like things of Your | Christ Jesus: for. ye also 
su ret Se S$ OL 
own countrymen, even? as they have of the Jews: ©) your owneountrymen evan 
15 Who both killed the Lord Jesus® and their yhG hi a - 
own prophets, and have persecuted us; and they Jesus and the prophets 
please not God, and are contrary to all men: please not sGod.-avacin 
j j 3s iles contrary to all men, for- 16 
16 Forbidding‘ us to speak to the Gentiles, that piddine dee coc a 
they might be saved,® to fill up their sins alway: Gentiles that they may be 
. Vv 5 * 
for® the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. niWay bur thee ae 
17 But we, brethren, being taken from you for a fom EPOR, Uaera hohe ai 
short time in presence, not in heart, endeavoured pet, We, brethren, being 17 
° Peavy FOU T rt 
the more abundantly to see your face with great meas: faroedsce Se 
7 ; heart, endeavored the more 
desire. exceedingly to see your 
18 Wherefore we would have come unto you face with great desire: be- 18 
s & USE Wi oO ain Nav 
(even I Paul) once again; but Satan hindered us. _| S286 unto you, 1 Paul 
‘ , 7 once and again, an atan 
19 For what zs our hope, or joy, or crown of | nee and ee ee 


rejoicing? are not even ye in the presence of our 
Lord Jesus Christ! at his coming? 


our hope, or joy, or crown 
of glorving? Are not even 
ye, before our Lord Jesus 


at his coming? For ye are 20 
our glory and our joy. 


é Matt. 5:12; Acts 7:52. fLuke 11:52; Acts 13:50; 14:19; 
#1 Cor. 15:23; 1 Thes. 3:13; Rev. 1:7: 22:12. ; 


20 For ye are our glory and joy. 











d Heb. 10:38. 


6 Gal. 1:22. c Acts 17°5. 
h Matt. 24:6. 


a Matt. 10:40. 
g Gen. 15:16. 


17:5; 22:21. 





the Lord, a divine message. Which effectually worketh. The word, received into the heart, is the 
good seed of the kingdom, and springeth up to eternal life. 14. Became followers. Imitators of the 
churches in Judea, enduring persecution faithfully. Ye also have suffered. As the Jews persecuted 
the churches in Judea, so you have been persecuted by your own countrymen. The persecution at 
Thessalonica was first stirred up by unbelieving Jews, but they induced the heathen to join in it. They 
“stirred up ‘the people” (Acts 17: 13). 15. Who both killed. The Jews in Thessalonica had incited 
the persecution there. Their hostility to righteousness elsewhere is cited. They not only slew the Savior, 
but had killed their own prophets (Matt. 23: 31). Persecuted us. The apostles and evangelists, and 
especially Paul. Their hatred pursued him everywhere. 16. Forbidding us to speak to the Gen- 
tiles. Nothing created such animosity on the part of the Jews as preaching the gospel to the Gentiles. 
See Acts 22: 21-23. To fill up their sins alway. To fill the measure of their sins so full that God 
would reject them as a people. Compare Gen. 15: 16; Matt. 23: 32. For the wrath is come upon them 
to the uttermost. They were ripe for destruction. Before twenty years it came. 

17-20. We, brethren, being taken from you. Forced away from them, his heart remained with 
them. 18. We would have come. Once and again, twice, he had purposed to return to them, but 
Satan hindered. How, is not stated, but some difficulties intervened that Paul attributed to Satan. 
His agency is often manifest when we do not recognize it; sometimes in wicked opposition, sometimes 
even“ as an angel of light.” 19, What is our crown of rejoicing? As the victor in the games 
could point to his crown as the proof of his powers, so Paul could point to the Gentile churches as the 
proof of his ministry. At hiscoming. Paul took pride in the thought how great a work the Lord at his 
coming would behold which he had wrought in the gospel. 


244 I. THESSALONIANS. 


(Ch. II. 


NN s ———— eee 


CHAPTER III. 


Paul’s Feelings Toward the Thessalonians. 


SumMARyY.—Paul in His Great Solicitude Sent Timothy to Them. The 
Joy that Timothy’s Report Gave Him. His Prayer to See Them Face 
to Face. A Prayer for Them. 


1 Wherefore, when we could no longer forbear,* 
we thought it good to be left at Athens alone, 

2 And sent? Timotheus, our brother, and minis- 
ter of God, and fellow-labourer in the gospel of 
Christ, to establish you, and to comfort you con- 
cerning your faith; 

3 That® no man should be moved by these afflic- 
tions: for yourselves know that‘ we are appointed 
thereunto. 

4 For? verily, when we were with you, we told 
you before that we should suffer tribulation; even 
as it came to pass, and ye know. 

5 For this cause, when I could no longer forbear, 
I sent to know your faith,‘ lest by some means the 
tempter have tempted you, and our® labour be in 
vain. 

6 But" now, when Timotheus came from you 
unto us, and brought us good tidings of your faith 
and charity, and that ye have good remembrance of 
us always, desiring greatly to see us,! as we also éo 
see you; : 

7 Therefore, brethren, we were comforted over 
you in all our affliction and distress by your faith: 

8 For now we live, if ye! stand fast in the Lord. 

9 For what thanks can we render to God again 
for you, for all the joy wherewith we joy for your 
sakes before our God; 











CHAPTER III. 


Wherefore when we could 1 
no longer forbear, we 
thought it good to be left 
behind at Athens alone; 
and sent Timothy, our 
brother and God’s minister 
in the gospel of Christ, to 
establish you, and to com- 
fort you concerning your 
faith; thatno man be mov- 
ed by these afflictions; for 
yourselves know that here- 
unto weare appointed. For 
verily, when we were with 
Nae we told you before- 

and that we are to suffer 
affliction: even_as it came 
to pass, and ye know. For 
this cause I also, when I 
could no longer forbear, 
sent that 1 might know 
your faith, lest by any 
means the tempter had 
tempted you, and our la- 
bour should be in vain. 
But when Timothy came 6 
even now unto us from 
you. and brought us glad 
tidings of your faith and 
love, and that ye have 
good remembrance of us 
always, longing to see us, 
even as we also to see you; 
for this cause, brethren, 
we were comforted over 
you in all our distress and 
affliction through your 
faith; for now we live, if 

e stand fast in the Lord. 

‘or what thanksgiving can 
we render again unto God 
for you, for all the joy 
wherewith we joy for your 
sakes before our God; 


i) 


ao 








a Acts 17:15. 6 Rom. 16:21; 2 Cor. 1:19. 


g Gal. 2:2. 


c Eph. 3:18. 


A Acts 18:1. @ Phil. 1:8. 





d John 16:33; Acts 9:16. 
j Phil. 4:1. 


e Acts 20:24. f1 Cor. 7:5. 


1-5. When we could no longer forbear. The closing verses of chapter 2 show Paul’s great desire 
to see them, as a father to see his suffering children. Hindered (2: 18), he at last “thought it good to be 
left alone at Athens” (Acts 18: 1-5). 2. Amd sent Timothy, our brother. Acts 18:5 shows that 
Paul had been left alone at Athens, went to Corinth alone, and was there joined by Silas and Timothy, 
who came from Macedonia. Timothy had been sent to strengthen the new church at Thessalonica. 
8. That no man should be moved by these afflictions. Timothy was sent to prevent any one 
being moved from Christ by the opposition and persecutions suffered. Yourselves know. Know that 
it is the lot of God’s people to suffer persecution. 4. For . we told you. He had faithfully 
forewarned them that tribulation would come. 5. Lest by some means the tempter, ete. The 
tempter is Satan. Unable to hear from them, fearing the effect of their fiery trial, he sent Timothy, not 
vonly to strengthen them, but to report to him their state . 

6-8. Now when Timothy came. Timothy came to him at Corinth (Acts 17: 5) and brought an 
excellent report of the young and persecuted church. '7. We were comforted. The good tidings of 
the faithfulness of the saints filled him with joy. 8. For now we live, if, ete. How tender his affec- 
tion for them if he could say that good news from them filled him with new life! 

9-18. What thanks can we render? How can we be thankful enough? 10. Night and day 


f 


stablish your hearts. 
duty and trial. 


should . 


Ch. IV.] 





10 Night® and day praying exceedingly that we 
might see your face, and might perfect that which 
is lacking in your faith? 

11 Now God himself and our Father, and our 
Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way unto you: 

12 And the Lord make 
abound in love one to another, and toward all men, 
even as we do toward you: 

13 To the end he may stablish your hearts un- 
blameable in holiness before God, even our Father, 
at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ” with all his 
saints. 


I. THESSALONIANS. 





you to 


CHAPTER IV. 


Exhortation to a Godly Life. 


Lord at His Coming. 


increase and 


SUMMARY.—Continence Commanded. Brotherly Love Required. Each 
Should Quietly Follow His Own Business. 
Hope for the Dead. They, as well as the Living Saints, shall Meet the 


Not to Sorrow Without 


1 Furthermore then, we beseech you, brethren, 


@ Acts 26:7. 





2), though not for three or four years. 
come or not, his prayer is for their increase in love, the greatest of all graces. 
Love shed abroad in their hearts would have this effect, and fit them for every 
He that loveth supremely fulfills the whole law, 
In all Paul’s letters to Gentile churches there is a closing exhortation to 


1, 2. Furthermore then. 


possess his vessel. 


ce Col. 1:10. 


and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have 
received of us how ye ought to walk and° to please 
God, so ye would abound more and more. 

2 For ye know what commandments we gave you 
by the Lord Jesus. 

3 For this is‘ the will of God, even your sanctifi- 
cation, that ye should abstain from fornication: 

4 That® every one of you should know how to 
possess his. vessel in sanctification and honour; 

5 Not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the 
Gentiles* which know not God: 


6 Zech. 14:53 Jude 14; Rev. 20:11. 


d Eph. 6:17. 








245 


night and day praying ex- 10 
eeedingly that we may see 
your face, and may perfect 
that which is lacking in 
your faith? 

Now may our God and 11 
Father himself, and our 
Lord Jesus, direct our way 
unto you: and the Lord 12 
make you to increase and 
abound in love one toward 
another, and toward all 
men, even as we also do to- 
ward you; to the end he 13 
may stablish your hearts 
unblameable in holiness 
before our God and Father. 
at the coming of our Lord. 
Jesus with all his saints. 





CHAPTER IV. 


Finally then, brethren, 1 
we beseech and exhort you 
in the Lord Jesus, that, as 
ye received of us how ye 
ought to walk and to please 
God, even as ye do walk,— 
that ye abound more and 
more. For ye know what 2 
charge we gave_ you 
through the Lord Jesus. 
For this 1s the will of God, 3 , 
even your sanctification, 
that ye abstain from forni- 
cation; that each one of 4 
cou know how to possess 
limself of his own vessel 
mm sanctification and hon- 
our, not m the passion of 5 
lust, even as the Gentiles 


e Rom. 6:19. Eph. 2:12. 





purity of life and against such sins as Gentiles especially needed to guard against. 
the Thessalonians begin with the fourth chapter. How ye ought to walk. Hereminds them that he 
had instructed them how to live to please God. 2, 
been given as coming from the Lord Jesus. 

8-8. This is the will of God. 


What commandments. 


praying. An expression of his intense longing to see again a band of young converts so tenderly 
endeared to him. And might perfect that which is lacking. Instruct them more fully in knowl- 
edge and duty. So recently heathen, they needed a wise teacher very much. 
An appeal that he may be permitted to return to them. The prayer was granted in due time (Acts 20: 1, 
12. The Lord make you to increase. 


11. Now God himself. 


Whether he may 
18. Tothe end he may 


These exhortations to 


What commands had 


What he had taught them was the will of God and needful to their 
sanctification, or holiness of life. That ye abstain from fornication. The student of the Epistles 
will note how often this command is repeated to Gentile churches, a fact easily explained when we 
remember that fornication was considered no sin among the heathen. 4, That every one of you 
Should restrain his bodily desires, and make even his appetites 
holy. 5. Even as the Gentiles which know not God. Even the greatest of heathen moralists, 


246 I. THESSALONIANS. 


6 That? no man go beyond and defraud his 
brother in any matter; because that the Lord és the 
avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned 
you and testified. 

7 For God hath not called us unto uncleanness,” 
but unto holiness. 

8 He® therefore that despiseth, despiseth not 
man, but God,* who hath also given unto us his 
Holy Spirit. 

9 But as touching brotherly love, ye need not 
that I write unto you: for ye® yourselves are taught 
of God to love one another. 

10 And indeed ye do it toward all the brethren 
which are in all Macedonia: but we beseech you, 
brethren, that ye increase more and more; 

11 And that ye study to be quiet, and to do your 
own business, and to work with your own hands, as 
we commanded you; 

12 That ye may walk honestly toward them that 
are without, and that ye may have lack of nothing. 

13 But I would not have you to be ignorant, 
brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that 
ye sorrow not, even‘ as others which have no hope. 

14 For? if we believe that Jesus died, and rose 
again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus. will 
God bring with him. 

15 For this we say unto you" by the word of the 


6 Lev. 11:44. dad] John 8:24. 


g1 Cor. 15:13. 


a Lev. 19:11. ec Luke 10:16. 


hil Kings 13:17. 








(Ch. IV. 


which know not God; that 6 
no man transgress, and 
wrong bis brother in the 
matter: because the Lord 
is an avenger in all these 
things, as also we fore- 
warned you and testified. 
For God called us not for 7 
uncleanness, but in sancti- 
fication. Therefore he that 8 
rejecteth, rejecteth not 
man, but God, who giveth 
his Holy Spirit unto you. 

But concerning love of 9 ~ 
the brethren ye have no 
need that one write unto 
you: for ye yourselves are 
taught of God to love one 
another; for indeed ye do 
it toward all the brethren 
which are in all Macedo- 
nia. But we exhort you, 
brethren, that ye abound 
more and more; and that 11 
ye study to be quiet, and 
to do your own business, 
and to work with your 
hands, even as we charged 
you, that-ye may walk 12 

onestly toward them that 
are without, and may have 
need of nothing. 

But we would not have 13 
you ignorant, brethren 
eoncerning them that fall 
asleep ; that ye sorrow not, 
even as the rest, which 
have no hope. For if we 14 
believe that Jesus died and 
rose again, even so them 
also that are fallen asleep 
in Jesus will God bring 
with him. For this we say 15 
unto you by the word of 


e John 13:34. f Lev. 19:28; Deut. 14:2; 2 Sam. 12:20. 





Socrates, instructed a harlot how she should conduct her shameful business. 


The heathen moralists con- 


demned unchastity only in the case of a child-bearing wife, as it would wrong her husband not to know 
the paternity of her children. 6. That no man go beyond. Beyond the bounds of purity, so as to 
wrong his brother. In our age, to assail the purity of wife or daughter is counted as a fearful crime 
against the family. The Lord is the avenger. He will punish the adulterer, or libertine. ‘7. Unto 
holiness. The Christian cailing demands purity of life. 8. He that despiseth. Who considers not 
the rights and welfare of his fellow-beings, and invades the purity of the home, let him know that it is 
God he despises, not man. God has required of him holiness instead of unecleanness, Giveth his Holy 
Spirit. The temple of the Holy Spirit must be holy. To defile it, that is ourselves, is to insult God. ; 

9-12. As touching brotherly love. This subject springs out of verse6. Taught of God. The 
whole gospel teaches you to love one another. When you are born of God, you are his children and all 
brethren. As Christ loved the brethren, so must you if you follow him. 10. And indeed ye do. 
Their conduct showed their brotherly love. 11. Study to be quiet. The Greeks were naturally.a 
restless people, often given to intermeddling in the business of other people. Work with your own 
hands. A Christian must not be anidler, <A ‘loafer’ cannot show forth the life of Christ. We gather, 
elsewhere, that some brethren at Thessalonica thought the time so short until the Lord would come that 
work was unnecessary. 12. That ye may walk honestly. Becomingly in the sight of those without. 
It would be a reproach if the heathen could say, “This new religion makes men idle and brings them to 
beggary.” Lack of nothing. The necessaries supplied by labor are especially meant, 

13-18. But we would not have youignorant. It seems that the Thessalonian brethren, expect- 
ing the speedy coming of the Lord, mourned over some of their number who had died, counting it a great 
loss that they did not live to meet Jesus. Them which are asleep. What we call death is only falling 
asleep in the arms of our Lord. 14. If we believe, etc. If we believe in the death and resurrection of 
Christ, we must believe also that all who sleep in him will be raised with him. 15. For this we say. 


I. THESSALONIANS. 


Lord, that we which are alive and remain unto the 
coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which 
are asleep. 

16 For? the Lord himself shall descend from 
heaven with a shout, with the voice of the arch- 
angel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in 
Christ shall rise first: 

17 Then we which are alive and remain shall be 
caught up together with them? in the clouds, to 
meet the Lord in the air: and so‘ shall we ever be 
with the Lord. 

18 Wherefore comfort one another with these 
words. 


Ch. V.] 


CHAPTER V. 


Closing Admonitions. 


SuMMARY.—The Time of the Lord’s Coming Unknown. Will be Sudden. 
Hence, Let Us not be Asleep. Let Us Have Our Armor On. Mutual 
Duties of Shepherds and Flock. Christian Life. Benediction. 

1 But of4 the times and the seasons, brethren, ye 
have no need that I write unto you. 

2 For yourselves know perfectly, that® the day of 
the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night. 

3 For when they shall say, Peace and safety, 
then! sudden destruction cometh upon them, as 
travail upon a woman with a child; and they shall 
not escape. 

4 But® ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that 
that day should overtake you as a thief. 


b Acts 1:95 Rev. 11:12. 
e Rey. 3:3. fisa. 13:6. 





@ Matt. 24:30; Acts 1:11; 2 Thes. 1:7. 
d Matt. 24:3, 





247 





| the Lord, that we that are 
alive, that are left unto the 
coming of the Lord, shall 
in no wise precede them 
that are fallen asleep. For 
the Lord himself shall de- 
scend from heaven, with a 
shout, with the voice of the 
archangel, and with the 
trump of God: and the 
dead in Christ shall rise 
first: then we that are 
alive, that are left, shall 
together with them be 
caught up in the clouds, to 
meet the Lord in the air: 
and so shall we_ever be 





17 


with the Lord. Wherefore 18 


comfort one another with 
these words. 


CHAPTER V. 


But concerning the times 1 


and the seasons, brethren 
ye have no need that aught 
be written unto you. 

yourselves know perfectly 
that the day of the Lord 
so cometh as a thief in the 


or 2 


night. When they are say- 3 


ing, Peace and safety, then 
sudden destruction cometh 
upon them, as travail upon 
a woman with child; and 
they shall in no wise es- 


cape. But ye, brethren, are 4 


not in darkness, that that 





day should overtake you 





ce John 12:26; 14:85 17:24; Rev. 21:3,45 22:3-5. 
g 1 John 2:8. 


He now explains how it will be at the Lord’s coming. We which are alive. We who are on the earth 
when the Lord comes, will not precede those who died in the Lord to meet him. 16. For the Lord 
himself. They seemed to have thought that the living saints would hurry to meet the Lord, and that 
the dead would be powerless to follow. On the contrary, Christ comes to them. He will descend. With 


a shout. The voice of an archangel. 


The voice of command. With the trump of God. The 


trumpet blast as a signal andasummons. The dead in Christ shall rise first. Before the living 
are gathered, all the saints who slept in Christ shall be gathered around him. In the final day, the first 
actis the gathering of the departed saints; the next, the gathering of the living saints. 17. Then we, 


etc. 
the Lord. So shall we ever be with the Lord. 
/ ore, comfort one another. Cheer each other with these assurances. 


subject in the conclusion 
know perfectly, ete. 


All the church, the saints of past ages, and the saints of the last age, shall ascend together to meet 
That glorious meeting shall never end. 18. Where- 


Tell the mourning ones that 
when they are called to meet the Lord they will find their own sleeping ones in the glorious company, 
1-3. But of the times and the seasons. Especially the time of the Lord’s coming, which is the 


of chapter 4. They had been instructed on this subject. 2. For yourselves 
They had been fully taught that the time of the Lord’s coming was unrevealed, 


-and that it would be unexpected. Compare Matt. 24: 43; 2 Thess. 2: 2; 2 Peter 3:10; Joeli: 15. The day 


of the Lord. 
the final coming of 
thief in the night. 
When the thoughtless are persuading 
tion shall come as suddenly as the pangs of childbirth. 

4-7. Ye, brethren, are not in darkness. The 


Not alone, the day of each individual’s death, nor of the destruction of Jerusalem, nor of 
the Lord at the end of the world, but rather it may be applied to all of these. Asa 
Without warning. Compare Luke 12: 39; Rey. 3: 3. 8. When they shall say. 
themselves that there is no ground for apprehension, then destruc- 


Christian has been fully instructed, is a child of 


248 J. THESSALONIANS. 


5 Ye are all’ the children of light, and the 
children of the day: we are not of the night, nor of 
darkness. 

6 Therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but let 
us watch and be sober. 

7 For” they that sleep, sleep in the night; and 
they that be drunken, are® drunken in the night. 

8 But let us, who are of the day, be sober, put- 
ting? on the breastplate of faith and love; and for 
an helmet the hope of salvation: 

9 For® God hath not appointed us to wrath, but 
to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, 

10 Who died for us, that, whether we wake or 
sleep, we should live together with him. 

- 11 Wherefore comfort yourselves together, and 
edify one another, even as also ye do. 

12 And we beseech you, brethren, to’ know them 
which labour among you, and are over you in the 
Lord, and admonish you; 

13 And to esteem them very highly in love for 
their works’ sake. And be at peace among your- 





[Ch. V- 


as a thief: for ye are all 5 
sons of light, and sons of 
the day: we are not of the 
night, nor of darkness; so 6 
then let us not sleep, as do 
the rest, but let us watch 
and be sober. For they 7 
that sleep sleep in the 
night; and they that be 
drunken are drunken in the 
night. But let us, since we & 
are of the day be sober, 
putting on the breastplate 
of faith and love; and for 
a helmet, the hope of sal- 
vation. For God appoint- 9 
ed us not unto wrath, but 
unto the obtaining of sal- 
vation through our Lord 
Jesus Christ, who died for 10 
us, that, whether we wake 
or sleep, we should live to- 
gether with him. Where- 11 
fore, exhort one another, 
and build each other up, 
even as also ye do. 

But we beseech you, 12: 
brethren, to know them 
that labour among you,and 
are over you in the Lord, 
and adironish you; and to 13 
esteem them exceedingly 
highly in love for their 
work’s sake. Be at peace 
among yourselves. And we 14- 


exhort you, brethren, ad- 
monish the disorderly, en- 
courage the fainthearted, 
support the weak, be long- 


selves. 

14 Now we exhort you, brethren, warn them that 
are unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the 
weak, be patient toward all men. 


d Isa, 59:17. 











a@Eph5:8. 6 Luke 21:34. ¢ Acts 2:15. ée Rom. 9:22; 1 Pet. 2:8; 2 Tim. 2:19. / Phil. 2:29, 





the light, and knows that he must always be ready. He follows the Light of the World. 5. Yeare all 
the children of light. They are of the light, of the day, because they have come to Christ for light, 
and are taught of him. Hence on this subject they are fully informed. Those are of the night, who turn. 
away from the light and refuse to accept it. 6. Therefore let us not sleep. Since Christians are of 
the day, they should be wide awake. Day is not the time for sleep. <A sleep of the spiritual faculties, 
which renders one insensible to danger, is meant.~ Instead of sleeping, Christians should watch and be 
sober. Fora comment declaring how we should obey this, turn to Luke 21: 34, 36: “Take heed to your- 
selves, etc.” 7%. They that sleep, sleep inthe night. Hence, Christians who are of the day, should 
be wakeful and watching. They that be drunken, are drunken in the night. In most countries 
they are ashamed to be seen intoxicated, and hence choose the night. In the Eastitisso. Peter thought 
the fact that it was day, and only nine o’clock, was proof that the scenes of Pentecost were not due to 
wine (Acts 2: 15). 

8-11. Putting on the breastplate of faith and love. The exhortation to the soldierly duties of 
watchfulness and sobriety suggests the thought of a sentinel and his armor. Compare Eph. 6; 11. There 
the shield of faith is spoken of; here the breastplate. Both were for the defense of the body. Nothing 
will better protect the heart from eyil thoughts and keep us watching than faith and love. And for an 
helmet, the hope of salvation. See notes on Eph. 6:17. What a power to protect, a blessed hope of 
salvation through Christ! 9. God hath not appointed usto wrath. Hence it is our privilege to- 
hope for salvation through Christ. 10. Who died for us. That we might secure salvation. Hence 
our salvation is so assured that even death cannot rob us of it. Whether we are alive, or sleep in-death, 
we shall live together with Christ. 11. Wherefore. This assurance is ground for comfort, and 
especially for comfort to mourners. Edify one another. Build each other up; strengthen each other. 

12,13. Know them, Recognize and appreciate. Which labor among you. Your preachers 
and elders. The three duties of those over them are to labor among them, to rule over them, and to 
admonish them. 18, Esteem them. This esteem is due them on account of their work. Compare 
Heb. 13: 17, and Phil. 1: 22. Be at peace. Let there be no factious spirit. 

14-16. Warn them that are unruly. The duties named in this section are those of the elders 
especially, but in a lesser sense the duty of all. Unruly. Those who are wayward, inconsistent, and. 


Chevy] I. THESSALOIANS. 


249 





15 See that none render evil for evil unto any 
man; but® ever follow that which is good, both 
among yourselves, and to all men. 

16 Rejoice evermore. 

17 Pray” without ceasing. 

18 In every thing give thanks: for this is the will 
of God in Christ Jesus concerning you. 

19 Quench not the Spirit. 

20 Despise® not prophesyings. 

21 Prove’ all things: hold fast that which is good. 

22 Abstain® from all appearance of evil. 

23 And‘ the very God of peace sanctifiy you 
wholly: and ZI pray God your whole spirit, and 
soul, and body, be® preserved blameless unto the 
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

. 24°Faithful" 7s he that calleth you, who also will 
0 zt. 

25 Brethren, pray for us. 

26 Greet all the brethren with an holy kiss. 

27 I charge you by the Lord that this epistle be 
read unto all the holy brethren. 

28 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with 
you. Amen. 

The first epistle unto the Thessalonians was written from 
Athens. 
aGal. 6:10. 6 Luke 18:1. 








c1Cor. 14.1. d1John 4:1. 


e Ex. 23:7. f Phil. 4:9. 


| suffering toward all. See 15. 
that none render unto any 
one evil for evil; but alway 
follow after that which is 
good, one toward another, 
and. toward all. Rejoice 16 
alway; pray without ceas~- 17 
ing; in every thing give 18 
thanks: for this is the will 

of God in Christ Jesus to 
you-ward. Quench not the 19: 
Spirit; despise not prophe~ 20: 
syings; prove all things, 21 
hold fast that which is 
good; abstain from every 22 
form of evil. 

And the God of peace 23 
himself sanctify you whol- 
ly; and may your spirit 
and soul and body be pre- 
served entire, without 
biame at the coming of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. Faith- 24 
fulis he that calleth you, 
who willalso do it. 

Brethren, pray for us. 25 

Salute all the brethren 26 
with a holy kiss. Ladjure 27 
you by the Lord that this 
epistle be read unto all the 
brethren. 

The ae of our Lord 2% 
Jesus Christ be with you. 





g1Cor.1:8. h1Cor. 10:18. 





disposed to follow their own will. 
eution, or cast down by trouble. 
render evil for evil. See note on Rom. 12: 21. 


whole world. 16. Rejoice evermore. Religion is not sullen and sour, 


Feeble-minded. Timid ones, who are easily discouraged by perse- 
Support the weak. Those weak in the faith. 15. See that none 
This doctrine was subversive of the practice of the 


but full of joy; so full that the. 


saint ean even be joyous when all the world seems to frown. He has a hidden source of joy, a present 


Savior, a blessed hope. 


17-22. Pray without ceasing. See notes on Luke 18: 1, and Eph. 6: 


18. 18. In everything give 


thanks. Always be thankful for God’s benefits, and always express your thanks. For scriptural exam~ 
ples, see Acts 27: 35: 2 Cor.1: 11; Acts 28: 15; Epbs 5:20. This is the will of God. The three duties 


just named are probably comprehended. 19. Quench not the Spirit. 


Do not resist it, or counteract 


its influence by sensual lives. He does who disobeys the word of God, or refuses to follow the exhorta- 


tions of those led by the Spirit, or who stifles his own conscience. 
Inspired teachings. 
because as yet it did not have the 
not be despised: 21. Prove all things. 


New Testament Scriptures for a guide. 


20. Despise not prophesyings. 
The prophets were specially inspired men in the early church. They were needed, 


This inspired preaching must 


What was spoken they must put to the test, and all that 


stood the test, they must hold fast to. There were those who could “discern spirits” (1 Cor, 12: 10), There 


were also rules for testing (1 John 4: 1-8). 22. 
ing is to avoid evil in every form. 

23-26. The God of peace. 
holy in every respect. 
blameless. 
serve you. 25. Pray for us. 
2 Thess. 3: 1. 
16: 20. 

27, 


Who bestows peace of soul. 


How often Paul requests this prayer ! 


Sanctify you wholly. 
Your whole spirit and soul and body. Let the whole man be preserved 
24, Faithful is he. He who has called you is faithful, and if you trust him he will pre- 


Abstain from all appearance of evil. The mean- 


Make you 


See Eph. 6:19; Col. 4: 3, and 


26. Greet all the brethren with a holy kiss. See notes on Rom. 16: 16, and 1 Cor. 


28. Icharge you by the Lord. His affectionate solicitude impels this solemn charge. Other- 


wise those in charge of the new church might think the letter was for them specially and that they were 
to teach its spirit and thoughts to the people. Read unto all. In the public assembly. 28. The 


grace of our Lord. The usual farewell penediction. 


INTRODUCTION TO THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE 
THESSALONIANS. 


The circumstances connected with the planting of the Church of Thessalonica, the 
character of the surroundings, and the trials of the young Christian brotherhood have all 
been explained in the introduction to the preceding epistle, to which I refer the reader. 
Those circumstances called for a second letter, which must have followed the first after 
an interval of only a few months, the only instance save that of the Corinthian letters in 
which the apostle directed two successive epistles to the same congregation. 

That the Second Epistle followed soon after the First is indicated (1) by the fact that 
almost the same state of affairs is described in each: There was persecution and trial, 
there was an eager expectation of the speedy Advent of the Lord, excepting that in the 
Second Epistle the excitement had led to greater extremes, and in each certain ones are 
described who were neglecting their ordinary employments as unnecessary in view of 
the Lord’s coming. Compare 2 Thess. 3: 6-14 with 1 Thess. 4: 10-12, and 1 Thess. 2: 9. 
In the second place both Silas and Timothy were present with Paul at the writing of each 
epistle. Compare the opening salutations. 

The reasons for writing the letter are apparent. Theconditionsthatcalled out the pre- 
ceding letter still existed, and the information brought by the messenger who had e¢ar- 
ried the letter showed the need of further instruction. The principal object is to correct 
the erroneous belief that the day of the Lord’s coming was very close at hand. This 
belief had received the more currency because some reported that Paul had so declared, 
and had even so stated in a letter. Hence he now shows that certain great events must 
precede that day, and that these events are yet future. He again enforces the teaching 
of the Lord that the time is unknown, and charges that all follow their usual employ- 
ments. 

This epistle, like the First, was evidently written during Paul’s long stay at Corinth, 


and both may be assigned to the same year. 
(250) 


THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAUL 


TO THE 


THESSALONIANS. 


CHAPTER I. 


Greetings. 


SuMMARY.—Salutation. Patient Waiting Under Tribulation. The Rey- 
elation of Christ for Judgment. The Punishment of the Disobedient. 


1 Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto the/ 


church of the Thessalonians’ in God our Father, 
and the Lord Jesus Christ: 

2 Grace unto you, and peace, from God our 
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. 

3 We are bound to thank God always for you, 
brethren, as it is meet, because that your faith 
groweth® exceedingly, and the charity of every one 
of you all toward each other aboundeth; 

4 So that’ we ourselves glory in you in the 
churches of God,® for your patience and faith* in 
all your persecutions and tribulations that ye en- 
dure; 

5 Which is* a manifest token of the righteous 
judgment of God, that ye may be counted” worthy 
of the kingdom of God, for which also ye suffer: 

6 Seeing! ét zs a righteous thing with God to 
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; 

7 And to you who are troubled, rest) with us, 





CHAPTER I, 


Paul and Silvanus, and 1 
Timothy, unto the church 
of the Thessalonians in 
God our Father and the 
Lord Jesus Christ; Grace 2 
to you and peace from God 
the Father and the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

We are bound to give3 
thanks to God alway for 
you, brethren, even as it 1s 
meet, for that your faith 
oo exceedingly, and 
he love of each one of you 
all toward one another 
aboundéth; so that we our- 4 
selves glory in you in the 
churches of God for your 
patience and faith in all 
your persecutions and in 
the afilictions which ye en- 
dure; which is a manifest 5 
token of the righteous 
judgment of God; to the 
end that ye may be count- 
ed worthy of the kingdom 
of God, for which ye also 
suffer: if so be that 1t isa 6 
righteous thing with God 
to recompense affliction to 
them that afflict you, and 7 
to you that are afflicted 





a2Cor.1:19. 61Thes.1.1. eles ig shal taka a2 Cor. 7:14. 


Rev. 3:4. iRev.6:10. 9 Rev. 14:13, 





e1Thes.1:3. f1Thes. 2: 15. 


g Phil. 1:28. 





1,2. Paul, Silvanus and Timotheus. See note on1 Thess. 1:1. The first two verses are nearly 


identical. 


3-5. We are bound to thank God. In 1 Thess. 3: 9-13, he states that he prayed ceaselessly for 


the Thessalonians. Here he points out how his prayers were answered. 
him many things concerning the church which filled him with thankfulness. One of 
Though persecuted, their faith did not fail, but 

. toward each other also abounded. 4. So 
On account of these things he spoke their praises in the churches, those of Achaia. 
It is always a stimulus to report to the churches the good work elsewhere, 
by the apostles to the churches oftener than any other, though 
There was a patient endurance of trial for 


returned to him told 
these was that their faith groweth exceedingly. 
pecame stronger. And with their faith their love 

that we glory. 
where he then was. 
Churches of God. <A designation given 
also spoken of as churches of Christ. Your patience. 


The messenger who had 


Christ. 5. A manifest token of the righteous judgment. Your sufferings are a proof of judg- 


ment to come. 


The wicked are not receiving their deserts; the righteous are suffering. A future 


judgment, hence, must come, because God is righteous. That ye may be counted worthy. Their 
sufferings not only proved a judgment to come, but tried them, purified them, and proved them worthy. 


6-10. Seeing it is a righteous 


thing. Your trials prove a coming judgment, because it is a 


righteous thing for God to punish those who trouble you. They must be requited for their Wrongs. 


(251) 


252 lI. THESSALONIANS. 


[Ch. IT. 





when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven 
with his mighty angels, 

8 In flaming? fire, taking vengeance on them?” 
that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of 
our Lord Jesus Christ: 

9 Who shall be punished with everlasting de- 
struction from the presence of the Lord, and* from 
the glory of his power; 

10 When he shall come to be glorified in his 
saints, and to be admired in all them that believe 
(because our testimony among you was believed) in 
that day. Line. 

11 Wherefore also we pray always for you, that 


rest with us, at the revela- 
tion of the Lord Jesus 
from heaven with the an- 
els of his power in flaming 8 
re, rendering vengeance 
to them that know not 
God, and to them that obey 
not the gospel of our Lord 
Jesus: who shall suffer 9 
punishment, even eternal 
destruction from the face 
of the Lord and from the 
glory of hismight, when he 10 
shall come to be glorified 
in his saints, and to be 
marvelled at in all them 
that believed (because our 
testimony unto you was 
believed) in that day. To 
which end we also pray al- 
ways for you, that our God 
may count you worthy of 


iL 


your calling, and fulfil ev- 
ery desire of goodness and 
every work of faith, with 
power; that the name of 12 
our Lord Jesus may be 
glorified in you, and yein 


our God would count you worthy of this calling, 
and fulfil all the good pleasure of hzs goodness, and 
the work of faith with power: 

12 That* the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may 


be glorified in you, and ye in him, according to the ot cae. ee ae 
grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ. esas 
CHAPTER II. 
The Man of Sin. , 
SUMMARY.—Not to be Troubled Supposing the Day of the Lord at Hand. 
An Apostasy Must First Come. Then the Revelation of the Man of 
Sin. The Wicked One Destroyed at the Lord’s Coming. Exhortation 
to Stand Fast. CHAPTER II. 
1 Now, we beseech you, brethren, by the coming], Now we beseech you, 1 
5 A ‘ a brethren, touchin the 
of our Lord Jesus Christ,° and by our gathering | coming of our Lord Jesus 


together unto him, Christ, and our gathering 





@ Heb. 10:27; 12:29; 2 Pet. 3:9. 6Psa. 79:6. ¢ Deut. 33:2; Isa. 2:19. d1Pet.1:7. eMatt. 24:31;1Thes. 4:17. 





7. And not only that, but it isa righteous thing that he give to you who are troubled rest. That 
rest would come when there would be no persecutors, no stripes, no stonings, no prisons. It shall be 
.when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed. At the Lord’s coming. Compare Matt. 24: 30. 8. In 
flaming fire. The flaming fire denotes brightness, glory, purity, and also destruction to adversaries. 
Dazzling brightness is always associated with his coming. God was revealed at Sinai in flaming fire 
(Exod. 3: 2; 19:18). Them that know not God. Know him not because they refuse to know him. 
See Rom. 1: 28. And obey not. This class refuse to accept and obey the gospel. Their day of grace 
will end with the day of the Lord. 9. Who shall be punished. Those who obey not the gospel shall 
be punished, The punishment is eternal destruction. This does not mean annihilation, but an 
eternal banishment from the presence of the Lord. In Matt. 25: 41, the doom of the wicked is, 
“Depart from, me.” The saints “are ever with the Lord;” the wicked are driven forever from his 
presence. 10. When heshallcome. These final judgments shall be when he comes to be glorified 
in his saints. The saints risen, glorious, rejoicing in salvation, shall be a glory of the Lord. Admired 
in all them that believe, All believers will look upon him with wonder and admiration. 

11, 12. Wherefore we pray always. In view of this glorious judgment, he prays that they may 
stand and be counted worthy. Ofthis calling. The Christian calling. Fulfill all the good pleasure 
of his goodness. The idea is, “Perfect in you the love of goodness and the work of faith.” 12, That 
the name of our Lord glorified. Holy lives glorify the Lord. 

This chapter is written to remove misapprehension on the subject of the Lord’s coming. It shows that 
it must not be expected until certain events have taken place. These are, (1) A falling away, or apostasy; 
(2) The removal of some power which hindered the manifestation of the man of sin; (3) The manifesta- 


Ch. II.] II. THESSALONIANS. 

2 That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be 
troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by 
letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at 
hand. 

3 Let no man deceive you by any means: for ¢hat 
day shall not come, except* there come a falling away 
first, and” that man of sin be revealed, the* son of 
perdition; 

4 Who opposeth and‘ exalteth himself above® 
all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so 
that he, as God, sitteth in the temple of God, 
shewing himself that he is God. 

5 Remember ye not, that, when I was yet with 
you, I told you these things? 

6 And now ye know what withholdeth that he 
might be revealed in his time. 


@1Tim. 4:1. 6 Dan.7:25; Rev. 13:11. cJohn aly (eget BPS 


é1Cor. 8: 5. 


|ye know tha 





253 


together unto him; to the 2 
end that ye be not quickly 
shaken from your mind, 
nor yet be troubled, either 
by spirit, or by word, or by 
open? as from us, as that 
the day of the Lord is now 
present ; let no man beguile 3 
you in any wise: for @ will 
not be, except the falling 
away come first, and the 
man of sin be revealed, the 
son of perdition, he that 4 
opposeth andexalteth him- 
self against all thatis call- 
ed God or that is worship- 
ped; so that he sitteth in 
the temple of God, setting 
himself forth as God. Re- 5 
member ye not, that when 
I was yet with you, I told 
you these things? And now 6 
which re- 
straineth, to the end that 
he may be revealed in his 


d Isa. 14:18; Ezek. 28:2; Dan. 11;36; Rey. 13:6. 


I nn nnn nnn ee EEE UnnnDggnnnEn nnn 


tion of the man of sin, and following this, the coming of the Lord. He had told them of these things while 
with them (verse 5), but now writes more fully. He does not seek to show all, but some of the events which 
will precede Christ’s coming. 

1, 2. By the coming. Rather, concerning the coming. His importunity is respecting this and “the 
gathering of the saints.” 2. That ye be not soon shaken in mind. Be not agitated, or in distress 
(troubled). Neither by spirit. By some ore who says he has a revelation of the Spirit. Nor by 
word. Nor by one who claims to quote a word or letter from us. It is thought that a forged letter had 
‘een circulated to which Paul alludes. In the close of this Epistle he shows how his letters may be 
known to be genuine. Some suppose, however, that by “letter” he refers to an incorrect interpretation 
which was placed on his first letter. 

8. Except there come a falling away first. An apostasy must precede the Coming. That is, 
there shall be a general falling away from the purity of the faith. No apostasy of magnitude occurred in 
the history of the church for centuries, which could answer to Paul’s description, but the gradual declen- 
sion, corruption, and departure from the ancient faith, which was fully developed a few hundred years 
later, has always been spoken of by Protestant church historians as The Apostasy. There is no good 
reason for doubting that it is to this the apostle refers. And that man of sin be revealed. He shall 
be revealed then in connection with the apostasy. The son of perdition. This expression occurs once 
elsewhere, and is there applied to Judas, an apostate. Here it evidently has a similar application. Some 
power, once Christian, falls away and becomes opposed to Christ. 

4. Who opposeth and exalteth himself. I shall endeavor ina few words to identify this power. 
Various explanations have been given, but there is only one power that exhibits all the marks given by 
Paul. Observe these: (1) The man of sin exalts himself above God. (2) He sits in the temple, that is, in 
the church, for that is always the sense in which Paul uses this term. He is achurch power. (3) He 
claims powers that only belong to divinity. (4) He shows off signs and lying wonders (verse 9) ; or, in 
other words, lays a claim to miraculous powers. Every one of these marks applies to the papacy: (1) Its 
development was simultaneous with that of the apostasy. (2) Its development was /eé (hindered) until 
the pagan Roman empire fell, put was rapid after it was taken out of the way (verse 7). (3) The papacy 
has set aside divine laws and has made other spiritual laws to bind men, and has claimed divine preroga- 
tives. A newly-elected Pope is adored and styled “Lord God, the Pope.” (4) It is in the temple of God, that 
is, it arose in the church, and still claims to be the “Holy Catholic Church.” (5) The claim of Infallibility 
is “sitting as God in the temple.” (6) The papacy has always claimed miraculous powers, and it is a fact 
well known that it has often worked off lying wonders (verse 9). No fact is better established than that 
the hierarchy of the church have often deceived by false miracles. Indeed, these have often been 
detected and explained. 

6-10. Ye know now what withholdeth. They knew because Paul had told them when with them. 
We have not that advantage, but I believe that he told them that this development could not take place 
until pagan imperial Rome fell. We know that it did withhold, or preventit. 7. For the mystery of 


254 II. THESSALONIANS. 


(Ch. II. 


ee ee ee ee 


7 For* the mystery of iniquity doth already work: 
only he who now letteth will let, until he be taken 
out of the way: 

8 And then shall that Wicked be revealed, 
whom? the Lord shall consume® with the spirit of 
his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of 
his coming: ' 

9 Even him, whose coming is*® after the working 
of Satan, with all power,‘ and signs, and lying 
wonders, 

10 And with all deceivableness of unrighteous- 
ness in* them that perish; because they received 
not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. 

11 And® for this cause God shall send them 
strong delusion,' that they should believe a lie. 

12 That they all might be damned who believed 
not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. 

13 But we are bound to give thanks alway to God 
for you, brethren beloved of the Lord, because 
God hath from the beginning chosen you to salva- 
tion through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief 
of the truth: 

14 Whereunto he called you by our gospel, to 
the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

15 Therefore, brethren, stand fast, and holdi the 
traditions which ye have been taught, whether by 
word, or our epistle. 

16 Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God, 








own season. For the mys- 7 
tery of lawlessness doth 
already work: only there is 
one that restraineth now 
until he be taken out of 
the way And then shall 8 
be revealed the lawless 
one, whom the Lord Jesus 
shall slay with the breath 
of his mouth, and bring to 
nought by the manifesta- 
tion of his coming; even he, 9 
whose coming is according 
to the working of Satan 
with all power and signs 
and lying wonders, and 10: 
with all deceit of unright- 
eousness for them that are 
perishing ; because they re- 
ceived not the love of the 
truth, that they might be 
saved. And for this cause 11 
God sendeth them a work- 
ing of error, that they 
should believe a lie: that 12 
they all might be judged 
who believed not the truth, 
but had pleasure in un- 
righteousness. 
ut weare bound to give 

thanks to God alway for 
you, brethren beloved of 
the Lord, for that God 
chose you from the begin- 
ning unto salvation in 
sanctification of the Spirit 
and belief of the truth: 
whereunto he called you 14 
through our gospel, to the 
obtaining of the glory of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. So 15: 
then, brethren, stand fast, 
and hold the traditions 
which ye were taught, 
whether by word, or by 
epistle of ours. 

Now our Lord Jesus 16. 





a@1John4:3. 6 Dan. 7:10. 
Rey. 18:23. Deut. 18:1; 


¢Job4:9; Isa. 11:4; Rev. 2:16; 19:15. 
@ Matt. 24:5; 1 Tim. 4:1. y1 Cor. 11:2. 


@ Heb. 10:27. 
Matt. 24:24; Rev. 18:13.; 19:21. g 2 Cor. 2:15; 4:3. h Rom. 1:24:1K 





é John 8341; Eph. 2:2; 
28. 2:22. 





iniquity. This revelation of the man of sin. Itwasa mystery, that is, something yet hidden. Doth. 


already work. Causes are beginning to work which will lead to 


it. Only he who now letteth. He 


that hindereth must first be taken out of the way. There was no room for an arrogant spiritual power in 
‘Rome as long as imperial Rome continued to persecute the church. A persecuted church cannot be a 
haughty church. Two things were needful before the papal power could be developed; viz., the over- 
throw of paganism, and the removal of the capital of the Empire from Rome. When these things were 


done, it was free to seize the old Roman scepter. 8. Then shall that Wicked be revealed. 
The Wicked power will be destroyed 
until that event. 9. Whose coming. That 
Is after the working of Satan. That is, it will deceive men as Satan does. 
Lying wonders, False miracles. 10. Deceivableness of unrighteousness. 
Those that perish, receive not the love 


hindering power is removed. Whom the Lord shall consume, 
by the Lord’s coming, and will continue to exist, possibly, 
of the Wicked power. 


which will be accepted by its votaries, by them that perish. 
of thetruth. They have a disinclination to receive it. 

11,12. For this cause God shall send them strong delusion. 
the truth. He who refuses to receive the truth will at last believe lies. 
God sends the delusion by natural laws. 
eousness.” 


After the: 


Unrighteous delusions. 


Because they do not receive 


It is the law of human nature. 
12. Be damned. Because “they had pleasure in unright- 


"18-17. Chosen you to salvation. In contrast with those who fall victims to the man of sin, the 


Thessalonian Christians had been chosen to life. 


From the beginning. From the beginning God had 


determined on the salvation of the Gentiles, and arranged the plans by which they were saved. See notes 
on Romans, chapter 9, for a full discussion of this subject. Through sanctification of the Spirit. 
This clause tells how God chose them to salvation. To this there are two sides, the human and the 


Ch. III.] II. THESSALONIANS. 


255 





even our Father, which*® hath loved us, and hath 
given us everlasting consolation, and good hope 
through grace, 

17 Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every 
good word and work. 


CHAPTER III. 


Closing Admonitions. 

SuMMARY.—A Request for Prayer. A Command to Withdraw from the 
Disorderly. An Admonition to the Idle. The Salutation with his Own 
Hand. 

1 Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of 
the Lord may have free course and be glorified, 
even as tt 7s with you; 

2 And that we may be delivered from unreasona- 
ble and wicked men: for all men have not faith. 

3 But the Lord is faithful, who shall stablish 
you, and” keep you from evil. 

4 And we have confidence in the Lord touching 
you, that ye both do and will do the things which 
we command you. 

5 And the Lord direct your hearts into the love 


Christ himself and God our 
Father which loved us ang 
gave us eternal comfort 
and good hope through 
grace, comfort your hearts 17 
and stablish them in every 
good work and word. 


CHAPTER ITI. 


Finally, brethren, pray 1 
for us, that the word of 
the Lord may run and be 
glorified, even as also itis 
with you; and that we may 2 
be delivered from unrea- 
sonable and evil men; for 
all have not faith. But3 
the Lord is faithful, who 
shall stablish you, and 
guard you from the evil 
one. And we have confi- € 
dence in the Lord ear 4 
you, that ye both do an 
will do the things which 
we command, And the5 
Lord direct your hearts 
into the love of God, and 
into the patience of Christ. 


Now we command you, 6 
brethren, in the name of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, that 
ye withdraw yourselves 
from every brother that 
walketh disorderly, and 
not after the tradition 
which they received of us. 


of God, and into the patient waiting for Christ. 

6 Now we command you, brethren, in the name 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that’ ye withdraw your- 
selves® from every brother that walketh disorderly, 
and not after the tradition which he received of us. 


c1Chron. 29:18; Matt. 22:37; 1 John 4: 16. 
1 Tim. 6:5: 2 John 10. 














d@ Rom. 16:17. e1 Cor. 5:11; 


aRey.1:5. bJohn 17: 15; 2 Pet. 2:9. 








divine. On the human side they believed the truth. On the divine side, God sanctified them by the 
Spirit. He has chosen from the beginning all that believe and accept the truth. 14. Whereunto he 
called you. See how God calls! Itis by the gospel. 15. Therefore, stand fast. In view of your 
calling. Hold the traditions. Instructions. 16. Everlasting consolation. God’s consolations. 
are eternal in their effects. 

1-5. Pray for us. How often Paul makes this request in his letters! Compare 1 Thess. 5: 25; Eph. 
6:19; Col.4: 3. That the word of the Lord, etc. He asks no prayers for his own ease, or worldly 
prosperity, but that he may be helped in his work of the gospel. Have free course. Not be hindered 
by opposition which might prevent success. When in bonds (2 Tim. 2: 9) he rejoiced that the word of the 
Lord was “not bound.” Be glorified. By its powers to save. See Acts 13: 48. 2. That we may be 
delivered. That the wicked may not have power to prevent us from spreading the gospel. He is not 
moved by a desire to escape such hardships or dangers as these may cause, but by a desire that his work 
may move right on. All have not faith. In all ages the preaching of the gospel divides those who 
hear it into two classes, the believers and unbelievers. 8. The Lord is faithful. Men may be 
unbelievers, and hostile, but the Lord is faithful to every promise, and in spite of evil men will keep you 
from evil. From the power of the evilone. 4. We have confidence in the Lord. That by the 
Lord’s power and protection ye both do, and will do the things commanded. 5. Patient waiting. 
“The patience of Christ” (Revision). A patient endurance for Christ. 

6-10. Now we commend you. He has (verse 4) expressed a belief that they will readily obey his 
commands. He now gives one. Brethren. The command is not directed to priest or presbyter, but to 
the whole church. Compare 1 Cor. 5: 4,5. Withdraw yourselves. Decline to receive as a brother 
longer. Exclude from fellowship. Every brother that walketh disorderly. This command applies 
to other disorderly walking also, but has a direct reference here to those who refused to work. Not after 
the tradition. The instructions received from us. "7. Yeknow how ye ought tofollow.us. For 
Paul’s example in the matter of work at Thessaionica, see 1 Thess. 2: 9. He labors for his own support. 
9. Not because we have not power. A right to support at your hands, but because we washed to 


256 II. THESSALONIANS. 


fCh. IIT. 





*7 For yourselves know how ye ought to follow 
us: for we behaved not ourselves disorderly among 
ou: 
¥ 8 Neither did we eat any man’s bread for nought; 
but? wrought with labour and travail night and day, 
that we might not be chargeable to any of you: 

9 Not” because we have not power, but to make 
ourselves an ensample® unto you to follow us. 

10 For even when we were with you, this we 
commanded you, that? if any would not work, 
neither should he eat. 

11 For we hear that there are some which walk 
among you® disorderly, working not at all, but are 
busybodies. 

12 Now them that are such we command and 
exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ,* that with quiet- 
ness they work, and eat their own bread. 

13 But ye, brethren, be not weary in well-doing. 

14 And if any man obey not our word by this 
epistle, note that man, and have no company with 
him, that he may be ashamed. 

15 Yet? count him not as an enemy, but admon- 
ish him as a brother. 

16 Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace 
always by all means. The Lord de with you all. 

17 The salutation of Paul with mine own hand, 
which. is the token in every epistle: so I write. 

18 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with 
you all. Amen. 


‘The second epistle to the Thessalonians was written from 
Athens. 


@ Acts 18:3; 20: 34. e1Pet.5:3. dGen.3: 1; 


g Lev. 19:17. 


b Matt. 10:10; 1 Tim. 5:17. 
J Rom. 12:11. 








For yourselves know how 7 
ye ought to imitate us: for 
we behaved not ourselves 
disorderly among you; nei- 8 
ther did we eat bread for 
nought at any man’s hand, 
but in labour and travail, 
working night and day, 
that we might not burden 
any of you: Snot eae we 9 
have not the right, but to 
make ourselves am ensam- 
ple unto you,that ye should 
imitate us. For when we 10 
were with you, this we 
commanded you, If any 
will not work, neither let 
him eat. For we hear of 11 
some that walk among you 
disorderly, that work not 
at all, but are busybodies. 
Now them that are such 12 
we command and exhortin 
the Lord Jesus Christ, that 
with quietness they work, 
and eat their own bread. 
But ye, brethren, be not 13 
weary in well- -doing. And 14 
if any man obeyeth not 
our word by this epistle, 
note that man, that ye 
have no company with 
him, to the end that he 
may be ashamed. And yeé 15 
count him not as an ene- 
my, but admonish him asa 
brother. 

Now the Lord of peace 16 
himself give you peace at 
all times in all ways. The 
Lord be with you all. 

The salutation of mie, 17 
Paul, with mine own hand, 
which is the token in every 
epistle: so write. The grace 18 
of our Lord Jesus Christ 
be with you all. 


1Thes.4:11. eIsa. 56:10. 





set you an example of industry. 10. We commanded. Even then he gavea command that if any 
refused to work for their food, they should be refused support by others. He who is able-to work, and 
unwilling, should not be fed. 

11-18. We hear. The word was brought, no doubt, by the messenger who returned to him. Which 
walk among you disorderly. By doing nothing. Itisasin to be anidler. God requires industry. 
Busybodies. “The devil finds some mischief, still, for idle hands to do.” 12. Now . such we 
command. Such are solemnly commanded in the name of Christ to go to work, to live quiet lives, and 
to support themselves. The idlers were restless and meddlesome. 18. Be not weary in well doing. 
Do not get weary of the duties of life, so as to desire an idle life. Discharge all duties faithfully, whether 
secular or religious. 

14-16. If any man obey not. Whoever does noe obey these charges, let him be noted, withdrawn 
from. See verse 6. He must be made ashamed of his course by seeing that it is repudiated by the church. 
15. Yet count him not as an enemy. The object of discipline is to save. Compare 1 Cor. 5: 5. 
Give him kind and brotherly admonition, and let him know the reason for your course. 16. The Lord 
of peace. Christ, who bestows peace upon all who walk in him. 

17,18. The salutation of Paul. Here he adds the salutation in his own hand-writing. The Epistle 
thus far had been written by one to whom he dictated, as was his custom, but he now adds his autograph. 
This autograph was the proof of genuineness. Their attention is perhaps called to this on account of a 
Spurious epistle (2: 2). 


INTRODUCTION TO THE FIRST EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY. 


Four of the epistles of Paul are addressed to persons; one, that of Philemon, on per- 
sonal matters; the other three to evangelists who had long labored under his directions, 
and who were charged at the time they were written with responsible trusts in which 
they needed his instructions. From the circumstance that Timothy and Titus were each 
exercising the care of the churches of a district these have been called the Pastoral Epis- 
tles. Yet the words Shepherd or Pastor, flock, and feed, do not occur in them, as they 
do in John 21: 16; Acts 20: 28; Eph. 4: 11; 1 Pet. 5: 2, but at the same time the duties 
implied in those relations are strongly urged. They deal more intimately with church 
organization and church culture, than any of the other epistles. 

If the generally accepted view of the date of these three epistles is received they have 
the common feature of belonging to the closing years of the apostle’s life. The epistles of 
Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians and Philemon, are the epistles of the captivity. On 
the hypothesis of Paul’s release from the first imprisonment at Rome, in accordance 
with the universal statement of the early church, these epistles are held to have been 
written after his release, and after he had once more made a tour of the churches which 
he had planted in Asia and Europe. Conybeare and Howson assign First Timothy to 
the date of A. D. 67. Certain allusions in these epistles can only be explained by assign- 
ing them to a date as late as this. The apostle had, after a circuit of the churches of Asia 
Minor, come into Macedonia, and from thence sent back to Timothy, who had been left 
in charge of the work in the city and district of Ephesus, instructions and admonitions 
which would be of service to him in his duties. Well aware of the difficulties he would 
meet at Ephesus, of the factious spirit of certain false teachers, the epistle is written not 
only to show him how he ought to act, but in order to support him by its authority. It 
was probably written a little more than a year before the apostle’s martyrdom at Rome. 

Timothy, to whom it is directed, was his own ‘‘son in the gospel.’? From the Acts and 
‘the Epistles the outlines of his history are easily gathered. He was born in the Asiatic 
district of Lycaonia, His father was a Greek but his mother a Jewess. From his infancy 
he was instructed by his mother and grandmother, whose names have been preserved, 
in the Hebrew scriptures, but had remained, probably at the demand of his father, uncir- 
cumcised. Converted by Paul, showing good gifts among the Lycaonian churches, Paul 
determined to make him a traveling assistant, and as it would aid much in enabling him 
to reach Jews, he had him circumcised. Indeed a Mamzer, a “‘bastard,’”’ asa child of a 
Jewish mother and heathen father was called by the Jews, would have had no access to 
_the synagogue without circumcision. 

- ~ From this time the allusions to Timothy in connection with Paul’s work are so fre- 
quent that, did space permit, we could easily trace his course. Finally, we find him 
attending Paul to Jerusalem on the occasion when Paul was made a captive. During the 
imprisonment at Cesarea he was probably absent, sent to the churches by Paul, but after 
the arrival at Rome, as we learn from ‘‘the Epistles of the Captivity,” he again joined 
him. He had probably attended him on his last tour of the churches of Asia, was left 
‘behind at Ephesus, was there the Siege oe dee letters, which are the last allusions to 


258 INTRODUCTION TO I. TIMOTHY. 


a 
him in the New Testament, unless he be “‘the angel of the church at Ephesus’? named in. 
Rev. 2: 1, as some have supposed. 

The genuineness of the Pastoral epistles was never questioned in the primitive church. 
They are in the oldest translation of the New Testament, the Peshito, which belongs to: 
the second century, are in the oldest canon of the New Testament books, the Muratori, 
which is assigned to the date of A. D. 170, are quoted by several of the Fathers of the 
Second Century, and are declared by Eusebius in his church history to be “‘universally 
received.” Some objections have been raised to them by certain rationalistic German 
critics, such as Baur, but these objections have been fully answered. The space that our 
plan allows will not permit me to consider these, further than to say that if they differ 
somewhat from the keen logic of Paul’s earlier letters that is easily accounted for by the 
fact that these are personal, and are addressed to the most intimate of personal friends, 
to whom he writes in unreserved freedom and with the tenderest affection. The style of 
every writer differs according to the subjects treated and the persons addressed. 

It only remains to be added that nothing has ever been written which contains, in the 
same space, so much that is indispensable to the preacher, the pastor, and to every church 
official. These classes may consider themselves especially addressed in the persons of 
Timothy and Titus, and they should study and reflect upon these letters until every 
charge, every truth and every admonition is written upon their hearts. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAUL TO 
TIMOTHY. 


CHAPTER I. 


The Work Assigned to Timothy. 


SUMMARY.—Greetings. Why Timothy was Left at Ephesus. The True 
Object of the Commandment. Whom the Law Affects. Paul’s Call to 


the Apostleship. Hymenzeus and Alexander. CHAPTER I. 


Paul, an apostle of Christ 1 
Jesus according to the 


1 Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by* the com- 
mandment” of God our Saviour, and Lord Jesus 
Christ, which* is our hope: 

2 Unto? Timothy, my own son in the faith: 
Grace, mercy, and peace, from God our Father, 
and Jesus Christ our Lord. 

3 As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus,° 
when I went into Macedonia, that thou mightest 
charge some that? they teach no other doctrine, 

4 Neither give heed to fables and endless geneal- 
ogies, which minister questions rather than godly 
edifying which is in faith; so do. 

5 Now® the end of the commandment is charity,® 
out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and 


commandment of God our 
Saviour, and Christ Jesus 
our hope; unto Timothy, 2 
my true child in faith: 
Grace, mercy, peace, from 
God the Father and Christ 
Jesus our Lord. 

As I exhorted thee to$ 
tarry at Ephesus, when I 
was going into Macedonia, 
that thou mightest charge 
certain men not to teach a 
different doctrine, neither 4 
to give heed to fables and 
endless genealogies, the 
which minister question- 
ings, rather than a dispen- 
sation of God which is in 
faith; sodo I now. But the 5 
end of the charge is love 
out of a pure heart and a 
good conscience and faith 





of faith unfeigned: 


B1 Tim. 2:83 4: 105 Tit, 1:3:2:10; 3:45 
Phil. 2:24. Gal. 1;6,7. 








Jude 25. ¢Col.1:27. d Acts 16: . a arr 4:17. e Acts 20:1,3; 


a . 
Bos does g Rom, 13:8; Gal. 5:14. h2 Tim. 





1, 2. Paul, an apostle. <As one object of this letter was to strengthen Timothy’s authority, Paul 
writes as an apostle. By the commandment, See Rom. 16: 26. As the Judaizing opposers tried to 
show that Paul was inferior to Peter and the other apostles, he often recalls the fact that his appointment 
came not from them, and that he was independent of them. The Lord sent him to the Gentiles, as they 
were sent to the Jews (Acts 9:15), 2. Timothy, my own son in the faith. One of his converts. 
Compare Titus 1: 4. 

8, 4. AsIbesought thee to abide still at Ephesus. Paul, it is presumed, seeing on the occa- 
sion of his last visit the need of a trusty evangelist at Ephesus to counteract the errors which were 
arising, had left Timothy behind. He was not left there as a bishop, as has been sometimes claimed, for 
we find that a part of his business was to appoint bishops; but as the representative of the apostle, an 
evangelist. The office of Titus in Crete was similar. That they teach no other doctrine. Than the 
gospel which they had been taught. Some of the errors which he was to correct are stated in the next 
verse. 4, Neither give heed to fables. In Titus 1: 4, the fables are called “‘Jewish.” It is likely 
such fables as those of the Talmud are meant, legends which have been added to the history of the Old 
Testament, additions to the Scriptures. Though the Talmud was committed to writing a little later, it 
aimed to collect the legends and traditions which had been iong in existence. Endless genealogies. 
Philo, a learned Alexandrian Jew who wrote a little before Paul’s time, built up a whole system on gene- 
alogies. The names in the genealogies with him represented the various conditions of the soul. Some 
have supposed that Paul refers to some foolish fancies of the Gnostics, but those were of later date. 
Which minister questions. Raise discussion. 

5-7. The end of the commandment. The purpose of the charge (see Revision) intrusted to you 
(see verse 3) is love. You must show these nen 950) instead of teaching foolish fables they must 


“ 


260 I. TIMOTHY. 


“Ch. FE. 





6 From which some having swerved, have turned 
aside unto vain jangling; 

7 Desiring to be teachers of the law; understand- 
ing neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. 

8 But we know that* the law zs good, if a man 
use it lawfully; 

9 Knowing? this, that the law is not made for a 
righteous man, but for® the lawless and disobedi- 
ent, for the ungodly and for sinners, for unholy and 
profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of 
mothers, for man-slayers, 

10 For whoremongers, for them that defile them- 
selves with mankind, for men-stealers, for liars, for 
perjured persons, and if there be any other thing 
that is contrary to sound doctrine; 

11 According to the glorious gospel of the blessed 
God, which was committed to my trust. 

12 And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath 
enabled me, for that he counted me? faithful,° 
putting me into the ministry ; 

13 Who! was before a blasphemer, and a perse- 
cutor, and injurious: but I obtained mercy, because® 
I did ¢¢ ignorantly in unbelief. _ 

14 And the grace of our Lord was exceeding 
abundant with faith and® love which is in Christ 
Jesus. 

15 This zs a faithful saying, and worthy of all 
acceptation,‘! that Christ Jesus came into the world 
to save sinners; of whom I am chief. 





@Rom.7:12. 6 Gal.3:19. 


e Rev. 21:8. @1Cor.7:25. ¢e2Cor. 3:5,6 
1 Cor. 15:9; Phil. 3:6. e 


g Luke 23; 34; John 9; 39; Acts 26:9. hk Luk 
Rom. 5:8; 1John 3:5. 


inculcate love. Out of a pure heart. 
pure heart; (2) a good conscience, and (3) sincere faith. 
From loye based on these three principles. Unto vain jangling. 
7. Desiring to be teachers. 





3 4:15 Col. 1:25. 
7:47. 


The three things essential to a pure and holy love are: 


unfeigned: from which 6 
things some having swery- 
ed have turned aside unto 
vain talking; desiring to be 7 
teachers of the law, though 
they understand neither 
what they say, nor where- 
of they confidently affirm. 
But we know that the law 8 
is good, if a man use it 
lawfully, as knowing this, 
that law is not made for a 9 
righteous man, but for the 
lawless and unruly, for the 
ungodly and sinners, for 
the unholy and profane, 
for murderers of fathers 
and murderers of mothers, 
for manslayers, for forni- 
cators,for abusers of them- 
selves with men, for men- 
stealers, for liars, for false 
swearers, and if there be 
any other thing contrary 
to the sound doctrine; ac- 
cording to the gospel of 
the glory of the blessed 
God, which was committed 
to my trust. 

I thank him that enabled 
me, even Christ Jesus our 
Lord, for that he counted 
me faithful, appointing me 
to his service: though I 
was before a blasphemer, 
and a persecutor, and in- 
jurious: howbeit I obtain- 
ed mercy, because I did it 
ignorantly in unbelief; and 14 
the grace of our Lord 
abounded exceedingly with 
faith and love which is in 
Christ Jesus. Faithful is 15 
the saying, and worthy of 
all acceptation, that Christ 
Jesus came into the world 
to save sinners; of whom I 


10 


11 


12 


13 





7 Acts 8:33 9:15 
i Matt. 9:13; Luke 19: 10; 





@) A 


6. From which some having swerved. 
Are engaging in idle disputes. 
To be teachers of law; there is no article. 


These aspire to a work for 


which they are totally unfitted. Who has not met the class of men described ? 


8-11. The law is good, if a man use it lawfully. Its object was not, however, to teach fables, 
and genealogies, and foolish fancies. The men he opposes asserted that the law was good, but made a 
wrong use of it. 9. The law is not made forarighteous man. Law (there is no article) is not 
given to justify righteous men, but to restrain, condemn and punish the wicked. <A long catalogue of 
sins, common in the Gentile world, are given, which were all condemned by the law. 10. Men-stealers. 
Those who stole men and sold them into slavery. Contrary to sound doctrine. Everything is for- 
bidden which is opposed to the gospel. 11. According to the glorious gospel. The sound doctrine 
taught in the gospel, which was his trust. : 

12-14. Who hath enabled me. Hath given me power to preach this glorious gospel, by counting 
me faithful, and appointing me to his service. 18. Who was beforeablasphemer. He never could 
forget his old life, before he was converted. But Iobtained mercy. The reason is that he was honest 
sincere in his opposition, being an unbeliever, and acting ignorantly. Had he been a wilful sinner, he 
would never have been chosen. 14. And the grace of our Lord abounded. In the mercy shown to 
him, for his eyes were opened, he became a believer and was filled with love of Christ. 

15,16. This is a faithful saying. That Christ came to save sinners. He, a sinner saved, was a 
proof that the saying was faithful. Of whomTIam chief. Because he had sinned so grievously in per- 


4 


Ch. II.] I. TIMOTHY. 


261 


Se ee Se ae ee ee ee eee 


16 Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that 
in me first Jesus Christ might shew forth all long- 
suffering, for a pattern to them which should here- 
after believe on him to life everlasting. 

17 Now unto? the King eternal, immortal,” invis- 
ible, the only wise God, be honour and glory for 
ever and ever. Amen. 

18 This charge I commit unto thee, son Timothy,° 
according to the prophecies which went before on 
oat that thou by them mightest war a good war- 

are; 

19 Holding faith, and a good conscience; which 
some haying put away, concerning faith have made 
shipwreck: 

20 Of whom is? Hymeneus® and Alexander: 
whom I have? delivered unto Satan, that they may 
learn not to blaspheme. 


CHAPTER II. 


Directions Concerning Public Worship. 


SuMMARY.—Prayers for Rulers. The Will of God that All Should Be 
Saved. How Men Must Pray. Concerning the Dress of Women at 
Worship. Concerning Women Teaching. 

1 I exhort therefore, that, first of all, supplica- 
tions, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, 
be made for all men; 

2 For? kings, and® for all that are in authority; 
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all 
godliness and honesty: 


a2 Tim. 2:17. e2 Tim 


h Rom. 18: 1. 


c1 Tim. 4:14. 
g Jer. 29: 7. 


@ Psa. 10:16; Dan. 7:14. 56 Rom. 1: 23. 





am chief; howbeit for this 16 
cause I obtained mercy 
that in me as chief might 
Jesus Christ shew forth all 
kis longsuffering, for an 
ensample of them which 
should hereafter believe on 
him unto eternal life. Now 
unto the King eternal, in- 
corruptible, invisible, the 
only God, be honor and 
glory for ever and ever. 
Amen. 

This charge I commit 
unto thee, my child Timo- 
thy, according to the 
prophecies which went be- 
fore on thee, that by them 
thou mayest war the good 
warfare; holding faith and 19 
a good conscience; which 
some haying thrust from 
them made shipwreck con- 
cerning the faith: of whom 20 
is Hymenzeus and Alexan- 
der: whom I delivered unto 
Satan, that they might be 
taught not to blaspheme, 


17 


CHAPTER II. 


I exhort, therefore, first 1 
of all, that supplications, 
prayers, imntercessions, 
thanksgivings, be made for 
all men; for kings and all 2 
that are in high place; that 
we tg lead a tranquil and 
quiet life in all godliness 





4:14, / Matt. 18: 17; 1 Cor. 5:5. 





secuting Christ. He wasa great sinner saved. 16. Howbeit. One cause of his obtaining mercy was 
that in him Christ might show forth how long-suffering he is. He forgave, saved, and blessed the bitter 


enemy. A pattern. An example for all believers to follow. 
17. Now unto the King. 


The remembrance of the great mercy to him causes him to break forth in 


praise. Compare Rom. 16: 25-27,and1Tim.6: 16. Eternal. King of the ages. 

18-20. This charge I commit unto thee. The charge referred to in verses3and5. According 
to the prophecies. Timothy was selected for the ministry by divine direction. One 80 chosen was 
chosen according to prophecy, the ordinary meaning being simply a declaration of the divine will. See 


notes on 1 Cor. 12: 28. That thou by them mightest war, etc. 


For this purpose the prophetic will 


chose him. 19. Holding faith. Essential to every saint, and especially to a minister. Some, however, 
had swerved from the faith, and made shipwreck. Faith is an ‘‘anchor, sure and steadfast.” 20, O£ 


whom is Hymenzus. 


He is mentioned as a heretical teacher in2 Tim. 2:17. Of Alexander nothing 


is known. Delivered unto Satan. Excommunicated. Compare 1 Cor. 5: 5. ; : 
1, 2. Iexhort, first ofall. This chapter contains some directions concerning public worship. Paul 


probably means that, first in order, prayers should be offered for all men, etc. So says Conybeare and 


; “Howson, and many others. Thus should the worship open. Supplications, prayers, intercessions. 


It is difficult to distinguish between these three words. “Perhaps the idea in ‘supplication’ is ee 
want; in ‘prayers’ that of solemn devotion, and in ‘intercessions’ that of individual petitions to God. = 
Plumpiree. 2. For kings, and for all that are in authority. For all rulers over us. This duty is 
not dependent on the righteousness of the rulers. The Roman-emperors were intensely wicked. Jews 
were enjoined to pray for their heathen rulers (Jer. 29: 7; Ezra6: 10). That we may lead, etc. The 


262 I. TIMOTHY. 


: / 


Ch. II. 





3 For this 7s* good and acceptable in the sight of 
God our Saviour; 

4 Who? will have all men to be saved, and to° 
come unto the knowledge of the truth. 

5 For there is one God, and one mediator 
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; 

6 Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be 
testified? in due time. 

7 Whereunto I am ordained a preacher, and an 
apostle, (I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not,) 
a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity. 

8 I will therefore that men pray every® where, 
lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting. 

9 In like manner also, that women adorn them- 
selves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and 
sobriety; not with broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, 
or costly array; 

10 But (which becometh women professing god- 
liness) with good works. 

11 Let the woman learn in silence with all sub- 


and gravity. This is good 3 
and acceptable in the sight 
of God our Saviour; who 4 
willeth that all men should 
be saved, and come to the 
knowledge of the truth. 
For there is one God, one 5 
mediator also between God 
and men, himself man, 
Christ Jesus, who gave 6 
himself a ransom for all; 
the testimony éo be borne in 
its own times; whereunto 7 
I was appointed a preach- 
er and an apostle (I speak 
the truth, I le not), a 
teacher of the Gentiles in 
faith and truth. 

I desire therefore that 8 
the men pray in every 
place, lifting up _ holy 
hands, without wrath and 
disputing. In like manner, 9 
that women adorn them- 
selves in modest apparel 
with shamefastness and 
sobriety; not with braided 
hair, and gold or pearls or 
costly raiment; but (which 10 
becometh women profess- 
ing godliness) through 
good works. Let a woman 11 
learn in quietness with all 





jection. 








a Rom. 12:2. 6 Isa. 55: 1,7; John 3:16: 1 Pet.3:9. eJohn17:3. d Gal. 4:4. ¢ Mal. 1:11; John 4: 21. 





special object of these prayers is that the earthly rulers may be so overruled that Christians shall live and 
worship in peace. Wars, seditions and persecutions would be injurious to the saints. 

3,4. For this. This custom of praying for rulers. Our prayers should be as comprehensive as the 
will of God to save.. 4. Who will have all men to be saved. The Scriptures uniformly represent it 
as the divine will that all should come to life. But he does not will to save men irrespective of the condi- 
tions of salvation. They must, in order to be saved, come to a knowledge of the truth. In other 
words, must hear, receive, and obey the gospel. 

5-7. For there is one God. One God of all men, not many gods. Hence the One God desires 
equally the salvation of all his creatures. And one mediator. For all men. The gospel scheme is 
universal. The man, Christ Jesus. Taking upon himself manhood in order to be the Savior of all 
men. 6. Who gave himself a ransom for all. Not for an elect nation, like the Jews, or for elect 
individuals arbitrarily selected, but for all men. All men have been redeemed by his blood, if they will 
accept the ransom. To be testified. The testimony, or preaching of this ransom, was to be given at 
due seasons. 7. Whereunto. To testify of thisransom. I am ordained a preacher. Appointed 
aherald. See margin of Revision. An apostle. An apostle also, with the authority of an apostle. I 
speak the truth. The Judaizers denied his apostleship. Hence this special affirmation. 

8. I willtherefore that men pray everywhere. This refers back to verse1. Everywhere. In 
all places of public worship. Lifting up holy hands. This seems to indicate an attitude in prayer. 
The hands lifted up must be sanctified to holy deeds. Without wrath and doubting. Wrath would 
unfit for prayer. So would doubt; but the word rendered ‘‘doubt,” is better rendered “disputing,” as in 
the Revision. 

9,10. In like manner, that women also. When they come to the public worship, let them not 
spend their thoughts in adorning their bodies, but adorn themselves in modest apparel. In simple 
attire which will not attract attention, With shamefacedness. A shrinking from all that is indeli- 
cate. Sobriety. Self-restraint; not yielding to vain impulses. Not with braided hair. The Gentile 
women were much given to arranging the hair in plaits over the head, with bands of gold. Such vain and 
idle show at worship is forbidden, as well as the wearing of pearls, or costly array. At the house of God 
a display is not comely. Compare 1 Peter 3:3. 10. But. There is another adorning which better 
becomes godly women. Let their ves be adorned by kindly, helpful deeds. 

11-15. Let the women learnin silence. In the public worship of the Gentile churches the teach- 
ing was confined to the men. For a discussion of the reasons, see notes on 1 Cor. 14: 33-36, Where the same 


Ch. III.] . 1, LIMOTHY: 


263 


eee ire ee ee es a ee 


12 But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to 
usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence. 

13 For Adam was first formed, then Eve. 

14 And Adam was not deceived; but the woman, 
being deceived, was in the transgression. 

15 Notwithstanding she shall be saved? in child- 
bearing, if they continue in faith, and charity, and 
holiness, with sobriety. 


CHAPTER III. 


Bishops and Deacons. 


SUMMARY.—The Qualifications of Bishops. Of Deacons. Their Wives 
The Reason for Writing to Timothy of These Matters. The Mystery 
of Godliness. ° 
1 This és a true saying, If a man desire the office 
of a bishop”, he desireth a good work. 
2 A bishop then must be blameless, the husband 
of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good. behaviour, 
given to hospitality, apt to teach; 


a Gen. 3:15, 16; Isa. 7: 14; 9:6. 5 Acts 20:28. 





subjection. But I permit 12 
not a woman to teach, nor 
to have dominion over a 
man, but to be in quiet- 
ness. For Adam was first 
formed, then Eve; and 
Adam was not beguiled, 
but the woman being be- 
guiled hath fallen into 
transgression: but she 15 
shall be saved through the 
childbearing, if they con- 
tinue in faith and love and 
La al ite with sobri- 
ety. 


13 
14 


CHAPTER IIl. 


Faithful is the saying, Tf1 
aman seeketh the office of 
a bishop, he desireth a good 
work. The bishop there- 2 
fore must be without re- 
proach, the husband of one 
wife, temperate, sober- 
minded, orderly, given to 
hospitality, apt to teach; 





directions are given. 


With all subjection. Submission to the authorized teachers of the church. 


12. I suffer nota woman to teach. To become an authorized teacher of the church, a work con- 


fined to the presbyters. 


Nor to usurp authority. Authoritative teaching and ruling were united. 


18. Some reasons drawn from the story of man in Eden are given for theserules. It will be seen that 


Paul regards these events as shadowing forth spiritual lessons. 
in order before woman. 
woman who was first led into the transgression. 
spoken of in the next verse. 15. Notwithstanding 


Adam was first formed. Man came 
14. And Adam was not deceived. It was man who was first created, but 
For these reasons a burden was laid on women which is 
she shall be saved in childbearing. Rather, 


through childbearing. Work was laid upon the fallen man; the pains of childbearing on the fallen woman. 
The apostle means here, that women will be saved in the line of their duties, and that those duties are 
domestic rather than public, There surely 1s no recommendation of the celibacy of monasticism. Possi- 
bly, too, another thought still may be alluded to. The first woman was assured that her seed should 
bruise the serpent’s head. It was woman’s glory that one of her sex was chosen to be the mother of our 


Lord. Thus through childbearing the Savior of 


all men comes into the world. If they continue. 


Domestic duties will not save unless to these are added the graces of a holy life. 


1. Ifa man desire the office of a bishop. 
a delineation of the qualifications and duties of bishops and deacons. 


Acts, and both are named in the first verse of the Epistle to the Philippians. 


Here, for the first time in the New Testament, is there 
Both offices have been alluded to in 


To form a correct idea of 


the New Testament bishop we must get away from modern episcopacy. The New Testament bishop was 
not diocesan, but in charge of a single chureh. Each ehurch hada plurality. Elders or presbyters, and 
bishops were only different designations for the same office. This arrangement was not changed until 
after the close of the first century and the death of the last of the apostles. Of these statements, admitted 
by the candid learned even of episcopal bodies, the following proofs may be briefly submitted: (1) Paul 


(Acts 20: 17) summons the “elders” 
the church of Philippi the 
this Epistle names 


officers intrusted with the same duties already named as those of the bishops. 


‘bishops and the deacons” are named as the officers (Phil. 1: 1). 
‘bishops and deacons” as the officers (chapter 2), but in 5; 17-22, names “elders” as 


of the church at Ephesus, and in verse 28 calls them “‘bishops.” (2) In 


(3) Paul in 


(4) In the Epistle to Titus, 


Paul commands (1: 5) to “ordain elders in every city,” but m describing the qualifications of an elder he 


calls him a bishop (1: 7). 
office of “bishops” over the flock. 
act as an overseer, or to take the 
Corinthians about the beginning of the second century, 
good work. A very important duty. 


(5) Peter (1 Peter 5: 1,2) addresses “elders” and commands them to exercise the 
The Greek word, as well as the word bishop, etymologically means to 
oversight. (6) I might add that Clement of Rome, who wrote to 
uses the terms interchangeably. Desireth a 


264 li LIMOELY. 


[Ch. III. 





8 Not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of 
filthy lucre; but patient, not a brawler, not covet- 
ous; 

4 One? that ruleth well his own house, having his 
children in subjection with all gravity; 

5 (For if a man know not how to rule his own 
house, how shall he take care of the church of 
God?) 

6 Not a novice, lest, being lifted up with pride, 
he fall into the condemnation of the devil. 

7 Moreover, he must have a good report of them 
which are without; lest he fall into reproach and 
the snare of the devil. 

8 Likewise must the deacons be grave, not double- 
tongued, not given to much wine, not greedy of 
filthy lucre; 

9 Holding the mystery of the faith in a pure 
conscience. 





no brawler, no striker; but 3 
entle, not contentious, no 
over of money; One that 4 

ruleth well his own house, 

having his children in sub- 
jection with all gravity; 

(but if aman knoweth not 5 

how to rule his own house, 

how shall he take care of 

the church of God?) not a 6 

novice, lest being puffed up 

he fall into the condemna- 

tion of the devil. Moreover 7 

he must have good testi- 

mony from them that are 
without; lest he fall into 
reproach and the snare of 

the devil. Deacons in like 8. 

manner must be grave, not 

doubletongued, not given 
to much wine, not greedy 

of filthy lucre; holding the 9 

mystery of the faith in a 

pure conscience. And let 10 

these also first be proved; 

then let them serve as dea- 
cons, if they be blameless. 

Women in like manner iL 

must be grave, not slander- 

ers, temperate, faithful in 


10 And let these also first be proved; then let 
them use the office of a deacon, being found blame- 


less. 
11 Even so must their wives be grave, not sland- 
erers; sober, faithful in all things. 


a Josh, 24:15, 





2-7. A bishop then must be blameless. None must be appointed because they desire the place. 
None are eligible unless they fill the following qualifications. Blameless. Not under charges; of good. 
repute. The husband of one wife. A married man, and having only one wife. In those loose times. 
of divorce, men might be converted who had successively several wives. Divorce for unscriptural rea- 
sons would not free a man from his first, lawful wife. Hence the limitation to those who had only one: 
living wife. Ido not think there is any reference to re-marriage after the death of a wife. Vigilant. 
Temperate. See Revision. Sober. Sedate. Givento hospitality. Often saints by persecution were 
made homeless. The bishops must set the example of receiving such. Apt to teach. Men who have. 
the knowledge and discretion which fit them to teach the flock. 3.° Not given to wine. Nota. 
drunken brawler, is the idea of the Greek. We must always bear in mind that the church had been 
formed of Gentiles whose morals had been at a very low standard. 4. One that ruleth well his own 
house. This implies that he must be aman of family. Having his children. He must be a father 
with obedient children. 5. For if aman know not. The order of his own house will show whether 
he is fit to have a charge in the house of God. The sins of Eli’s sons showed that Eli, though a good man, 
was unfitted to rule. 6. Not a novice. One recently converted. Those chosen for bishops must be 
old and tried. Paul and Barnabas did not ordain elders until their second visit to the churches (Acts. 
14; 23). Lifted up with pride. A novice, suddenly exalted, was in danger of undue elation. '7. More- 
over, he must have a good report of them which are without. Have an established character 
which speaks well for the church among the unconverted. Lest he fall into reproach. Into some 
snare of the devil, some improper conduct, which will bring reproach on the church. 

8-10. Likewise must the deacons. The ancient church understood that the seven appointed in 
Acts, chapter 6, were the first deacons. They were not called deacons, but filled a diaconate, In Phil. 
1: 1, we find deacons existing. Their office seemed to have been to look after the temporal matters of’ the 
church, and especially to care for the poor and the widows. Not double-tongued. Not saying one 
thing to one man, and another thing to others. Not greedy of filthy lucre. Men who are covetous 
and unscrupulous as to modes of getting money are not to be chosen. 9. Holding the mystery of the 
faith. The gospel, God’s revealed mystery to all believers. 10. Let these also first be proved. 
Not novices, but men fully tested. Before they use the office of a deacon, their characters must be 
thoroughly examined, and they must be found blameless. 

11. Even so must their wives. The word in the Greek may mean women, or wives. It is ren- 


Ch. IV.] 1. “TIMOTHY: 


265» 


a a Ee ee eee ee 


12 Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife, 
ruling their children and their own houses well. 

13 For they that have used the office of a deacon 
well purchase to themselves a good degree, and 
great boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus. 

14 These things write I unto thee, hoping to 
come unto thee shortly: 

15 But if I tarry long, that thou mayest know 
how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of 
God, which is the church of the living God, the 





all things. Let deacons be 12° 
husbands of one wife, rul- 
ing their children and their 
own houses well. For they 13° 
that have served well as 
deacons gain to themselves 

a good standing, and great 
boldness in the faith which 

is in Christ Jesus. 

These things write Lunto 14 
thee, hoping to come unto 
thee shortly; but if I tarry 15. 
long, that thou mayest 
know how men ought to 
behave themselves in the 
house of God, which is the 


church of the living God 
the pillar and pound (6) 
the truth. And without 16. 
controversy great is the 
mystery of godliness; He 
who was manifested in the 
flesh, justified in the spirit 
seen of angels, ‘preached 
among the nations, be- 
lieved on in the world, re- 
ceived up in glory. 


pillar and ground of truth. 

16 And, without controversy, great is the mystery 
of godliness:* God was manifest in the flesh,” justi- 
fied in the Spirit,° seen of angels, preached unto 
the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up 
into glory. 


CHAPTER IV. 


A Falling Away Predicted. 


SuMMARY.—An Apostasy in Latter Times. Some of the Marks of that 
Apostasy. Directions to Timothy in View of This. The Preacher to 
Bean Example. To Take Heed to Himself. 


1 Now the Spirit* speaketh expressly, that® in the 


6 Matt. 3.16; John 1:32; Rom. 1:4. 


CHAPTER IV. 
But the Spirit saith ex- 1’ 





a Isa. 7:14; John 1:14. c Matt. 28:2; Luke 2:13. dJohn16:18. e1 Pet. 1:20. 








dered wife in verse 12. The Revision says, ‘‘Women must be, etc.” I believe that the Old Version is: 
nearer right. The duties of women generally are certainly not spoken of in the midst of a discussion of 
elders and deacons. Either deaconesses are meant, or the wives of bishops and deacons; more likely the 
latter. We know that an injudicious wife may mar the work of a church officer. Not slanderers. Not 
given to tattling. 

12, 18. Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife. The same word is used in the Greek 
here for wife that is used in verse 11. See notes on ‘‘one wife” under verse 2. Ruling their children. 
See notes on verses 4and5. 18. For they that, etc. These demands for the office are high, for those: 
who exercise it well purchase a good degree. Securea high position in the church and in God’s 
favor. And great boldness in the faith. To fill these duties well gives strength, and often fits for 
higher duties. Stephen and Philip became evangelists. 

14-16. These things I write, . . hoping to come unto thee shortly. It is not certain that. 
he was ever able to visit Ephesus again, though it is thought that he did on his way to Crete. 15. But 
if I tarry. In that case he wrote that Timothy might understand how to act. Behave thyself in the 
house of God. Conduct thyself in the management of the church. Which is the church of the living 
God. The house of God is not the temple of Diana, which stood there at Ephesus. The pillar and ground 
of the truth. The church is the pillar and support of the truth because it preaches it to the world, pre- 
serves it, and transmits it from generation to generation. 16, Without controversy. Undoubtedly. 
Great is the mystery of godliness. The mystery that God has revealed to us in the gospel in order 
to make men godly. The great things revealed in this mystery are next named, certainly wonderful 
things, well called great. God was manifest in the flesh. Was manifested in Jesus Christ. Justi-. 
fied in the Spirit. When, after his condemnation to death, the power of God raised him from the dead. 
Seen ofangels. The angels were at the open tomb and told the women of his resurrection. Preached 
unto the Gentiles. A wonderful fact in the mind of a Jew like Paul, who had been trained to believe: 
that the Gentiles were accursed. Received up into glory. At the Ascension. Six elements enter 
into this mystery of godliness, elements all of which are fully revealed in the gospel. The mystery is not. 
something incomprehensive, but the hidden wisdom of God revealed in the gospel; a sense similar to that. 
in which mystery is always used in the Scriptures. Compare Matt. 13: 11; Rev. 1: 20; Rev. 17: 5, 7. 

1-8. Now the Spirit speaketh expressly. In revelations made to Paul and other inspired men.. 
See 2 Thess. 2:3. In latter times. In future times. How far away is not indicated. Some shall. 


266 Te TIMOvuSs = 


(Ch. IV. 


i 


latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving 
heed? to seducing spirits,” and doctrines of devils; 

2 Speaking lies in hypocrisy; having® their con- 
science seared with a hot iron; 

3 Forbidding* to marry,? and commanding to 
abstain from meats, which God hath created to be 
received with thanksgiving of them which believe 
and know the truth. 

4 Fort every creature of God ¢s good, and nothing 
to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving: 

5 For it is sanctified by the word of God and 

rayer. 

6 If thou put the brethren in remembrance of 
these things, thou shalt be a good minister of Jesus 





pressly, that in later times 
some shall fall away from 
the faith, giving heed to 
seducing spirits and doc- 
trines of devils, through 2 
the hypocrisy of men that 
speak lies, branded in their 
own conscience as with a 
hot iron; forbidding to 3 
marry, and commanding to 
abstain from meats, which 
God created to be received 
with thanksgiving by them 
that believe and know the 
truth. For every creature 4 
of God is good, and noth- 
ing is to be rejected, if it 
be received with thanks- 
iving: for it is sanctified 5 
hrough the word of God 
and prayer. 

If thou put the brethren 6 
in mind of these things, 


thou shalt be a good min- 
ister of Christ Jesus, nour- 
ished in the words of the 
faith, and of the good doc- 
trine which thou hast fol- 
lowed until now: but refuse 7 
rofane and old wives’ fa- 
les. And exercise thyself 
unto godliness: for bodily 8 
exercise is profitable fora 
little; but godliness is prof- 
itable for all things, hav- 
ing promise of the life 
which now is, and of that 


Christ, nourished up’ in the words of faith and of 
good doctrine, whereunto thou hast attained. 

7 But refuse profane and old wives’ fables, and 
exercise thyself rather unto godliness. 

8 For bodily exercise profiteth little; but godli- 
ness is profitable unto all things, having™ promise 
of the life that now is, and of that which is to 
come. 














c Eph. 4:19. d Prov. 18:22; Heb. 13:4. 


a2Pet.2:1. 6 Dan. 11:35; Rev. 9:20. 
h Psa. 37:43 84:11; Matt. 6:33. 


2 Tim. 3:14 e1Cor. 8:8. # Titus. 1:15. 
g im, 3:14. 





depart from the faith. There shall be an apostasy. Compare 2 Thess.2:3. Some of the marks of 
this apostasy are now given. Giving heed to seducing spirits. The apostle seems to recognize a 
preternatural element which speaks by false prophets, in false utterances which claims to be from God. 
These seducing spirits might work through hierarchs, who claimed to speak for God, or through councils 
which claimed to make infallible utterances. Doctrines of demons. Doctrines suggested by demons. 
The Greek daimonion, demon, not devil, always refers in the New Testament to an evil spirit. 2. Speak- 
ing lies through hypocrisy. Rather, “Some shall depart through the hypocrisy of men, 
speaking lies.” See Revision. Having their conscience. The liars just mentioned. The sensitive- 
ness of their consciences is destroyed by the brand.of the devil. 8. Forbidding to marry. Not long 
after Paul’s time the superior holiness of the unmarried life began to be preached in the church, and this 
resulted at last in monasticism anda celibate clergy. Commanding to abstain from meats. The 
ascetic practices which began to grow up in the church a little later extended to foods. To eat the least 
palatable food which would sustain life was counted a virtue. These ascetics generally forbade animal 
food, and some lived only on bread and water. These practices are still found among certain orders of 
the Latin and Eastern churches. Which God hath created. The foods which God hath-¢ereated are 
for use, to be eaten thankfully by those who know the truth, instead of having their minds darkened 
py delusions. 

4, 5. Forevery creature. Everything God has created is good, and has its proper use. Hence, it 
is not to be refused as sinful. This applies to what God has created. He did not create one drop of 
aleohol. 5. It is sanctified. The food we eat is made holy when we offer thanks to God for it and 
pray his blessing upon it. This passage shows that the early saints were always wont to offer thanks 
before eating. 

6-9. If thou put the brethren in remembrance. Impress upon them what has just been written. 
A good minister. Thus shall Timothy well discharge his office, and prove himself a faithful minister. 
7. Refuse profane and old wives’ fables. The foolish myths and legends of the heathen, and also 
the marvelous additions which Jewish rabbis had made to the Old Testament. Reject all these. Exer- 
cise thyself rather unto godliness. Train thyself to a godly life, as the gymnast trains himself to 
bodily exercise. 8. For bodily exercise. The Greeks gave great attention to bodily training. At 
Ephesus, where Timothy then was, may still be seen the remains of the stadium where the athletes dis- 
played their skill. Let Christians display the same assiduity in training for godliness. For the bodily 


CE TVs] I. TIMOTHY. 


267 





9 This 7s a faithful saying, and worthy of all 
acceptation. 

10 For therefore we both labour and_ suffer 
reproach, because we trust in the living God,? who 
isthe Saviour of all men, specially of those that 
believe. 

11 These things command and teach. 

12 Let” no man despise thy youth; but be thou 
an example of the believers, in word, in conversa- 
tion, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. 

13 Till I come, give attendance to reading, to 
exhortation, to doctrine. 

14 Neglect* not the gift that is in thee, which was 


given thee! by prophecy,® with the laying on of |. 


hands of the presbytery. 

15 Meditate upon these things; give thyself 
wholly to them that thy profiting may appear to 
all. 

16 Take heed unto thyself, and unto the doc- 
trine; continue in them: for in doing this thou 
shalt both! save thyself, and them that hear thee. 








aPsa.36:6; Acts 14:17; 17: 25,28. b Titus 2:15. ¢c2 Tim. 1:6. 








@1 Tim. U: 18. 


which is to come. Faithful 
is the saying, and worthy 
of all acceptation. For to 
this end we labour and 
strive, because we have 
our hope set on the living 
God, who is the Saviour of 
all men, specially of them 
that believe. These things 
command and teach. Let 
no man despise thy youth; 
but be thou an ensample 
to them that believe, in 
word, in manner of life, in 
love, in faith, in purity. 
Till I come, give heed to 
reading, to exhortation, to 
teaching. Neglect not the 
gift that is in thee, which 
was given thee by prophe- 
ey, with the laying on of 
the hands of the presbyte- 
Ae Be diligent in these 
things; give thyself wholly 
to them; that thy progress 
may be manifest unto all. 
Take heed to thyself, and 
to thy teaching. Continue 
in these things; for in do- 
ing this thou shalt save 
both thyself and them that 
hear them. 


eActs6:6. fHzek. 33:9. 





9 
10 


11 
12 


_ 


5 


16 


exercise profits little, while the godly training is profitable in all things. It makes men happier, 


more prosperous, more healthy here, and in addition it prepares them for the life to come. 
to exercise the body. 9. Thisisafaithiul saying. A trust- 


reach heaven is not either to starve, or 
worthy saying. Verse 8 is referred to. 


10, 11. For therefore. On account of the eternal life which godliness insures. 
Cor. 11: 21-27. 11. These things. Especially what has been embraced 


suffer reproach. Compare 2 
in verses 8-10. 


The way to 


We labor and 


12-16. Let no man despise thy youth. The remainder of the chapter is personal. Timothy was 
much younger than Paul, much younger than most of the presbyters, but he must have been fully thirty- 
five years old. He was converted about A. D. 46, and was then a young man, quite young, according to 


the ideas of that age, to be over presbyters. 


In A. D. 51 (Acts 16: 1-3), Paul had taken him away from 


home. I suppose that he must have been twenty at that time. If so, he was from thirty-five to thirty- 
eight years old at this time. Be thou an example. So should every preacher be, and in all the char- 
acteristics which follow. 18. Give attendance to reading. To the reading of the Scriptures to the 


people. In that age, when printed books 
municated in this way. To doctrine. 

to special spiritual gifts given to him to fit him 
were essential, in that first age. By 
to me Paul and Barnabas,” I suppose 
he would be spiritually endowed for his work. With 


in the usual way, 


mind that the ancient evangelists had no New Testament to guide them, and hence needed 
Rather, Let these things be thy special care. 


cations. 15. Meditate upon, ete. 


were unknown, the knowledge of the Scriptures had to be com- 
To instruction. 14. Neglect not the gift. The allusion is 
for the duties of an evangelist. 
prophecy. As the Spirit at Antioch said to the prophets, “Separate 
a revelation was given that Timothy was to be set apart, and that 
the laying on of the hands. 
and at the ordination the Spirit conferred upon him new gifts. It must be borne in 
special qualifi- 
Give thyself 


These were given, and 


He was ordained 


wholly to them. The preacher must be heart and soul in his work in order to succeed. 16. Take heed 


unto thyself. This is the special duty of every minister. 
unto the doctrine. Take heed what you teach. 


Let him watch himself first of all. And 





268 J. TIMOTHY. [6h V.. 
CHAPTER V. 
The Widows of the Church. 
SuMMARY.—Rules for Reproving. Honoring Widows. How They Should 
be Supported. Who are to be Taken Into the Number of Widows. The 
Younger Widows. The Presbyters. A Charge Concerning Timothy’s 
Health. CHAPTER V. 


1 Rebuke? not an elder, but entreat him as a 
father; and the younger men as brethren; 

2 The elder women as mothers; the younger as 
sisters, with all purity. 

3 Honour widows that are widows indeed. 

4 But if any widow have children or nephews, let 
them learn first to shew piety at home, and? to 
requite their parents: for that is good and accepta- 
ble before God. . 

5 Now she that is a widow indeed, and desolate, 
trusteth in God, and continueth in supplication and 
prayers night and day. 

6 But she that liveth in pleasure is dead while 
she liveth. 

7 And these things give in charge, that they may 
be blameless. 

8 But if any provide not for his own, and spec- 
ially for those of his own house, he hath denied the 
faith, and is worse than an infidel. 

9 Let not a widow be taken into the number 
under three-score years old, having been the wife of 
one man, 

10 Well reported of for good works; if she have 
brought up children, if she have lodged® strangers, 


a Lev. 19:32. 6 Matt. 15:4. ec Acts 16:15. 





Rebuke not an elder, but 1 
exhort him as a father; the 
younger men as brethren: 
the elder women as moth- 2: 
ers; the younger as sisters, 
in all purity. Honour wid- 3 
ows that are widows in- 
deed. But if any widow 4 
hath children or grand- 
children, let them learn 
first to show piety towards 
their own family, and to 
requite their parents: for 
this is acceptable in the 
sight of God. Now she 5: 
that is a widow indeed, and 
desolate, hath her hope set 
on God, and continueth in 
supplications and prayers 
night and day. But she 6 
that giveth herself to pleas- 
ure is dead while she liv- 
eth. These things also 7 
command, that they may 
be without reproach. But 8 
if any provideth not for 
his own, and specially his 
own household, he hath 
denied the faith, and is 
worse than an unbeliever. 
Let none be enrolled as a 9 
widow under threescore 
years old, having been the 
wife of one man, well re- 10: 

orted of for good works; 
if she hath brought up 
children, if she hath used 
hospitality to strangers, if 
she hath washed the saints’ 





1, 2. Rebuke not an elder. An aged man. Treat him with deference due to age. It is evident 
‘trom the four classes named together, the young men, the aged women, and the young women, that the 


reference in the word “‘elder”’ 1s not to office, but to age. 


8, 4. Honor widows that are widows indeed, In the church at Jerusalem the widows were: 


honored with support (Acts 6: 1). 


The teaching of Paul here seems to place widows who were above 


sixty years old, and without children or grandchildren to support them, in a class of church widows 


devoted to the work of the church and supported out of its funds. 


Such were ‘‘widows indeed.” 


4, But 


if any widow have children or nephews. These must support them, and thus “show piety at 


home.” Nephews is better rendered “tgrandchildren,” 


5-8. Shethatis awidowindeed. Has neither husband nor children, and is left desolate. Having 


no earthly trust, she trusteth in God, and shows this by her devout life. 6. She that liveth in 
pleasure. The widow that plays the wanton is dead spiritually. '7. These things give in charge. 
Insist upon these things. 8. If any provide not for his own. The support of his relatives. and 
servants 1s referred to. Children and grandchildren must support their aged parents. Any one who does 
not provide for his own family, whether it be wife and children, or aged parents, has practically denied. 
the faith, and is worse than an unbeliever, for even unbelievers do these things. 

9,10. Let not a widow be taken. Into the order of widows supported by the church and engaged 
in its work. Under threescore. None but the aged. Having been the wife of one man, Not 
having had more than one husband living at the same time, as was very common in those days of easy 
divorce. 10. Wellreported of. Good character was a requisite. Good works. The good works are 


Ch. V.] I. TIMOTHY. 


df she* have washed the saints’ feet, if she have re- 








269 


feet, if she hath relieved 
the afflicted, if she hath 


lieved the afflicted, if she have diligently followed | regent ees ouneer 11 
Say good work. aeons refuse: see when 
. ;- ey have waxed wanton 
1 But the younger widows refuse: for when | against Christ, they desire 
they have begun to wax wanton against Christ, they | 1 marry; having condem- 12 
will marry; - Pelecea. thot fuer (atu 
3 rejecte eir first faith. 
ae . And withal they learn also 13 
12 Having? damnation, because they have cast) tov iale, One abourteom 
off their first faith. paar a Ma 
é 3 2 nly idle, i 
13 And‘ withal they learn éo be idle, wandering and. busybodies, speaking 
about from house to house; and not only idle, but | tyne ahd heretore 14 
tattlers also, and busybodies, speaking things which | that the younger widows 
they ought not Tae henectolas cies aiees 
for) ia ? 
ad : occasion to the adversar 
14 I* will therefore that the younger women | for reviting: for already 15 
marry, bear children, guide the house,® give none |.s0me are turned aside after 
i Satan. If any woman that 16 
occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully. _| believeth hath widows, let 
15 For some are already turned aside after Satan. | per ieee nhs ivan 
16 Iff any man or woman that believeth have|¢d; that it may, relieve 
f : them that are widows in- 
widows, let them relieve them, and let not the Heed gee 
Z * ‘ e e elders that rule 17 
church be charged ; that it may relieve them that) weit pe counted worthy of 
are widows indeed. double honour, expecially 
17 Let® the elders that rule well be counted word and in teaching, For 18 
é Ss bd he Seripture saith, ou 
worthy of double honour, _ especially they who|shait not muzzle the ox 
labour in the word and doctrine. when he treadeth out the 
: 4 : i corn. And, The labourer 
18 For the scripture saith," Thou shalt not muz-|is worthy of | his hire. 
zle the ox that treadeth out the corn. ee ee 


And, The 
labourer 7s worthy of his reward. 

19 Against an elder receive not an accusation, 
‘but before two or three witnesses. 





aGen. 18:4; Luke7:38. 6 Heb.6:4,6; 10:28. c2 Thess. 3: 11. 
Ruth 2:18; Matt. 15:4. g Gal. 6:6. A Deut. 25: 4. 


@1 Cor. 7:9. 
1 Deut. 24: 14; Luke 10: 7. 


not an accusation, except 
at the mouth of two or three 


e Titus 2:8. Gen. 47: 12; 


A Sa igi a ee ae AS EE Ee a SS eS 
named. Brought up children. Either her own, or orphans or neglected children. Lodged strangers. 
The duty of hospitality is often urged. Often, in that age, saints were made homeless by persecution. 
Washed the saints’ feet. A duty of hospitality, not a church ordinance. Relieved the afflicted. 
A ministering angel. 

11-16. The younger widows refuse. Do not take them into this number for the reason that they 
in part will wish to marry again. 12. Having damnation. Not because they marry, but because 
after entering a class consecrated entirely to the church work they forsake its duties in order to marry. 
18. Withal, they learn to be idle. They have not that gravity which is required for this work of 
visitation and ministration laid upon the ‘“‘widows indeed,” but wander from house to house to gossip. 
14. Iwill, therefore, that the younger women marry, None are to enter upon this consecrated 
life but the aged; there are to be no young nuns. The apostle distinctly forbids the conventual system 
which now exists in the Romish church. 16. If any that believeth have widows. If any 
have widows among their relatives, let them support these, instead of the church, in order that the church 
may support the ‘“‘widows indeed.” 

17-20. Letthe elders that rule well. The officials called “bishops” in 3: 2, are here called elders. 
See note on the passage referred to. Counted worthy of double honor. Held in especial esteem, 
-and not only treated with respect, but maintained. Especially they who labor in the word and 
doctrine. The class that we call preachers, or pastors. That support is referred to is shown by verse 
18. 18. The Scripture saith. Deut. 25:4. See note ont Cor. 9:9. And the laborer is worthy of 
his reward. This is quoted from Luke 10: 7. Paul says itis Scripture. Therefore, Luke’s Gospel was 
already written and in Paul’s hands when this Epistle was written.” He calls this Gospel “Scripture.” 
Peter applies the same term to Paul’s writings (2 Peter 3: 16). 19. Against an elder receive not. 
Accusations against bishops might be brought before Timothy. They were not to be considered unless 


270 I. TIMOTHY. 


(Ch.VI. 





20 Them? that sin rebuke before all, that others” 
also may fear. 

21 I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and the elect angels, that thou observe 
these things, without preferring one before another, 
doing nothing by partiality. 

22 Lay* hands suddenly on no man, neither? be 
partaker of other men’s sins: keep thyself pure. 

23 Drink no longer water, but use a little wine 
for thy stomach’s sake, and thine often infirmities. 

24 Some men’s sins are open beforehand, going 
before to judgment; and some men they follow 
after. 

25 Likewise also® the good works of some are 
manifest beforehand; and they that are otherwise 





witnesses. Them that sin 20 
reprove in the sight of all, 
that the rest also may be 
in fear. I charge thee in 21 
the sight of God, and 
Christ Jesus, and the elect 
angels, that thou observe 
these things without preju- 
dice, doing nothing by par- 
tiality. Lay hands hastily 
on no man, neither be par- 
taker of other men’s sins: 
keep thyself pure. Be no 
longer a drinker of water, 
but use a little wine for thy 
stomach’s sake and thine 
often infirmities. Some 24 
men’s sins are evident, go- 
ing before unto judgment; 
and some men also they 
follow after. in like man- 25 
ner also there are good 
works that are evident; 
and such as are otherwise 


22: 


23 


i cannot be hid. 
cannot be hid. 


CHAPTER VI. 


Various Duties Enjoined. 

SUMMARY.—Duties of Servants. Life the Test of Doctrine. The Blessed- 
ness of Contentment. The Danger of the Love of Money. Charge to 
the Man of God. A Lesson for the Rich. 

1 Let as many‘ servants as are under the yoke 
count their own masters worthy of all honour, that 
the name of God and Ais doctrine be not blas- 
phemed. 


a Titus 1: 18. 


CHAPTER VI. 


Let as many as are ser- 1 
vants under the yoke count 
their own masters worthy 
of ail honour, that the 
name of God and the doc- 
trine be not blasphemed. 


6 Deut. 13: 11. c1 Tim. 4:14. d2Johnll. e¢1Pet.3: 8-16. / Titus2: 9. 








supported by two or three witnesses. The same rule is found in Deut. 19:15. 20. Them that sin. 
Whether they be elders, or private members, if convicted, rebuke them publicly, for the sake of the lesson 
to others. Do not hush the matter up privately. 

21-25. Icharge thee. The solemnity of this charge shows that Paul had a fear that Timothy’s. 
sympathies might lead him aside from a strictly judicial course. The eléct angels. Why “elect”? we 
do not certainly know. They may be the good angels as distinct from the bad angels, or those who were 
_ chosen to assist in the work of human redemption may be meant. Angels are often mentioned in this 
connection. Observe these things. Carry out this discipline without respect to persons. 22, Lay 
hands suddenly on no man. ‘All the old commentators, and the great majority of modern ones, 
apply this to ordination.” The meaning is that no man must be ordained to office until his fitness is 
surely known. Neither be partaker, etc. He who appoints an unfit man to office becomes in a cer- 
tain sense responsible for that man’s sins. Keep thyself pure. Free from the sins of other men. 
23. Drink no longer water. I suppose the thought of Timothy’s trials called to mind a sense of his. 
physical condition. Hence, he gives a medical prescription, The water of that region is not good. The 
writer well remembers a fearfully sick day that he passed at Ephesus im 1889, due to the water. Paul, 
hence, advises that instead, he try the light wines, with only the smallest percentage of alcohol. The pre- 
scription is not of a beverage, but of a remedy for an invalid. 24. Some men’s sins are open 
beforehand. Discipline has been spoken of. Some men’s lives are fully known, and their sins cry out, 
but others conceal them, and they will only be fully manifest at judgment. 25. Likewise also the 
good works. The same rule applies to good works. Some get credit for more by far than they deserve, 
while the good deeds of others will not be fully revealed until judgment. Then all will be estimated 
aright. 

1,2. Let as many servants as are under the yoke. Under the yoke of slavery. The slaves 
were as numerous as the free population, and many of the early Christians belonged to this class. 
Count their own masters worthy of all honor. There was danger that these converted slaves. 
would despise their heathen masters. If they were to do so, it would create a great odium against the 


Ch. VI.] I TIMOTHY. 


271 





2 And they that have believing masters, let them 
not despise them, because* they are brethren; but 
rather do them service, because they are faithful and 
beloved, partakers of the benefit. These things 
teach and exhort. 

3 If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to 
wholesome words, even the words of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according 
to godliness; 

4 He is proud,” knowing nothing,but doting about 
questions and strifes of words, whereof cometh 
envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, 

5 Perverse disputings of? men of corrupt minds, 
and destitute of the truth,’ supposing that gain is 
godliness:* from such withdraw thyself. 

6 Butt godliness with contentment is great gain. 

7 For’ we brought nothing into ¢his world, and it 
7s certain we can carry nothing out. 

8 And? having food and raiment, let us be there- 
with content. 

9 But! they that will be rich fall into temptation 
and a snare, and ¢nfo many foolish and hurtful 
lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdi- 
tion. .* 

10 Fori the love of money is the root of all evil; 
which while some coveted after, they have erred 
from the faith, and pierced themselves through 
with many sorrows. 





And they that have believ- 
ing masters, let them not 
despise them, because they 
are brethren; but let them 
serve them the rather, be- 
cause they that partake of 
the benefit are believing 
and beloved. These things 
teach and exhort. 

If any man teacheth a 
different doctrine, and con- 
senteth not to sound words, 
even the words of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and to the 
doctrine which is accord- 
ing to godliness; heis puft- 
ed up, knowing nothing, 
but doting about question- 
ings and disputes of words, 
whereof cometh envy, 
strife, railings, evil surmis- 
ings, wranglings of men 
eorrupted in mind and be- 
reft of the truth, supposing 
that godliness is a way of 
gain. But godliness with 
contentment is great gain: 
for we brought nothing 
into the world, for neither 
can we carry anything out; 
but having food and cover- 
ing we shall be therewith 
content. But they that de- 
sire to be rich fall into a 
temptation anda snare and 
many foolish and hurtful 
lusts, such as drown men 
in destruction and perdi- 
tion. For the love of mon- 
ey is aroot of all kinds of 
evil: which some reaching 
after have been led astray 
from the faith, and have 
pierced themselves through 
with many sorrows. 


2 


o 


4 


a 


© 





61Cor. 8:2. c2Tim.38:8. d@ Titus 1: 11. 


h Gen. 28; 20; Heb. 13: 5. 


a Col. 4:1. 


eRom.16:17. / Psa. 87: 16. 
4 Matt. 13:22. j Exod. 23: 8. 





gJob.1:21; Eccl. 5:15. 


Christian religion and lead to attempts to extirpate it. Slavery was to be destroyed, not by putting a. 
spirit of insubordination into slaves, but by putting a Christian spirit into masters. 2, Because they 
are brethren. Converted masters must not despise their masters because in the church they are 
equal. Rather, they must serve them better, because they are beloved brethren, and partakers’ of the 
benefit of their service. 

8-5. If any man teach otherwise. Teach new doctrines or duties which differ from the doctrine: 
of Christ. See1:3. 4. He is proud. The idea is that he is blinded with pride, so that he really 
knows nothing. Doting. Morbidly dwelling upon foolish questions. He no doubt refers to foolish 
disputes which had been sprung upon the church by heretical teachers. 5. Thinking that gain is 
godliness. Men who have come into the church for gain and think that godliness is a source of 
gain. 

6-8. Godliness with contentment. In contrast with this false view a godly life with contentment 
is a great gain. It brings its greatest gainin eternity. 7. For we brought nothing. See Job 1: 21. 
Since we must leave the earth as we came into it, contentment and an immortal hope are better than 
earthly gains. 8. Having food and raiment. Having the necessities of life let us be content 
without piling up wealth. 

9,10. They that will be rich. Who have set their heart on riches. Fallinto temptation. Are 
tempted to do sinful things in order to build up wealth. It is not so much the possession of wealth, as 
cupidity and a trust in riches, which constitute the danger. See notes on Mark 10: 24. 10. For the 
love of money is the root of all evil. Not the money itself, which if used as by a steward of God 
is a blessing, so muchas the love of it. This greedy love is the source of every sin. Men murder, cheat, lie, 
rob, run saloons, gambling houses, brothels, all for the love of money. For love of money Judas sold his. 


272 I. TIMOTHY. 


11 But thou,* O man of God, flee these things; 
and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, 
love, patience, meekness. 

12 Fight” the good fight of faith, lay hold on® 
eternal life, whereunto thou art also called,4 and 
hast professed a good profession before many wit- 
nesses. 

13 I give thee charge in the sight of God, who® 
‘quickeneth all things, and before Christ’? Jesus, who 
‘before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession, 

14 That thou keep this commandment without 
spot, unrebukeable, until? the appearing of our 
Lord Jesus Christ: 

15 Which in his times he shall shew, who 7zs® the 
blessed and only Potentate,'! the King of kings, and 
Lord of lords; 

16 Who! only hath immortality, dwelling in* the 
light which no man can approach unto;! whom no 
man hath seen, nor can see:™ to whom be honour 
and power everlasting. Amen. 

17 Charge them that are rich in this world, that 
they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain 
riches, but in the living God, who giveth us richly 
all things to enjoy; 

18 That they do good, that they be rich in good 
works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate; 
@ Deut. 83:1. 62 Tim. 4:7. c Phil. 3:12. d@ Heb. 13:23. 


@ Rev. 17:14. j John 5:26. £2 Chron. 5:14. 
m Eph. 8: 20; Phil. 4: 20; Jude 25; Rev. 7: 12. 











ée John 5:21. Rev. 1:5. 
2? Exod. 33: 20; Deut. 4: 


(Ch. VI. 


But thou, Oman of God, 11 
flee these things; and fol- 
low after 6) eousness, 
godliness, faith, love, pa- 
tience,meekness. Fight the 
good fight of the faith, la 
hold on the life eternal, 
whereunto thou wast call- 
ed, and didst confess the 
good confession in the sight 
of many witnesses. I 
charge thee in the sight of 
God, who quickeneth all 
things, and of Christ Je- 
sus, who before Pontius 
Pilate witnessed the good 
confession; that thou keep 
the commandment, with- 
out spot, without reproach, 
until the appearing of our 
Lord Jesus Christ: which 15 
in its own times he shail 
shew, who is the blessed 
and only Potentate, the 
King of kings, and Lord of 
Lords; who only hath im- 16 
mortality, dwelling in light 
unapproachable; whom no 
man hath-seen, nor can 
see: to whom be honour 
and power eternal. Amen. 

Charge them that arerich 17 
in this present world, that 
they be not highminded, 
nor have their hope set on 
the uncertainty of riches, 
but on God, who giveth us 
richly all things to enjoy; 
that they do good, that 18 
they be rich in good works, 
that they be ready to dis- 
tribute, willing to commu- 


12 


g 1 Thes. 3:13. A1 Tim.1s11. 
12; John 1: 18; 6: 46. 





Master. Some .. 
Judas is one example. 


- have erred. Have wandered from the faith through the love of money. 


11,12. O man of God. This expression is used in the sense of an evangelist devoted to God’s work, 


See 1 Sam. 9: 6,8; 1 Kings 13: 1, 4,8. Flee these things. The love of money. Instead of following 
after money, seek after righteousness, ete. 12. Fight the good fight of faith. The thought is 
of a soldier. See 1:18. The Christian life is a struggle. Oppose hurtful earthful lusts, but seize upon 
eternal life. Hast professed a good profession. When called to eternal life. “This refers 
probably to his baptism, when, as we know from very early times, a public profession of faith was 
made.”’—Speaker’s Commentary. “The Divine call, and the confession of believers are correlatives; they 
‘imply each other.”—Bengel. Compare Acts 8: 37. 

18-16. I charge thee. See 1: 5,18. The whole epistle is a charge, and here at the close Paul 
renews the charge very solemnly. Quickeneth. Giveth life to. Who before Pontius Pilate 
witnessed a good confession. The Greek may be rendered “under Pontius Pilate.” Jesus before 
the Sanhedrim confessed that he was the Christ, the Son of God, and on that confession they condemned 
him to death and hurried him to Pilate for-execution. I believed this is what Paul refers to. Though, 
before Pilate our Lord reaffirmed in substance this same confession (John 18; 33-37). 14. That thou 
keep the commandment. Not one only, but the will of Christ. Until the appearing. The language 
seems to imply a feeling that Christ would come in Timothy’s time; at any rate Timothy is to keep that 
in view. 15. Which in his times he shall show. In his own times. Man knows not the day or 
hour. The Blessed and only potentate. All power in heaven and earth had been placed in his 
hands (Matt. 28:18; Rev. 17: 14; 19: 16). 16. Who only hath immortality. See John 5: 26. Heis 
‘the source from whence there comes to man eternal life. Dwelling in light. Surrounded by the 
‘divine splendors which no mortal can gaze upon. 

17-19. Charge them that are rich. Some in Ephesus had riches. These must be humble and 
“*condescend to men of low estate.” Their trust must be in God, rather than in uncertain riches. 


War, Vi, | I. TIMOTHY. 273 


19 Laying up in store for themselves a good nicate; laying up in store 19 
foundation against the time to come, that they may Catia asadast the time 16 


i come, that they may la 
Jay hold on eternal life. Fae inten te 


20 O Timothy, keep that which is committed to | tife indeed. 
thy trust, avoiding profane and vain babblings, and SSI EM 3 pd i ete 


23+] 7 ‘ . thee, turning away from 
oppositions of science falsely so called: irdor ie harblnes aan 


21 Which some professing have erred concerning oppositions of the Kknow!- 
. og 
the faith. Grace de unto thee. Amen. called; "whieh some Veo: af 
4 . . . C; A essin ave erred concern- 
The first to Timothy was written from Laodicea, which is the ing the faith. a 


chiefest city of Phrygia Pacatiana. Tao pe wih re 
eee 8 ee 
18. That they do good. The right use of wealth is given. Letit be a means of doing good so that 
they may be rich in good works. 19. Laying up store. Treasure in heaven by giving for good 
purposes. See close of verse 18. 

20,21. O Timothy. A final exhortation to faithfully discharge his trust. Oppositions of 
science. The wild speculations which were already taught by dreamers and which were probably 
derived from Jewish sources. These speculations a half century later had ripened into what was called 
Gnosticism. Some had already run off after speculations and departed from the faith. There are 
ot ie the Epistles to Ephesus and Colosse to the germs of this same false teaching. 





INTRODUCTION TO THE SECOND EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY. 


The Second Epistle to Timothy has a melancholy interest as the last letter which Paul 
ever wrote, written from his second imprisonment in Rome, only a short time before his 
martyrdom. In the Introduction to First Timothy the uniform testimony of the early 
church that Paul was released, shortly after the close of Acts, and engaged for several 
years in missionary work, was stated. On this point the testimony is clear, and goes 
back even to Clement of Rome, a companion of Paul named in one of his Epistles, who 
states in his Epistle to the Corinthians that Paul was enabled to carry out his purpose of 
preaching the gospel in the extreme West. This verdict of antiquity is supported by 
criticism, and the allusions in the three Pastoral Hpistles can only be explained by 
conceding that there was a release, a period of missionary activity, and finally a second 
arrest, and imprisonment at Rome. ; 

On this hypothesis Conybeare and Howson outline the interval between the dates of 
the two letters to Timothy. Shortly after the first was written Paul is supposed to have 
again visited Ephesus, to have gone from thence, in company with Titus, to Crete. The 
latter was left in charge of the work there when Paul left for Europe (Titus 1: 5). 
Where the Epistle to Titus was written cannot be certainly known, but it was at some 
point on the route from Crete to Nicopolis, a city situated on the Grecian shore of the 
Adriatic Sea (Titus 3:12). If Paul reached there for the winter, as he proposed, it is 
probable that here he was again arrested, and from thence borne to Rome for trial. The 
only writing extant that came from this second period of imprisonment is the Second 
Epistle to Timothy. 

Timothy, his ‘‘beloved son in the gospel,” was still laboring in distant Ephesus, but 
the aged apostle, about to go to rest from his weary labors, desired to see him once more 
in the flesh. Hence, he bids him come, as speedily as possible; but, lest he might 
arrive too late to receive his parting words, he impresses upon him in this letter, with 
the earnestness of a last charge, the various duties of his office, and especially of oppos- 
ing the dangerous heresies which threatened to destroy the vitality of the Christian. 


religion. 
(274) 


THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAUL TO 


TIMOTHY. 


CHAPTER I. 


Timothy’s Preparation for His Work. 


SUMMARY.—Paul’s Affection for Timothy. Timothy’s Early Training in 
the Seriptures. Paul’s Suffering for Christ. The Charge to Hold Fast 


Sound Words. Phygellus and Hermogenes. 

1 Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of 
God, according to* the promise of life which is in 
Christ Jesus, 

2 To Timothy, my dearly beloved son: Grace, 
mercy, and peace, from God the Father, and Christ 
Jesus our Lord. 

3 Ithank God, whom I serve from my forefathers 
with pure conscience, that without ceasing I have 
remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day; 

4 Greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful of 
thy tears, that I may be filled with joy: 

5 When I call to remembrance the unfeigned 
faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy grand- 
mother Lois, and> thy mother Eunice; and I am 
persuaded that in thee also. 

6 Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, that* 
thou stir up the gift of God, which is in thee by the 
putting on of my hands. et 

7 For* God hath not given us the spirit of fear;° 
but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind. 


d Rom. 8: 15. 





aHeb.9:15. 6Acts16:1. cl Tim. 4:14. 





CHAPTER I. 


Paul, an apostle of Christ 1 
Jesus by the will of God, 
according to the promise 
of the life which is in 
Christ Jesus, to Timothy, 2 
my beloved child: Grace, 
merey, peace, from God the 
Father and Christ Jesus 
our Lord, 

I thank God, whom I 3 
serve from my forefathers 
ina pure conscience, how 
unceasing is my remem- 
brance of thee in my sup- 
plications, night and day 
longing to see thee, remem- 4 
bering thy tears, that I 
may be filled with joy; 
having been reminde of 5 
the unfeigned faith that is 
in thee; which dwelt first 
in thy grandmother Lois, 
and thy: mother Eunice, 
and, I am _ persuaded, in 
thee also. For the which 6 
cause I put thee in remem- 
brance that thou stir up 
the gift of God, which is 
in thee through the layin 
on of my hands. For God 7 

ave us not a spirit of fear- 
fulness; but of power and 


e Luke 24: 49, 





1, 2. Paul, an apostle. Seenoteon1Tim.1:1. 2. To Timothy. See sketch of the public life 
of Timothy in the Introduction to 1 Timothy. 

8-5. Whom I serve from my forefathers. Like Timothy (verse 5), he had been taught by his 
parents to fear and serve the Lord. Even before he became a Christian, he verily thought he served God. 
See Acts 23: 1; 24: 14, and Rom. 11: 23, 24,28. 4. Greatly desiring to see thee. There is something 
pathetic in this language. The lonely prisoner calls to mind the tears of Timothy at their last parting, 
and feels a yearning desire to see and counsel him face to face once more. 5. WhenI call to remem- 
brance. As he looked back he saw Timothy from his youth up a believer. His grandmother and mother 
had been converted before him, and he had followed them into the kingdom. See Acts 16: 1. : 

6-7. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance. From the earnestness with which he stirs up 
Timothy in both Epistles, it seems likely that he did not possess the rugged, restless energy of Paul, 
Stir up the gift of God. The supernatural gift which he received by the imposition of the apostolic 
hands. The gift of office was conferred by ordination at the hands of the presbytery; the gift of miracu- 
lous powers, by the imposition of the hands of an apostle. 7. God hath not given us the spirit of 
fear. When the gifts of the Spirit were bestowed at the laying on of my hands, not a spirit of cowardice, 
but of power, miraculous power, and of love, mT 5 sound mind, of divine wisdom, was imparted. 

a « 


276 Il. TIMOTHY. 


[Ch. I. 





8 Be? not thou therefore ashamed of the testi- 
mony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner: but be 
thou partaker of the afflictions of the gospel, accord- 
ing to the power of God; 

9 Who hath saved us, and? called ws with an holy 
calling,® not according to our works, but according® 
to his own purpose and grace, which was given us 
in Christ Jesus before® the world began; 

10 Butt is now made manifest by the appearing 
of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who% hath abolished 
death, and hath brought life and immortality to 
light through the gospel: 

11 Whereunto I am appointed a preacher, and an 
apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles. 

12 For the which cause I also suffer these things: 
nevertheless I am not ashamed; for I know whom I 
have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to 
keep that which I have committed” unto him 
against that day. 

13 Hold! fast thei form of sound words, which* 
thou hast heard of me, in faith and love which is in 
Christ Jesus. 

14 That good thing which was committed unto 
thee keep by the Holy Ghost which dwelleth in us. 

15 This thou knowest, that all they which are in 
Asia be turned away from me; of whom are Phy- 








love and discipline. Be not 
ashamed therefore of the 
testimony of our Lord, nor 
of me his prisoner: but 
suffer hardship with the 
gospel according to the 
power of God; who saved 
us, and called us with a 
holy calling, not according 
to our works, but accord- 
ing to his own purpose and 
grace, which was given us 
in Christ Jesus, before 
times. eternal, but hath 
now been manifested by 
the appearing of our Sav- 
iour Christ Jesus,who abol- 
ished death, and brought 
life and incorruption to 
light ae be the gospel, 
whereunto I was appoint- 
ed a preacher, and an apos- 
tle, and a teacher. For the 
which cause I suffer also 
these things: yet Iam not 
ashamed; for I know him 
whom I have believed, and 
Iam persuaded that he is 
able to guard that which I 
have committed unto him 
against that day. Hold the 
pattern of sound words 
which thou hast heard 
from me, in faith and love 
which is in Christ Jesus. 
That good thing which was 
committed unto thee guard 
through the Holy Ghost 
which dwelleth in us. 

This thou knowest, that 
all that are in Asia turned 
away from me; of whom 
are Phygelus and Hermog- 





8 


9 


10 


13 


14 


15 


gellus and Hermogenes. enes, The Lord grant met. 1 
16 The Lord! give mercy unto the house of iphorus: for he oft refresh- 
Onesiphorus;™for he oft refreshed me, and was not |° ™& 4nd was not 
ashamed of my chain: 
@ Mark 8:38; Rom. 1:16. 61Thes.4:7. ¢Titus3:5. d Rom. 8:28. eEph. 1:4; 1 Pet.1:20. fEph.1: 9; Col. 
1:26; 1Pet. 1:20. g1 Cor. 15:54; Heb. 2:14. A1 Pet. 4:19. ¢ Titus 1:9; Heb. 10:23; Rev. 2: 25. 


j Rom. 2: 20; 6:17; 1 Tim. 1: 10; 6:3. &2 Tim. 2:2. 





8-12. Be not 


7 Matt. 5:7. 


m Phile. 7. 


- ashamed. Since “the spirit of fear” was not imparted, there must be boldness 


to testify for the Lord. Of me, his prisoner, Thougha prisoner, he was a prisoner for righteousness’ 
sake. It may be that this was a gentle rebuke; that Timothy had failed in boldness. Be thou a par- 
taker. Ready to share with me whatever may befall. According to the power of God. Suffer 
afflictions, bearing them, sustained by the power of God. 9. Who hath saved us. God’s power hath 
saved us and all believers. Not according to our works. He called us according to his purpose to 
eall men before the world began, He purposed to call the Gentiles—a race rebellious. See notes on 
Romans, chapter9. 10. But is now made manifest. His purpose, formed before the world began, 
was made manifest when Christ appeared. Who abolished death. Took away from death his power, 
and will finally destroy him (1 Cor. 15: 26). Brought life and immortality to light. Revealed them 
in the gospel. 12. For which cause I also suffer. Because he was appointed an ‘apostle and 
teacher of the Gentiles.” See verse 11. Compare Acts 22: 21, and Eph. 3:1. That which I have com- 
mitted unto him. His whole interests, his life, body, soul and spirit. He leaves all in God’s hands 
with perfect confidence. 

13,14. Hold fast the form of sound words. Hold and teach sound doctrine, the pure faith, the 
gospel as Paul taught it to him, preaching it in faith and love. 14. That good thing which was 
committed unto thee. The sound faith just alluded to. Don’t let it be perverted. Keep it by the help 
of the Holy Spirit. This charge is given in view of the conduct of some from the province of Asia, where 
Timothy was then dwelling, referred to in verse 15. 

15-18. This thou knowest, The language that follows seems to mean that there had been a large 


Ch. IZ.] II. TIMOTHY. 


rari 


i a ee 
17 But, when he was in Rome, he sought me out| ashamed of my chain; but, 17 


very diligently, and found me. 

18 The Lord grant unto* him that he may find 
mercy of the Lord? in that day: and in how many 
things he* ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou 
knowest very well. 


CHAPTER II. 


To Be a Workman Approved of God. 


SuUMMARyY.—Training Other Evangelists. Warring as a Good Soldier. 
Suffering with Christ. Rightly Dividing the Word of Truth. Purity 
of Life. 

1 Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace 
that is in Christ Jesus. 

2 And the things that thou hast heard of me 
among many witnesses,® the same commit thou to 
faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. 

3 Thou therefore endure hardness as a good 
soldier of Jesus Christ. 

4 No? man that warreth entangleth himself with 
the affairs of ¢his life, that he may please him who 
hath chosen him to be a soldier. 

5 And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he 


when he was in Rome, he 
sought me diligently, and 
found me (the Lord grant 
unto him to find merey of 18 
the Lord in that day); and 
in how many things he 
ministered at Ephesus, 
thou knowest very well. 


CHAPTER II. 


Thou therefore, my child, 1 
be strengthened in the 
grace that is in Christ Je- 
sus. And the things which 2 
thou hast heard from me 
among many witnesses, 
the same commit thou to 
faithful men, who shall be 
able to teach others also. 
Suffer hardship with me, 3 
as a good soldier of Christ 
Jesus. No soldier on ser- 4 
vice entangleth himself in 
the affairs of this life; that 
he may please him who en- 
rolled him as a soldier. 
And if also a man contend 5 
in the games, he is not 


crowned, except he have 
contended lawfully. The 6 
husbandman that labour- 
eth must be the first to 


not crowned, except he strive lawfully. 
6 The husbandman that laboureth must be first 
partaker of the fruits. 








a Matt. 25:34. 62Thes.1:10. cHeb.6:10. d Psa. 68: 85; Eph. 1:19; 8:16; 6:10; Col.1:1; 1 Tim. 1:2. 
e1Tim. 1:18. f1Cor. 9: 25. 


defection in Asia already. Some think that Paul refers to professors of Christ from the province of Asia, 
then in Rome, who had all deserted him. Phygellus and Hermogenes. Nothing more than this 
reference is known of them. 16. Onesiphorus. How different with this faithful disciple, from the 
rest of the Asiatics! In spite of Paul’s chain, and danger, he often visited and cheered him. Paul was 
chained to a soldier. 17. He sought me. Not only was not ashamed, but sought him at great pains 
and found him. 18. Inthatday. The day when he shall be called to meet the Lord. He ministered 
to me at Ephesus. He then belonged to Ephesus, had ministered to Paul there, and shown his faith- 
fulness again at Rome. The language seems to imply that these kind deeds were past. Perhaps 
Onesiphorus had started back home. 

1, 2. Thou, therefore, my son. Since his son, Timothy, should follow his example, and seek to be 
strong through the grace of Christ. 2. And the things that thou hast heard of me. The instruc- 
tion that I gave thee to fit thee for preaching Christ, do thou impart to other men, faithful, in order 
that they may be able to teach others also. As Paul prepared Timothy to preach the gospel, so he 
is to prepare other men. Among many witnesses. This probably refers to Timothy hearing Paul 
teach these things before many congregations. Faithful men. Trustworthy men. 

8-6. Thou, therefore, endure hardness. Timothy was a soldier of the cross. It is the part of a 
soldier to suffer as well as to fight. 4. No man that warreth. The soldier todo good service must 
devote himself entirely to the soldier’s life, giving up worldly affairs. So the soldier, like Timothy, 
engaged as a minister, should have no other business. 5. And if aman also strive. In the various 
athletic games of the Greeks. Unless he complies with the regulations, no prize will be assigned to him 
in any contest. So one, striving for the Christian crown, must seek to please the Master. 6. The hus- 
bandman that laboreth. The farmer has the first right to the fruits. Three illustrations, that of the 
soldier, the athlete, and the husbandman, are here given. They all bear on the life of Timothy. All 
three must deny themselves and suffer, in order to receive the reward. The soldier denies himself the 





278 II. TIMOTHY. Ch. II. 
7 Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee partake of the fruits, Con- 7 
1 1 7 sider wha sa or e 
understanding in all things. ; Ti cial oie toe uiden: 
8 Remember that Jesus Christ, of the* seed of | standing inall things. Re- 8 
“1b : he dead dings’ t member Jesus Christ, risen 
David,” was raised from the dead, according® to my | from the dead, of the seed 
gospel: of Da according to re 
ospe. wherein suier 
9 Wherein I suffer trouble, as an evil-doer, even hardship unto bonds, as a 9 
unto bonds; but the word of God i is not bound. _| of God is not bound, There- 10 
10 Therefore I endure all things for the elect’s foe doin wee. wet ee 
sakes,? that they may also obtain the salvation also may obtain’ the salva- 
. . ° . . 1 pal yu - 
which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. sus with eternal glory. "a 
, i 1 . Mort j aithful is the saying: For 
11 dé ts a faithful saying: Fort if we be dead | fait ed wie ee ee 
with him, we shall also live with him: shall also live with him: if 12 
12 If* we suffer, we shall also reign with him :* if reign with him: if we shall 13 
, i Ne : eny him, he also will deny 
Mb deny him, he also will deny ee ‘ ; us: if we are faithless, he 
13 If! we believe not, yet he abideth faithful;/ he | abiaeth faithful; for’ he 
. cannot deny himself. 
cannot deny himself. ; Of these things put them 14 
14 Of these things put them in remembrance,* omeprinaer ware 
charging them before the Lord that! they strive not Lord, that ney strive Rat 
. T O 
about words to no profit, but to the subverting of | fo the subverting of them 
that hear. Give diligence 15 
the hearers. to present thyself approyv- 
15 Study to shew thyself approved unto God, a ed unto God, a workman 
9 a is] oO 0} e 
workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly ashamed, handling aright 
ividi p the word of truth. But 1 
dividing the word of truth. j | Rr poe eoithee 
16 But™ shun profane and vain babblings; for | for they will proceed fur- 


they will increase unto more ungodliness. 














a Acts 2:30; 18:28; Rom. 1:3,4. 
4:10. g Rom. Sri. 91566 
BUTI. 5:91: 69193) 2" Tim. 4: 


61Cor. 15:1. _¢ Rom. 2:16. @2Cor.1:6. e1 Tim. 1:15. Rom. a 2 Cor. 
h Matt. 10:83; Mark 8:38; Luke 12:9. «Rom. 3:3; 9:6. j Num. 23:19. 
71 Tim. 1:4. m Titus 1:4. 





world; the athlete obeys rigid laws; the husbandman labors and waits for a reward. So you must be 
content to deny yourself, to suffer, and to wait for your reward.”’ 

7-10. Consider what I say. Reflect, and take in its meaning. 8. Remember. This is spoken 
for encouragement in suffering. That Jesus Christ of the seed of David. Even as the prophets 
had predicted that he should be. Was raised from the dead. He suffered, died, but was not holden 
of death, and was exalted. My gospel. The gospel I preach everywhere. 9. Wherein I suffer 
trouble. For this gospel. For it I am now a prisoner as an evil doer. The word of God is not 
bound. Its great preacher was, but the Word could not be. It was being preached abroad by thousands 
of tongues. 10. Therefore I endure. Since the work goes on, I endure cheerfully. For the elect’s 
sakes. All came upon him on account of his devotion to the church.-He suffered that others, God’s 
chosen ones, might obtain salvation. 

11-18. It isafaithful saying. A true saying. Some think that the 11th and 12th verses were part 
of anearly hymn. If we be dead with him. Rather, as in the Revision, ‘Died with him.’? Compare 
Rom. 6: 4, 5, 8, and Col. 2: 12. The reference is to death to the old life, and burial into the death of Christ 
at baptism. 12. If we suffer. We diein order to live. So our suffering with Christ “works out for us 
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.” Compare also Rom. 8: 17, and Matt. 19: 27, 28. If we 
deny him. See Matt. 10: 13. 18. If we believe not. If we prove faithless, he will still be faithful 
to keep every promise he has made. 

14-18. Put theminremembrance. Those to whom you minister. Charging that they 
strive not about words. We see proofs in both letters to Timothy that the idle speculations which 
did the chureh such damage a little later had already begun. 15. Study to show thyself. To this 
end the utmost diligence must be used. Approved unto God. Sucha preacher that his work will 
please the Heavenly Father. A workman that needeth not to be ashamed. Whose life and work 
are such as to honor Christ and the gospel. This requires a pure life as well as judicious work. Rightly 
dividing the word of truth. The Revision reads, “Handling aright.” The Greek word means, liter- 
ally, “cutting straight.” The thought, probably, is to present the truth clearly, truthfully, without 


Ch. Tt} Il. TIMOTHY. 


279 





17 And their word will eat as doth a canker: of 
whom is Hymeneus? and Philetus; 

18 Who concerning the truth have erred, saying” 
that the resurrection is past already ; and overthrow 
the faith of some. 

19 Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth 
sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that 
are his. And, Let every one that nameth the name 
of Christ depart from iniquity. 

20 But in a great house there are not only vessels 
of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of 
earth; and some to honour, and some to dishonour. 

21 If a man therefore purge himself from these, 
he shall be a vessel unto honour, sanctified, and 
meet for the master’s use, and prepared unto every 
good work. 

22 Flee also youthful lusts: but follow righteous- 
ness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call on 
the Lord out of a pure heart. 

93 But foolish and unlearned questions avoid, 
knowing that they do gender strifes. 

94 And the servant of the Lord must not strive; 
but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient; 

25 In meekness instructing them that oppose 
themselves; if God peradventure will give them 
repentance to the acknowledging of the truth; 





ther in ungodliness, and 
their word will eat as doth 
a gangrene: of whom is 
Hymenzus and Philetus; 
men who concerning the 
truth have erred, saying 
that the resurrection is 
past already, and over- 
throw the faith of some. 
Howbeit the firm founda- 
tion of God standeth, hav- 
ing this seal, The Lord 
knoweth them that are 
his: and, Let every one 
that nameth the name of 
the Lord depart from un- 
righteousness. Now in a 
great house there are not 
only vessels of gold and of 
silver, but also of wood 
and of earth; and some 
unto honour, and some 
unto dishonour. If aman 
therefore purge himself 
from these, he shall be a 
vessel unto honour, sanc- 
tified, meet for the mas- 
ter’s use, prepared unto 
every good work. But flee 
youthful lusts, and follow 
after righteousness, faith, 
love, peace, with them that 
call on the Lord out of a 
pure heart. But foolish 
and ignorant questionings 
refuse, knowing that they 
ender strifes. And the 

ord’s servant must not 
strive, but be gentle to- 
wards all, apt to teach, for- 
bearing, in meekness cor- 
recting them that oppose 
themselves; if peradvent- 
ure God may give them re- 





alTim.1:20. 61Cor. 15:12. ¢ Matt. 24: 24; Rom. 8: 35; 1 John 2:19. 





plunders, and with an exactness which cannot be gainsaid. 16. 


But shun. 


Li 


18 


20 


22 


25 


Preach the truth. Shun 


foolish speculations. Profane. Unholy. 17. And their word. The profane and vain babblings. 


Eat as doth a canker. Eat deeper and deeper, like a gangrene. 


1 Tim. 1: 20. 


Of whom is Hymenzeus. 
18. Who concerning the truth have erred. Their speculation is stated. 


See 
They 


preached, as some do in our own times, that the resurrection which Christ teaches is only a moral resur- 


rection, a resurrection of the soul to a better life. 
and found some currency in the second century. 

19. Nevertheless. Notwithstanding the 
foundation stands. 


This error was taught also in Corinth (1 Cor. 15: 12), 


faith of some is overthrown (verse 18), God’s firm 
It stands unshaken. His promises are sure. Having this seal. On seals were 


often inscriptions, and the thought here is of the inscription. Upon this seal are two inscriptions. The first 
cheers with the assurance that the Lord knows his own, and will not forget them; the second shows who 


are his. The Lord knows his people, 


of God. ; 
20-22. But ina great house. As in 


and his people obey him. Thus they may know that they are known 


a house there are vessels of honor and dishonor, gold and 


earthen, so in the house of God, the church, there are even some earthy materials. 21, Ifa man there- 


fore purge himself from these. If aman 


wishes to be a noble vessel, of gold, for honorable uses in 


the Lord’s house, let him cleanse himself from earthly lusts. 22. Flee also youthful lusts. Hence, 


let youthful passions be controlled. Flee these, 
4; 12. 

28-26. Foolish and 
as the false teachers raise. 
engage in these profitless discussions. 
put not rudely; rather gently, kindly, humbly. If God 
yepentance often by providences which lead to repentance. 
are in the snare of the devil, taken captive at his will. 
they ‘may recover” themselves (the idea is, 


unlearned questions 


24. The servant of the Lord must not strive. 
25. In meekness correcting. Opposers must be corrected, 
will give them repentance. God gives 
26. And that they may recover. 
The only hope is that in the providence of God 
to “return to soberness.” See margin of Revision), repent, 


and follow righteousness, etc. See note on I Tim. 


avoid. Such unprofitable questions and speculations 
Hence, should not 


They 


280 II. TIMOTHY. 


Gh. IIL. 





26 And that they may recover themselves out of 
the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him 
at his will. 


CHAPTER III. 


A Defection from the Truth Foretold. 
SUMMARY.—False Teachers Predicted. Enemies of the Truth Described. 

Paul’s Life Known to Timothy. His Example Commended. The Holy 

Scriptures. 

1 This know also, that* in the last days perilous 
times shall come: 

2 For men shall be lovers of their own selves, 
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers,” disabedi- 
ent to parents, unthankful, unholy, 

3 Without natural affection, truce-breakers, false 
accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that 
are good, ' 

4 Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleas- 
ures more than lovers of God; 

5 Having a form of godliness, but denying the‘ 
power thereof: from such turn away. 

6 For’ of this sort are they which creep into 
houses, and lead captive silly women laden with 
sins, led away with divers lusts; 

7 Ever learning, and never able to® come to the 
knowledge of the truth. 

8 Now? as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, 
so do these also resist the truth: men of corrupt 
minds, reprobate concerning the faith. 


a@Judelgs. 6Rom.1:30. cl Tim. 5:8. d Matt. 23:14. 





pentance unto the know!- 
edge of the truth, and they 26 
may recover themselves 
out of the snare of the 
devil, having been taken 
captive by the Lord’s ser- 
vant unto the will of God. 


CHAPTER III. 


But know this, that in 1 
the last days grievous 
times shall come. For men 2° 
shall be lovers of self, lov- 
ers of money, boastful, 
haughty, railers, disobedi- 
ent to parents, unthankful, 
unholy, without natural 3; 
affection, implacable, slan- 
derers, without self-con- 
trol, fierce, no lovers of 
good, traiters, headstrong, 4 
pufied up, lovers of pleas- 
ure rather than lovers of 
God; holding a form of 5: 
godliness, but having de- 
nied the power thereof: 
from these also turn away. 
For of these are they that 6: 
creep into houses, andtake 
captive silly women laden 
with sins, led away by di- 
vers lusts, ever learning, 7 
and never able to come to 
the knowledge of the truth. 
And like as Jannes and 8. 
Jambres withstood Moses, 
so do these also withstand 
the truth; men corrupted 
in mind, reprobate con- 


é1Tim. 2245 (Ex. 710. 








and acknowledge the truth. Men are commanded to Repent (Matt. 3: 2; Acts 2: 38, ete.), but here God is: . 
alluded to as ‘‘peradventure”’ giving repentance. The meaning is made clear by comparing with Acts. 
11:18: “Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life.” The meaning there is that 
God has granted to the Gentiles the privilege of repentance, even as unto the Jews. So Paul’s idea here 
is that God, peradventure, may grant these, though sinning so grievously, opportunities for repentance, 
instead of delivering them over to hardness of heart. 

1-5. In the last days. In the last ages of the world. The expression is often used of the gospel 
dispensation. Perilous times. Grievous, times of distress. 2. For men shall be, Some of the 
characteristics of men in that period are given. Such men probably exist in all ages, but at the time 
referred to by Paul they shall be in the predominance. Lovers of their own selves. Selfish. 
8. Truce-breakers. “Implacable,” in Revision. Those who will not make or keep peace. 4. Heady. 
Headstrong. Lovers of pleasures. Lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God. 5. Having.a. 
form of godliness. This implies that the persons described professed to be religious, worshipers of 
God in outward form, A godless church is described. Denying the power. Rejecting its power. 
Their lives are not moulded by it. From such turn away. This implies that some of this formal, 
godless religion had begun to show itself even at that time. . 

6, 7. This sort are they. Men of this sort are they who form a party by creeping into houses and. 
by their seductive influences lead silly women captive. Not the sensible, pious women, but silly women, 
already laden with sins. Hence, easily led away. 7, Ever learning. Listening with greedy ears. 
to every one that comes along, but never learning anything. 

8, 9. As Jannes and Jambres. These were the traditional names of the Egyptian magicians who- 
opposed Moses. See Exod. 7: 11. Paul adopts these names in referring to them. As these opposed Moses, 
so do the false teachers just described oppose the truth, These names are found in a Jewish Targum on. 


Ch. JIT] II. TIMOTHY. 


9 But they shall proceed no further: for their 
folly shall be manifest unto all men, as* theirs also 
was. 

10 But thou hast fully known my doctrine, man- 
ner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering, charity, 
patience, 

11 Persecutions, afflictions, which came unto me? 
at Antioch,° at Iconium, at Lystra; what persecu- 
tions I endured: but out of them all the Lord 
delivered me. 

12 Yea, and® all that will live godly in Christ 
Jesus shall suffer persecution. 

13 But evil men and seducers shall wax worse 
and worse, deceiving, and being deceived. 

14 But continue thou in the things which thou 
hast learned and hast been assured of, knowing of 
whom thou hast learned them ; 

15 And that from a child thou hast known the 
holy scriptures, which* are able to make thee wise 
unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ 
Jesus. 

16 All® scripture zs given by inspiration of God, 
and ¢s profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for cor- 
rection, for instruction in righteousness; 

17 That" the man of God’ may be perfect, 
throughly furnished unto all good works. 








281 





cerning the faith. But they 9 
shall proceed no further: 
for their folly shall be evi- 
dent unto all men, as theirs 
also came to be. But thou 
didst follow my teaching, 
conduct, purpose, faith, 
longsuffering, love, pa- 
tience, persecutions, suf- 
ferings; what things befell 
me at Antioch, at Iconium, 
at Lystra; what persecu- 
tions Lendured: and out of 
them all the Lord delivered 
me, Yea, andall that would 12: 
live godly in Christ Jesus 
shall suffer persecution. 
But evil menandimpostors 13 
shall wax worse and worse, 
deceiving and being de- 
ceived. But abide thou in 
the things which thou hast 
learned and hast been as- 
sured of, knowing of whom 
thou hast learned them; 
and that from a babe thou 
hast known the sacred 
writings which are able to 
make thee wise unto sal- 
vation through faith which 
is in Christ Jesus. Every 
seripture inspired of God 
is also profitable for teach- 
ing, for reproof, for correc- 
tion, for instruetion which 
1s in righteousness: that 17° 
the man of God may be 
complete, furnished com- 
pletely unto every good 
work. 


10° 


11 


14 





-8.13; 9:11. 6 Acts13:14. cActs14:2. dPsa. 34:19; 2 Cor: 1:10. e Matt. 10:24; John 17:14; Acts 14: 225 
t Gor. 1518: 1 Thes.3:3. 7 Psa. 119-11; John 20:31; Rom. 10:17. g Luke1:70; 2 Pet. 1:20: h 1Tim.6:11; Titus 1:9. 








Exod. 7: 11, and 22:11. Reprobate. Have abandoned the faith. 9, They shall proceed no further. 
They shall be exposed, and their folly made manifest to prevent them from further success. As Jannes 
and Jambres could not stand before Moses, these men shall fail before the truth. 

10-18. Thou didst follow my teaching (Revision). Timothy had known his teaching and manner’ 
of life, and followedit. 11. Persecutions J at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra. See Acts, 
chapters 13, 14. These persecutions befell Paul in the part of Asia where Timothy was reared, and hence- 
he would be familiar with all. Out of them all the Lord delivered me. Hence, let Timothy cheer- 
fully suffer, if need be, and trust the Lord. 12. All that will live godly. In that age persecution 
was inseparable from a devoted Christian life. The same has been true, to a certain extent, in ali ages. 
Tf the church was less worldly it would be more persecuted. 18. Evil men and seducers. The men 
who hate the church shall become worse and worse. Seducers. Enchanters, men who lead astray. 

14-17. Continuethou. Refusing to heed the evil men, continue in the truth. Knowing of whom. 
thou hast learned them. Of pious parents first, but more especially of Paul. 15. And that from. 
achild. Taught by his grandmother, Lois, and his mother, Eunice (1: 5), he had learned to know the 
Scriptures from childhood. Holy Scriptures. The Books given by inspiration. The Jewish Beripsared: 
are primarily meant, but a part of the New Testament was already written. Make thee wise, Give 
thee the wisdom that leads to salvation. If the Old Testament could make him wise, how much more the- 
New! Through faith which is in Christ Jesus. This 1s essential. Unless the Seriptures lead to> 
Christ, there is no salvation. 16. All Scripture. The Revision 1s much better: “Every Scripture 
inspired of God is also profitable,” ete. Whether it is, depends on ‘its Inspiration. For instance, the 
Apocrypha is called Scripture, but is not inspired. For doctrine. For teaching. 17. That the man 
of God. The preacher. See 1 Tim. 6: 11; 1 Kings 13:1, 2 Kings 6:6. May be perfect. E ully fitted 
for his work. The sense is “complete.” Thoroughly furnished. Fully equipped. If he is master of 
the Holy Scriptures, he is so equipped. If this was true when: Paul wrote, with only a part of the New 
Testament written, with what emphasis may it be said now when we have both the Old and New Testa-- 


ments in full! 


TLD IM GREY 


Feb. IV. 





CHAPTER IV. 


The Last Solemn Charge. 


SUMMARY.—A Charge to Preach the Word. Paul’s Time of Departure at 
Hand. His Blessed Confidence. Timothy Asked to Come. Deserted 
by Others in the Hour of Trial, Yet the Lord was with Him. Parting 
Salutations. : 

1 I charge thee therefore before God, and the 
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and 
the dead at his appearing, and his kingdom; 

2 Preach the word; be instant in season, out of 
season; reprove, rebuke,? exhort with? all long-suf- 
fering and doctrine. 

3 For the time will come when they will not 
endure® sound doctrine; but after their own lusts 
shall they heap to themselves teachers, having 
itching ears; 

4 And they shall turn away their ears from the 
truth, and®@ shall be turned unto fables. 

5 But watch thou in all things, endure afflictions, 
do the work of an® evangelist, make full proof of 
thy ministry. 

6 For I am now ready to be offered, and the time 
of my departure is at hand. : 

7 Lhave fought a good fight, I have finished my 
course, I have kept the faith: 

8 Henceforth there is laid up for me* a crown of 
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, 
shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but 
unto all them also that love his appearing. 





CHAPTER IY. 


I charge thee in the sight 1 
of God, and of Christ Je- 
sus, who shall judge the 
quick and the dead, and by 
his appearing and his king- 
dom; preach the word; be 2 
instant in season, out of 
season; reprove, rebuke, 
exhort, with all longsufter- 
ing and teaching. For the 3 
time will come when they 
will not endure the sound 
doctrine; but, having itch- 
ing ears, will heap to them- 
selves teachers after their 
own lusts; and will turn 4 
away their ears from the 
truth, and turn aside unto 
fables. But be thou sober 5 
in all things, suffer hard- 
ship, do the work of an 
evangelist, fulfil thy min- 
istry. For I am already 6 
being offered, and the time 
of my departure is come. 
I have fought the good 7 
fight, I have finished the 
course, I have kept the 
faith: henceforth there is 8 
laid up for me the crown 
of righteousness, which 
the Lord, the righteous 
judge, shall give to me at 
that. day: and not only to 
me, but also to all them 
that have loved his ap- 
pearing. 








@ Titus 1:33. 61 Tim. 4:18. ¢1 Tim. 1:10.. d1 Tim, 1:4. 


e Acts 21:8. /Rev. 2:10. 





1, 2. I charge thee. How impressive this charge from the weary, war-worn apostle, as he stood on 
the edge of the grave! The names of God and of Christ are invoked to give it solemnity. Christ is named 
in his capacity of Judge, who shall judge not only Timothy’s hearers, but himself. Quick and the 
dead. Livinganddead. See1 Thess.4:5. At his appearing and his kingdom. This final judg- 
ment is placed at the time when Christ shall appear in his kingdom of glory. See Matt. 25: 31. 2. Preach 
the word. Proclaim the Word, as‘a herald of Christ. This is implied in the Greek. The Word is the 
Gospel and its teachings. Nothing else must be preached. The excellence of the Scriptures has just 
been mentioned (3: 16,17). These equip the preacher for his work. Be instant, ete. Preach on all 
occasions.. Be urgent in the work. 

8,4. For the time will come. Hence, there is need of diligence now. Sound doctrine. Gospel 
teaching. Heap to themselves teachers, Run from one teacher to another; unsettled and restless. 
Having itching ears. Ears which seek to be tickled by some new sensation. This class is numerous 
still. 4. And they shall turn away their ears from the truth. It is amoral law, continually 
illustrated, that those who do not seek truth will receive untruth. 

5-8. Watch thou. Rather, Be thou sober, and on the alert. Do not sleep. Do the work of an 
evangelist. Preach the gospel and look after the churches. Make full proof. Discharge thy min- 
istry fully. 6. For Iam now ready to be offered. Poured out as an offering by having his blood 
shed. See margin of Revision. The time of my departure. Death, to Paul, was simply a departure, 
a leaving the body and this world for a better state. At hand. His death had been predetermined by 
his enemies, and was near. 7. Ihave fought the good fight. The figure is drawn from the Grecian 
games. Literally, “I have striven a good strife.” I have finished the course. Drawn from the 
games also. Theraceisruntotheend. Ihave kept the faith. In spite of every opposition and afflic- 


Ch. IV] Il. TIMOTHY. 


283 





9 Do thy diligence to come shortly unto me: 





Do thy diligence to come 9 
10 For* Demas hath forsaken me, having loved? | Morty unto me: for De- 10 
this present world, and is departed unto Thessalon-| loved this present world, 
° . . 2 n = 
ica; Crescens to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia. Crescens to Galatia, Titus 
11 Only Luke is with me. Take® Mark, and | 22imatia. Only Luke is 1 
bring him with thee: for he is profitable to me for | Pting hm with thee: for 
the ministry inde Mee Petia 02 
a ° sent to Ephesus. The cloke 13 
12 And* Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus. that T left at ‘Troas with 
13 The cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus, | Carpus, bring when thou 
- iS comest, and the books, es- 
when thou comest, bring with thee, and the books, pecially the | parehments. 
. iL exander the coppersmith 14 
but especially the parchments. _ : did me much evil: the Lord 
14 Alexander * the coppersmith did me much | Milrender to him accord: 
evil; the* Lord reward him according to his works: | be thou wanre also; for he 
x greatly withstood our 
15 Of whom be thou ware also; for he hath|Vords” at my first defence 16 
greatly withstood our words. no one took my part, but 
x c zg all forsook me: may it not 
16 At my first answer no man stood with me,®| be laid to their account. 
But the Lord stood by me, 17 


but all men forsook me: J pray God that it may not 
be laid to their charge. 


and strengthened me; tha’ 
through me the message 


might be fully proclaimed, 
and that all the Gentiles 
might hear: and I was de- 
livered out of the mouth 


17 Notwithstanding ® the Lord stood with me, 
and strengthened me; that by me the preaching 
might be fully known, and ¢hat all the Gentiles 
might hear: and I was delivered! out of the mouth 
of the lion. 





a Col. 4: 14; Phile. 24. 61John2: 15. 


ec Acts 12: 25; 15:37; Col. 4: 10. 
1 Tim. 1:20. #2Sam. 3:39; Psa. 28:4; Rev. 18:6. 


d@ Acts 20:4; Eph. 6:12. e Acts 19: 335 
g Acts 7: 60. 2:9 


h Matt. 10:19. 72 Pet. 2:9. 








tion he has remained true. How true, his whole life shows. 8. Henceforth there is laid up for me. 
As the successful competitor in the games receives a crown, so the crown awaited him. The crown of 
righteousness. The crown given for righteousness. The righteous Judge. He was about to die by 
the sentence of an unrighteous judge. The higher Judge would reverse the sentence and give hima 
crown. And not to me only. All can have the same hope. All who serve him, and would love to see 
him come as their best friend, shall have the same crown. 

9-18. Do thy diligence to come. In view of his speedy departure, in view of Paul’s need of him. 
10. For Demas hath forsaken me. Demas is named in Col. 4: 14 and Philemon 24 favorably, but in 
the time of trial his courage failed. Death seemed to threaten, and as he clung to life, he fled. 
Crescens. Not namedelsewhere. Titus. Well known as one of Paul’s companions. Dalmatia. The 
district east of the Adriatic in Lllyricum, where we know churches were already planted. It is hkely he 
was there by Paul’s orders. See Titus 3:12. 11. Only Luke is with me. Of my traveling com- 
panions. The old friend is faithful to the last. Take Mark. John Mark, so well known. He seems to 
have been at this date at Ephesus. For more of Luke and Mark, see Introduction to the Gospels which 
they wrote. 12. Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus. He probably carried this letter and was to 
supply Timothy’s place. Tychicus is named several times, Acts 20: 4; 21: 29 and in the last chapters of 
Colossians and Ephesians. 18. The cloke. If his imprisonment is prolonged he will need it. Carpus. 
Probably his host at Troas. The books. Manuscripts. Especially the parchments. Papyrus and 
parchment were both used for books, and he wishes particularly the latter. 

14,15. Alexander the coppersmith. An Alexander is named in Acts 19: 23 and in 1 Tim. 1; 20 as 
belonging to Ephesus. This may have been the same man. We cannot be sure whether the evil was done 
in Ephesus, or Rome. Did me much evil. By his opposition. The Lord reward him. The 
Christian, when wronged, is to turn over to the Lord the recompense for the wrong. 15. Of whom be 
thou wate. This seems to indicate that Alexander was at Ephesus still. 

16-18. At my first answer. This seems to point to a first hearing of the case, which had then been 
adjourned, perhaps to wait for witnesses. Then, as now, cases were often postponed, or there were second 
trials. No man stood with me. None of his brethren dared to appear.in his support. It was the last 
year of the reign of Nero, and times were terrible. 17. The Lord stood with me. He hada better 
helper than man. He had an assurance that the Lord was with him. That by me. The Lord strength~ 


284 II. TIMOTHY. : fGh, 1V- 





18 And* the Lord shall deliver me from every | of thetion. The Lord will 18 
evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly | dejiver mo from every one 


° ever. | unto his heavenly king- 
kingdom: to whom ve glory for ever and eve ad ie a 


Am en. ae om Ze) abn Foes bis 
b : , ¢ alute Prisca and Aquila, 
19 Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the household® | , Satute Prisca and Aqui, 
of Onesiphorus. horus. Erastus abode at 20: 


: ° orinth: but Trophimus I 
20 Erastus¢ abode at Corinth: but Trophimus® | {ett at Miletus sick. Do 21 


7 | thy diligence to come be- 
have I left at Miletum sick. oe ee ee oe 


21 Do thy diligence to come before winter. lnteth thee, and Fudens, 
Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and and all the brethren. - : * 
i e Lor e wit iy 22: 
Claudia, and all the brethren. ° ae spirit. Grace be with you. 
22 The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit. 


Grace de with you. Amen. 





The second epistle unto Timotheus, ordained the first bishop of 
the church of the Ephesians, was written from Rome, 
when Paul was brought before Nero the second time. 





a Psa. 121:7. 6 Acts18:2. c2Tim.1:16. @ Acts19:22. e Acts 20:4. ~ 





ened him, so that in his defense he could proclaim to the Gentiles boldly the principles of the gospel. For 
the manner in which he was wont to defend himself, see in Acts his famous speeches before Felix, Festus. 
and Agrippa. Out of the mouth of the lion. Probably a proverbial expression indicating deliver- 
ance from great danger. Some have thought it meant that he was delivered from being thrown to the 
lions. 18. And the Lord shall deliver me. In the future as in the past. From every evil. 
work. From evil doers. . 

19-22. Salute Prisca and Aquila. These tried friends, whom he met first in Corinth, afterwards 
in Ephesus, who returned also to Rome, were now again in Ephesus. The house of Onesiphorus. See: 
2Tim.1: 16. Some have thought that this form implies that Onesiphorus was dead, but that does not 
follow necessarily. 20. Erastus abode at Corinth. Probably his old home (Rom. 16: 23). Trophi- 
mus. He was an Ephesian (Acts 21: 19). These personal details were better understood by Timothy 
than by us, but I suppose that this statement is made to explain why Trophimus was notin Rome. This. 
verse proves that this letter does not belong to the date of Paul’s first imprisonment, since years have 
passed between Paul’s last visit to Miletus and the first Roman imprisonment. 21. Come before 
winter. He could not come in the winter because navigation was suspended. Eubulus. Not before 
mentioned. It is probable that all these were Roman brethren. Pudens. He is thought to have been a. 
Roman senator, from data secured outside of the New Testament. Linus. <A Linus appears as a bishop 
of Rome not many years later. Claudia. It has been argued that this lady was the daughter of a 
British king, and the wife of Pudens. See Conybeare and Howson. 

Shortly after this Epistle was written, within a few months at most, Paul had his second hearing, was 
sentenced to death by execution, was led out of the city at the Ostian Gate toa place called the Three 
Fountains, and there was beheaded. At least all early tradition, and the Fathers, among them Clement,, 
one of his companions, support this view. 


INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLE TO TITUS. 


The Epistle to Titus was written before the Second, and there is good reason to believe, 
after the First Epistle to Timothy. It belongs to a period when Paul was nota prisoner, 
and can hardly be assigned to that portion of his life which is covered by the historian 
of Acts. There is not in Acts any allusion whatever to a visit to Crete, or to churches in 
that great island, a fact that cannot be accounted for except by placing his Cretan mis- 
sionary tour after his first imprisonment. It is probable that churches had been planted 
before his visit, as in Rome and many other places; that after his first letter to Timothy 
he returned to Ephesus, and from thence passed into the island. When he left, as the 
work of organization was left incomplete, Titus remained in order to “‘supply what was 
wanting’’ (1: 5), and afterwards Paul wrote to him to give further instructions concern- 
ing the work. Hence the date of the letter will be somewhere from A. D. 65 to 68. 

Crete is a great island, stretching one hundred and fifty miles from east to west, but 
only about thirty-five miles in width, mountainous but fertile, and had in 1867 a popula- 
tion of 210,000, mostly Greeks. It is closely connected with early Greek legend and his- 
tory, and although under Turkish rule, is in full sympathy with the Kingdom of Greece. 
Its modern history is mainly a record of resistance to the Turkish power. 

Titus, to whom the letter is addressed, was a Greek. He attended Paul to Jerusalem 
at the time the question of Gentile Christians was considered (Acts 15). Paul refused 
to allow him to be circumcised (Gal. 2: 1-5; 2 Cor. 2: 12; 7: 5-16). He bore Paul’s first 
letter to Corinth, and is often referred to in the epistles, although his name is not men- 
tioned in Acts. From 2 Tim. 4:10, we learn that he was in Dalmatia, at the time Paul 
wrote from his prison, and we find (Titus 3: 15) that Paul bade him come from Crete to 
Nicopolis, which is on the same coast as Dalmatia. It is still claimed in Dalmatia that 
he was the missionary of that region. 

The genuineness of the letter, like that to Timothy, was never questioned until a recent 
period, but every objection made by the rationalistic critics of the German school has 
been satisfactorily answered, and there is no reasonable ground for doubt that all three 
-of the Pastoral Letters belong to the last 1385) of the great apostle’s life. 


THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO 


om 


PEPUS: 


CHAPTER I. 


Directions to Titus. 


SUMMARY.—Why Titus was Left. The Qualifications of Elders. False 
Teachers who Must be Stopped. The Character of Cretans. Condition 
of the Cretan Churches. 

1 Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus 
Christ, according to the faith of God’s elect,* and 
the acknowledging of the truth which? is after god- 
liness ; 

2 In hope of eternal life, which God, that cannot 
lie, promised before*® the world began; 

3 But hath in due times manifested his word 
through preaching, which is committed unto me,‘ 
according to the commandment of God our Saviour; 

4 To® Titus, mine own son after the common 
faith: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the 
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour. 

5 For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou 
shouldest* set in order the things that are wanting, 
and® ordain elders in every city, as I had appointed 
thee: 

6 If any be blameless, the husband of one wife, 
having faithful children, not accused of riot, or 
unruly. 

7 For a bishop must be blameless, as" the steward 
of God; not self-willed, not soon angry,! not given 
to wine, no striker, not given to filthy lucre; 





a2 Tim. 2:25. 61Tim. 6:3. c2Tim.1:9. d@ Acts 9:15. 


h Matt. 24:45. ¢ Ley. 10:9 











CHAPTER I. 


Paul, a servant of God, 1 
and an apostle of Jesus 
Christ, according to the 
faith of God’s elect, and 
the knowledge of the truth 
which is according to god- 
liness, in hope of eternal 2 
life, which God, who can- 
not lie, promised before 
times eternal; but in his 3 
Own seasons manifested 
his word in the message 
wherewith I was intrusted 
according to the command- 
ment of God our Saviour; 
to Titus, my true child 4 
after a common faith: 
Grace and peace from God 
the Father and Christ Je- 
Sus our Saviour. For this 5- 
cause left I thee in Crete, 
that thou shouldest set in 
order the things that were 
wanting, and appoint eld- 
ers in every city, as I gave 
thee charge; if any manis 6 
blameless, the husband of 
one wife, having children 
that believe, who are not 
accused of riot or unruly. 
For the bishop must be 7 
blameless, as God’s stew- 
ard; not selfwilled, not 
soon angry, no brawler, no 
striker, not greedy of filthy 
lucre; but given to hospi- 8 
tality, a lover of good, so- 
berminded, just, holy, tem- 
perate; holding to the 9 


é2 Cor. 2:13; Gal. 2:3. f1 Cor. 11:34. g Acts 14:23. 


1-4. Aservant of God. Paul usually calls himself a “servant of Christ.” James1:1 uses the form 
here. According to. His apostleship looked to the promotion of the faith of God’s elect. And 
acknowledging of the truth. Bringing men to acknowledge the truth. 2. In hope of eternal 
life. All his work as an apostle was in hope, etc. 8. Manifested. God has manifested the eternal 
life promised by his word in the gospel. 4. To Titus, mine own son. Concerning Titus, see Intro- 
duction. Thedanguage here shows that he was one of Paul’s converts. 

5, 6. For this cause leftI thee. Paul had then been in Crete, attended by Titus, and had left him 
there to set the churches in order. In Crete. See Introduction. The things that are wanting. 
Not only in organization, but in instruction and practice. Ordain. “Appoint,” in the Revision. The 
mode of appointing is not here indicated. Elders. See notes on 1 Tim. 3: 1-6. In every city. A 
plurality were to be appointed wherever there were ae 6. Ifany be blameless. The appoint- 


Ch. 1.] TITUS. 


287 


ee 


8 But a lover of hospitality, a lover of good 
men, sober, just, holy, temperate; 

9 Holding fast the faithful word as he hath been 
taught, that he may be able* by sound doctrine both 
to exhort and to convince the gainsayers. 

10 For there are many unruly and vain talkers 
and deceivers, specially” they of the circumcision: 

11 Whose mouths must be stopped; who subvert* 
whole houses, teaching things which they ought 
not, for filthy lucre’s sake. 

12 One‘ of themselves, even a prophet of their 
own, said, The Cretians are alway liars, evil beasts, 
slow bellies. 

13 This witness is true: wherefore rebuke them 
sharply, that they may be sound in the faith; 

14 Not giving heed to Jewish fables, and com- 
mandments® of men, that turn from the truth. 

15 Unto‘ the pure all things are pure: but unto 


faithful word which is ac- 
cording to the teaching, 
that he may be able bot 

to exhort in the sound doc- 
trine, and to convict the 
gainsayers. For there are 10 
many unruly men, vain 
talkers and deceivers, spe- 
cially they of the cireum- 
cision, whose mouths must 11 
be stopped; men who over- 
throw whole houses, teach- 
ing things which they 
eught not, for filthy lucre’s 
sake. One of themselves, 12 
a prophet of their own, 
said, Cretans are alway 
liars, evil beasts, idle glut- 
tons. This testimony is 
true. For which cause re- 13 
prove them sharply, that 
they may be sound in the 
faith, not giving heed to 14 
Jewish fables, and com- 
mandments of men who 
turn away from the truth. 
To the pure all things are 15 
pure: but to them that are 
defiled and unbelieving 


nothing is pure; but both 
their mind and their con- 
science are defiled. They 16. 
profess that they know 
God; but by their works 
they deny him,being abom- 
inable, and disobedient, 
and unto every good work 
reprobate. 


them that are defiled and unbelieving ¢s nothing 
pure; but even their mind and conscience is defiled. 
16 They? profess that they know God; but in 
works they deny him, being abominable, and diso- 
bedient, and unto every good work reprobate. 


6 Acts 15:1. ¢ Matt. 23:14. d Acts 17:28. eIsa. 29:13; Matt. 15:9. Luke 11:39. 











a1 Tim. 1:10. g Ezek. 33:31. 











ment is conditioned on finding the right kind of men. See notes on 1 Tim. 3: 1-6 for a discussion of the 
qualifications. 

7-9. Forabishop. An elder and bishop were then different names for the same office. See notes on 
parallel passage in 1 Timothy. Must be. Unless he has these traits he must not be appointed. Blame- 
less. Nocharge against him. Compare1 Tim. 3: 2,3. See notes there. 8. A lover of hospitality. 
See note on 1 Tim. 3:2. 9. Holding fast the faithful word. Sound in the gospel doctrine, and able 
to teach it to others, as well as to refute opposers. 

10-18. There are many unruly and vain talkers. The last sentence suggests to Paul to speak 
of the Cretan errorists. The allusions to the false teachers show that the Epistle belongs to the closing 
years of the apostle’s life. Of the circumcision. Jews, perhaps Judaizing Christians who had so 
troubled the Gentile churches. See the Galatian letter. 11. Whose mouths must be stopped. 
Muzzled. The way to stop them is for the churches to refuse to hear them. All false teachers, or bad 
men, should now be stopped from preaching in the same way. Subvert whole houses. Subvert their 
faith. For filthy lucre’s sake. For base gain. 12. One of themselves. Of the Cretans. A 
prophet. A Cretan sage, seer and teacher, Epimenides by name, who lived about B. C. 500. The 
Cretans are always liars. This hard testimony of his countrymen is quoted from a poem, now lost. 
18. This witness is true. Paul’s observations confirmed it. So do many ancient writers. Cretize 
(Cretanize) became a slang phrase for lying. Wherefore. Their bad conduct must be sharply rebuked 
until the gospel so transforms them that they will become sound in the faith. 

14-16. Jewish fables. See note oni Tim.1:4. Commandments of men. Commandments which 
are only the traditions of men, additions to God’s ordinances. See Mark 7: 4,8. 15. Unto the pure 
all things are pure. In the “Jewish fables” just referred to were rigid regulations concerning foods 
and purifications. Hence Paul adds, “It is not food that makes one impure. To the pure all things are 
pure. When one is unbelieving and defiled, no food can make him pure.” See notes on Rom. 14; 14 and 
1 Cor. 8: 4-8. 16. They profess that they know God. These teachers of Jewish fables and carnal 
ordinances profess to know and serve God, yet their immoral lives are a denial of him. 


288 TEU. 


cCh. IL 


it i an ee ee ee SS 


CHAPTER II. 


Practical Duties Versus Unsound Doctrine. 


SUMMARY.—Duties of the Aged. Of the Young Men and Women. Of 

Seivants. Christian Life. Christian Hope. 

1 But speak thou the things which become* sound 
doctrine: 

2 That the aged men be sober, grave, temperate, 
sound in faith, in charity, in patience. 

3 The® aged women likewise, that they be in 
behaviour as becometh holiness, not false accusers, 
not given to much wine, teachers of good things; 

4 That they may teach the young women to be 
sober, to love their husbands, to love their children ; 

5 To be discreet, chaste, keepers at home,° good, 
obedient to their own husbands, that the word of 
God be not blasphemed. 

6 Young men likewise exhort to be sober-minded. 

7 In‘ all things shewing thyself a pattern of good 
works: in doctrine shewing uncorruptness, gravity, 
sincerity,° 

8 Sound? speech, that cannot be condenmed;® 
that he that is of the contrary part may be ashamed, 
having no evil thing to say of you. 

9 Hexhort servants to be obedient unto their own 
masters, and to please them well in all things; not 
answering again; 

10 Not purloining, but shewing all good fidelity; 
that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savy- 
jour in all things. 


| temperate, 





CHAPTER II. 


But speak thou the things 1 
which befit the sound doc- 
trine: that aged men be 2 
grave, sober- 
minded, sound in faith, in 
love, in patience: that aged 3 
women likewise be rever- 
ent in demeanor, not slan- 
derers nor enslaved to 
much wine, teachers of 
that which is good; that 4 
they may train the young 
women to love their hus- 
bands, to love their chil- 
dren, to be soberminded, 
chaste, workers at home, 
kind, being in subjection 
to their own husbands,that 
the word of God be not 
blasphemed: the younger 6 
men likewise exhort to be 
soberminded: in all things 7 
shewing thyself an ensam- 
ple of good works; in thy 
doctrine shewing uncor- 
ruptness, gravity, sound 
speech, that cannot be con- 
demned; that he that is of 
the contrary part may be 
ashamed, having no evil 
thing to say of us. Hzhort 9 
servants to be in subjection 
to their own masters, and 
to be well-pleasing to them 
in all things; not gainsay- 
ing; not purloining, but 
showing all good fidelity; 
that they may adorn the 
doctrine of God our Sav- 


o 


ao 


10 








a1Tim. 6:3. 61¥Pet.3:3,4. ¢ Col. 3:18; 1Pet.3:1,5. d1 Pet. 5:3. 


1-6. Speak... .- 


eEph. 6:24. f1Tim.6:3. 


g Neh. 5:9. 





sound doctrine. Instead: of inculeating Jewish fables and speculations 


impart healthy teaching; teach practical duties. 2, That the aged men be sober. Not given to 
wine. We must keep in mind that the converts had recently been given to heathen vices. Temperate. 
Exhibiting self-control. Sound in faith. True believers. In patience. Steadfastly persevering. 
8. The aged women likewise. One general rule is given, in effect that they seek holy lives. Not 
false accusers. Not given to slander, and insinuations of evil, a fault by no means uncommon among 
certain classes of women. Teachers of good things. Both by example and precept. How beautiful is 
an aged Christian woman of saintly lite! 4. That they may teach. A special mission is to teach the 
young women. What they were to be taught follows. 5. To be discreet. How often thoughtless 
indiscretion has caused great pain and trouble! Keepers at home. Those who are continually going 
must neglect the duties of domestic life. See1Tim.5:13. 6. Young men . . be sober-minded. 
‘The precept, sober-minded, occurs four times in six verses, and may be accounted for by the volatile 
character of the Cretans. See 1: 12, 13. 

7,8. Showing thyself a pattern. While exhorting others. Showing uncorruptness. Sin- 
cerity. 8. Sound speech. Speech of a healthy, moral effect. He that is of the contrary part. 
‘Opposers, whether heathen, Jews, or false teachers. 

9,10. Exhort servants. Slaves. See notes on Eph. 6: 5-8. Many of the first converts were ser- 
vants. 10. Not purloining. Mer robbed of liberty and labor have always been under temptation to 
steal. Good fidelity. Faithfulness in duty which will secure the master’s confidence. That they may 
adorn. The virtues of a Christian servant would commend Christianity to the master. As a matter of 
fact we know that many masters were converted by their servants. 


Ch. III.] aETUS: 


11 For the grace of God that bringeth salvation® 
hath appeared to all men, 

12 Teaching us, that,” denying ungodliness and 
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, 
and godly, in this present world; 

13 Looking for that blessed’ hope, and the glori- 
ous appearing of the great God and our Saviour 
Jesus Christ; 

14 Who gave himself for us, that he might 
redeem us from all iniquity,4 and purify unto him- 
self® a peculiar people, zealous of good works. 

15 These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke 
‘with all authority. Let no man despise thee. 








CHAPTER III. 


Various Duties of Social Life. 


SSUMMARY.—Duties of Christian Life. The Former State of Christians. 
How God Saved Us. The Bath of Regeneration. The Treatment of 
Heretics. Personal Directions. : 

1 Put them in mind to be subject to principalities 
and powers, to obey magistrates,‘ to be ready to 
every good work; 

2 To® speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, 
but gentle, shewing all meekness unto all men. 

3 For we ourselves also were sometimes foolish, 
‘disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and 
pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and 
hating one another. 

4 But after that the kindness and love of God 
our Saviour toward man appeared, 

5 Not® by works of righteousness which we have 
done, but according to his mercy he saved us,‘ by 
the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the 
Holy Ghost; 





289 


iour in all things. For the 11 
grace of God hath appear- 
ed, bringing salvation to 
all men, instructing us, to 12 
the intent that, denying 
ungodliness and worldly 
lusts, we should live sober- 
ly and righteously and god- 
ly in this present world; 
looking for the blessed 13 
hope and appearing of the 
oN of our great God and 

aviour Jesus Chrtst; who 14 

ave himself for us, that 

e might redeem us from 
all iniquity, and purify 
unto himself a people for 
his own possession, zealous 
of good works. 

These things speak and 15 
exhort and reprove with 
all authority. Let no man 
despise thee. 


CHAPTER III. 


Put them in mind to be 1 
in subjection to rulers, to 
authorities, to be obedient, 
to be ready unto every 
good work, to speak evil 2 
of no man, not to be con- 
tentious, to be _ gentle, 
shewing all meekness to- 
ward all men. For we also 3 
were aforetime foolish, dis- 
obedient, deceived, serving 
divers lusts and pleasures, 
living in malice and envy, 
hateful, hating one anoth- 
er. But when the kindness 4 
of God our Saviour, and 
his love toward man, ap- 
peared, not by works done 5 
in righteousness, which we 
did ourselves, but accord- 
ing to his merey he saved 
us, through the washing of 
regeneration and renewing 





c Acts 24:15. d Heb. 9: 14. 


6 Luke 1: 75. 
h Rom. 8: 20; Gal. 2: 16. 


Eph. 4: 31. 


aJohn1:9. 


é EX. 15: 9; Deut. 7:6; 14:2. 
t John 3: 8, 5; 1 Pet. 3:21. 


f Heb. 13:21. g Ex. 20:16; 





11-15. Hath appeared to all men. The divine favor shown forth in the gospel of salvation is for 


-all men, servants as well as masters. 12. Teaching us. 
-must deny ourselves ali sinful lusts, and live godly lives. 


We are taught in this system of grace that we 
13. Looking for. The attitude of Chris- 


tians is that of waiting in expectation of the fulfilment of a glorious hope. Compare 1 Cor. 1:7; Phil. 
.8:20;1 Thess. 1:9. 14. Whogave himself. The Lord who will appear gave the greatest of all things, 
himself, for us. That he might redeem us. To deliver us from sin, not only from its power, but its 
penalty. A peculiar people. Separate, chosen, holy in life. The Jews were, under the old covenant, a 
peculiar people; now, Christians, are God’s Israel. 15. Let no man despise thee. Command 
respect. 

1 2. Be subject to principalities and powers. To the authorities over them. The Cretans were 
subjected to Roman sway B. C. 67, but had always been turbulent and impatient. Christians should keep 
_aloof from seditions which could only work evil. 2. Gentle. Forbearing and patient. 

8-7. For we ourselves. We Christians. Were sometimes. Once we were just as foolish, diso- 
ibedient, turbulent and sinful as others. 4, But after that. That we are not so now is due, not to 


290 TITUS: 


6 Which* he shed on us abundantly through 
Jesus Christ our Saviour ; 

7 That, being justified by 
made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. 

8 This is a faithful saying, and these things I 
will that thou affirm constantly, that they which 
have believed in God might be careful to maintain 
good works: these things are good and profitable 
unto men. 

9 But” avoid foolish questions, and genealogies, 
and contentions, and strivings against the law; for 
they are unprofitable and vain. 

10 A man that is an heretic,° after the first 
second? admonition, reject; 

11 Knowing that he that is such is subverted, and 
sinneth,¢ being condemned of himself. 

12 When I shall send Artemas unto thee, or* 
Tychicus, be diligent to come unto me to Nicopolis; 
for I have determined there to winter. 

13 Bring Zenas the lawyer‘ and Apollos on their 
journey diligently, that nothing be. wanting unto 
them. 

14 And let ours also learn to maintain good 





his grace, we should be 


and 





(eh. 10s 


of the Holy Ghost, which 6 
he poured out upon us 
richly, through Jesus 
Christ our Saviour; that, 7 
being justified by his grace, 
we might be made heirs 
according to the hope of 
eternal life. Faithful is the 8 
saying, and concerning 
these things I will that 
thou affirm confidently, to 
the end that they which 
have believed God may be 
careful to maintain good 
works. These things are 
good and profitable unto 
men: but shun foolish 9 
questionings, and genealo- 
gies, and strifes, and fight- 
ings about the law; for 
they are unprofitable and 
vain. A man that is heret- 
ical after a first and second 
admonition refuse; know- 
ing that such a one is per- 
verted, and sinneth, being 
self-condemned. 

When I shall send Arte- 
mas unto thee, or Tychi- 
cus, give diligence to come 
unto me to Nicopolis: for 
there I have determined to 
winter. Set forward Zenas 
the lawyer and Apollos on 
their journey diligently, 
that nothing be wanting 
unto them. And let our 
people also learn to main- 





a Wzek. 36:25; Joel 2:28; John 1:16. 61 Tim. 1:4; 2 Tim. 2: 238. 


c2 Cor. 13: 2. 


d@ Matt. 18:17; 2 Tim. 3:5; 


QJohn10. e Acts 13:46. f Acts 20:4; 2 Tim. 4: 12. g Acts 18: 24. 





ourselves, but to the love of God shown in the gospel. 5. He saved us. Not by our righteousness, but 
by his mercy. The means chosen by his mercy to place us in the state of salvation are next spoken of. 
By the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost. Two elements enter into the 


saving; these are referred to in John 3: 5 as the birth of water and of the Spirit. 


God’s spirit effects the 


renewal of the spirit of man by bringing him to faith and repentance through the preaching of the gospel; 


thus the renewal of the Holy Spirit is begun, and the gift of 


the Holy Spirit is promised as a sequence of 


baptism. Rom. 6: 1-8 shows that the sinner dies to sin, is buried by baptism, rises to a new life, and is a 


new creature. Washing of regeneration. Literally, “Bath of regeneration.” 
baptism, such as Meyer, Olshausen, Lange, Plumptree, Schaff, Canon Cook, 
Regeneration is due to the Holy Spirit, but baptism is an outward act that God requires to 
only occurs here and in Matt. 19: 28. 6. Which. The 


reputation refer this to 
Wesley, ete. 
complete the fact. The term “regeneration” 


All commentators of 


Holy Spirit. Shed onus abundantly. On the church. On some even in miraculous measure. See 
Acts2:1-10. '7. That being justified. Our sins all forgiven, that through God’s grace, we might be 


accepted as his children. 


8,9. This is a faithful saying. What has been said in the last four verses. 
That they are saved by the gospel, and hence must live holy lives. Maintain good works. 
How often this admonition ! 


good deeds. 9. But avoid foolish questions. 


Affirm confidently. 
Active in 
Genealogies. See 


note oni Tim.1:4. Strivings about the law. Disputes over points connected with the J ewish law. 


10, 11. An heretic. 


A divider, or schismatic. Any one who preaches doctrines which divide the 


household of faith isa heretic. So is any schismatic or factious man. Reject. First admonish and 
warn, repeat it, and if there is no change, then refuse his fellowship. 11. Knowing, ete. No one can 
continue factious unless he is perverted from the truth. This is the only passage in the New Testament 


where “heretic” occurs, though ‘“‘heresy” is elsewhere named. 


12-15. WhenIshallsend. Titus was not stationed permanently in Crete, as a diocesan bishop, but: 
was left for a certain work (1: 5), and is now bidden to leave as soon as another is sent to take his place.. 
Artemas. Otherwise unknown. Tychicus. Often named as one of Paul’s companions. See notes on 
Col. 4: 7 and Eph. 6: 21. Come unto me to Nicopolis. A town on the west coast of Greece in Epirus, 
so named because Augustus Cesar gained the great battle of Actium there. It means, “‘City of Victory.” 
History seems to make it probable that Paul did go there to winter, was again arrested, and carried to- 


Ch. II.] TITUS. 291 


works for necessary uses, that they be* not unfruit- | tain good works tor neces- 
ful a, at that they be not 


. All that are with me sa- 15 
15 All that are with me salute thee. Greet them lute thee. Salute them that 


that love us in the faith. Grace be with you all, | love us in faith. 
CAS Grace be with you all. 


It was written to Titus, ordained the first bishop of the church 
of the Cretians, from Nicopolis of Macedonia. 








@ Col. 1:10; Phil. 1:11; 2 Pet. 1:8. 


Rome to die. 18. Bring Zenas the lawyer. Of him nothing more is known. And Apollos. See 
Acts 18: 24-28. It was the custom of the churches to help the early evangelists forward in their journeys. 
14. Let ours. Our fellow-Christians. This suggests that it would be a good work to aid Zenas and 
Apollos. 


INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLE TO PHILEMON. 


This, the fourth of the personal letters of Paul, differs from the other three, as well as 
from all other epistles of Paul, in that it is neither doctrinal, nor intended for general 
church instruction. It has its interest in that it shows by a particular example the appli- 
cation of the great principles of Christian brotherhood to social life. It is written to 
Philemon, an active Christian of Colosse, a convert of Paul, in behalf of Onesimus, a 
runaway slave of Philemon, who had found refuge in Rome, had in some way been 
brought under Paul’s instruction during his first Roman imprisonment, and had been 
brought to Christ. In Col. 3: 9 and 4: 9 he is mentioned as belonging to Colosse, com- 
mended as a faithful:'and beloved brother who had been of great service, and it is there 
stated that he would return from Rome to his old home along with Tychicus, while this 
epistle explains the occasion of his return, and throws a practical light on the new rela- 
tions of master and slave, which could not be done by precept alone. 

A few words concerning ancient slavery will assist in an understanding of the lesson 
of the epistle. Slavery was universal. Aristotle, one of the most enlightened of the 
Greeks, held that the Creator had made the majority of the human race for slavery. 
Even the Mosaic law permitted the relation, but mitigated the condition of the slave by 
protective regulations which made Jewish slavery far the mildest in the world. Under 
the Roman law the slave was not considered a man, but a chattel without any civil rights 
whatever, completely at the mercy of his master. The master could sell him, give him 
away, torture him, crucify him, put him to death, even feed him to his fishes, and there 
was no law to interfere in his behalf. But when Christ came he introduced new relations 
between man and man. Allin the church were a brotherhood. In Christ Jesus there 
was neither bond nor free, male nor female. All stood on a footing of equality before 
the Lord; all were brethren; all God’s children, and to be bound to each other by the 
ties of brotherly love. 

Such revolutionary ideas were sure in the course of time to destroy the condition of 
slavery, but in the meanwhile, Christianity sought to prepare men for the revolution 
before it was declared, and hence the relation was continued under new regulations. 
The servant was to continue to render faithful service to a master who was a brother 
beloved, and the master was to love and trust his servant as a brother, and to do unto 
him as he would be done by in guch a relation. Hence in the early church thousands 
of masters and slaves met on an equal footing and often the slaves were the bishops who 
ruled the church and watched over the spiritual welfare of their masters. 

Onesimus, an unconverted slave of Philemon, had fled, whether after or before his 
” master’s conversion, is unknown. When he was converted the principles of Christian 
teaching would require him to return,’ but the conditions of his return are explained in 
the affectionate letter which he carries back to Philemon. He returns a servant, but as 
amore than servant, ‘“‘a brother beloved, not only in the flesh, but in the Lord,’’ and 
Philemon is desired to so receive him in a tender appeal to his consciousness of how much 
he owes to him who asks. He is reminded that Onesimus is Paul’s own son in the Gos- 
pel, as well as himself. A sense of the fault is exhibited, and forgiveness for the 
offender is required, not by the authority of apostolic power, but of love. 

This epistle must have been written about the same time as that to the Colossians, and 
was carried by the same messengers. Its genuineness is accepted by almost all critical 
authorities, the rationalist Baur being the only notable exception. 


2 


THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO 


PHILEMON. 


The Appeal for Onesimus. 
SuMMARY.—Greetings. Thanksgivings for Philemon’s Faith. Entreaty 
for Onesimus. The Change in Onesimus. His Return. An Appeal to 
Philemon’s Love for Paul. Paul’s Hope to Visit Colosse. Closing 
Salutations. 


1 Paul,* a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy 


our brother, unto Philemon our dearly beloved,” 
and fellow-labourer, 

2 And to our beloved Apphia, and Archippus* our 
fellow-soldier, and to the church in thy house: 

3 Grace® to you, and peace, from God our 
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. 

4 I* thank my God, making mention of thee 
always in my prayers, : 

5 Hearing® of thy love and faith, which thou hast 
toward the Lord Jesus, and toward all saints; 

6 That the communication of thy faith may 
become effectual, by” the acknowledging of every 
good thing which is in you in Christ J esus. 

7 For we have great joy and consolation in thy 
love, because the bowels of the saints! are refreshed 
by thee, brother. 

8 Wherefore,’ though I might be much bold in 
Christ to enjoin thee that which is convenient, 


@ Eph. 4:1; 2Tim. 1:8. 6 Phil. 2:25. cCol.4:17. d@ Rom. 16:5; 1 Cor. 16:19. 





eEph. 1:2. 7 


Paul, a prisoner of Christ 1 
Jesus, and Timothy our 
brother, to Philemon our 
beloved and fellow-work- 
er, and to Apphia our sis- 2 
ter, and to Archippus our 
fellow-soldier, and to the 
church in thy house: 
Grace to you and peace 3 
from God our Father and 
the Lord Jesus Christ. 

Ithank my God always, 4 
making mention of thee in 
my prayers, hearing of thy 5 
love, and of the faith 
which thou hast toward 
the Lord Jesus, and toward 
all the saints; that the fel- 6 
lowship of thy faith may 
become effectual, in the 
knowledge of every good 
thing which is in you, unto 
Christ. For I had much 7 
joy and comfort in thy 
ove, because the hearts of 
the saints have been re- 
freshed through thee, 
brother. 

Wherefore,though I have 8 
all boldness in Christ to 
enjoin thee that which is 


1 bane 1:2; 2 Thes. 


1:3; Col. 1:4. gEph.1:15. h Phil. 1:9, ¢2 Cor. 7:13; 2Tim.1:16. j1Thes. 2:6, 





1-8. Paul, a prisoner. A prisoner at Rome. The first words are an appeal to the sympathy of 
Philemon. He refers to his chains five times in this letter. Timothy our brother. Two other Epis- 
tles of the Captivity name Timothy in the first verse. See Phil.1: fand Col.1:1. Unto Philemon. See 
Introduction. Philemon evidently lived in Colosse, but Paul had never been there. He had probably 
converted him in Ephesus, the capital of the province, during his long sojourn there. 2. Our beloved 
Apphia. Supposed to have been Philemon’s wife. And Archippus. The connection has suggested 
that he was Philemon’s son. He was no doubt a minister. See Col. 4:18. The church in thy house. 
As the early church had no houses of worship, it met in private houses. 8. Grace. The benediction of 
grace would remind him of God’s mercy. ; : 

4-7. Ithank my God. Here he begins to speak directly to Philemon, whom he always Tenens in 
his prayers. 5. Hearing of thy love and faith. The ground of his thankfulness is Philemon 8 godly 
life. 6. That the communication of thy faith. Rather, “fellowship,” as in the Revision. The 
word is koinonia, and the prayer is that the fellowship of faith between Philemon and Onesimus may 
become effectual in showing forth forgiveness, which would of course be comprehended in every good 
thing. Here, however, the statement is general. '7, For I had much joy and comfort. Alluding 
to the time when news came to him of the state of the church at Colosse and of Philemon’s active Chris- 


tian life. The news was brought, no doubt, by *r(293) (Col. 1: 7). 


294 PHILEMON. 


[Ch. I. 





9 Yet, for love’s sake, I rather beseech thee, be- 
ing such an one as Paul the aged, and now also a 
prisoner of Jesus Christ. 

10 I beseech thee for my* son Onesimus, whom’ 
I have begotten in my bonds; 

11 Which in time past was to thee unprofitable, 
but now profitable to thee and to me; 

12 Whom I have sent again: thou therefore re- 
ceive him that is mine own bowels; 

13 Whom I would have retained with me, that* 
in thy stead he might have ministered unto me in 
the bonds of the gospel. 

14 But without thy mind would I do nothing;* 
but thy benefit should not be as it were of necessity, 
but willingly. 

15 For® perhaps he therefore departed for a sea- 
son, that thou shouldest receive him forever; 

16 Not now as a servant, but above a servant, a 
brother beloved, specially to me, but how much 
more unto thee, both? in the flesh, and in the Lord? 

17 If thou count me therefore" a partner, receive 
him as myself. fe 

18 If he hath wronged thee, or oweth thee ought, 
put that on mine account; 





a@Col. 4:9. 61 Cor. 4:15; Gal. 4:19. ¢1 Cor. 6:17; Phil. 2:30. 


23:8; 1 Tim.6:2. g Col. 3:22. 


@2 Cor. 9:7. 
h2 Cor. 8:23. 





8-14. Wherefore. After this introduction Paul states the purpose of the letter. 





e Gen. 45:5,8; Rom. 8:28. 


befitting, yet for love’s 9 
sake I rather beseech, be- 
ing such a one as Paul the 
aged, and now a prisoner 
also of Christ Jesus: I be- 10 
seech thee for my child, 
whom I have begotten in 
my bonds, Onesimus, who 11 
was aforetime unprofitable 
to thee, but now is profita- 
ble to thee and to me: 
whom I have sent back to 12 
thee in his own person, 
that is, my very heart: 
whom [ would fain have 13 
kept with me, that in thy 
behalf he might minister 
unto me in the bonds of the 
gospel: but without thy 14 
mind I would do pe pen a 
that thy goodness shou. d 
not be as of necessity, but 
of free will. For perhaps 15 
he was therefore parted 
Srom thee for a season, that 
thou shouldest have him 
for ever; no longer as a 16 
servant, but more than a 
servant, a brother beloved, 
specially to me, but how 
much rather to thee, both 
in the flesh and in the 
Lord. If then thou count- 17 
est me a partner, receive 
him as myself. But if he 18 
hath wronged thee at all, 
or oweth thee aught, put 


7 Matt. 


Though I might 


be much bold in Christ. As an apostle, and as the one who gave Philemon the gospel, he had the 
right to command what is befitting. 9. Yet. Yet he does not come thus with commands, but as 
beseeching for love’s sake. Paul the aged. That his appeal may be more sure to touch Philemon, he 
reminds him that Paul is an old, gray-haired, scarred veteran of Christ, who has grown aged in his 
service, and is now a prisoner suffering for his Lord. 10. For my son Onesimus. His spiritual son, 
whom he in his bonds, while a prisoner in chains, had converted. It is possible that Epaphras met 
Onesimus, his fellow-townsman in Rome, and brought him to Paul. 11. Which in time past was to 
thee unprofitable. He may not only have been a restless, discontented servant, but in addition, he ran 
away. But now profitable. Such a change has taken placein him. He has served Paul in his bonds 
well, and will also serve Philemon well. 12. WhomThave sentagain. Not only that he may make 
amends to thee for his wrong, but that thou mayst be able to treat him as a brother in Christ. Mine own 
bowels. Rather, “My very heart” (Revision). Iam so much attached to him. To be unkind to him 
would wound Paul’s very heart. 18. Whom Iwould have retained. Would gladly have kept him 
with me to render for thee the service you would be glad to give me while I am in chains, only (14) with- 
out thy mind would I do nothing. He wished, if such a service was rendered, it might be with 
Philemon’s free consent. 

15-17. Perhaps he therefore departed, etc. Perhaps his departure was providential, to lead to 
his conversion, to give you a faithful helper, and to save him forever. 16. Not now as a servant. 
His relation is changed. He is more than a servant, a Christian brother, beloved specially to me. 
See verse 12. How much more unto thee. He has both temporal, fleshly relations to thee (those of 
master and servant), and besides is your brother in Christ. Both these ties ought to bind him to you. 
The gospel held Christian masters responsible for both the moral and the physical welfare of their ser- 
vants. 1'7. If thou count me a partner. Christian fellow-laborers are partners. See 2 Cor. 8: 23, 
where Titus is named as Paul’s partner. Then receive him, as you would me. 

18-21. If he hath wronged thee. By defrauding thee of his service. Some have seen in thisa 
suggestion that Onesimus had robbed Philemon, but that inference is not necessary. See Introduction on 


nla PHILEMON. 


2 


295 





19 I Paul have written z¢ with mine own hand, I 
will repay it: albeit I do not say to thee how thou 
owest unto me even thine own self besides. 

20 Yea, brother, let me have joy of thee in the 
Lord: refresh my bowels in the Lord. 

21 Having? confidence in thy obedience, I wrote 
unto thee, knowing that thou wilt also do more 

than I say. 

22 But withal prepare me also a lodging: for? I 
trust that® through your prayers I shall be given 
unto you. 

23 There salute thee’ Epaphras, my fellow-pris- 
oner in Christ Jesus; 

24 Marcus,® Aristarchus,£ Demas, Lucas,’ my 
fellow-labourers. 

25 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with 
your spirit. Amen. 


Written from Rome to Philemon by Onesimus a servant. 





a2 Cor. 7: 16. 6 Phil. 1:25; 2:24. ¢2Cor.1:11. 
g Col. 4: 14. 





that to mine account; 119 
Paul write it with mine 
own hand, I will repay it: 
that I say not unto thee 
how that thou owest unto 
me even thine own self be- 
sides. Yea, brother, let me 20 
have joy of thee in the 
Lord: refresh my heart in 
Christ. Having confidence 21 
in thine obedience I write 
unto thee, knowing that 
thou wilt do even beyond 
what I say. But withal 22 
prepare me also a lodging: 
for I hope that ata 
your prayers I shall be 
granted unto you. 

Epaphras, my _ fellow- 23 
prisoner in Christ Jesus, 
saluteth thee; and so do 24 
Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, 
Luke, my fellow-workers. 

The grace of our Lord 25 
Jesus Christ be with your 
spirit. Amen. 


d Col. 1:7; 4:12. e Acts 12°12. f Acts 19: 29; 27:2; Col. 4: 10. 





the gospel and slavery. 19. I, Paul, have written it with mine own hand. If you hold this 
wrong against him, here is my written bond that I will repay it. Albeit. Here is a reminder that 
Philemon owed his own salvation to Paul, a reminder which would certainly prevent him from putting in 
aclaim against the apostle. 20. Let me have joy of thee. By learning that you have cheerfully 
granted all I ask in this letter. 21. Having confidence. This letter is written in full confidence that 
even more than I ask will be granted. Perhaps this is a hint that Philemon might grant Onesimus his 
freedom. 

22-25. Prepare me alsoalodging. All the letters of the first imprisonment express confidence 
that he will be set at liberty. That Paul visited Asia again is almost certain, and perhaps he visited 
Colosse. 23. There salute thee Epaphras. See notes on Col. 1:7. He probably founded the 
Colossian church. See also Col. 4:12. My fellow-prisoner. Perhaps only in the sense that he shared 
Paul’s imprisonment by becoming his companion. 24. Marcus. Mark. See Introduction to Mark. 
Aristarchus. A Macedonian. See Acts 27:2. Demas. See 2 Tim 4: 10 for his later history. Lucas. 
See Introduction to Luke, Also Col, 4; 14. These are all mentioned in the closing salutations of the 
Colossian letter. 


INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS. 


That this Epistle is entitled to a place in the New Testament Scriptures has beer 

. discussed but little in comparison with the question of its authorship. It is quoted at 

large by Clement of Rome before the close of the first century, by Ignatius, Polycarp, 

Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, and others in the second century, is found in the Versions of 

the second century, is named in the Ancient Canons, and is affirmed to be a part of the 

Holy Scriptures by the Council of Antioch (A. D. 269) and of Nice (A. D. 325) ; as well 
as by later councils. 

On the other hand, both the ancient and modern church have been divided concerning 
the writer to whom it is to be ascribed. Contrary to the usual custom the writer’s name 
is not given in the opening verses, nor in the closing salutations. It differs somewhat in 
style from any other portion of the New Testament. Some have thought it improbable 
that Paul, the Apostle to the Gentiles, should have addressed an Epistle to Hebrews; 
for these, and perhaps other reasons, many devout critics have held that it was written 
by Barnabas, or by Apollos, or by Luke, and even Clement of Rome has been named as 
the author. In the ancient church the East with one consent declared in favor of Paul, 
while the West asserted that it belonged to some other writer, though in modern times’ 
the Latin Church has decided the question by the weight of infallibility in favor of the 
apostle to the Gentiles. Luther and Calvin both held that it was not Pauline, and have 
been followed by many moderns. 

The limits of this work will not allow details concerning this discussion, and I will 
content myself with briefly stating reasons why I think it is to be ascribed to Paul. (1) 
There is no proof whatever, of any kind, that any one else was the author. There is 
only conjecture. (2) Paulis named as the author in the second century by Christian 
Fathers who were the disciples of men who had sat at the feet of the apostles. (3) 
The greatest of the Ante-Nicene Fathers who make mention of its authorship affirm 
that it was written by Paul. (4) It was written in Paul’s lifetime, for the temple was 
evidently still standing; it was written by a friend of Timothy, written from Italy, and 

evidently by one who was a prisoner. (5) The salutation, or benediction with which 
it closes is found in the other thirteen epistles of Paul, and is found in the New Testa- 
ment epistles of no other writer. Paul alone invokes grace upon those whom he 
addresses as his farewell words. (6) The second Epistle of Peter, an Epistle 
evidently written to Hebrews, declares that Paul had written an Epistle to them. ‘Ag 
our beloved brother Paul, according to the wisdom given to him hath written unto you; 
as also in all his Kpistles, etc.” This refers to some particular letter, sent to the same. 
persons whom Peter was addressing, and hence there seems to be little doubt that there 
existed, before Peter died, an Epistle to the Hebrews written by Paul. (7) The argu- 
ment is thoroughly Pauline. There can be no doubt, even if the language is not Paul’s, 
that he inspired the thoughts. Hence, we are justified in concluding that the Epistle is 
really one of Paul’s, even if his thoughts are in part clothed in the language of another 
writer. 

It is addressed to Husrews; evidently Hebrew Christians; probably not so much 
those of Jerusalem as the ‘‘Dispersion,”’ BECP of Jewish Christians in Gentile 


INTRODUCTION TO HEBREWS. 297 





lands. It shows that those addressed were persecuted, were in danger of being tempted 
to fall away, that they had not yet shed their blood for Christ, and in order to strengthen. 
them the superiority of Christianity to Judaism is demonstrated by showing the superla- 
tive excellence of Christ. He is (1) superior to the prophets; (2) superior to the angels ;. 
(3) superior to Moses. (4) His priesthood is superior to that of Aaron, being a priest after’ ' 
the order of Melchizedek. (5) Then the superiority of the New Covenant to the Old is 
shown, being a better covenant, based upon better promises. This is shown in Chs. 8, 
9, 10, and then follows in the remaining chapters an exhortation to steadfastness, based 
upon faith and strengthened by examples of the heroes of the faith. 

It is evident from the closing words, whatever may have been the writer’s reasons for 
not incorporating his name in the Epistle, that he was well known to those addressed. 
He asks their prayers, prays for them, speaks of visiting them with Timothy, and closes 
with the usual Pauline farewell benediction. 


THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE 


HEBREWS. 


CHAPTER I. 


Christ Greater than Angels and Prophets. 


SumMARY.—The Message Spoken by the Son. The Glory of the Son. 


His Superiority to the Angels. 

1 God, who at sundry times, and in* divers man- 
ners, spake in time past unto the fathers by the 
prophets, 

2 Hath? in these last days spoken unto® us by his 
Son," whom he hath appointed heir of all things, 
by® whom also he made the worlds; 

3 Who,‘ being the brightness of hzs glory, and 
the express image of his person,® and upholding all 
things by the word of his power, when he had by 
himself purged our sins,” sat down on the right 
hand of the Majesty on high; 

4 Being made so much better than the angels, as! 
he hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent 
name than they. 








CHAPTER I. 


God, having of old time 1 
spoken unto the fathers in 
the prophets by divers por- 
tions and in divers man- 
ners, hath at the end of 2 
these days spoken unto us 
in his Son, whom he ap- 
pointed heir of all oe 
through whom also he 
made the worlds; who be- 3 
ing the effulgence of his 
glory, and the very image 
of his substance, and up- 
holding all things by the 
word of his power, when 
he had made purification 
of sins, sat down on the 
right hand of the Majesty 
on high; having become by 4 
so much better than the 
angels, as he hath inherit- 
ed a more excellent name 
than they. For unto which 5 
of the angels said he at 
any time, 

Thou art my Son, 

This day have I begotten 

thee? 





aNum.12:6,8. 6 Gal. 4:4. ¢cJohn1:17;3 15: 15. 


1Cor. 8:6. f Zech. 18:7; John 14:9; 2 Cor. 4:4; Col.1:15. g Rey. 4:11. 





d Psa. 2:85 33:6; Matt. 21:38; 


28:18; John 3: 35. 


e John 1: 33 
A Psa. 110: 1. 


¢ Phil. 2:9. 


1-4. God who. Instead of the introductory greetings usual in an Epistle, the apostle plunges into 
the midst of his subject by a grand exordium. At sundry times. Rather, ‘In divers portions,” as in 
the Revision. The Old Testament was given in “‘portions,” not all at once, and at wide intervals. Spoke. 
Though prophets might be chosen as the instruments, the message was that of God. While God spoke 
_ through them, the prophets were only men. 2- Hath in these last days. “At the end of these 
days” (Revision). At the end of the Jewish dispensation. Spoken unto us by his Son. “Last of 
all he sent his Son.” The importance of the message is shown by the messenger. No longer an inspired 
prophet, but, instead, the Son of God is the speaker. Whom he hath appointed heir of all things. 
The Father delivered all things into the hands of the Son (Acts 2: 36; John 17: 10). “The heir is the Lord 
of all” (Gal. 4:1). By whom also he made the worlds. Through his agency or instrumentality. 
Christ, the Logos, is represented as God’s medium in creation. See note on Johni: 3. 8. Who being 
the brightness of his glory. A manifestation of the glory of God. The very image of his sub- 
stance. In Christ we have a tangible, visible representation of the substance of God. We see God in him. 
“He that hath seen me hath seen the Father” (John 14: 9). By the word of his power. The Son 
hath all power, and his power was always manifested by his word. He spoke and it was done, whether it 
was to still the winds or to raise the dead. So in creation, the word was spoken and it was done. When 
he had by himself purged our sins. Made an atonement for them. Sat down at the right 
hand of the Majesty on high. Of God. The right hand was always the place of honor. See note 
on Eph. 1: 20. 4. Having become so much better. Superior to the angels. His superiority is 
shown in the greater name, which he received by inheritance; that of the Son. Our Savior has other 
names, but this name only is received by inheritance. This superiority is shown by the manner in which 
God addresses the Son. The apostle particularly shows Christ’s superiority to the angels, because 
through angels the Jewish law was given. See “ A : . Gal. 3: 19; Heb. 2: 3. 


Ch. 1.] HEBREWS. 


299 





5 For unto which of the angels said he at any 
time,* Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten 
thee? And again,” I will be to him a Father, and 
he shall be to me a Son? 

6 And again, when he bringeth in‘ the first-begot- 
ten into the world, he saith, And? let all the angels 
of God worship him. 

7 And of the angels he saith, Who* maketh his 
angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire. 

8 But unto the Son he saith, Thy throne, O God, 
zs for ever and ever; a sceptre of righteousness 2s 
the sceptre of thy kingdom. 





and again, 
Iwill be to him a Father, 
And he shall be tomea 
Son? 

And when he again bring- 
eth in the firstborn into the 
world he saith, And let all 
the angels of God worship 
him. And of the angels he 
saith, 

Who maketh his angels 
winds, 

And his ministers a flame 

of fire: 
but of the Son he saith, 
Thy throne, O God, is for 
ever and ever; 

And the sceptre of up- 

rightness is the sceptre 


6 


7 


8 


= 4 pall nt of thy ere ao ; 
9 Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated ini- ew (Bape 9 
quity; therefore God, even thy God,* hath anointed pituity - re 
thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. fecal pies et) Nk 


10 And,” Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid 


With the oil of gladness 


above thy fellows. 


And, 10 

Thou, Lord, in the begin- 

*ning hast laid the foun- 
dation of the earth, 

And the heavens are the 
works of thy hands: 

They shall perish; but 11 
thou continuest: 

And they all shall wax 
old as doth a garment; 
And as a mantle shalt 12 

thou roll them up, 


the foundation of the earth; and the heavens are 
the works of thine hands: 

11 They: shall perish, but thou remainest; and 
they all shall wax old as doth a garment; 

12 And as a vesture shalt thou fold them up, and 
they shall be changed: but thou art the same, and 
thy years shall not fail. 








@ Psa. 97:7; 1 Pet. 8: 22. 
A Psa. 102:25. i Isa. 34: 4. 


a Psa.2°7. 6 Psa. 89:26. c Rom. 8: 29. e Psa. 104:4. f Psa. 45:6,7. g Isa. 61:1. 





5-12. For to which of the angels. To none of them did he ever use such language as follows, 
The style in which the Father addresses Christ shows his superiority to the angels. Thou art my son. 
See Ps. 2:7. The second Psalm was regarded by the Jews as a prophecy of the Messiah. This day 
have I begotten thee. What day is referred to in the prophecy? Acts 13: 32, 33 answers the question 
by quoting this very passage and declaring that it was fulfilled in the resurrection of Christ from the 
dead. He was born from the dead and God, who raised him, thus demonstrated that he was hisSon. I 
will be to him a Father, etc. Quoted from1Sam.7: 14. They were spoken originally of David’s son 
Solomon, chosen to be king after him, but he was in a certain sense a type of Christ. Expression “Son of 
David,” “Seed of David,” while applicable to Solomon, pre-eminently refers to Christ. 6. When he 
again bringeth the first porn into the world. Macknight thinks that Christ was brought into the 
world the first time when he was born at Bethlehem; that the time referred to here is when he comes 
again to judge the world. Whatever the time referred to Ps. 97: 7 shows his superiority to the angels for 
it says, “Let all the angels of God worship him.” 7. But of the angels he saith. The 
quotations made show how God speaks to and of the Son, but quite different are the words used of the 
angels. He maketh his angels spirits. In the Revision we have “winds” instead of ‘“‘spirits.” 
The word is Pneumata, a word which uniformly in the New Testament means spirit, and spirits in the 
plural, and I believe that “spirits” is the better rendering. The passage is quoted from Ps. 104: 4and 
means that he maketh spirits his messengers, or angels, and flaming ones (the burning seraphs) his 
ministers. It is incongruous with the thought to introduce into the passage winds and lightnings, 
natural phenomena, when the theme is the status of angel intelligences. 8. But to the son. The 
quotation is from Ps. 45: 6. Thy throne O God. Then the Son has an eternal throne, and is divine. 
The sceptre, etc. He then has a kingdom, and rules it with a righteous sceptre. The point is that he 
is a Divine King with an eternal throne. 9. Therefore God, even thy God,etc. Because of the 
holiness of the Son, God the Father hath anointed him. The exaltation of the Son cometh from the 
Father. He is the Anointed, and above all other anointed kings, priests and prophets. 10. And thou 
Lord in the beginning. From Ps. 102; 25-27. A part of the preceding part of the Psalm speaks of 
the Messiah’s Kingdom, and hence these verses may well apply to the Messiah, especially as they 
jparmonize with what we are told elsewhere of his glory. See notes on Johni1:3. 11. They shall 


300 HEBREWS. (Ch. 


13 But to which of the angels said he at any| 4$,a Farment, and they 


time,? Sit on my right hand, until I make thine] But thou art the same, 
: 9 And thy years shall not 
enemies thy footstool: fail 


at : yita But of which of the angels 13 
14 Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth | Pha at amy nee 


to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation? | Sit thouonmy right hand 
: Till [make thine enemies 
ees footstool of thy 
ee 
CHAPTER II. Are they not all minister- 14 
DAs i 5 ing spirits, sent forth to do 
The Superiority of the New Dispensation. service for the sake of 
: ; , them that shall inherit sal- 
SuMMARyY.—The Danger of Neglecting the Great Salvation; the Salvation | vation? 
Offered by Christ. The Superiority of Christ to the Angels Further 
Shown. Christ, the Divine Man, Put Over All Things. Fitted to be 
Our Savior by Taking upon Himself Humanity; and by Suffering. 
Hence, He Took Not the Nature of Angels, But Became the Seed of 
Abraham. He,a Tempted and Suffering Savior, Can Succor Us Who 


Suffer and Are Tempted. CHAPTER II. 


1 Therefore we ought to give the more earnest| Therefore we ought to 1 
. é give the more earnest heed 
heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any | to the things that were 


A : heard, lest haply we drift 
time we should let them slip. away from them. For if the 2° 


2 For if the word spoken by angels was stedfast, Poe oo ones ans 
: f Fj ‘ ast, an 
and every transgression and disobedience received a | évery transgression’ and 


steel : disobedience received a 
just recompence of reward; : ; p | ustrecompense of reward; 
3 How shall we escape, if we neglect so great? | how shall we escape, if we 3. 


. “ neglect so great salvation? 
salvation; which ‘at the first began to be spoken by whieh haviag at the first 


been spoken through the 
the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that Lord. was conenicn ae ay 


heard him; us by them that heard; 








a@Psa.110:1. O6Isa. 45:17. 





perish. All created things shall grow old and pass away. 12. As vesture shalt thou fold them. 
up. The heavens shall be rolled away. They are rolled up to be put away like a worn out garment. 
Butthouartthesame. The Son is eternal, the same yesterday, to-day and forever. 

138, 14. Sit thou on my right hand. Quoted from Psalms 110:1. Make thy enemies thy 
footstool. The custom is alluded to of putting the feet on the necks of conquered enemies. See Josh. 
10: 24,25. This passage is applied to Christ in Acts 2: 35, and in 1 Cor. 15: 25. 14. Are they not all 
ministering spirits? The real office of the angels is indicated. It is to give service in working out 
the plans of God for the salvation of the elect. The passage does not teach that each heir of salvation 
has a guardian angel, but that the angels do service in working out the Divine plans in behalf of the 
saved. 

The work of angels can be learned in the Scriptures from the missions in which they are engaged. Itis. 
to aid in carrying out the plans of God for the government and salvation of ourrace. Under the rule of 
Christ they are his ministers to aid in the work of redeeming man. For examples of their work see Gen. 
19: 1-26; 2 Kings 19: 35; Acts 12: 23; Jude6; Acts 10: 1-8; Matt. 18: 10; Acts 5: 19, ete. Christ is Lord;. 
they are servants. 

1-4. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed. Because the message to us is spoken,, 
not by angels or prophets, but by the Son of God. To the things which we have heard. To 
Christ’s gospel, and to his words of instruction. Lest . . we should let them slip. Lest we 
should let them slip from us because we drift away from them and refuse to heed them. 2. Forif the 
word spoken by angels. The Jewish law. See notes on Acts 7:53 and Gal. 3: 19. The law was: 
given through the medium of angels, as was confessed by the Jews. See Josephus, Antig. XV: 5, section 
3. Was steadfast. Confirmed by a penalty upon transgressors. Every transgression. Nothing 
is plainer in all Jewish history than that obedience to the law was rewarded and disobedience punished. 
8. How shall we escape. How then, if this was true of the law, can we hope to escape if we neglect: 
the message of the Son? So greatsalvation. Nota temporal, but an eternal salvation, the salvation. 
of the gospel. Begun to be spoken by our Lord. More especially after his death and resurrection 
when he bade his disciples go into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature. Was: 


ah. IT.) HEBREWS. 


301 





4 God also bearing them witness, both with signs 
and wonders, and with divers miracles, and the 
gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will? 

5 For unto the angels hath he not put in subjec- 
tion the world to come, whereof we speak. 

6 But one in a certain place testified, saying,* 
What is man, that thou art mindful of him? or the 
son of man, that thou visitest him? 

7 Thou madest him a little lower than the angels; 
thou crownedst him with glory and honour, and 
didst set him over the works of thy hands: 

8 Thou hast put all things in subjection under 
his feet. For in that he put all in subjection under 
him, he left nothing that ts not put under him. 
But now we see not yet all things put under him: 

9 But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower 
than the angels for the suffering of death, crowned 
with glory and honour; that he by the grace of God 
should taste death for every man. 

10 For” it became him, for whom are all things, 
and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons 
unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation® 
perfect through sufferings. 

11 For both he that sanctifieth and they who are 
sanctified are all of one; for which cause he* is not 





God also bearing witness 4 
with them, both by signs 
and wonders, and by man- 
ifold powers, and by gifts 
of the Holy Ghost, accord- 
as | to his own will. 
or not unto angels did 5 
he subject the world to 
come, whereof we speak. 
But one hath somewhere 6 
testified, saying, 
What is man, that thou 
art mindful of him? 
Or the son of man, that 
thou visitest him? 
Thou madest him a little T 
lower than the angels; 
Thou crownest him with 
glory and honour, 
And didst set him over 
the works of thy hands: 
Thou didst put all things 8 
in subjection under his 


feet. 
For in that he subjected all 
things unto him, he left 
nothing that is not subject 
to him. But now we see 
not yet all things subjected 
to him. But we behold him 9 
who hath been made a lit- 
tle lower than the angels, 
even Jesus, because of the 
suffering of death crowned 
with glory and honour, 
that by the grace of God he 
should taste death for ev- 
ery man. For it became 10 
him, for whom are all 
things, and through whom 
are all things, in bringing 
many sons unto glory, to 


ashamed to call them brethren, make the author of their 


6 Luke 24: 46. 





c Matt. 3:15. d Matt. 28:10; John 20:17; Rom. 8:29. 


a Psa. 8:4. 





confirmed to us. If Paul was the writer of Hebrews he places himself in the position of the church, 
for elsewhere he tells us plainly that he received the gospel from the Lord himself. The apostles who 
had heard and seen the risen Christ first proclaimed his gospel publicly on Pentecost, an event evidently 
alluded to in this passage. 4. God bearing them witness. God bore witness to the truth of their 
words by the signs and wonders of Pentecost. He also bore witness afterwards by giving them 
miraculous powers, and by the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit. Note that when the Law was 
given on Sinai God bore witness by signs and wonders. Also when the gospel, the message of Christ, 
was given on Mt. Zion God bore witness with signs and wonders. 

5-12. The world to come. Literally, “the inhabited earth in the future.” The Jewish dispensa- 
tion was called by the Jews “the present world.” A dispensation following it would be ‘‘the world to 
come.” The reference is rather to the future gospel ages than to the eternal world. These are not 
subjected to the angels. 6. But one in acertain place. David, Ps.8:4. 7. Thou madest him 
a little lower than the angels. Man, for the time, was made lower than the angels. Yet he was 
crowned, as the Psalmist tells us, with glory and honor, and given dominion. 8. Thou didst put all 
things in subjection under his feet. This introduces the point of the quotation. It declares that 
all things (except God, i Cor. 15: 27) have been made subject toman. But we do notsee our race in domin- 
ion over the heavens, the powers of nature and eternal world. 9. But we see Jesus. Jesus is the 
solution of the problem. He was made while in the flesh on earth apparently lower than the angels, 
and suffered death, but he, the Son of Man, who died as mortals die, the now glorified man, has “all 
power in heaven and in earth,” (Matt. 28: 18). Through him, the Son of Man, all things are subjected 
to glorified humanity. Taste of death for every man. To die. He became man in order that he 
might die for every man, and because of the suffering of death was crowned (Phil. 2: 9). It was after 
his suffering that “all power was given unto his hands.” Compare 1 Cor. 15: 27; Eph. 1: 20; Phil. 3: 21. 
10. For it became him. It became God, was fitting, and God’s purpose. For whom are all 
things. God, who is over all and possesses all. Paul-uses this expression Rom 11: 36; Col. 1: 6; 1 Cor. 
8:6. The captain of their salvation. Christ, a Prince and a Leader. Perfect. Not perfect in 


302 HEBREWS. 


(Ch. IL. 





12 Saying,? I will declare thy name unto my 
brethren; in the midst of the church will I sing 
praise unto thee. 

13 And again,” I will put my trust in him. And 
again,® Behold I and the children which God hath 
given me. 

14 Forasmuch then as the children are partakers 
of flesh and blood,* he also himself likewise took 
part. of the same;° that through death he might 
destroy him that had the power of death, that is, 
the devil; 

15 And deliver them who through? fear of death 
were all their lifetime subject to bondage. 

16 For verily he took not on him the nature of 
angels; but he took on him the seed of Abraham. 

17 Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be 
made® like unto his brethren, that he might be a 
merciful and faithful high priest in things pertain- 
ing to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of 
the people. 

18 For® in that he himself hath suffered, being 
tempted, he is able to succour them that are 





salvation perfect through 
sufferings. For both he 11 
that sanctifieth and they 
that are sanctified are all 
of one: for which cause he 
is not ashamed to call them 
brethren, saying, 
I will declare thy name 
unto my brethren, : 
In the midst of the con- 
sreeon will I sing 
hy praise. — 
And again, I will tgs, my 13 
trust in him. And again, 
Behold, I and the children 
which God hath given me. 
Since then the children are 14 
sharers in flesh and blood, 
he also himself in like 
manner partook of the 
same; that through death 
he might bring to nought 
him that had the power of 
death, that is, the devil; 
and might deliver all them 
who through fear of death 
were all their lifetime sub- 
ject to bondage. For verily 16 
not of angels.doth he take 
hold, but he taketh hold of 
the seed of Abraham. 
Wherefore it behoved him 17 
in all things to be made 
like unto his brethren, that 
he might be a merciful and 
faithful high priest in 
things pertaining to God, 


15. 





to make propitiation for 


tempted. 





a Psa. 22:22. b Psa. 18:2; Isa. 12:2. cIsa.8:18; John 10:29; 17:6,9, 11,12. dJohn1:14; Rom. 8:3. 
e1Cor. 15: 54, 55; Col. 2:15; 2 Tim. 1:10. -fLuke 1:74; Rom. 8:7; 2 Tim. 1:7. g Phil. 2:7. h Heb. 4:15; 5:23 7:25. 





holiness, for he was sinless, but perfectly fitted to be our Savior. To this end it was needful that he 
should suffer as one of ourrace. 11. Both he that sanctifieth. He who makes men holy by purging 
them of their sins, and those who are made holy are all of one. Are made of one nature because he 
‘took our nature and suffered. Hence he is not ashamed to call all the saved, though they are: 
mortals, by the name of brethren. This is done in the Hebrew Scriptures (Ps. 22: 22). The language 
quoted from the Psalm is ascribed to Christ, but is addressed to God. The point is that the speaker calls 
the worshipers brethren. 12. In the midst of the church. In the Psalm “Congregation” is the 
term used. The Revision has so rendered it here. : 

13-15. And again. A quotation is now given from Isa. 8:17 in which the Messiah is represented 
associating himself with the saints as all children of God. The point is that Christ makes himself the 

‘brother of the saved. Verses 17 and 18 are quoted in order to give this point clearly. 14. He himself 
likewise. As these children are all mortal he, though divine, took on himself our mortality. He did 
this, that through death he might bring to nought the power of him who first brought death on our 
race. It was needful that he be clothed with mortality in order to die, and needful to die in order to deliver 
men from the power of sin and give them a glorious hope. 15. That he might deliverthem. Not 
only from sin, which gives death its sting, but from all fear of death by giving the hope of a blessed life 
to come. 

16-18. He took not the nature. He did not lay hold of an angel form in order to save angels, but 
the human form and nature, in order to be our Savior. He chose to be of the seed of Abraham, being 
the Son of Mary, a descendant of Abraham. 17. It behoved him to be made like his brethren. 
Hence, for the reasons given above, it was necessary that he take our nature. A merciful and 
faithful high priest. To be our high priest he must be in full sympathy with us, having experienced 
our trials and our sufferings. To make propitiation. As our high priest he made atonement for us. 
Conscious of all our frailties he intercedes for us. In him, the Divine man, all who are found in him are 
justified before God. 18. In that he suffered, he is able to sympathize with all who suffer and to. 
succour all who have trials and need help. 

These two chapters show that Christ is higher than the angels, and hence that the gospel is superior in 
its demands to the Law. They show that to Christ as the Son of Man, subjected to death, and glorified, 
all things have been subjected; that he becomes a brother to the saints, and that he took our nature, 


Ch. TT] HEBREWS. 303 


the sins of the people. For 18. 


in that he himself hath 

CHAP TER 160% suffered being tempted, he 

: ¢ is able to succour them 
Christ Superior to Moses. that are tempted. 


SuUMMARY.—Our Apostle and High Priest. He Above Moses, as the 
Builder is Above the House. Moses a Servant in the House; Christ 
the Son. Lessons Drawn from Israel Under Moses. How the Israelites 
Provoked God in the Wilderness. How He Refused Them Admission 
to the Rest. Unbelief Caused Their Fall. CHAPTER III. 


1 Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the} wherefore, holy breth- 1 


. 7 a ; i ren, partakers of a heav- 
heavenly calling, consider the* Apostle and High | (i), partakers order the 


Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus; Apostle and High Priest of 
2 Who was faithful to him that appointed him, | Who was faithful to him 2 


b , 1 j that appointed him, as also 
as also? Moses was faithful in all his house. poo debe td pelo hety 


8 For this man was counted worthy of more For he hath been counted 3 
glory than Moses, inasmuch as” he who hath builded | Moses’ by so much as he 


that built the house hath 
the house hath more honour than the house. ee en 


4 For every house is builded by some man; but house. For every house is 4 
he that built all things 7s God. ho that built an anne. 13 


7 i i i God. And Moses indeed 5 
5 And Moses verily was faithful in all his house, | God. And Moses indeed 


as a servant,° for a testimony of those things which as a servant, for a testimo- 
ie a ny 0 ose things whic 
were to be spoken after; were afterward to be spo- 


s = ; c f| ken; but Christ as a son, 0- 6 
6 But Christ asa Son over his own house; whose *| tens ort er syhoge house 


house are we, if? we hold fast the confidence and are we, if we hold fast our 
TPR i SS a or 
the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end. at our hope fem aie tie 





a Matt. 15:24; 1 Tim. 8:15. 6 Num. 12:7. ¢ Zech. 6:12; Matt.16:18. d@Eph.2:10. e Deut. 18:15, 18, 19. 
J Eph. 4:12; 1 Pet. 2:5. g Matt. 10: 22. 








suffered and tasted death, in order that he might become a faithful and merciful high priest, touched 
with a feeling of our infirmities, able to make atonement for us, and to come to us with an Elder 
Brother’s help in every time of need. 

1,2. Wherefore. Secing Christ is so exalted as the first and second chapters show. Holy brethren. 
Christians made holy by being purged of their sins. Partakers of the heavenly calling. Called by 
a gospel which came from heaven and which will lead those who obey it, and thus become partakers, to 
heaven. Consider the Apostle and High Priest. Christ. An apostleis one sent. Moses, in this 
sense, was an apostle. Christ was sent from heaven. The Twelve were sent out by Christ. Heis not 
only Apostle, but High Priest; superior to both Moses and Aaron combined. Our profession. More 
correctly, “Our confession,” that is, of all confessors of Christ. The confession of Peter (Matt. 16: 16) 
was the confession of primitive Christians. 2. Who was faithful. As Moses was faithful to his 
trust, so has Christ been. In all his house. The house of Israel, the nation, the congregation of God. 
Israel, a type of the church, is spoken of under the figure of a building. In Numbers 12: 6-8, it is declared 
that Moses was faithful in his house. 

3-6. For this man was counted worthy of more glory. Jesus, the house-builder, the builder 
of Israel, as well as of the church, the Divine Savior, is more glorious than Moses, a member of the house 
of Israel, even as the builder of the house is superior to the house. 4. Every house is builded by 
some one. The word man does not occur in the Greek. The meaning is ‘“‘every house has a builder, but 
the Builder of all things is God.” He built the house of Israel, but Christ is God manifest to us, the 
Divine personality at work in human redemption; hence, the builder of the typical church, as well as of 
the antitype. 5. Moses was faithful, etc. See Numbers 12:7. As aservant. Not as the builder, 
or as the master, but as a waiting manin the house. Fora testimony. The whole ministry of Moses 
was a “testimony” to what would follow after, a shadow of what was tocome. This will be brought out 
more fully in subsequent chapters. 6. But Christ as a son. Moses was a waiting man in the Lord’s 
house, but Christ, the Son, is Lord over the house, his own church. Whose house are we. “Ye are 
God’s building” (1 Cor. 3: 16); “My church” (Matt. 16: 18). If we hold fast the confidence. We, 
Christians, are Christ’s house, and will continue to be Christ’s house, if we hold fast, ete. The possibility 
of falling away, as Israelites fell away from God’s house of Israel, is pointed out in the following verses. 


304 HEBREWS. 


(Ch. III. 





7 Wherefore (as? the Holy Ghost saith,” To-day 
if ye will hear his voice, 

8 Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, 
in the day of temptation in the wilderness ; 

9 When your fathers tempted me, proved me, 
and saw my works forty years. 

10 Wherefore I was grieved with that generation, 
and said, They do alway err in their heart; and they 
have not known my ways. 

11 So I sware in my wrath, They shall not enter 
into my rest.) 

12 Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of 
you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the 
living God. 

13 But exhort one another daily, while it is called 
To-day; lest any of you be hardened through the 
deceitfulness of sin. 

14 For we are made partakers of Christ, if we 
hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto 
the end; 

15 While it is said, To-day if ye will hear his 
‘voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation. 

16 For® some, when they had heard, did provoke: 
howbeit not all that came out of Egypt by Moses. 





end. Wherefore, even as 7 
the Holy Ghost saith, 

To-day if ye shall hear 
his voice, 

Harden not your hearts, 8 
as in the provocation, 

Like as in the day of the 
temptation in the wil- 
derness, 

Wherewith your fathers 9 
tempted me by proving 
me, 

And saw my works forty 


ears. 
herefore I was dis- 10 
pleased with this gene- 
ration 


And said, They do alway 
err in their heart: 
But they did not know 
my ways; 
As I sware in my wrath, 11 
They shall not enter into 
my rest. 
Take heed, brethren, lest 12 
haply there shall be in any 
one of you an evil heart of 
unbelief, in fallmg away 
from the living God: but 13 
exhort one another day by 
day, so long as it is called 
To-day; lest any one of 
you be hardened by the de- 
ceitfulness of sin: for we 14 
are become partakers of 
Christ, if we hold fast the 
beginning of our confi- 
dence firm unto the end: 
while it is said, 15 
To-day if ye shall hear 
his voice, 





a2Sam. 28:2; Acts1:16. 6 Psa. 95:7. 





7-11. Wherefore. Take warning from the fate of Israel. 
quoted are found in Psa. 95: 7-11. 


c Num. 14; Deut. 1:34. 


As the Holy Ghost saith. The words 
David there exhorts his brethren to learn a lesson from Israel in the 


wilderness, and not to provoke God. To-day if you will hear his voice. At that very time. So 
to-day, and ever, God wishes us to hear him to-day, not to-morrow. 8. Harden not your hearts. To 
harden the heart is to reach such a state that God’s voice makes no impression. As in the provoca- 
tion. The Hebrew of the Psalm says Like Meribah. The meaning is “Harden not your hearts as our 
fathers did at Meribah.” See the account in Exod.17:1-7. Seealso Num. 27: 14, where Kadesh Meribah 
isnamed. Both may bereferredto. Day of temptation. Day of trial. 9. When your fathers 
tempted me, proved me. Tempted me by proving me. Seeing how much murmuring and sin I would 
endure. Saw my works forty years. All his mighty manifestations in their behalf during all the 
period of their sojourn in the wilderness. 10. Wherefore I was grieved. The word more nearly 
means “disgusted.” They do alway err. Not simply by making mistakes, but their hearts are wrong. 
11. Solswareinmy wrath. A figure of speech which means that God, indignant at their unbelief 
and sin, declared they should not enter Canaan. See Num. 14: 20-35. Shall not enter my rest. 
Canaan, while the Israelites were yet in bondage, was promised as a land of rest. On the weary journey 
in the wilderness it was still looked to as the rest. To prohibit from entering the rest was then to 
prohibit from entering Canaan. It is, however, a type of heaven, the land of eternal rest. Hence, the 
warnings that are pointed out in the next verses. 

12-19. Takeheed . lest, etc. They fell from unbelief, which led them to depart from God. 
Take heed, lest you Hebrew Christians seeking the heavenly rest, should so fall. 18. But exhort one 
another daily. Continually stir each other to duty, lest you be hardened against God’s voice by the 
deceitfulness of sin. How sin does deceive us by making false promises of happiness and of safety. 
14. Partakers of Christ. In fellowship with Christ, partakers of his benefits and glory. If we 
hold, etc. If we persevere to the end. The Israelites started well, but did not persevere. The only 
final perseverance of the saints is to persevere until the work of life is over. 15. While it is said. 
‘The thought and connection are, “‘You are partakers of Christ, if you remain stedfast, and listen to the 
exhortation, To-day,if ye will,etc.” 16. For some, when they had heard, did provoke. 
‘Some in the wilderness heard God, but refused to listen, and did provoke him. Howbeit, not all. 


Chey | HEBREWS. 


17 But with whom was he grieved forty years? 
‘was it not with them that had sinned,* whose car- 
cases fell in the wilderness? 

18 And to whom sware he that they should not 
enter into his rest, but to them that believed not? 

19 So we see that they could not enter in because 
of unbelief. 





CHAPTER IV. 


The Rest that Remaineth for the Saints. 
‘SUMMARY.—Diligence Needful to Enter the Rest. A Rest for the Saints. 

God’s Resta Type. Old Israel Did Not Find the True Rest. There 

Remaineth a Rest. 

1 Let us therefore fear, lest, a promise being left 
‘us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem 
to come short of it. 

2 For unto us was the gospel preached as well as 
unto them: but the word preached did not profit 
them, not being mixed with faith in them that 
heard 7¢. 

3 For we which have believed do enter into rest; 
as he said,’ As I have sworn in my wrath, if they 
shall enter into my rest: although the works were 
finished from the foundation of the world. 

4 For he spake in a certain place of the seventh 
day on this wise, And* God did rest the seventh 
‘day from all his works. . 


@a@1Cor. 10:5. 6 Psa. 95:11. 





305 


Harden not your hearts, 
as in the provocation. 
For who, when they heard, 16 

did provoke? nay, did not 
all they that came out of 
Egypt by Moses? And with 17 
whom was he displeased 
forty years? was it not 
with them that sinned, 
whose carcasses fell in the 
wilderness? Andto whom 18 
sware he that they should 
not enter into his rest, but 

to them that were disobe- 
dient? And we see that 19 
they were not able to enter 

in because of unbelief. 


CHAPTER IV 


Let us fear therefore, lest 1 
haply, a promise being left 
of entering into his rest, 
any one of you should 
seem to have come short of 


-| it. For indeed we have had 2 


good tidings preached unto 
us, even as also they: but 
the word of hearing did 
not profit them, because 
they were not united by 
faith with them that heard. 
For we which have believ- 3 
ed do enter into that rest; 
even as he hath said, 

As I sware in my wrath, 

They shall not enter into 

my rest: 

although the works were 
finished from the founda- 
tion of the world. For he 4 
hath said somewhere of the 
seventh day on this wise, 
And God rested on the 


e Gen. 2:2; Ex. 20:11; 31:17: 


‘There were a few exceptions; Joshua and Caleb, Eliezer, and perhaps some more of the Levites. 

17. With whom was he grieved forty yearsP With what sort of persons? The answer is, with 
‘them that sinned, all of whose bodies were left in the wilderness. 18. To whom sware heP etc. 
It was to them who sinned because of their distrust of God. See Num. 14: 20. 19. Sowesee ... 
because of unbelief. It was unbelief that kept them out of Canaan. Hence, the lesson which is given 
more fully in the next chapter. These warnings show us that the Hebrew Christians addressed were 
subjected to trials, and some of them in danger of apostasy, falling away through unbelief. Hence, the 
fate of Israel in the}wilderness is pointed out. If unbelief shut out the Israelites from the rest in Canaan, 
unbelief will shut the gates of the heavenly rest to those who have started on the way. 

1-8. Let us therefore fear. God’s promises are conditional. A rest is promised, but we must take 
heed that we do not come short of it by failing to keep the conditions. 2. For unto us was the gospel 
preached. We have the promises of the gospel, but they had the promises of an earthly land of rest 
preached to them. They broke the covenant on which the promises were based. The word preached 
did not profitthem. The reason was that it was not received in unfaltering faith. Hence they did not 
‘obey it. So unbelief would make the gospel to us of none effect. 8. For we which have believed. 
Believers in Christ enter into rest ; have the hope of the promised rest. To have the rest is conditioned 
upon a trusting faith. If they shall enter into my rest. Rather, “They shall not, etc.” See 
Revision. It is the same quotation that is found in 3:11. The argument is that the Israelites were 
excluded from God’s rest, and hence it follows that some others must enter in, since the rest has not been 
prepared in vain. Although the works were finished. Though God completed his work in six days 
and rested the seventh, a type of the rest to be given to his saints, yet keeping the Sabbath is not 
entering into that rest. 

4-7. Hespakeinacertain place. In Gen. 2: 2. Thereitis stated, “God rested on the seventh day 
from all his works.” The Sabbath rest was therefore established long before Israel was denied entrance 

20 


306 HEBREWS. 
5 And in this place again, If they shall enter into 
my rest. 


6 Seeing therefore it remaineth that some must 
enter therein, and* they to whom it was first 
preached entered not in because of unbelief. 

7 (Again, he limiteth a certain day, saying in 
David, To-day, after so long a time; as it is said,” 
To-day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your 
hearts. 

8 For if Jesus had given them rest, then would 
he not afterward have spoken of another day. 

9 There remaineth therefore a rest to the people 
of God. 

10 For he that is entered into his rest, he also 
eg ceased from his own works, as God did from 

is.) 

11 Let us labour therefore to enter into that rest, 
joe any man fall after the same example of unbe- 

ief. 

12 For the word of God és° quick, and powerful, 
and sharper than any* two-edged sword, piercing 
even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and 
of the joints and marrow, and és a® discerner of the 
thoughts and intents of the heart. 

13 Neither is there any creature that is not mani- 
fest in his sight: but all things are naked and open- 
ed unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do. 





[Ch. IV- 


seventh day from ail his 
works; and in this place 5 
again, 
They shall not enter into 
my rest. 
Seeing thereforeit remain- 6. 
eth that some should enter 
thereinto, and they to 
whom the good tidings 
were before preached failed 
to enter in because of diso- 
bedience, he again defineth 7 
a certain day, saying in 
David, after so long a time, 
To-day, aS it hath been 
before said, 

To-day if ye shall hear 

his voice, 

Harden not your hearts. 
For if Joshua had given & 
them rest, he would not 
have spoken afterward of 
another day. There re- 9 
maineth therefore a ‘sab- 
path rest for the people of 
God. For he that is enter- 10: 
edinto his rest hath him- 
self also rested from his 
works, as God did from his. 
Let us therefore give dili- 11 
gence to enter into that 
rest, that no man fall after 
the same example of diso- 
pedience. For the word of 12: 
God is living, and active, 
and sharper than any two- 
edged sword, and piercin 
even to the dividing of sow! 
and spirit, of both joints 
and marrow, and quick to 
discern the thoughts and 
intents of the heart. And 13 
there is no creature that is 
not manifest in his sight: 
put all things are naked 





a Heb. 3:19. 6 Psa. 95:7. c Isa. 49:2; Jer. 23:29. d@Rev. 1: 16. 


e1 Cor. 14:24, 25. 








into the rest. Hence it is not the rest. 


5, Inthis place again. In Psalm 95: 11, which declares that: 


Israel should not enter into God’s rest. Though Israel had kept the rest of the Sabbath, they had not. 


entered into God’s rest, as this language shows. 


The rest of the Sabbath is not then the promised rest, 


nor is Canaan below, from which nearly all Israel was once excluded, because David exhorts the people, 


though in Canaan, to enter into the rest. 6. Seeing 


. that some must enter. 


Since God 


has a rest for his people, and it is not made in vain, there must be some who enter therein. Those to 


whom it was first offered entered not because of 
Joshua and Caleb, have faith. 7. Again he limiteth a certain day. 


their unbelief. Hence it remaineth to all who, like 


The thought is that there ie a 


day of opportunity. If that day is passed by, the opportunity is gone. The word of the Lord is, To-day 


if, etc. 


3-11. For if Jesus. “Joshua,” as in the Revision. Jesus is the Greek form of the Hebrew word. 
Joshua. Joshua led Israel over the J ordan into Canaan, but that did not give them complete rest. If 
that had been true, David would not have exhorted them to seek to enter into rest. Five hundred years 
after they entered Canaan this exhortation is given in the 95th Psalm. 9. There remaineth therefore 
avrest. Since God has a rest for his people, and neither the Sabbath nor Canaan is the rest, these being 
only types of that rest, a rest remaineth to the people of God. 10. For he that is entered into 
his rest. When God rested on the Sabbath, the type of the true rest, his works ceased. So when our 
rest comes, weary toil, trials and sufferings will be over. 11. Let us labor therefore. Since this 
glorious rest, the heavenly rest, remains for faithful believers, we should seek to enter upon it, and 
especially take heed that we do not come short through unbelieving disobedience as did Israel. 

12,18. For the word of God. The Israelites came short because they refused to hear the word of 
the Lord. If we would enter in, we must take heed to the word. It is living and active (Revision), 
sharper than any two-edged sword. Cutting keenly and in all directions. Dividing of soul and 
spirit. It not only gives life, but slays, as was the case with the Israelites who fell in the wilderness, and. 
pierces to the soul and spirit. It reaches the very fountains of life. A discerner of the thoughts. 


Ch. V.] HEBREWS. 


14 Seeing then that we have a great high priest, 
that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of 
God, let us hold fast owr profession. 

15 For* we have not an high priest which cannot 


307 


and laid open before the 
eyes of him with whom we 
have to do, 

Having thena aot high 14 
priest, who hath passed 
through the heavens, Jesus 


the Son of God, let us hold 
fast our confession. For 15 
we have not a high priest 
that cannot be touched 
with the feeling of our in- 
firmities ; but one that hath 
been in all points tempted 
like as we are, yet without 
sin. Let us therefore draw 16 
near with boldness unto 
the throne of grace, that 
we may receive mercy, and 
may find grace to help us 
in time of heed. 


be touched with the feeling of our infirmities : but? 
was in all points tempted like as we are,° yet with- 
out sia. 

16 Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne 
of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace 
to help in time of need. 


CHAPTER YV. 


The Superiority of Christ’s Priesthood. 


SuMMARyY.—The Office of a High Priest. High Priests Chosen of God. 
Christ a Priest of the Order of Melchisedec. He Learned Obedience 
Through Suffering. The Need of Learning the Deeper Truths of the 
Gospel. 

1 For every high priest, taken from among men, 
is ordained for men in things pertaining to God,‘ 
that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins: 

2 Who can have compassion on the ignorant, and 
on them that are out of the way; for that he him- 
self also is compassed with infirmity. 

3 And® by reason hereof he ought, as for the 
people, so also for himself, to offer for sins. 


a Isa. 5:33. 6 Luke 22:28. ¢ Dan. 9:24; 2 Cor. 5:21; 1 Pet 2:22; 1John3:5. d Heb. 8:3,4. e Lev. 4:3. 


CHAPTER VY. 


For every high priest, be- 1 
ing taken from among men, 
is appointed for men in 
things pertaining to God, 
that he may offer both 
gifts and sacrifices for sins: 
who can bear gently with & 
the ignorant and erring, 
for that he himself also is 
compassed with infirmity; 
and by reason thereof is 3 
bound, as for the people, 
so also for himself, to offer 














It lays bare the thoughts and the intentions. 18. Neither is there any creature. In Christ appears 
the Word in personal form, while in the gospel we have his spoken word. Here the reference is to the 
personal Word. Every creature is manifest before him, and all our deeds and thoughts are open to his 
eyes. 

Wace’ Seeing then that we have a great high priest. As has been shown. Our high priest; 
now makes intercession in the true Holy of Holies. 15. For we have not a high priest, ete, A 
high priest must be in sympathy with those for whom he ministers. Christ, who took upon himself our 
infirmities, is such a high priest. He was tried and tempted as man, but remained sinless. 16. Let us 
therefore come boldly. Because our high priest can be touched by our infirmities. The throne of 
grace. The Jewish high priest interceded before the mercy-seat. We may come boldly to the merey- 
seat, knowing that our loving Elder Brother is our high priest in*the heavens. Hence we may always 
have confidence when we ask for grace and help in time of need. 

The practical lesson of the chapter is that the True Rest promised remains. It was not the Sabbath 
day, nor was it Canaan. It is the heavenly rest of which these are types. Unbelieving disobedience 
excluded the Israelites from the typical rest of Canaan., So, too, 1t will exclude those who have started to 
enter into the heavenly rest if they refuse to hear Christ through unbelief. The believing Joshua and 
Caleb entered into Canaan. So, too, the true and faithful believers who follow Christ will enter into the 
rest above. 

1-8. Every high priest taken from among men. Such as Aaron and all the high priests of 
Israel. Is ordained for men. He is appointed to officiate in holy things and to intercede in behalf of 
his fellow-men. God did not need the high priest, but men needed him. That he may offer both gifts 
and sacrifices. “Gifts” were strictly bloodless offerings, while “sacrifices” required the life of the 
victim. These were offered in behalf of men, either by the high priest in person, or under his direction. 
2. Who can have compassion, ete. It is needful that the high priest be one in sympathy with men, 
because he has experienced in person the common infirmities of the race. Otherwise, how could he be a 
merciful high priest touched by the infirmities of men? 8, And by reason hereof. Of his own 
infirmity, m that he was of men. Ought, as for the people, so also for himself, As one of a sinful 


308 HEBREWS. 


[Ch. V. 





4 And* no man taketh this honour unto himself, 
but he that is called of God, as was” Aaron. 

5 Sof also Christ glorified not himself to be made 
an high priest; but he that said unto him,? Thou 
art my Son, to-day have I begotten thee. 

6 As he saith also in another place,* Thou art a 
priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec: 

7 Who in the days of his flesh, when he had‘ 
offered up prayers and supplications, with® strong 
crying and tears, unto" him that was able to save 
him from death, and was heard in that he feared. 

8 Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedi- 
ence! by the things which he suffered: 

9 And being made perfect, he became the author 
of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him; 

10 Called of God an high priest, after! the order 
of Melchisedec. 

11 Of whom we have many things to say, and 
hard to be uttered, seeing ye are dull of hearing. 

12 For when for the time ye ought to be teachers, 
ye have need that one teach you again which be the 
first principles of the oracles of God; and are 
become such as have need of milk, and not of 
strong meat. 





for sins. And no man tak- 4 
eth the honour unto him- 
self, but when he is called 
of God, even as was Aaron. 
So Christ also glorified not 5 
himself to be made a high 
priest, but he that spake 
unto him, 

Thou art my Son, 

This day have I begotten 

thee: 
as he saith also in another 6 
place, : 

Thou art a priest forever 

After the order of Mel- 

chizedek. 
Who in the days of his 7 
flesh, having offered up 
prayers and supplications 
with strong erying and 
tears unto him that was 
able to save him from 
death, and having been 
heard for his godly fear, 
though he was a Son, yet 8 
learned obedience by the 
things which he suffered: 
and having been made per- 9 
fect, he became unto all 
them that obey him the au- 
thor of eternal salvation; 
named of God a high priest 10 
after the order of Melchiz- 
edek. 

Of whom we have many 11 
things to say, and hard of 
interpretation, seeing ye 
are become dull of hearing. 
For when by reason of the 12 


time ye ought to be teach- 








a1Sam. 13:9; 2Sam. 6:6; John8:27. 6 Ex. 28:15 Num. 16:5,40. 


ec John 8:54; Acts 13:33; Rom. 8:3. d@ Psa. 2:7. 
ePsa 110:4. fdohn17:1. g Psa. 22:1. } i i sani 


h Matt. 26:53. @ Phil. 2:8. j Heb. 6:20 








race he needed to approach God in his own behalf, as well as in behalf of men. He offered ‘“‘atonement for 
his own sins and for the sins of the people.” This was shown forth in the very garments he wore when he 
offered the national atonement once a year. On the shoulder of the ephod (Exod. 28: 10) were two onyx 
stones, on which were engraved the names of the twelve sons of Jacob, the representatives of all the 
tribes of Israel, of Levi the priestly tribe as well as the others. As he stood before the merey-seat inter- 
eeding, he bore all these names before the Lord. ‘ 

4-6. And no man taketh this honor unto himself. He must be called to it by God. Aaron 
was so appointed. See Exod. 28:1; Ley. 8:2. 5. So also Christ glorified not himself. Did not 
take the office of himself, but God called him to his priesthood, The time is pointed out when he was so 
ealled. It was when God said, Thou art my son, to-day have I begotten thee. This refers to when 
Christ was begotten from the dead, the first-born of the new creation. See Eph. 1; 20-23. At this time he 
entered fully, at the call of God, upon his high priesthood in behalf of men. 6. A priest forever after 
the order of Melchisedec. Christ’s priesthood continues while time endures. He is not of the order 
f Aaron, but of Melchizedek, a king as well asa priest. See Gen. 14: 18,19, For afuller discussion of 
the priesthood of Melchizedek, see notes on chapter 7: 1-10. 

7-10. Who in the days of his flesh. Christ, while on earth, is referred to. When he had 
offered up prayers, etc. A particular time when these earnest supplications were offered is pointed 
wat. The agony of Gethsemane is meant. It was then that he said, “If it be possible, let this cup pass 
from me.” Even there he was heard. For an angel descended to strengthen him. Feared. Rever- 
anced the Father in humble submission. A pious fear is meant. 8. He learned obedience. He 
«laimed no special exemptions because he was the Son, but learned and taught obedience in the supremest 
fest that the world ever saw. He learned obedience experimentally. 9. Being made perfect. Fitted 
im all points to be our high priest by his suffering; made, not a perfect man, for he was that already, but a 
perfect high priest. He became the author. Was able to offer the gospel to all nations, and thus to 
save all them that obey him. He does not save men in disobedience. 10. Called of God an high 
priest. When he had suffered he was called of God an high priest, or entered upon his priesthood. 
Order of Melchisedec. See notes on verse 6 and chapter 7: 1-10. 

11-14. Of whom we have many things to say. Of Christ in his priesthood. Hard to be 


Ch. VI.] HEBREWS. 


13 For every one that useth milk ¢s* unskillful in 
the word of righteousness ; for he is a babe. 

14 But strong meat belongeth to them that are of 
full age, even those who by reason of use have their 
senses exercised” to discern both good and evil. 


CHAPTER VI. 


Going On Toward Perfection. 
SUMMARyY.—Leaving First Principles. First Principles Explained. Going 

On to Perfection. The Fatal Consequences of Apostasy. Exhortation 

to Diligence. The Absolute Assurance of God’s Promises. 

1 Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine 
of Christ, let us go on unto perfection; not laying 
again the foundation of repentance from dead 
works, and of faith toward God, 

2 Of¢ the doctrine of baptisms, and® of laying on 
of hands, and® of resurrection of the dead,‘ and of 
eternal judgment. 





309 
ers, ye have need again 
that some one teach you 


the rudiments of the first 
principles of the oracles of 
God; and are become such 
as have need of milk, and 
not of solid food. For ev- 13 
ery one that partaketh of 
milk is without experience 
of the word of righteous- 
ness; for he isa babe. But 14 
solid food is for fullgrown 
men, even those who by 
reason of use have their 
senses exercised to discern 
good and eyil. 


CHAPTER VI. 


Wherefore let us cease to 1 
speak of the first princi- 
ples of Christ, and press on 
unto perfection ; not laying 
again a foundation of re- 
pentance from dead works, 
and of faith toward God, 
of the teaching of baptisms, 2 
and of laying on of hands, 
and of resurrection of the 
dead, and of eternal judg- 


ment. And this will we do, 3 


3 And this will we do,* if God permit. 


@1 Cor. 14:20; Eph. 4:13. 61 Cor. 2:14,15. c Acts 19:4. d@ Acts 8:14. e Acts17:381. 7 Acts 24:25. g1Cor. 4:19. 








uttered. Hard to be expressed so that you will understand. The priesthood of Christ, after the order 
of Melchizedek, opens up some difficult questions. Seeing ye are dull of hearing. Of slow under- 
standing. 12. When ye ought to be teachers. You have been disciples long enough to be able to 
teach others, but still need some one to teach you first principles. See note oné: 1,2. Oracles of 
God. God’s word. 13. Every one that useth milk, ete. Those who only understand the A B C’s 
of Christianity are only babes in Christ, like the babes whose food is milk. Such an one cannot handle 
the word of righteousness skillfully. 14. Strong meat belongeth to them that are of full 
age. When one has reached manhood we do not expect him to live on the food of babes. Soa church 
member, as time goes on, ought to feed on strong meat, the higher teaching of religion. There should be 
growth in knowledge. Their senses exercised. The reference here is to the faculties of the soul. A 
Christian ought to study, to gain a thorough knowledge of the Scriptures and especially of the New Tes- 
tament, to become able to teach others, and to explain the higher principles of our religion. In addition 
he ought to be able to discern the moral character of the environments of life, to know not only what to 
accept and what to reject, but how to warn his less instructed brethren. 

1,2. Leaving the principles. The rudiments, the milk fitted only for babes. Let us go on unto 
perfection. Go on to the higher lessons which belong to full grown men. The exhortation is to go on 
from the lessons of Christian childhood to those of manhood in Christ. See verses 13, 14 of chapter 5. 
Not laying again the foundation, ete. To lay the foundation once is enough, if it is laid right. 
These first principles are the foundation of Christian life, but we must build higher and higher upon them. 
Repentance. This was essential in laying the foundation. All men are commanded to repent. Repent- 
ance 1s essentially a change of the will, the rebellious will becoming a will to serve the Lord. Dead 
works. Some try to save themselves by trusting in their works but they are as vain to save as though 
they were dead. Faith towards God. Faith as well as repentance enter into the foundation. The 

' sinner must believe upon the Lord, and repent. See Acts 16: 31 and 2:38. 2. Of the doctrine of bap- 
tisms. The third of these first principles which belong to the “ foundation” relates to baptism. See 
Acts 2: 38; also Eph. 4:5; Matt. 28: 19, etc. But why is the plural used? There is but one baptism in 
water when the penitent 1s baptized mto Christ (Eph.4:5; Gal. 3:27). There Is; however, another baptism 
which was promised before Christ came which was not of water. See Matt. 3:12. Christ also promised 
it before his ascension. Hence there is not only the baptism of the body in water, but of the spirit in the 
Holy Spirit, as fulfilled on the day of Pentecost. Laying on of hands. In the primitive church the 
extraordinary operation of the Holy Spirit was imparted by the laying on of the Apostolic hands (Acts 
8:17). Of the resurrection of the dead. One of the fundamental but primary principles of Christian 
teaching. Of eternal judgment. This was comprehended in teaching the resurrection. All were to 
be rewarded according to the deeds of this life. ; 

8-6, If God permit. We will go on to these higher lessons if God permit. The author is led by the 


310 HEBREWS. [Ch>-VI1. 


4 For it és impossible for? those who were once] tiudhing those who were 


i av et ift, | once enlightened and tast- 
enlightened, and have tasted of* the heavenly gift, ed of the heavouly etf, aad 
and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, were made partakers of the 
5 And have tasted the good word of God, and eed and ch Cake na ies, 


the powers of the world to come, powers of the age to come, 


* and then fell away, itisim- 6 
6 If they shall fall away, to renew them again | possible to renew them 


sf F 4 . 147 are again unto repentance; 
unto poe oe ao cr ee kg healer seeinigs they: crucify” 10 
atr al u 2272 tO an Open | themselves the Son of Go 
the Son iM 0 vat iy P afresh, and put him to an 
shame. ee shame. ake ue land 7 
s . g ‘ which ha run e rain 
7 For the earth, which drinketh in the rain that | en nae rt eet at 


cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs meet | and bringeth forth herbs 
for them by whom it is dressed, receiveth blessing | sake itis also tillea, receiv- 


; eth blessings from God; 
from God: 4 ; . | but if it beareth thornsand 8. 
8 But that which beareth thorns and briers 28 | thistles, it is rejected and 


= C : * nigh unto a curse; whose 
rejected, and zs nigh unto cursing; whose end zs to ond ie to be BLFLEL 


But, beloved, we are per- 9 
be burned. suaded better things of 


9 But, beloved, we are persuaded better things of pen ese things that ac- 
s . alve m, ou 
you, and things that accompany salvation, though we thus speak; fot Gods 10 
not unrighteous to forge 
we thus speak. | : your work and the love 
10 Fore God és not unrighteous, to forget your which ye Shewed toward 
. -) 1S Name, 1 at ye minis- 
work and labour of love, which ye have shewed tered unio the ee, and | 
: S aay sti oO minister. And we 11 
toward his name, in that ye have ministered to the | ooci.¢ that each one of you 
saints, and do minister. , may shew the same dili- 
. ence unte e€ fuiness 0 
11 And we desire that every one of you do shew hope even to the end: that 12 
o's . f qi ye be not sluggish, but im- 
the same diligence, to’ the full assurance of hope | ¥@ po not Sugeish, Put ims 
unto the end: 
12 That ye be not slothful, but followers of them 


a Matt. 12:32; Heb. 10:26; 1John 5:16. 06 Matt. 7:22; Heb. 10:32. ¢ John 4:10; 6:32; Eph. 2:8. d@ Heb. 10:29. 
e Matt. 10:42; 25:40; John 13:20. Col. 2:2. 

















Spirit in what he says, and hence humbly defers all he shall say in the rest of the epistle to the will of God, 
4, For it is impossible. There are sins that have no forgiveness (Matt. 12: 31, 32). There are Apos- 
tates who can never find a place for repentance, not because of the failure of God’s mercy but because 
they have destroyed their moral capacity for a heartfelt repentance. Usually the most hardened sinners 
are apostates. Wore once enlightened. Had the light of the Gospel. See John 8:12. Have tasted. 
Experienced. The heavenly gift. The new life in Christ, Christ “giveth life unto the world” (John 
20:31). Partakers of the Holy Ghost. The Spirit of God is sent into the heart of all sons (Gal. 4: 6; 
Rom. 8:9). 5. And have tasted the good word of God. Fed on that word which is food for the 
soul. The powers of the world to come. The miraculous gifts of the Spirit. The world to come is 
used in the Epistles in the sense of the Christian dispensation. 6. Iitheyfallaway. Apostatize from 
the faith. To renew themtorepentance. He is so far fallen that he has no capacity left for repent- 
ance. Judas the Apostate sorrowed, but his sorrow became despair. There was remorse but not repentance. 
Crucity . . the Son of God afresh. By rejecting Christ they place themselves with those who 
rejected him and crucified him because he affirmed that he was the Son of God. Those meant are 
not those ‘‘ overtaken in a fault,” or backsliders only, but men once Christian professors who not only turn 
away from but oppose Christ. 

7,8. For the earth, etc. These two verses show that treatment depends on what kind of fruit is 
borne. God sends sunshine and rain on the earth. If it brings forth food for man, it is blessed. But if it 
brings forth thorns and briers they are rejected. So God, who blesses our lives, and refreshes them with 
the Gospel, demands righteous fruit. If they bear thorns, the end is destruction. 

9-12. We are persuaded better things of. That you will not bear thorns and briers, 10. For 
God is not unrighteous to forget. Though the Hebrew Christians had not advanced in knowledge 
(5: 12), yet they had shown the fruits of the love of Christ in ministering to the saints. 11. Show 
the same diligence. Not only continue your work of iove, but show equal diligence in attaining the 


Ch. VI.] HEBREWS. 311 


i . . ‘fa LQm. | through faith and patience 
who through faith and patience inherit* the prom-) throush ta aera ne 


ises. For when God made 13 


2 , * 3 romise to Abraham, since 
13 For when God made promise to Abraham, | he could swear by’ none 


= aus 4 > b awar reater, he sware by him- 

because he could sware by no greater, he? sware by | Si?'iving Surely bless- 
é i il 

himself, ing A ha ea Hee ee 

14 Saying, Surely blessing I will bless thee, and Se taviae 1S 


multiplying I will multiply thee. patiently endured, he ob- 
* : tained the promise. For 16 
15 And so, after he had patiently endured, he | men swear by the greater: 


ae : and in every dispute of 
obtained the promise. theirs the oath is final for 


4 Pk c confirmation. Wherein 17 
16 For men verily swear by the greater: and° an Getler wipe ieee 
oath for confirmation 7s to them an end of all strife. | more abundantly unto the 


. . . it iV y is 
17 Wherein God, willing more abundantly to He ecutlee af Lis eoure 


1 a oe is Taae 117 sel, interposed with an 
shew unto the heirs of promise* the immutability | Sy). thar by two tmmuta- 18 


of his counsel, confirmed 7¢ by an oath; _ | ble things, in which it is 
18 That by two immutable things, in which 7é was | Weiay have a strong en 


impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong pr ea oe ae 


consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold of the hope set before us: | 
upon the hope? set before us: shor Of ohe soul nihoge 


Thich’ / as both sure and stedfast and 
19 Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, Se a eane antnaa 


both sure and stedfast," and which entereth into | within the veil; whither as 20 
that within the vail; ee en, oe 

20 Whither! the forerunner is for us entered, ap Ee eS 
even Jesus, made an high priest for ever, after the 
order of Melchisedec. 


-a Heb. 10:36. 0 Gen. 22:16. cEx. 22:11. dHeb.11:9._e Rom. 11:29. fHeb. 12:1. g Psa. 130:7. Ah Ley. 16:155 
Heb. 9:7. i Heb. 4:14; 9:24. 





_ 


4 














full assurance of hope, by going on to perfection in knowledge. 12. Thatyebe .. . followers 
ofthem. Of the glorious heroes of the faith, like Abraham, and Moses and the martyrs, like Stephen 
‘and James. Faith and patience. These qualities, essential to stedfastness, must be found in those who 
“inherit the promises.” 

18-20. For when God made promise. The promises are absolutely sure. See how God confirmed 
his promise to Abraham! See Gen. 92: 15-18. 14. Saying, surely blessing. The promise so con- 
firmed to Abraham is given in these words. 15. He obtained the promise. It was sure, but he had 
to patiently endure in order to obtain. The history of Abraham shows how he was blessed. 16. For 
mon verily swear by the greater. When men make a solemn oath in order to settle a fact or cove- 
nant beyond controversy they usually swear in the name of God. God, however, could swear by no one 
greater than himself. 17. God, willing, etc. God, out of condescension to that human weakness 
which puts more confidence in an oath than in the bare word, confirmed his promise by an oath. 18. 
That by twoimmutable things. By his word of promise, and by his oath, neither of which could ever 
be broken. Strong consolation. In the absolute certainty of God’s promises who have fied for 
refuge. Fled from the wrath revealed aga‘nst sin to the Gospel with its promises and blessed hopes. 
19. Which hope . . an anchor of the soul. As an anchor holds the ship when the storms are 
raging, so this hope holds the soul stedfast. Entereth into that within the vail. The vail was before 
the Holy of Holies in the tabernacle, but it was atype of heaven. Hence this means that the hope reaches 
to heaven. Itisaheavenly hope. 20. Whither the forerunner. As the High Priest entered within 
-the vail into the Holy of Holies, so our High Priest has entered for us, and before us, into the heavens. 
A High Priest forever, etc. See notes on chapter 7: 1-10. 

i-8. For this Melchisedek, king of Salem. See the account of him in Gen. 14; 18-20. That he 
was a character of exceeding dignity is manifest, not only from the statements of Genesis but of this 
chapter. There have been many speculations concerning his personality, but no man can lift the vail. 
He bursts upon us as a priest-king, king of Salem, or Jerusalem, which we now know from discoveries 
‘in Egyptian records existed even in those very early ages; “priest of the most High God.” ‘There is no 
account of his parents, none of his birth, none of his death, none of the beginning or end of his priest- 
hood; hence, he appears in the record without parents, genealogy, beginning or end, simply as one that 


312 HEBREWS. 


(Gh. Vit. 





CHAPTER VI. 


Christ’s Priesthood After the Order of Melchisedec. 
SumMARy.—The High Dignity of Melchisedec as a Priest. Abraham Paid 
Him Tithes. Thus Did the Aaronie Priesthood Confess His Superior- 
ity. A Type of a Priest Forever. Christ to be a Priest After the 
Order of Melchisedec. Hence, the Aaronic Priesthood Imperfect. 
Hence, too, the Law Must be Changed. Christ, the Priest of the New 
Covenant, Hath an Unchangeable Priesthood. 


1 For this? Melchisedec, king of Salem, priest of 
the most high God, who met Abraham returning 
from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him; 

2 To whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of 
all; first, by interpretation, King of righteousness, 
and after that also King of Salem, which is King of 

eace ; 
x 3 Without father, without mother, without de- 
scent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of 
life; but, made like unto the Son of God, abideth 
a priest continually. 

4 Now consider how great this man was, unto? 
whom even the patriarch Abraham gave the tenth 
of the spoils. 

5 And verily°® they that are of the sons of Levi, 
who receive the office of the priesthood, have a 
commandment to take tithes of the people accord- 
ing to the law, that is, of their brethren, though 
they come out of the loins of Abraham: 

6 But he, whose descent is not counted from 
them, received tithes of Abraham, and blessed? him 


CHAPTER VII. 


For this Melchizedek, 1 
king of Salem, priest of 
God Most High, who met 
Abraham returning from 
the slaughter of the kings, 
and blessed him, to whom 2: 
also Abraham divided a 
tenth part of all (being 
first, by interpretation 
King of righteousness, an 
then also King of Salem, 
which is, King of peace; 
without father, without 3: 
mother,without genealogy, 
haying neither beginning 
of days nor end of life, but 
made like unto the Son of 
God), abideth a priest con- 
tinually. 

Now consider how great 4 
this man was, unto whom 
Abraham, the patriarch, 
gave a tenth out of the 
chief spoils. And they in- 5. 
deed of the sons of Levi 
that receive the priest’s of- 
fice have commandment to 
take tithes of the people 
according to the law, that 
is, of their brethren,though 
these have come out of the 
loins of Abraham: but he 6° 
whose genealogy is not 
counted from them hath 
taken tithes of Abraham, 


and hath blessed him that 
hath the promises. But 7 
without any dispute the 
‘| less is blessed of the bet- 


that had the promises. 
7 And, without all contradiction, the less is 
blessed of the better. 


@ Gen 14:18; Psa. 110:4; Heb. 5:6,10. 














6 Gen. 14:20. ¢ Num. 18:21. d@ Rom. 4:18; Gal. 3:16. 





liveth, a fit type of him whose priesthood and kingly state endure forever. Who met Abraham. 
See Gen. 14: 20. Abraham was returning from the pursuit of the marauders who had captured Lot, his. 
nephew. Blessed him. The “great father,” “the friend of God,” thus acknowledges his superior: 
spiritual dignity. 2. To whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all. Tithes were paid to him 
as the priest of the Most High. King of righteousness. Such is the meaning of Melchisedek. The 
word may not be the name, but a title. King of Salem. This means “ King of Peace.” It will be: 
observed that the payment of tithes for religious purposes is at least 400 years older than the Jewish law. 
See also Gen. 28: 22. 8. Without father, without mother. See note on verse 1. Nor end of life. 
None as he appears in history. As far as he is revealed to us he is a living character, one that lives. 
right on, like unto the Son of God. The Apostle does not affirm this was absolutely so, but that it is. 
thus that Melchisedek appears on the back ground of early history. He abideth, in the Sacred Record, 
a priest continually. ; 

4-10. How great this man was. When one so great as Abraham recognized his superiority by: 
paying him tithes. 5. The sons of Levi. The Aaronic priesthood, all of them of the tribe of Levi. 
Take tithes of the people according to the law. They require the enactment of the law in order: 
to collect tithes of the people, their own brethren. The tithes are paid, not because of their great 
spiritual dignity, but because the law compels it. 6. But he whose descent is not counted from 
them. Melchisedek, who was not of the blood of Abraham or tribe of Levi, received tithes of Abraham,, 


Ch. VII. HEBREWS. 


313: 





8 And here men that die receive tithes; but 
there he receiveth them, of* whom it is witnessed, 
that he liveth. 

9 And, as I may so say, Levi also, who receiveth 
tithes, payed tithes in Abraham. 

10 For he was yet in the loins of his father when 
Melchisedec met him. 

11 If’ therefore perfection were by the Levitical 
priesthood, (for under it the people received the 
law,) what further need was there that another 
priest should rise after the order of Melchisedec, 
and not be called after the order of Aaron? 

12 For the priesthood being changed, there is 
made of necessity a change also of the law. 

13 For he of whom these things are spoken per- 
taineth to another tribe, of which no man gave 
attendance at the altar. 

14 For éé ts evident that® our Lord sprang out of 
Juda; of which tribe Moses spake nothing con- 
cerning priesthood. 

15 And it is yet far more evident: for that after 
the similitude of Melchisedec there ariseth another 
priest, 


ter. And here mén that 8 
die receive tithes ; but there 
one, of whom it is witness- 

ed that he liveth. And, so 9 
to say, through Abraham 
even Levi, who receiveth 
tithes, hath paid tithes; ’ 
for he was yet in the loins 10: 
of his father, when Melchi- 
zedek met him. 

Now if there was perfeec- 11 
tion through the Levitical 
pees (for undér it 

ath the people received 
the law), what further 
need was there that anoth- 
er priest should arise after 
the order of Melchizedek, 
and not be reckoned after 
the jorder of Aaron? For 
the _ priesthood bein 
changed, there is made of 
necessity a change also of 
the law. For he of whom 
these things are said be- 
longeth to another tribe, 
from which no man hath 
given attendance at the 
altar. For it is evident 
that our Lord hath sprung 
out of Judah; as to which 
tribe Moses spake Par 
concerning priests. And 15. 
what we say is yet more 
abundantly evident, if af- 
ter the likeness of Melchi- 
zedek there ariseth anoth- 
er priest, who hath been 


a 


3 


14 


16: 


made, not after the law of 
a carnal commandment, 
but after the power of an 


16 Who is made, not after the law of a carnal 
commandment, but after the power of an endless 
life. ; 





a Heb. 5:6. 6 Gal. 2:21. c Gen. 49:10; Isa. 11:1; Matt. 1:3; Luke3:33; Rom. 1:33 Rey. 5:5. 





not because of law, but because of his transcendent dignity. '7. Theless is blessed of the better. 
Though Abraham had the promises of God Melchisedek, as the higher in spiritual dignity and nearer to 
God, blessed him. See Gen. 27: 27-29. 8. Here men that die receive tithes. The Aaronic priest- 
hood die, and the death of the high priests is a matter of record. Their mortality was a prominent: 
feature, but in the case of Melchisedek he who receives tithes liveth right on as far as the records tell 
us. We behold him only as a living priest, typical of a priest who liveth forever. 9. Levialso, who 
receiveth tithes. The sacred tribe of Israel, the tribe to whom tithes are paid, paid tithes to 
Melchisedek. 10. He was yet. All Israel, kings and priests, though yet unborn were represented in 
Abraham. Hence Levi paid tithes, and thus confessed the superiority of the priesthood of Melchisedek. 

11-17. The superiority of the priesthood of Melchisedek to that of Aaron in dignity having been 
shown, the imperfection of the latter is next pointed out. If therefore perfection were by the 
Levitical priesthood. If it effected the complete pardon of sins and made men holy. What further 
need was there, etc. If it gave all needful spiritual blessings there would be no need of another 
priesthood. The Aaronic priesthood would have been continued on forever. But a change of the: 
priesthood had been predicted, as wil! soon be shown. 12. For the priesthood being changed. 
The law as given “under the Levitical priesthood” (verse 11), and was all grouped around the priesthood 
as its very center. Of course, if the priesthood was changed the law of the old priesthood, the law of 
Moses, must go with it, and give place to a new law. 18. For he of whom these things are 
spoken. Of whom an unchangeable priesthood is predicted. Pertaineth to another tribe. All the 
priests of the Jewish dispensation had been of the tribe of Levi, but Christ was not of this tribe. 14. 
Our Lord sprang out of Judah. In the genealogies as given by Matthew and Luke. The Messiah 
was to be the sonof David. 15. It is far more evident. Still more clear than that the new High 
Priest should be of the tribe of Judah. That could be shown by an argument, because it was affirmed. 
(1) that the Christ was to be the Son of David; (2) David was of Judah ; (3) The Christ was to be a priest. 
On the other hand, without argument, is the clear affirmation that there was to be a new priesthood, a 
priest after the likeness of Melchisedek. 16. Who is made, etc. The Levitical priesthood 








314 HEBREWS. [Ch.VIT. 
17 For: he’ testifieth, Thou arta priest for ever | cates Wes ton & is wit 7 
after the order of Melchisedec. Thoma a elon ier 
18 For there is verily a disannuling of the com-| “‘chizedek. _ 
mandment going on before, for the weakness and | fpr Pere ist Mia nande 
rofl ment because of its weak- 
unprofitableness thereof. monblioss a ee 
19 For® the law made nothing perfect, but the | (forthe law made nothing 19 
bringing in of4 a better hope did; by the which® we | Perret), an a ter hope, 
draw ‘nigh unto God. through which we draw 
: : nigh unto God, And inas- 20 
20 And inasmuch as not without an oath he was mich 23 it ig not without | 
29. ° the taking of an oath or 
made preest: 5 : they indeed have been 
21 (For those priests were made without an oath; made priests without an 
but this with an oath by him that said unto him, | py him that saith of him, 
The! Lord sware, and will not repent, Thou art a et aeoetie Hineseln will 
priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec:) Thou art a priest forev- 
22 By so much was Jesus made a surety of a bet-| py so mach also hath Jesus 22 
A Q become the surety of a bet- 
ter testament. 2 ter covenant. And they 23 
23 And they truly were many priests, because indeed have been made 
s Ti n¥ in num sy 
they were not suffered to continue by reason of | hecause that by death they 
death: are hindered from contin- 
y : 5 uing: but he, because he 24 
24 But this man, because he® continueth ever, | abi eth for ever, hath his 
° re oO hange 5 
hath an unchangeable priesthood. Wherefore also he ta able os 
25 Wherefore he is able also to save them to the eee oo 
uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he God through him, secing 
. . . a] r live m e€ in- 
ever liveth® to make intercession for them. vereession Tor them. ; 
5 Kor i Pj , ‘or such a high priest 26 
26 For such an high priest became us, who is|, For s yo ute ee 
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners,’ | undefiled, ‘separated from 


and made higher than the heavens; 


sinners, and made higher 





a Psa. 110:4. 6 Rom. 8:33; Gal. 4:9. _¢ Acts 131393 Rom. 3:20; Gal. 2:16. d Heb. 6:18. eRom. 5:2. 7 Psa. 110:4. 
g Isa. 9:6,7; John 12:34; Rom. 9:5. hk Rom. 8:3431 Tim. 2:5; 1John2:1. ¢@ Eph. 1:20; 4:10. 








based their claims on a carnal commandment, a fleshly claim, that of hereditary right. Eleazer 
succeeded Aaron because he was his son, and so each high priest. The power of an endless life. 
The claim of the great high priest is not fleshly descent, but that he lives forever. He demonstrated his tite 
to the office by rising from the dead. He was exalted to the kingly priesthood when he arose from the 

dead (Eph. 1: 20). 17. Thou arta priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek. See Ps. 90: 4. 
' This declares that the Christ shall be a priest, a priest forever, a priest not of the order of Aaron but 
that of Melchisedek; a priest-king whose office abideth continually. 

18-22. A disannulling of the commandment going before. The old law and the Aaronic 
priesthood are abrogated because of their imperfection. They could not make men perfect. 19. For the 
law made nothing perfect. The law was only a preparatory arrangement. It did not fit men for 
eternal life. The bringing in of a better hope. See the Revision. The ideais: The law was disan- 
nulled and a ‘‘better hope” brought in, that of the gospel, by which we draw nigh to God. 20. Not 
without an oath. God never interposed an oath except to show certainty and immutability. Thus he 
swore to Abraham (Gen. 22: 16-18); to the rebellious Israelites (Deut. 1: 34); to David, that his seed 
should endure forever (Psa. 89: 4). Since the same solemn assurance is given concerning the priesthood 
of Christ, the meaning is that it is immutable. 21. For those priests. The Aaronic priests. Their 
priesthood did not rest upon an oath. Hence, it was not eternal; Christ’s did, for God (see Psa. 90: 4) 
gave it the sanctity of an oath. The solemn words are significant, ‘““The Lord sware and will not repent, 
Thou art «4 priest forever, etc.” 22. By somuch. By such solemn means was Jesus made a surety, the 
pledge and firm assurance. A surety is intended to secure absolute certainty. A better testament. 
Rather, covenant. Jesus became the pledge of the new covenant, the Gospel. God has established him 
as its high priest forever, by the sanctity of an oath. This is the line of argument. 

23-28. Were many priests. Since they were removed by death there were in succession many 
Aaroni¢ high priests. 24. But this man, etc. Christ was victorious over death before he entered 





Ch. VIII.] HEBREWS. 315 
27 Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, | than the heavens; who 27 
: ° si P 4}needeth not daily, like 
i Sate yi sacrifice,* first for his own sins,” and those high priests to sane 
; ny ae c sacrilices, Hrs or his own 
then for the people’s: for this* he did once, when | Suen) {st for the ens 


he offered up himself. 
28 For the law maketh? men high priests which 





have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was 
since the law, maketh the Son, who? is consecrated 
for evermore. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


The Two Testaments. 


‘SUMMARY.—Our Glorious High Priest. His Sacrifice. The True Taber- 
nacle Above. Christ the Mediator of the New Covenant. The Old 
Covenant Imperfect. Removed to Give Place to the New. : 
1 Now of the things which we have spoken ¢his ts 

the sum: We have such an high priest, whot is set 

on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in 
the heavens; 
2 A minister of the sanctuary, and of the® true 
tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man. 
3 For every high priest is ordained to offer gifts 





and sacrifices: wherefore 7é* is of necessity that 


of the people: for this he 
did once for all, when he 
offered up himself. For 
the law appointeth men 
high [oie having infirm- 
ity; but the word of the 
oath, which was after the 
law, appointeth a Son, per- 
fected for evermore. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Now in the things which 1 
we are saying the chief 
point is this: We have such 
a high priest who sat down 
on the right hand of the 
throne of the Majesty in 
the heavens, a minister of 2 
the sanctuary, and of the 
true tabernacle, which the 
Lord pitched, not man. For 3 
every high priest is ap- 
pointed to offer both gifts 
and sacrifices: wherefore it 


is necessary that this high 


this man have somewhat also to offer. priest also have somewhat 





c Rom. 6:10. 
h Eph. 5:2. 


b Ley. 16:15. d Heb. 5: 


g Heb. 9:11. 


a Ley. 9:73 16:6, 11; Heb. 5:3; 9:7. 1,2. eHeb.2:10, fCol.3:1. 








upon his priesthood; he lives forever, and hence, there is no change of his priesthood. 25. Wherefore 
he is able also to save, etc. Because he is such a high priest, and hath the power of an endless life. 
“He is not a frail mortal like us; and can save, in every extremity, all who approach God through his 
priesthood. 26. Suchan high priest became us. We need just such a high priest; one who hath 
no sins and is exalted above the heathen. He needs not to save himself, and hence is able to save. 
27. Who needeth not daily. The daily sacrifice was offered on the altar, under the direction of the 
high priest, for the sins of the whole nation, including himself. For this he did once. Instead of the 
daily offering for himself and others, Christ made but one offering, himself, when he died upon the cross. 
This offering was complete when he, as the high priest, ascended into the Holy of Holies above to inter- 
eede for the sins of his people. The perfect high priest had offered the perfect sacrifice and had 
dedicated the new and beiter covenant. Christ made his offering as a priest in ‘‘The true tabernacle, 
which the Lord pitched, and not man.” 28. For the law, etc. The law puts imperfect men into the 
Aaronic priesthood. Butthe word of theoath .. . maketh the Son. The spotless and Divine 
one who became an eternal priest. 

1,2. Thisisthesum. The crowning truth. We have such an high priest. Such as has been set 
forth in the preceding chapters: sympathizing, sinless, unchangeable, mighty to save, divine. Set on the 
right hand. He has offered his sacrifice and sat down in the heavens at God’s right hand, Concerning 
the significance of sitting at the right hand of God, see notes on Ephesians 1: 21. 2. A minister 
of the sanctuary. Not of any earthly temple, but of the sanctuary above. The true taber- 
nacle, the tabernacle made of God, whose Holy of Holies is in the heavens, of which the earthly taber 
nacle was only a feeble pattern. The earthly tabernacle had an outer court, with the altar, a holy place, 
and a Holy of Holies. These parts have been understood to be typical (1) of the world, from whence we pass 
by the altar of sacrifice, the blood of Christ into (2) the holy place, the church, and from the holy place 
the high priest passed beyond the vail into (3) the Most Holy Place, typical of heaven itself. There our 
high priest, having rent the vail that all in the church may follow, dwells and intercedes for us. There 
he presented his offering, the blood of his atonement. 

8. For every high priest is ordained, etc. It is his appointment to offer gifts and sacrifices. 
‘That is his office. Hence, if Jesus sa High Priest he must have an offering, but his offering must be pre- 


316 HEBREWS. 


[Ch:-VII1.. 





4 For if he were on earth, he should not bea 
priest, seeing that there are priests that offer gifts 
according to the law; 

5 Who serve unto the example and* shadow of 


to offer. Now if he were on 4 
earth, he would not be a 
priest at all, seeing there 
are those who offer the 
gifts according to the law; 
who serve that which is a 5 


copy and shadow of the 
heavenly things, even as 
Moses 1s warned of God 
when he is about to make 
the tabernacle: for, See, 
saith he, that thou make 
all things according to the 
pattern that was shewed 
thee in the mount. But 6 
now hath he obtained a 
ministry the more excel- 
lent, by how much also he 
is the mediator of a better 
covenant, which hath been 
enacted upon better prom- 
ises. For if that first cove- 7 
nant had been faultless, 
then would no place have 
been sought for a second. 
For uname fault with 8 
them, he saith, 
Behold, the days come, 
saith the-Lord, 
That [ will make a new 
covenant with the 


heavenly things, as Moses was admonished of God 
when he was about to make the tabernacle: for, 
See, saith he, ¢hat thou make all things according 
to the pattern shewed to thee in the mount. 

6 But now’ hath he obtained a more excellent 
ministry, by how much also he is the mediator of a 
better covenant, which was established upon better 
promises. 

7 For if that first covenant had been faultless, 
then should no place have been sought for the 
second. 

8 For, finding fault with them, he saith, “Behold, 
the days come, saith the Lord, when I will make a 
new covenant with the house of Israel, and with 
the house of Juda: c i wi 

9 Not according to the covenant that I made with with the nouns of Ju 
their fathers in the day when I took them by the mech yee FA 
hand to lead them out of the land. of Egypt; Neovenant “hat T'made ve 
because they continued Hoy in my covenant, and I In the day that T took 
regarded them not, saith the Lord. Pes Oe uae ee 

10 For this 7s the covenant that I will make with the land of Eevp®. ae 
the house of Israel after those days, saith the Lord; 

I will put my laws into their mind, and write them 
in their hearts; and* I will be to them a God, and 


For they continued not 
in my covenant, 
they shall be to me a people: 


And [regarded them not, 
saith the Lord. 

For this is the covenant 10» 
that I will make with 
the house of Israel 








@Col.2:17. bEx, 26:40; Num. 8:4. ¢2Cor. 3:6; Heb.7:22. dJer. 31:31. éZech. 8:8. 





sented in the true Holy of Holies above. 4. On earth, he should not be a priest. The law required 
all the priests who served in the temple to be of the tribe of Levi, but he was not of the tribe: 
of Levi, or of the priests appointed to serve at the altar, hence could not serve at an earthly altar. 
- or in an earthly sanctuary. The law was in force as long as he was on earth and that excluded him. 5, 
Who serve unto the example and shadow, etc. The service of the priests and of the temple is after 
the example of, and a shadowing forth of heavenly things. See . that thou make all things, 
ete. A pattern was shown Moses. All must be made after that pattern (Exod. 25: 40). Hence the taber- 
nacle made according to that plan shadowed forth heavenly things. The earthly high priest was a typé of 
the great high priest in the heavens. 6. Now hath he obtained a more excellent ministry. More 
excellent than that of the Levitical priesthood. He serves in the heavenly sanctuary. Mediator of a 
better covenant. The high priest was a mediator, interceding with God for the people. Christ is the 
mediator of the better covenant with its more glorious promises; viz., the Gospel. "7%. For if that 
first covenant. The covenant of Sinai, the Law of Moses, the Old Testament. It was faulty and could 
not make men perfect. See note on chapter 7: 18. 

8-12. I will make a new covenant. By the mouth of Jeremiah (31: 34) the Lord declared that he: 
would make a new covenant which would take the place of the old covenant. This shows that the old did 
not meet the full needs of men. 9. Not according to the covenant, etc. It shall differ from the 
covenant of Sinai made while the Lord was leading Israel up trom Egypt. Because they continued 
not in my covenant. Israel had broken the covenant, and been unfaithful. 10. This is the cove-- 
nant that,ete. This shall be a principle of the new covenant. I will put my laws‘in their mind, 
Under the new covenant the minds and hearts shall be given to the Lord and filled with his law. They 
shall “worship in spirit and truth.” Write them in their hearts. Instead of upon tables of stone. 


Ch. IX.] HEBREWS. 317 





11 And? they shall not teach every man _ his Biter (nese. Gays 6a set 


neighbour, and every man his brother, saying,| I will put my laws into 
Know the Lord: for all shall know me, from the| nd‘on their heart also 
least to the greatest. will I write them: 


: 5 : . And I will be to them a 
12 For I will be merciful to their unrighteous- Fate oR ee 
ness, and their sins and their inquities will I re- puecsesask ee 


- And they shall not teach 11 
member no more. every man his fellow- 


13 In that he saith, A new covenant, he hath| citizen, nes 
made the first old. Now that which decayeth and| “ey °ssWae ne the 
waxeth old ts ready to vanish away. Lord: 


For all shall know me, 
From the least to the 


greatest of them. 
CHAPTER IX. : A I will be Pou to 12 
‘ eir iniquities, 
The Old and New Testament. And thelf sins will I re- 


. Ae member no more. 
‘SUMMARY.—The Tabernacle. Its Furniture. The Significance of Its} In that he saith, A new 13 


Service. The Greater Tabernacle and Its High Priest. The Two Tes- | covenant, he hath made the 


taments. When the New Testament Came into Force. The Dedication wenn a shat woke 
of the First Testament. Thisa Pattern of Heavenly Things. Christ, | eth aged is nigh unto van- 


Our High Priest, Hath Entered the Perfect Tabernacle. ishing away. 


; : HAP 
1 Then verily the first covenant had also ordi-| wow Cee ine ertiove- 


x — ; b , nant had ordinances of di- 
nances of divine service, and” a worldly sanctuary. | 7am sve ae ee 
2 For® there was a tabernacle made; the first, | tuary, a sanctuary of this 


5 : world. For there was a 2 
wherein was the candle-stick, and the* table, and | tabernacle prepared, the 


ws 5 j 12 QQ a , first, wherein were the can- 
the shew-bread; which is called the Sanctuary. Gicctice we the Live ad 
3 And® after the second veil, the tabernacle the shew-bread; which is , 
which is called the Holiest of all; after the coghed Gale dee 
: tabernacle which is called 
4 Which had the golden censer, and the ark of | fab an eg 
the covenant overlaid round about with gold, |a golden censer, and the 


é ark of the covenant over- 
wherein was‘ the gold pot that had manna,® and_| jaidround about with gold, 


e i S h wherein was a golden pot 
Aaron eae that budded, and® the tables of the holding. ‘the manna, dna 
4 ° aron’s ro at budded, 
OTST and the tables of the cove- 


- 





—_—_$$— 
. 54: 133 John 6:45; 1John 2:27. 6 Ex. 25:8. cEx.26:1. d@ Lev. 24:5. eEx.40:3. fEx.16:33. g Num. 
i alate : 17:10. AEx. 25:16; Deut. 10: 2,5; 2 Chron. 5:10. 








11. They shall not teach every man his neighbor. Under the old covenant children were born into 
covenant relation. As they grew up they had to be taught of the Lord, or they would never know him. 
As a matter of fact many did not learn to know him, But under the new covenant all must learn to know 
‘God and the Son whom he hath sent before they can enter the covenant. Every one must enter by faith in 
Christ, repentance of sin, and surrender to the will of God. Hence all members of the new covenant 
know God, from the least unto the greatest. 12. For Iwill be merciful, etc. When they enter 
into covenant relation through the Gospel every sin will be blotted out. 

18. In that he saith, a new covenant. This language implies that the other covenant, the one 
made at Sinai, is the old covenant. That which . . waxeth old. This language implies that the 
old covenant is to pass away. That it has done so is shown in the next chapter. 

1-5. The first covenant had also ordinances of divine service. The two covenants, the Mosaic 
-and the Christian, have been named in chapter 8. Here they are contrasted. The first, or Mosaic had its 
ordinances, and a sanctuary, or tabernacle of worship in this world. 2. For there was a tabernacle 

made. The tabernacle prepared at Sinai. See Exod. chapter 26. The first. The first room, or division, 
ealled the holy place. Wherein was the candlestick. See Exod. 25: 31-40. It was made of gold and 
bad seven lamps for burning olive oil. Our space will not allow a discussion of the symbolical meaning 
of the furniture. Also in the holy place was a table on which were kept twelve loaves of bread, called 
shew bread. This table was overlaid with gold. See Lev. 24:5-9, 3. After the second vail. The first 
vail was over the door into the holy place. The second vail separated the holy place from the-Most Holy 
“Place, the innermost recess, the Holiest Place in the worship of Israel. 4, Which had the golden 


318 HEBREWS. 





5 And? over it the cherubims of glory shadowing 
the mercy-seat; of which we cannot now speak 
particularly. 

6 Now when these things were thus ordained,” the 
priests went always into the first tabernacle, accom- 
plishing the service of God: 

7 But into the second went the high priest alone® 
once every year, not without blood, which he offer- 
ed for himself, and for the errors of the people: 

8 The? Holy Ghost this signifying, that the® way 
into the holiest of all was not yet made manifest, 
while as the first tabernacle was yet standing: 

9 Which was a figure for the time then present, 
in which were offered both gifts and sacrifices,* 
that could not make him that did the service per- 
fect, as pertaining to the conscience; 

10 Which stood only in? meats and drinks, and® 
divers washings,'! and carnal ordinances, imposed 





[Gh, IX. 


nant; and above it cheru- 5 
bim of glory evershadow- 
ing the merecy-seat; of 
which things we cannot 
now speak severally. Now 6 
these things having been 
thus prepared, the priests 
go in continually into the 
first tabernacle, accom- 
plishing the services; but 7 
into the second the a 
priest alone, once in the 
year, not without blood, 
which he offereth for him- 
self, and for the errors of 
the people: the Holy Ghost 8 
this signifying, that the 
way into the holy place 
hath not yet been made 
manifest, while as the first 
tabernacle is yet standing; 
which tis a parable for the 9 
time now present; accord- 
ing to which are offered 
both gifts and sacrifices 
that cannot, as touching 
the conscience, make the 
worshipper perfect, being 
only (with meats and 
drinks and divers wash- 








5 5 mi ings) carnal ordinances, 
on them until the time of reformation. imposed until a time of ref- 
ormation. 
a Ley. 16:2. 6 Num. 28:3; Dan. 8:11. c¢ Ex. 30:10. d Heb. 10:19. eJohn 14:6. fGal.3:21. g Rom. 14:17. 
hNum. 19:7. iEph. 2:15. 





censer. The critics are divided whether the word rendered censer refers to the golden censer or to the 
altar of incense. Both our versions have adopted censer, which is probably correct. In the golden censer 
was burned incense in the Most Holy Place, when the High Priest entered it once a year (Ley. 16: 12). 
The altar of incense stood against the vail of the Most Holy Place. The ark of the covenant. See 
Exod. 25: 10-16. This chest, made of acacia wood and overlaid with gold, was the most sacred thing in the 
tabernacle. Wherein was the golden pot that had manna (Exod. 16: 32-34). Aaron’s rod (Num. 
17: 1-11). The tables of the covenant (Deut. 10: 1-5). The two stone tables of the law. All these but. 
the tables had been removed before the temple was built (1 Kings 8: 9). Many hold that they were by the 
ark, not in it. See Deut. 31: 26; Num.17: 10. The ark itself disappeared when the temple was destroyed 
by Nebuchadnezzar. 5. And overit the cherubim. These symbolic figures, made of gold, hovered 
over the lid of the ark, called the mercy seat. Cannot now speak particularly. Cannot discuss the 
significance of each of these objects. The cherubim were angels. See Gen. 3: 29. 

6-10. The priests goin continually. The present tense used in the Greek asin the Revision. The 
temple, which was a copy of the tabernacle, was still standing when the Epistle was written. Into the 
first tabernacle. Into the holy place. The priests went in every day in the service. 7. Butinto the 
second. Into the second part, the Most Holy Place, none entered but the high priest alone, he only once 
a year at the feast of the atonement, and then carrying the blood of the atonement, which he offered for his. 
own sins as well as those of the people. See Ley. 16: 11-15; Exod. 30; 10-25. The errors of the people. 
Their sins of ignorance and mistakes. High handed, open defiance of God’s law was not atoned for. 
8. The Holy Ghost this signifying. The divine arrangement, which suffered only the high priest to 
enter into the Holiest of all, signified that the way into the Holy of Holies above had not yet been 
made manifest or revealed to men, It required the Gospel to open the way. The vail was yet over the 
mystery of redemption. While as the first tabernacle was yet standing. So long as the first 
tabernacle or temple worship stood as the divine service, the true and living way opened up through Christ 
was not made manifest. Even the high priest himself could go to the “ mercy seat”? only once a year. 9. 
Which was a figure. The Jewish rites were not the true and complete divine service but only figures, 
types. The gifts and sacrifices were symbols. Nor could they make the worshiper perfect. They 
could not cleanse him from all sin, deliver him from all fear, and make his conscience clear. They were 
not perfect sacrifices but pointed to the perfect sacrifice. The Jewish sacrifices only removed ceremonial 
impurities and sins of ignorance. 10. Being only. See the Reyision, which is much clearer. These 
rites were all only carnal ordinances. They pertained to the flesh, were outward, did not renew the 
spirit, and were temporal, imposed until the time of reformation. That is, until the new covenant 
was ushered in. Divers washings. “Baptisms” in the Greek. Immersions of the whole body were 





Ch. IX.] HEBREWS. 319 
¢ . . . ° \ G 
11 But Christ being come an high priest of* good igh past, Hayne conan at 
things to come,” by a greater and more perfect things to come, through 
tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not ject°iabernacle, not made 
of this buildings EE ie 
12 Neither by the blood of goats and calves, but* | yet through the blood of 
by his own blood, he entered in? once into the holy | fhrougn his own blood, en 
place, having® obtained eternal redemption for us. Moe BE Pama 
13 Fort if the blood of bulls and of goats, and’ tained eternal redemption. 
the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean, and pulls, and the aes a 
sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh; ee hee bi ieee. 
14 How much more? shall the blood of Christ,' sanctity {unto the cleanness 
who through the eternal Spirit offered) himself more Chee ieee 
without spot to God, purge“ your conscience from | Christ, onesie nea: 
dead' works™ to serve the living God? self, without blemish unto 
15 And® for this cause he is the mediator of the science from dead works to 
new testament, that? by means of death, for the | setvethe living God And 15. 
redemption of the transgressions that were under diator of a new covenact, 
the first testament, they? which are called might pince for seresec tae 
receive the promise of eternal inheritance. Whe ,, Bapsgronsions ” (hak 
16 For where a testament zs, there must also of nant, they that have been 
necessity be the death of the testator. orelaisa oe tho eer, alvin? 








6 Heb. 8:2. cRev.1:5. d Zech. 3:9. e Dan. 9:24. f Lev. 16:14. gNum.19:2. k1lJohni1: q. 
~Rom. 1; 4; 1 Pet. 3:18. jEph.2:5. kHeb.1:3. 7Heb. 6:1. m Luke 1: 74. 
nm1Tim.2:5. o Rom. 3: 25; 1Pet.3:18. » Heb. 3:1. 


@ Heb. 10:1. 





often required in the Jewish service. For examples see Exod. 29: 4; Lev. 16: 4; Num. 19: 7; Lev. 17: 15, 
etc. These washings were all carnal ordinances for ceremonial purification. 

11-14. But Christ being come. The tabernacle service having been described Christ’s work is now 
placed in contrast. Through a greater and more perfect tabernacle. The high priest below passed 
through the first tabernacle to the Holy of Holies; Christ, our high priest, through a greater one not 
made with hands, not a material building. What is meant? Various answers have been given, none of 
which are entirely satisfactory. It seems impossible to limit the meaning to his body, or to the church, or 
to the world, as some have done. Rather the reference is to the rites of the true and great tabernacle 
service by which ‘‘ good things,” heavenly blessings are secured, in contrast with those of the earthly 
tabernacle. The earthly high priest, by complying with its rites, which were only a figure, entered into the 
Holiest of all; Christ by his sacrifice, the rites of the greater tabernacle service, entered into the true 
Holiest of all of which the earthly most holy place was only asymbol. It is shown in the next verse that. 
the reference is to the sacrifice by which he entered. 12. By hisown blood. The high priest always 
carried into the Most Holy Place the blood of the atonement, but Christ carried his own blood when he 
entered the Holy of Holies above. Obtained eternal redemption. By his offering. His ransom 
was complete, and for all time. 18. For if the blood of bulls and goats. This was shed for the 
purification of the people on the day of atonement. The ashes of an heifer. See Num. 19: 21. The 
red heifer was burned, the ashes were put in water, and this water sp:inkled on the people for their cere- 
monial purification. 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ. If the blood of animals had 
any efficacy to purify, how much more the blood of Christ? Through the eternal Spirit. Led by the 
Divine Spirit. He was dragged to the sacrifice like the victims, but laid down his own life to take it up 
again. This he did as God’s Anointed, anointed with the Spirit, acting by its power. Your con- 
science from dead works. Cleanse it from the guilt of works which deserve death. To serve the 
living God? If the sacrifices of the tabernacle cleansed from ceremonial pollution so that men could 
engage in its service, will not the blood of Christ cleanse you so that you can join in the acceptable service 
of the living God? 

15. For this cause he is the mediator of the new covenant. Covenant here rather than testa- 
ment. Diatheekee means both ‘‘covenant”’ and “testament,” but here ‘“‘mediator” shows that covenant 
is referred to. That by means of death. His owndeath. Transgressions that were under the 
first covenant. None under the old covenant could have complete redemption except by the death of 
Christ. Those who served God under it offered sacrifices which were types of Christ’s sacrifice, but they 


320 HEBREWS. 





(Ch. IX. 


. P heritance. For where a 16 
17 For? a testament is of ee ean si ae testament is, there must of 
ad: Pw igh al reng e | uecessity be the death o 
dead: otherwise it 1s of no strength at all while gs Pee eG 
seg er ee, ok oat 
18 Whereupon’ neither the first testament was) goth itever avail while he 
dedicated without blood. ee ra 18 
19 For when Moses had spoken every precept to hath not been dedicated | 
7 thou ood. For when 
all the people according to the law, he took the | yey -"Gommandment had 
blood of calves and of goats,° with water, and Pet ene pe 
scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled both the | to the law, he took the 
book and all the people, eta wien grater tae 
20 Saying,’ This zs the blood of the testament Searles wool and BySsOp, 
‘which God hath enjoined unto you. book itself, and all the peo- 
21 Moreover,’ he sprinkled likewise with blood | ple Saving, This is the 20 
a : f the min-! which God commanded to 
both the tabernacle, and all the vessels 0 on Oe 
istry. tabernacle and all jthe ves: 
5 1 sels 0 e ministry € 
22 And almost a ee et by ay Ee pee sprinkled in ike juanner 
i 3 ood 18 NO| with the blood. And ac- 
with peo and without’! shedding o Sording Yo the ad may 
Temission. almost say, all things are 
23 It was therefore necessary that the® patterns | jeans d eee edine vot 
of things in the heavens should be purified with | blood thereisno remission. | 
these; but the heavenly things themselves with fore that the eopies of the 
A ; things in e eavens 
better sacrifices than these. A should be cleansed with 
24 For Christ is not entered into the holy places these; but the heavenly 
made with hands,which are the figures of the true; hetter saeriices than these, 
° Cre i 7 rag | For Christ entered not into 
but into heaven itself, now to’ appear in the pres-| 7 °hoiy place made with 
ence of God for us: hands, like in pattern to 








a Gal. 3:15. 0x. 24:6. ¢ Ex. 24: 5-8; Lev. 14:4; 16: 14; 15: 18. 


d Ex. 24:8; Matt. 26:28. e Hx. 29:12; Lev. 
8:15. fLev.17:11. gHeb.8:5.. h Heb. 6: 20. 


zi Rom. 8: 84; Heb. 7: 25; 1John 2:1. 





could not be made efficacious without Christ. Itis by his death that they which are called, of every 
dispensation, have the promise of eternal inheritance. 

16-17. For where a testament is. An inheritance has just been spoken of (verse 15). That sug- 
gests a last will and testament, one meaning of the Greek word diatheekee used in verse 15. A testament 
has no force until the testator is dead. 17. Is of force after men are dead. As soon asa man dies, 

his last will and testament comes into force, but has no force whatever while he lives. The application of 
this is that Christ’s testament, the new covenant, came into force when he died. The old covenant was in 
force to the cross; it was then ‘nailed to the cross,” and Christ having died, the New Testament came 
into force. It has been urged against this view that the making of wills was not a custom of Israel. It 
was, however the custom of the whole Roman Empire, and Judea was now a Roman province. The 
Roman customs had made provinces of the empire familiar with the use of wills. 

18-22. Neither the first testament was dedicated without blood. The death and shedding of 
the blood of Christ was necessary to the inauguration of the New Testament, as has just been shown. Even 
when the First was inaugurated Christ died in type and blood was shed. I believe that the apostle means 
to say that even in the inauguration of the Old Testament death was necessary, the death of a victim, 
which pointed to Christ’s death. 19. For when Moses. For the events alluded to see Exod. 24: 1-8. 
All that God had proclaimed in the ten commandments and the accompanying precepts (Ex. 21-23) was 
written in the book of the covenant. This was read to the people, and they promised obedience. Then 
the book and all the people were sprinkled with blood, and Moses said, 20. This is the blood of the 
testament. The covenant had been dedicated by blood. It is well to note that this covenant embraced 
the Decalogue, yet it was the covenant done away to make room for the covenant of Christ. The taber- 
nacle worship had not yet been setup. 21. Moreover he sprinkled with blood. Afterwards, about 
a year later, when the tabernacle was ready, both it and its furniture were sprinkled (Exod. 40: 9-15; Lev. 

-8:24). 22. Almostallthings. See Ley. 16: 16,19, 33. Under the law almost every thing was purified 
by blood, lest it had been defiled. Without shedding of blood there is no remission. Every sin 
-under the law required atonement, and no atonement could be made without blood. 











Ch. X.] HEBREWS. 321 
25 Nor yet that he should offer himself often, ee uret ste Ah 
as the high priest entereth into the holy place every the face of God for us: nor 25 
year with blood of others; himself often as the brah. 
26 (For then must he often have suffered since eee learn pe te 

° & a yea year 
the foundation of the world:) but now once® in the | with biscg 4ca7 BY own; 
end of the world hath he appeared, to put away sin Gren ee a ace 
-by the sacrifice of himself. Coy ee 

a eke : f he end of the ages 
27 And? as it is appointed unto men once to die, hath he been manifested to 
_ : * 3 put away sin by the sacri- 
but after this the judgment; \ fice of himself. And inas- 27 
28 So° Christ was-once? offered to bear the sing|much as it is appointed 
a unto men once to die, and 
of many: and unto them that look for him shall he after this cometh judge- 
E i . : : : ment; so Christ also, hav- 28 
appear® a second time, without sin, unto salvation. ing been once GEeiba 46 
bear the sins of many, shall 
CHAPTER X. | from sin, to them that watt 
for him, unto salvation. 
Christ’s Sacrifice Offered Once for All. ; 
“SUMMARY.—The Imperfection of the Sacrifice of the Law. In Such 
Sacrifices God Had No Pleasure. Christ’s Sacrifice Offered Once for 
All. The Holiest of All Opened by the Blood of Christ. Exhortation 
to Faithful Perseverance. If Christ is rejected, No More Sacrifice. CHAPTER X, 
k : For the law having a1 
1 For the law having‘ a shadow of good things to fhadow of the good things 
‘come, and not of the very image of the things, can age of the tnines, they can 
never with those sacrifices, which they offered year fees pone BY Ca 
by year continually, make the comers thereunto | they ” offer’ Continually, 
perfect: draw. high.” Hise would 2 
‘ ° raw nigh. 4iseé wou 
2 For then would they not have ceased to be ete toe oe 
offered? because that the worshippers once purged Shippers plu Tee eon ono 
3 5 cleansed, w 
should have had no more conscience of sins. no more ¢onseience of sins? 
@1Cor. 10:11; Eph. 1:10; Gal. 4:4; Heb. 7:27; 10:10; 1 Pet. 3:18. &Gen. 3:19; Eccl. 3:20. c Rom. 6:10. d Matt. 


26:28; Rom. 5:15; 1 Pet. 2: 24; 1John3: 5. 





e Matt. 25:34; John 14:83 Titus 2:13. f Col. 2:17. 








23-26. The patterns of things in the heavens. See chapter 8:5. The tabernacle and all its 
Service were shadows. These were purified, as we have just seen, by blood. The heavenly things 
with better sacrifices. By the heavenly things are meant all of which the tabernacle was typical. The 
holy place was a type of the church, which is cleansed with the blood of Christ. Perhaps, too, there is a 
reference to the redeemed church above, in the heavens, which eternally praises him who cleansed it with 
his blood. 24. The holy places made with hands. The tabernacle on earth. Figures of the 
true. Pictures, copies. Into heavenitself. The true Holy of Holies. There, in the presence of God, 
Christ intercedes for us, as the high priest below interceded before the Shekinah. 25. Nor yet, ete. 
The high priest entered once a year with the blood of a victim. Not so Christ, our High Priest. 26. For 
then. In that case he must have suffered many times. But now once. Only once did he offer sacri- 
fice, viz., himself. Inthe end of the world. At the end of the Jewish dispensation; literally, “‘the end 
of the ages,” the end of the antediluvian, patriarchal ane Jewish ages. 

27,28. Asitis appointed unto men once to die, etc. The fixed order for all men is to die once 
only, and to be judged after death. When they die, finality is stamped on their life work. 28. So 
‘Christ was once offered. Died once as a sin offering. But judgment followed, and he was justified 
and vindicated by his resurrection. He died once, and after it was the judgment, that made him the King 
of glory. His work of redemption was done once for all. So unto them that look for him. Allthe 
saints who desire his appearing; to them he shall appear a second time, at his second advent, sinless and 
the mighty Savior. He becomes a sin offering but once, and appears the second time without a sin 
offering, because he hath done the work once and forever. 

1-4. The Law. The law of Moses. Having a shadow of the good things to come. It did 
not contain the good things but only the shadow of them. They were typified in the law but exist in 
the gospel. Can never . . make the comers thereunto perfect. That is, free them from sin, 
and thus perfect their consciences. 2. For then would they not, etc. If the legal sacrifices 
-secured ae forgiveness, they would not have been offered over and over. The fact that it was 


322 HEBREWS. 


3 But? in those sacrifices there is a remembrance 
again made of sins every year. 

4 For it is not possible that the blood of bulls 
and of goats should take away sins. 


Ch. X. 


But in those sacrifices there 3 
is aremembrance made of 
sins year by year. For it 4 
is impossible that the blooa 
of bulls and goats should 
take away sins. Wherefore 5 


when he cometh into the 
world, he saith, 

Sacrifice and offering 
thou wouldest not, 

But a body didst thou 
prepare for me; 

In whole burnt offerings 6 
and sacrifices for sin 
thou hast no pleasure: 

Then said I, Lo, Ll am7T 


come 

(In the roll of the book 

it is written of me) 

To do thy will, O God. 
Saying above, Sacrifices 8 
and offerings and whole 
burnt ofierings and sacri- 
jices for sin thou wouldest 
not, neither hadst pleasure 
therein (the which are of- 
fered according to the 
law), then hath he said, 9 
Lo, I am.come to do thy 
will. Hetaketh away the 
first, that he may establish 
the second. By which will 10 
we have been sanctified 
through the offering of the 
body of Jesus Christ once 


5 Wherefore, when he cometh into the world, he 
saith,° Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not, but 
a body hast thou prepared me: 

6 In burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin thou 
hast had no pleasure: 

7 Then said I, Lo, I come (in the volume of the |- 
book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God. 

8 Above, when he said, Sacrifice, and offering, 
and burnt-offerings, and offering for. sin, thou 
wouldest not, neither hadst pleasure ‘therein; 
(which are offered by the law;) 

9 Then said he, Lo, I come to do thy will, O 
God. He taketh away the first, that he may estab- 
lish the second. 

10 By’ the which will we are sanctified, through 
the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. 

11 And every priest standeth daily® ministering, 


1 1 ie ol j for all. And every priest 11 
and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, which fr eect ea ee 
can never take away sins: minister aS and offering 

12 But? this man, after he had offered one sacri- cece Dis wines Gap cas 
fice for sins, for ever sat down on the right hand of | take away ns: but he, 12: 


when he had offered one 
sacrifice for sins for ever, 
sat down on the right hand 


God; 








a Ley. 16:21. 6 Micah6:6. ¢WVsa. 40:6; 50:8; eee Jer. 6:20; Amos5:21. d@John17:19. e Num. 28:3- 
FCO se 





done showed that there was still a consciousness of sin. 8. There is aremembrance, etc. Besides. 
the daily sacrifices, and the individual sacrifices, there was repeated every year the atonement for the: 
whole nation. There were daily, weekly, monthly and yearly sacrifices. 4. Itisnot possible. The 
blood of bulls and goats, the animals offered in the sacrifices, had no power to cleanse from sin. In their 
essence the only real efficacy of the bloody sacrifices of the altar was the moral effect upon the people 
and the fact that they pointed forward to the Lamb of God. 

5-10. When he cometh into the world. Since the Levitical sacrifices could not cleanse from sin, 
Christ, the Redeemer from sin, said when he entered upon his mission, Sacrifice and offering thou 
wouldést not. Quoted from Ps. 40: 6-8. Since the sacrifices and offerings of the Jewish altar did not 
meet God’s will. A body hast thou prepared me for an offering. This is Christ’s offering. 6. In 
burnt offerings. Burnt offerings were wholly consumed. See Ley. 1: 17. Sacrifices for sin. See 

| Ley. 4:1t05: 13. They were so called because of their special reference to sin. In neither had God 

pleasure; that is, they did not fully meet his will. 7. Then said I, Lo, I come. The Psalmist 

represents Christ, who comes simply to do the will of God, completely surrendered to his will. In the 

volume of the book. In the roll of the law it is written of me; that is, there Lam predicted. 8, 9, 

Then said he. He said, first, “The Levitical sacrifices do not please God;” then he said, second; Lo, I 
come to do thy will. This is pleasing to God. Hence he taketh away the first, the old covenant 
with its saerfices, and establishes the second, the new covenant inaugurated by complete submission to 
the will of God. 10. By which will we are sanctified. By this complete submission our sins are- 
removed from us and we are made holy. The meaning of “‘sanctified” here is remission of sins. Through 
the offering. In Christ’s surrender his body was offered on the cross, once for all for sin, and by that. 
offering our sins are remitted. 

11-14. Every priest standeth daily ministering. Christ offered his sacrifice “once for all,’” 
put Levitical priests offer daily their sacrifices which can never take away sins. 12. But.this 
man. Jesus, after . » . one sacrifice, himself on the cross, sat down, which implies that he: 


Ch. exej HEBREWS. 


13 From henceforth expecting till? his enemies 
be made his footstool. 

14 For by one offering he hath perfected for 
ever them that are sanctified; 

15 Whereof "the Holy Ghost also is a witness to 
us: for after that he said before, 

16 This® 7s the covenant that I will make with 
them after those days, saith the Lord; I will put 
my laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I 
write them; 

17 And their sins and iniquities will I remember 
no more. 

18 Now, where remission of these 7s, there és no 
more offering for sin. 

19 Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter 
into the holiest by the blood of J esus, 

20 By“ a new and living way, which he hath con- 
secrated for us through the vail, that is to say, his 
flesh; 

21 And having an high priest over® the house of 
God; ’ 

22 Let us draw near with a true heart,‘ in full 
assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled 
from.an evil conscience, and our? bodies washed 





323 


of God; from henceforth 13 
expecting till his enemies 
be made the footstool of 
his feet. For by one offer- 14 
ing he hath perfected for 
ever them that are sancti- 
fied. And the Holy Ghost 15 
also beareth witness to us: 
for after he hath said, 
This is the covenant that 16 
I will make with them 
After those days, saith 
the Lord; 
I will put my laws on 
their heart, 
And upon their mind also 
will I write them; 
then saith he, 
And their sins and their 17 
iniquities will I remem- 
ber no more. 


_| Now where remission of 1% 


these is, there is no more 
offering for sin. 

Having therefore, breth- 19 
ren, boldness to enter into 
the holy place by the blood 
of Jesus, by the way which 20 
he dedicated for us, a new 
and living way, through 
the veil, that is to say, his 
flesh; and having a great 24 
priest over the house of 
God; let us draw near with 22 
a true heart in fulness of 
faith, having our hearts 
sprinkled from an evil con- 
science, and our body 
washed with pure water: 


with pure water. 











62 Pet.1: 21. cJer. 31:33. 


3: 21; James 1: 6. 


@ Psa. 110: 1. d@ John 10: 9; 14:6; Heb. 9:8. e1 Tim.3:15. Ff Eph. 3:12; 1John 


g Ezek. 36: 25; 2 Cor. 7:1 





needeth to make no more offerlng. On the right hand of God. Honored forever. 18. From 
henceforth expecting. Waiting until every enemy is conquered. See note on1;13. 14. For by 
one offering, that of the cross, he hath perfected forever. Given them perfect consciences free 
from a sense of the guilt of sin. Them that are sanctified. All Christ’s brethren are sanctified 
(2; 11); so are all whose sins are forgiven (verse 10, also verse 29); all saints are sanctified (1 Cor. 1: 23 
hence all Christians are called the “sanctified.” Cg 

15-18. Whereof the Holy Ghost is also a witness. It testifies that Christ perfects the sancti- 
fied. See, too, that it bears witness in words. It spokein Jeremiah the prophet. 16,17. This is the 
covenant, etc, See Jeremiah 31: 33,34; also notes on 8:10. Their sing and iniquities will I 
remember no more. It is thus God “perfects the sanctified,” by forgiving all their sins. 18. Where 
remission of these is. Hence, since there is complete remission, no more offering for sin is required. 

19-22. Having therefore, brethren, boldness. It has now been shown that Christ has, as our 
high priest, opened the way into the holiest of all, the heavens, for us. Hence we may follow with 
boldness. We have the assurance of heaven. 20. By a new and living way. Christ is the way. 
The way for us is not only pointed out but opened through his flesh. His rent body poured out the 
redeeming blood, and thus the veil before the holiest of all was rent open that we might enterin, For 
us the rent veil is the body of Christ. 21. And having an high priest. Our high priest hath 
opened the way by rending the veil. He is priest over the House of God, the church on earth, and our 
high priest in the Holiest of all above. 22. Let us draw near, the altar of incense, the open veil, 
and to God who dwelleth in the Holiest of all. With atrue heart. Sincere and pure heart. In full 
assurance of faith. Filled with trust in our high priest. Our hearts sprinkled from an evil 
conscience. By the blood of Christ through which we realize that our sins are forgiven. Our bodies 
washed with pure water. See Titus 3:5,and Acts 22:16. Alford, Prof. Stuart, Delitzch, Moll, 
Meyer and most commentators refer the passage to baptism. That is undoubtedly the thought of the 
sacred writer; the heart and spirit are cleansed by the blood of Christ and the body sanctified by washing 
in pure water, effecting the purification of the whole man. 


324 HEBREWS. 


23 Let us hold fast the profession of our faith 
without wavering; (for he* zs faithful that prom- 
ised; 

24 a let us consider one another, to provoke 
unto love, and to good works: 

25 Not” forsaking the assembling of ourselves 
together, as the manner of some 7s; but exhorting 
one another: and® so much the more, as ye see? the 
day approaching. 

26 For® if we sin wilfully* after that we have 
received the knowledge cf the truth, there remain- 
eth no more sacrifice for sins, 

27 But a certain fearful looking for of judgment, 
andé fiery indignation, which shall devour the ad- 
versaries. 

28 He that despised Moses’ law died without 
mercy under two or three witnesses; 

29 Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, 
shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden 
under foot the Son of God, and hath® counted the 
blood of the covenant, wherewith he. was sanctified, 
an unholy thing,' and hath done despite unto the 
Spirit of grace? 

30 For we know him that hath said, Vengeance! 
belongeth unto me, I will recompense, saith the 
Lord. And again,* The Lord shall judge his 
people. 

31 Jt! 7s a fearful thing to fall into the hands of 
the living God. 


@1Cor. 1:9; 10:18; 1 Thes. 5:24; 2 Thes. 3:3. 
J2 Pet. 2:20. g Ezek. 86:5. 








6 Acts 2:42. 
#1 Cor. 11:29. 


c Rom. 13:11, 


t Matt. 12:31. j Deut. 32°35. 





[Ch.X. 


let us hold fast the confes- 23 
sion of our hope that it 
waver not: for he is faith- 
ful that promised: and let 24 
us consider one another to 
provoke unto love and 
good works; not forsaking 25 
the assembling of ourselves 
together, as the custom of 
some is, but exhorting one 
another; and so much the 
more, as ye see the day 
drawing nigh. 

For if we sin wilfully 26 
after that we have received 
the knowledge of the truth, 
there remaineth no more a 
sacrifice for sins, but a cer- 27 
tain fearful expectation of 
judgement, and a fierce- 
ness Of fire which shall de- 
vour the adversaries. A 28 
man that hath set at 
nought Moses’ law dieth 
without compassion on the 
word of two or three wit- 
nesses: of how much sorer 29 
punishment, think ye, shall 
he be judged worthy, who 
hath trodden under foot 
the Son of God, and hath 
counted the blood of the 
eovenant, wherewith he 
was sanctified, an unholy 
thing, and hath done de- 
spite unto the Spirit of 
grace? For we know him 380 
that said, Vengeance be- 
longeth unto me, I will 
recompense. And again, 
The Lord shall judge his 
people. It is a fearful 31 
thing to fall into the hands 
of the living God, 





@2 Pet. 3:9. eNum. 15:30; 1 John 5:16. 
k Psa. 50: 4. 


Z Luke 12:5. 





28. Let us hold fast. The thought is, cling to the faith professed and the hope in the soul without 


wavering. 


24,25. Consider one another. Let each care for others and exhort others to love and to good 


works both by word and example. 


25. Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves. 


In times of 


persecution there was a great temptation to stay away from the church assembles, and some had fallen 
into this dangerous neglect. As ye see the day approaching. ‘There were signs that the Hebrew 
Christians could see that the day was near at hand. They probably thought that Christ would come in 
_ person at that day. He did come in judgment on the Jewish nation. As that awful time of trial seemed 
near at hand they should be zealous in exhorting each other. Macknight, Stuart, Milligan, Meyer and 
many others refer ‘‘ day ” to the destruction of the Jewish nation. i 

26-31. For if we sin wilfully. Deliberately trample under foot Christ’s will; apostatize from 
the faith in life. Remaineth no more sacrifice. We have, in that case, rejected Christ, the only 
sacrifice for sin. 2’7. There remains instead a looking for of judgment. Cut off from hope of 
salvation by rejecting Christ, one has only judgment and punishment to look forward to. 28. Hethat 
despised Moses’ law. He who wilfully rebelled against the law of Moses had no remission. When 
proved guilty by two or three witnesses his fate was death. See Num. 15: 30-36; Deut. 13: 6-10. There 
was mercy for the ignorant, the mistaken, those ‘‘overtaken,”? but not for the deliberate despiser. 29. 
Of how much: sorer punishment, Where much is given much is required. How great the sin of 
the apostate! Trodden under foot the Son of God. Despised him instead of Moses. Counted 
the blood of the covenant, the blood of Christ, the blood by which he was sanctified (cleansed 
from the guilt of sin), treated this blood as if it was unholy. Done despite unto the spirit of 


Ch. X.] HEBREWS. 


325 


a a ee 


32 But* call to remembrance the former days, in 
which, after ye were illuminated, ye endured” a 
great fight of afflictions; 

33 Partly, whilst ye were made a gazingstock, 
both by reproaches and afflictions; and partly, 
Mee ye° became companions of them that were so 
used. 

34 For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, 
and* took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, 
knowing in yourselves that ye have in heaven a 
better and an enduring substance. 

35 Cast not away therefore your confidence, 
which hath great reeompence of reward. 

36 For® ye have need of patience, that, after ye 
have done the will of God,‘ ye might receive the 
promise. 

37 For? yet a little while, and he® that shall come 
will come, and will not tarry. 

38 Now, the just shall live by faith: but if any 
man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in 
him. 


But call to remembrance 32 
the former days, in which, 
after ye were enlightened 
ye endured a great conflic 
of sufferings ; partly, being 33 
made a gazingstock both 
by reproaches and afflic- 
tions ; and partly, becomin 
partakers with them tha 
were so used. For ye both 34 
had compassion on them 
that were in bonds, and 
took joyfully the spoiling 
of your possessions, know- 
ing that ye yourselves have 
a better possession and an 
abiding one. Cast not away 35 
therefore your boldness, 
which hath great recom- 
ee of reward. For ye 36 

ave need of patience, that, 
having done the will of 
God, ye may receive the 
promise. . 

For yet a very little 37 

while, 

He that cometh, shall 
come, and shall not 
tarry. 

But my righteous one 38 
shall live by faith: 

Andif he shrink back,my 
soul hath no pleasure 
in him. 

But we are not of them 39 


that shrink back unto per- 
dition; but of them that 
have faith unto the saving 
of the soul. 


39 But we are not of them who draw back unto 
perdition; but of them that believe to the saving of 
the soul. 


6 Col. 2:1. 





a Gal. 3:4. ePhil. 1:7. dMatt.5:12. eLuke21:19. fCol.3:24. gLukel8:8. hk Heb. 2:3, 4. 





grace. Rejected all the work, the words, the preaching, the pleadings of the Holy Spirit. 30. We 
know him that hath said. We know what God hath said. He promises vengeance and judgment 
upon sinners. Vengeance. See Deut. 32:35, The Lord shalljudge. See Deut. 32: 36. 81. Itisa 
fearful thing, ete. <A fearful thing for the sinner who has despised God’s mercy; for the apostate who 
has trampled it under foot. 

82-36. Call to remembrance the former days. Some former day of persecution, after they 
were enlightened (Revision) by the gospel. Possibly the great persecution at the death of Stephen is 
referred to, or that of Acts 12:1-3. 338. Madea gazing stock. Looked upon with reproach, abused 
and afflicted personally, Companions. Sharing the suffering of those who were persecuted. 84 
For ye had compassion on them in bonds (Revision). And actively showed their sympathy. 
Took joyfully the spoiling of your goods. The losses made necessary by becoming Christians 
Knowing. Knowing that if they lost on earth they would gain in heaven. 35. Cast not away 
therefore. In as much as formerly ye endured so well, be faithful now. Some great period of trial was 
' evidently being endured. 36. For ye have need of patience. Patience is an essential element of 
patient endurance. See Rom. 5: 3-5. 

37-39. For yet a little while. Quoted from Habakkuk, chapter 2, and applied to Christ. Soon 
Christ will come, either in person or by his providence, in such a way as to bring relief. He did thus 
come very soon after and ended Jewish persecution by the overthrow of the nation. This is a frequent 
sense of the oft-repeated allusions to the coming of the Lord found both in the Old and New Testaments: 
See Habakkuk, chapter2. The passage there quoted refers to the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchad- 
nezzar, and is here applied to the destruction by the Romans. 88. Now the just shall live by faith. 
Hab 2:4. Those who continued to walk in the full assurance of faith (verse 22) shall live by faith. If 
any man draw back. He who draws back through fear, or because of trial, in him God hath no 
pleasure. See Ps.5:4. 39. But we are not of them. The apostle has confidence that the Hebrew 
saints are of those who “shall live by faith” rather than of those who draw back to perdition. He that 


draweth back is lost. 


326 HEBREWS. 





CHAPTER XI. 
Living by Faith. 


SuMMARY.—Faith Explained. The Faith of the Elders. Remarkable 
Examples of Ancient Faith. All Seeking for a Better Country. The 
Victories of Faith. The Sufferings Endured by Faith. Christians 
Exhorted to Follow These Glorious Examples. 


1 Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, 
the evidence’ of things not seen. 

2 For by it the elders obtained a good report. 

3 Through faith we understand that the worlds” 
were framed by the word of God; so that things 
which are seen were not made of things which do 
appear. 

4 By faith® Abel offered unto God a more excel- 
lent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained wit- 
ness that he was righteous, God testifying of his 
gifts; and by it he, being dead, yet speaketh. 

5 By faith? Enoch was translated that he should 
not see death; and was not found, because God had 
translated him: for before his translation he had 
this testimony, that he pleased God. 

6 But® without faith ¢¢ 7s impossible to please 
him: for he that cometh to God must believe that 
he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that 
diligently seek him. 

7 By faitht Noe, being warned of God of things 





(Ch. XI. 


CHAPTER XI. 


Now faith is the assur- 
ance of things hoped for 
the proving of things not 
seen. For therein the eld- 
ers had witness borne to 
them. By faith we under- 
stand that the worlds have 
been framed by the word 
of God, so that what is 
seen hath not been made 
out of things which do ap- 
pear. By faith Abel offered 
unto God amore excellent 
sacrifice than Cain,through 
which he had _ witness 
borne to him that he was 
righteous,God bearing wit- 
ness in respect of his gifts: 
and through it he being 
dead yet speaketh. By faith 
Enoch was translated that 
he should not see death; 
and he was not found, be- 
cause God translated him: 
for before his translation 
he hath had witness borne 
to him that he had been 
well-pleasing unto God: 
and without faith it is im- 
possible to be well-pleasing 
unto him. for he that com- 
eth to God must believe 
that heis, and that heisa 
rewarder of them that seek 
after him. By faith Noah, 
being warned of God con- 
cerning things not seen 
as yet, moved with godly 





a Rom. 8:24. dJohn1:3. ¢cGen.4:4. d Gen. 5: 22. 


e John 3: 18, 36. 


* Gen. 6:13. 





is) 


5 


for) 


4 


1-3. Faith is the substance. The old meaning of substance, as well as of Hupostasis, the Greek 
word here used, is ‘‘stand under,” that is to be a foundation. Faith is the foundation on which all our 
hopes for the future are built. The evidence. Rather, the conviction or persuasion of things not seen. 
Without faith we would be limited to the very narrow world comprehended by the senses. 2. For by it 
the elders, ete. The ancient men of God, through faith, so lived, that they have obtained a good name. 
8. Through faith we understand, etc. The creation of the world is among “the things not seen,” 
and all our knowledge of it rests upon our faith in the word of God. Indeed, our knowledge of all past 
history depends upon faith. 

4-7. Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain. See the account of Gen. 
4: 1-5. Abel’s faith was probably shown in offering just such a sacrifice as the Lord demanded, while Cain 
made an offering according to his own ideas. Obtained witness. In some way the Lord testified his 
approval of Abel’s sacrifice, and showed his disapproval of Cain’s, perhaps by sending fire to consume 
Abel’s. By it. By his faith. His faith speaks to all ages. 5. By faith Enoch was translated. 
See Gen. 5: 24; also Jude 14. His faithfulness was rewarded by a translation to heaven without first 
becoming a victim of death. Had this testimony. The testimony is that he “‘ walked with God,” and 
God took him, because he was pleased with him. 6. But without faith it is impossible, ete. Man 
cannot please God without faith because in unbelief he cannot do what is pleasing to God. To please God 
we must come to him in the appointed ways, but this cannot be done without belief in his existence and 
trust in his blessings. 7% By faith Noah. See Gen. 6: 13-22. When he was divinely warned of a com- 
ing deluge he believed it, simply upon the word of God. Now observe how his faith acted. (1) He was 
moved by fear; (2) he prepared the ark as God had directed. His faith moved him to obedience. Con- 
demned the world. The example of his faith was a rebuke to all who were not moved by it. The man 
who gives heed to God by his conduct condemns those who refuse to heed him. Became heir. It was 
by the obedience of faith (Rom. 1: 5) that he became an heir of the blessings vouchsafed to those who are 
eounted righteous through faith. See Rom. 1: 17. 


Ch. XI.) HEBREWS. 








327 


not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark | fear, prepared an ark to 
to the saving of his house; by the which he con- Pr kaaeh he pie 
demned the world, and became heir of *the right- ee a. ionteben 
% . . . y eous- 
eousness which is by faith. ness which is according to 
8 By faith Abraham, when he was called to go| when ee allah ovens 
out into a place which he should after pecoiwer fOr)” eyo vaste secsics tok 
wea cre ] A receive for 
an inheritance, obeyed; and he went out, not know-|an_ inheritance; and he 
ing whither he went. werner 1 Sees By ath 9 
9 By faith he sojourned in the land of PLOMige,,| Be, eeaNe > seloumnee 
as in a strange country, dwelling in” tab leg lian not Wis own, dwelling 
: g Vs we. ing Jn abernacles | /and not his own, eos | 
with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him in the Be ot an 
same promise: . a sae same promise: for 10 
. . 1 0. r i 
_10 For he looked for a city which hath founda- which hath $id edna 
tions, whose builder and maker ¢s God. Hons, neg: pan 
11 Through faith also’ Sara herself received | even Sarah herself received 
strength to conceive seed, and® was delivered of a Phen she was past eg 
child when she was past age, because she judged BIDS, one Poe aloed: 
him faithful who had promised. wherefore | also, there 12 
a Lg ea : spra one, a m a 
12 Therefore sprang there even of one, and* him Sods ae end, a ree as 
as good as dead, so many as the stars of the sky in | ihe stars of ncaa end, 
multitude, and as the sand which is by the seashore | which is Wy ehoeen shore, 
innumerable... ‘innese all died in faith 
7 h, 13 
13 These all died in faith, not having® received ene ET gine 
the promises, but having seen them afar off, and | them and greoted: ine 
oe persuaded of them, and embraced them, and™ ressed “that they. Sere 
sse ng r i i strangers and pilgrims on 
confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims 00 | tne earth. For they that 14 
the earth. say such things make it 
. , ° if t ey are 
ae For they that say such things declare? plainly secking after, a country of 
; eir own. And if indeed 15 
t at they seek a country. Z they had been mindful of 
15 And truly, if they had been mindful of that that country {rom_ which 
a ey we out, ey wo 
country from whence they came out, they might tas Bad poportinity, 1 
have had the opportunity to have returned: ; 
.a Rom. 3: 22; Phil. 3:9. bGen. 12:8. ¢ Rey. 21:22. d@Gen.17:19. e Luke 1:36. jf Rom. 4:19. g John 8: 56. 


h Gen. 47:9. %@Heb. 13:14. 


8-12. By faith Abraham. 


to go where he should be led. In obedience to this call he obeyed through f 


action of faith. 9. By faith he sojourned in the land of promise. 
promised to him and his seed; dwelling 
God. Heirs . . of the same promise. See 
city which hath foundations. Not only fora 
above in the eternal city, the New Jerusalem. Builder 
only projected the plans of 
‘OT: 15-21; 18: 11-14; 21: 1, 2. Far beyond 


even of one, and him as good as dead. From an old man, 
powers were dead, a people. As the stars of the sky in multitude. 
are used to express a vast multitude. 

13-16. These all died in faith. All the patriarch 


as did Isaac and Jacob, in tents, 
Gen. 26: 3, 4; 27: 4, 13, 14. 10. For he looke 
permanent home for his seed in Can 
and maker. Architect and maker. God not 
the eternal city but has executed them. 11. Faith also Sarah. See Gen. 
the years of child bearing, yet by f 


strength to bear the child of promise. She was about ninety years old. 12. 
a hundred years old, whose re 


See Deut.1: 10. These figures 


See Gen. 11: 31; 12: 1-4. While in Ur of the Chaldees he was commanded 
aith, a striking example of the 


He was a stranger in the land 


yet all trusting the promise of 
d fora 
aan, but for a home 


aith she was given natural 
Therefore sprang there 
productive 


gsnamed. They died without the fulfillment of the 


promises, either those of a temporal possession or of an innumerable seed. Having seen them afar off. 


‘They beheld them in the future by faith. Confessed. 
They had no fixed home and were waiting for a country. 
fess that they are pilgrims. Seek a country. 


By their whole lives that they were pilgrims. 
14. They that say such things. Who con- 
This confession shows that they are seeking a country 


328 HEBREWS. 


(Ch. XT. 





16 But now they desire a better country, that is, 
an heavenly: wherefore God is not ashamed? to be 
called their God; for’ he hath prepared for them a 
city. 

ii By faitht Abraham, when he was tried, offered 
up Isaac: and he that had received the promises 
offered‘ up his only begotten son; 

18 Of whom it was said,* That in Isaac shall thy 
seed be called: 

19 Accounting that God was able to raise him up, 
even from the dead; from whence also he received 


return. But now they de- 
sire a better country, that 
is, a heavenly: wherefore 
God is not ashamed of 
them, to be called their 
God: for he hath prepared 
for them a city. 

By faith Abraham, being 
tried, offered up Isaac: 
yea, he that had gladly re- 
ceived the promises was 
offering up his only begot- 
ten son; even he to Whom it 
was said, In Isaac shall 
thy seed be ealled: ac- 
counting that God is able 
to raise up, even from the 
dead; from whence he did 
also in a parable receive 


16- 


17 


him in a figure. him back, | By faith Isaac 20, 
7 f q ae esse acob an sau, 
20 By faith* Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau con-| ye Concerning things t6 
cerning things to come. come. By faith Jacob, 21 


21 By faith Jacob, when he was a dying, blessed* 
both the sons of Joseph; and worshipped," leaning 
upon the top of his staff. 

22 By faith! Joseph, when he died, made mention 
of the departing of the children of Israel; and gave 
commandment concerning his bones. 

23 By faithi Moses, when he was born, was hid 
three months of his parents, because they saw he 
was a proper child; and they were not afraid of the 


when he was a dying, 
blessed each of the sons of 
Joseph: and worshipped, 
leaning upon the top of his 
staff. By faith Joseph, 
when his end was nigh, 
made mention of the de- 
parture of the children of 
Israel; and gave command- 
ment concerning his bones. 
By faith Moses, when he 
was born, was hid three 
months by his parents, be- 


| cause they saw he was a 


goodly child; and they 
were not afraid of the 


king’s* commandment. 





eGen. 22:1. d@James2:21. e Gen. 21:12. 
4 Gen. 50: 243 Hx. 13:9. j Hx. 2:2. 


6 Phil. 3:20. 


a Ex. 3:6, 15. 
h Gen. 47: 381. 


fGen. 27:27. g Gen. 48: 5. 
k Ex. 1:16. 











somewhere and have not yet foundit. 15. Ifthey had been mindful, ete. They could have returned 
to their old home in Ur of the Chaldees, if they had chosen, but though homeless in a strange land they 
had faith inafuture home. 16. Desireabettercountry. They desired a country better than Chaidea, 
better even than Canaan. They had a faith which looked for a heavenly country. 

17-19. Abraham, when he was tried. See’Gen. 22: 1-14. Offered up his only begotten son. 
Abraham stands as the great Old Testament example of faith, ‘the Father of the faithful,’ the maw 
“whose faith was counted for righteousness.” Hence his faith was tried by the sternest test of any man 
of God on record, not that God might be certain of his faith, but that all his spiritual children should 
profit by hisexample. Note: (1) Isaac was the only child of his marriage; (2) he was the child of prom- 
' ise and by grace; (3) he was the heir, not only of Abraham but of all God’s promises to Abraham. Yet: 
Abraham was told to offer him. It was God’s command. What a trial of faith! Yet, he believed, though 
he could not see how, that God would keep his promises, and that in ‘‘ Isaac his seed should be called,'” 
even though God raised him from the dead. Hence in faith he obeyed, and his faith was gloriouslY 
rewarded. The lesson for us is implicit obedience to God’s command and trust in his promises, N othing 
less 1s a demonstration of faith. 19. Received him in a figure. As one who mn his mind had been 
sacrificed. It was from the altar of sacrifice that he received him back. 

20-22. By faith Isaac blessed, etc. See Gen, 27: 26-40; 28: 2,3. In the blessing there are prophe- 
cies of their future history. 21. By faith Jacob, when he wasadying. See Gen. 48: 8-22, In his. 
blessing he foresaw that both Ephraim and Manasseh would be tribes of Israel, and that the younger 
would be the ancestor of the greater tribe. Leaning upon the top of his staff (Gen. 48: 81). The 
Hebrew word as originally written may mean either staff or bed, that on which one rests. In our English 
version of Genesis ‘“‘bed” has been preferred. The Septuagint, followed here, says ‘‘staff.? It means. 
that the sick old man raised from his couch and leaned his weight on his staff while conferring the bless- 
ing. 22. By faith Joseph. See Gen. 50: 24,25. By faith he looked forward to the children of Israel. 
going up to Canaan for a home, and charged that his body should be carried up. This charge was faith- 
fully fulfilled. See Josh. 24: 32. 


23-27. By faith Moses . . was hid. See Exod. 2: 2; Acts 7:20. Through faith in God the: 
parents were led to disobey the king’s cruel edict, and to hide the child. A proper child. A promising: 


7 


ChexL4 HEBREWS. 


329 





24 By faith Moses, when he was come to years, 
refused to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter ; 

25 Choosing® rather to suffer affliction with the 
people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin 
for a season; 

26 Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater 
riches than the treasures in Egypt: for he had 
respect unto the recompence of the reward. 

27 By faith” he forsook Egypt, not fearing the 
wrath of the king: for he endured, as seeing him 
who is invisible. 

28 Through faith* he kept the passover, and the 
sprinkling of blood, lest he that destroyed the first- 
born should touch them. 

29 By faith they passed through the Red sea as 
by dry land; which the Egyptians assaying to do 
were drowned. 

30 By faith? the walls of Jericho fell down, after 
they were compassed about seven days. 

31 By faith® the harlot Rahab perished not with 
them that believed not, when she had received the 
spies with peace. 

32 And what shall I more say? for the time 
would fail me to tell off Gedeon, and of® Barak, 
and of ® Samson, and of! Jephthae; of) David also, 
and* Samuel, and of the prophets: 

33 Who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought 
righteousness, obtained promises, stopped! the 
mouths of lions, 


d Josh. 6: 20. 


b Ex. 10: 29; 12:37. c Ex. 12: 21. 0 
k1Sam. 1: 20. 


a Psa. 84: 10. 
i Judgesll:1. j1Sam. 16:1. 


h Judges 13: 24. 





eé James 2: 25. 
71 Sam. 17: 84; Dan. 6: 


king’s commandment. By 24 
faith Moses, when he was 
grown up, refused to be 
called the son of Pharaoh’s 
daughter; choosing rather 25- 
to be evil entreated with 
the people of God, than to 
enjoy the pleasures of sin 
for a season; accounting 26 
the reproach of Christ 
greater riches than the 
treasures of Egypt: for he 
looked unto the recom- 
ense of reward. By faith 27 
1e forsook Egypt, not fear- 
ing the wrath of the king: 
for he endured, as seeing 
him who is invisible. By 
faith he kept the passover, 
and the sprinkling of the 
blood, that the destroyer of 
the first-born should not 
touch them. Byfaith they 29 
passed through the Red 
sea as by dry land: which 
the Egyptians assaying to 
do were swallowed up. By 30: 
faith the walls of Jericho 
fell down, after they had 
been compassed about for 
seven days. By faith Ra- 31 
hab the harlot perished not 
with them that were diso- 
bedient, having received 
the spies with peace. And 32: 
what shall I more say? for 
the time will fail me if I 
tell of Gideon, Barak 
Samson,  Jephthah; of 
David and Samuel and the 
prophets: who through 33: 
faith subdued kingdoms, 
ought righteousness,ob- 
tained promises, stopped 
the. mouth of lions, 


28. 


J Judges 6: 11. A a 4:6. 





child. 24. Moses . . refused to be called, etc. 


He had faith in God’s promises, and hence for- 


sook his honored position, for the sake of his people. 25. Choosing rather. There were honor,, 
wealth and pleasure in the palace, but affliction with the enslaved nation. He chose the latter by faith.. 
For a season. The pleasures of sin are transient. 26. Esteeming the reproach of Christ. Any 
reproach endured through faith in the promises of which Christ was the center and sum, was called the: 
reproach of Christ. This reproach, though men might shrink from it, was really of more value perma- 
nently than the treasures of Egypt, because he looked forward to the recompense, the heavenly 
blessings. 277. By faith he forsook Egypt. The Exodus was all an achievement of faith. It was 
faith that made Moses disdain the king’s wrath. He endured, as seeing him who is invisible. 
The unseen God was present with him by faith and his support gave strength to endure all. 

28-31. Through faith he kept the passover (Exod. 12: 3-30). He kept it because God commanded 
and he believed all God promised. The sprinkling of blood. The blood of the lamb sprinkled on the 
door posts. He not only believed that this weuld protect Israel’s first born, but his faith went beyond the: 
type to the Lamb of God. 29. By faith they passed through the Red sea. See Exod. 14: 13-22. 
In obedience to God’s command they marched into the sea and ‘‘ were baptized unto Moses in the cloud 
and in the sea”’ (1 Cor. 10: 1,2). 80. By faith the walls of Jericho fell. See Josh. 6: 8-21. 31. By 
faith the harlot Rahab. See Josh. 2: 1-22. 

32-88. What shall we more say? All these cases are examples of heroic deeds and holy lives of 
faith. And the Scriptures are full of them; of such examples as Gideon (Judges 6: 11); Barak (Judges 
4: 1); Samson (Judges 13: 1); Jephthae (Judges 11: 1); of David also (1 Sam. 16: 1); Samuel. 
(1 Sam. 1: 20); of the prophets. Many of these were ‘illustrious examples of the power of faith. 38.. 


030 HEBREWS. 


34 Quenched* the violence of fire, escaped the” 
edge of the sword,® out of weakness were made 
strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned‘ to flight the 
armies of the aliens. 

35 Woment received their dead raised to life 
again; and others were? tortured, not accepting 
deliverance; that they might obtain a better resur- 
rection. 

36 And others had trial of cruel mockings and 
scourgings, yea, moreover,® of bonds and imprison- 
ment: 

37 They® were stoned, they were sawn asunder, 
were tempted, were slain with the sword:' they 
wandered about in sheep-skins and goat-skins; 
being destitute, afflicted, tormented: 

38 (Of whom the world was not worthy:) they 
wandered in deserts, and 7m mountains, and) in 
dens and caves of the earth. 

39 And these all, having obtained a good report 
through faith, received not the promise: 

40 God having provided some better.thing for us, 
that they without us should not* be made perfect. | 











[Ch._XI. 


quenched the power of fire, 34 
escaped the edge of the 

sword, from weakness were 

made strong, waxed mighty 

in war, turned to_ flight 

armies of aliens. Women 35 
received their dead by a 
resurrection: and others 
were tortured, not accept- 
ing their deliverance: that 
they might obtain a better 
resurrection: and others 
had trial of mockings and 
scourgings, yea, moreover 
of bonds and imprison- 
ment: they were stoned, 
they were sawn asunder, 





| they were tempted, they 


were slain with the sword: 
they went about. in sheep- 
skins, in goatskins: being 
destitute, afflicted, evil en- 
treated (of whom the world 38 
was not worthy), wander- 
ing in deserts and moun- 
tains and caves, and the 
holes of the earth. And 39 
these all, having had wit- 
ness borne to them through 
their faith, received not the 
promise, God having pro- 40 
vided some better thin 
concerning us, that apar 
from us they should not be 
made perfect. 








a Dan. 3:25. 61Sam. 20:1; 1 Kings19:3. e¢ 2 Kings 20:7; Jol 42:10. 
f Acts 22:25. g.Gen. 39:20; Jer. 20: 2; 37: 15, 


h 1 Kings 21: 135 
72 Kings 1:8. 


j1 Kings 18:4. & Rom. 11: 26. 





d@1Sam. 14:13. 


ée 1 Kings 17:22; 2 Kings 4:35. 
2 Chron. 24:4.” 2 





Who through faith subdued kingdoms. Some of those named subdued kingdoms, as Barak, Gideon, 


David. Obtained promises. 
mouths of lions. The case of Daniel is the most remarkable. 
violence of fire. 
the sword. SeeisSam. 18: 1. 


385. Women received their dead raised to life again. 


Promises were made to many of the worthies named. Stopped the 


See Dan. 6: 20. 84. Quenched the 
See the case of ‘‘the Hebrew children” in Dan. 3: 19-28. 


Escaped the edge of 
The widow 


of Zarephath (1 Kings 17: 17-24) and the Shunammite (2 Kings 4: 18-37) are examples. Others were tor- 


tured. This was especially true in the terrible persecutions recorded in the Books of the Maccabees. 
They preferred to suffer in hope of the resurrection to eternal life. 


better resurrection. 


A 
386. Others 


had trial of, ete. This was true of many persecutions recorded in Jewish history. 3'7. They were 


stoned. See 1 Kings 21: 10-15; 2 Chron. 24: 21. 
’ Isaiah’s fate. 
unworthiness. 


Sawn asunder, 
88. Of whom the world was not worthy. 
They wandered in deserts. To hide from persecutors. 


The Talmud says that this was 
When it rejects the good it shows its 


89,40. And these all, having obtained a good report through faith. By the power of faith 


they lived holy and heroic lives, but all died without having seen the fulfillment of the promise of a Deliv- 
erer. 40. God having provided some better thing for us. The new and better covenant, the 
gospel, the realization of the promise made to Abraham. That they without us should not be made 
perfect. That they and we together might be made complete in the city whose builder and maker is God. 
The full fruition, the being made complete (perfect) belongs to the heavenly state. All these ancient 
heroes, who died not having received the promise, need the realization of the promise in Christ to make 
them perfect; by that promise we also are saved. 


Ch. XII.] HEBREWS. 





CHAPTER XII. 


Perseverance and the Christian Race. 


SUMMARY. How to Run the Christian Race. Enduring Affliction. The 
Lord’s Chastisement of Children. The Lesson from the Case of Esau. 
The Terrors of Sinai Contrasted with the Gospel. Paying Heed to the 
Gospel. 


1 Wherefore, seeing we also are compassed about 
with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside 
every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset 
us, and let us run with patience the race that is set 
before us, 

2 Looking? unto Jesus, the author and finisher of 
our faith;® who, for the joy that was set before 
him, endured the cross, despising the shame,° and 
3 set down at the right hand of the throne of God. 

3 For® consider him that endured such contradic- 
tion of sinners against himself, lest ye® be wearied 
and faint in your minds. 

4 Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving 
against sin. 

5 And ye have forgotten the exhortation which 
speaketh unto you as unto children, My! son, despise 
not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint 
when thou art rebuked of him. 

6 For¢ whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and 
scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. 

7 If ye endured chastening, God dealeth with 
you as with sons: for what son is he whom the 
father chasteneth not? 


a2Cor. 3:18. 01Pet. 1:11. c Psa. 110:1. d John 15:20. 





331 





CHAPTER XII. 


Therefore, let us also, 1 
seeing we are compassed 
about with so great a cloud 
of witnesses, lay aside 
every weight, an the sin 
which doth so easily beset 
us, and let us run with pa- 
tience the race that is set 
before us, looking unto 2 
Jesus the author and per- 
fector of owr faith, who for 
the joy that was set before 
him endured the cross, de- 
spising shame, and hath 
sat down at the right hand 
of the throne of God. For 
consider him that hath en- 
dured such gainsaying of 
sinners against themselves, 
that ye wax not weary, 
fainting in your souls. Ye 4 
have not yet resisted unto 
plood, striving against sin: 
and ye have forgotten the 5 
exhortation, which reason- 
eth with you as with sons, 

My son, regard not light- 

ly the chastening of 
the Lord, 

Nor faint when thou art 

reproved of him; 

For whom the Lord lov- 6 

eth he chasteneth, 

And scourgeth every son 

whom he receiveth. 

Itisfor chastening that 7 
ye endure; God dealeth 
with you as with sons; for 
what son is there whom his 
father chasteneth not? 


e Gal. 6:9. fJob 5:17. g Psa. 94:12; James 1:12; Rey.3:19. 





1-4. So great a cloud of witnesses. The vast cloud of witnesses named in Chapter 11, who tes- 
tify by their lives to the power of faith. Let us lay aside every weight. Every hindrance. The 
figure used is that of the Greek foot races in the games then practiced in every province of the Roman 


Empire, including Palestine. Before running the 


runner laid off every weight. And the sin which 


doth so easily beset us. Our besetting sin, whatever it may be. In the case of these Hebrew Chris- 


tians the context shows that the besetting sin was unbelief. 


Let us run with patience the race that 


is set before us. Run the Christian race with steadfast perseverance. 2. Looking unto Jesus. In 


running Jesus should be constantly regarded as the example. 
but the faith in the Greek. 
of the saint. 
we should look to him. For the joy that was set before him. 
_at God’s right hand. Endured the cross. 
ignominious of deaths. Set down at the right hand, etc. 


Finisher of the faith. Not owr faith 
The Gospel, which rests upon faith, is meant rather than the individual faith 
Jesus is its author and perfected it. He is the exemplar of all who live by faith. Hence 
The joy of saving men and of sitting 
Not only its pain butitsshame. It was in that age the most 
Tn the place of heavenly honor. 38. Con- 


sider him. When you become faint and discouraged by persecution, consider what Christ suffered from 


sinners. 4. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood. Have not been persecuted unto death. 


5-11. Ye have forgotten the exhortation, etc. Surely they must have forgotten, or they would 

My son, despise not, etc. This is quoted from Job 5: 17, 18. 
Do not murmur at God’s reproofs and chastenings. 6. Whom 
The chastening hand does not show the anger of God but his love. 
”, If ye endure chastening. If youare ealled 
chastisement. 


pear their tribulations more cheerfully. 
See also 2 Sam. 6: 7-10. The thought is, 
the Lord loveth he chasteneth. 
Every child is chastened and reproved for its good. 
on to suffer, it shows that God 


is treating you as his children. 8. If ye be without 


9 
9) 


332 HEBREWS. 


(Ch. XII. 





8 But if ye be without chastisement, whereof @all 
are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons. 

9 Furthermore, we have had fathers of our flesh 
which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: 
shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the 
Father of spirits, and live? 

10 For they verily for a few days chastened us 
after their own pleasure; but he for our profit, 
that” we might be partakers of his holiness. 

11 Now no chastening for the present seemeth to 
be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless afterward it 
yieldeth* the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto 
them which are exercised thereby. 

12 Wherefore? lift up the hands which hang 
down, and the feeble knees; 

13 And make straight paths for your feet, lest 
that which is lame be turned out of the way;° but 
let it rather be healed. 

14 Follow peace with all men, and_holiness,* 
without which no man shall see the Lord: 

15 Looking diligently lest® any man fail. of the 
grace of God; lest any root of bitterness springing 
up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled; 

16 Lest there 6e any fornicator, or profane per- 
son, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his 
birthright. 





But if ye are without 8 
chastening, whereof all 
have been made partakers 
then are ye bastards, and 
not sons. Furthermore, we 9 
had the fathers of our flesh 
to chasten us, and we gave 
them reverence; shall we 
not much rather be in sub- 
jection unto the Father of 
spirits, and live? For they 
verily for afew days chas- 
tened us as seemed good to 
them; but he for our profit, 
that we may be partakers 
of his holiness. All chast- 
ening seemeth for the pres- 
ent to be not joyous, but 
grievous; yet afterward it 
yieldeth peaceable fruit 
unto them that haye been 
exercised thereby, even the 
Fruit of righteousness. 
Wherefore lift up the 12° 
hands that hang down, and 
the palsied knees; and 13. 
make straight paths for 
our feet, that that which 
is lame be not turned out 
of the way, but rather be 
healed. 

Follow after peace with 14 
all men, and the sanctifica- 
tion without which no man 
shall see the Lord: looking 15, 
carefully lest there be any 
man that falleth short of 
the grace of God; lest any 
root of bitterness spring- 
ing up trouble you, and 
thereby the many be de- 
filed; lest there be any for- 
nicator, or profane person, 
as Esau, who for one mess 
of meat sold his own birth- 


16 





| aPsa. 73:14. 0 Lev.19:2. ¢James3:18. dJob4:3,4. e Gal. 6:1. J Matt.5:8. g Deut. 29:18. hk Gen. 25:33. 








Instead of that being a fact for congratulation it only shows that God does not regard you as children. 
You may call yourselves God’s children, but you are not truesons. 9. Wehavehad fathers . 


which corrected us. 


Every judicious father corrects his children in some way. Shall we not then sub- 


mit cheerfully to the heavenly Father’s correction? Father of spirits, Our earthly parents are the 
parents of our bodies; God is the creator of all spirits, and the author of our spiritual life. When we are 
born of the Spirit our new life is due to God and we are begotten as his children. 10. They chastened 

‘us. For a little while earthly parents corrected as it pleased them, but God ever watches us that we may 
be made holy. 11. Now no chastening, etc. It is never pleasant to endure the chastening, but it 
afterwards benefits by the holier life it insures. In sorrow we naturally cling closer to God. 

12,18. Lift up the hands. See Job4; 3, The thought is, shake off all weariness, all lameness, and. 
push right on. 

14-17. Follow peace with all. Live peaceful lives. And holiness. Pure and sinless lives. 
Without which no man,ete. Without a holy life no one shall be in fellowship with God. To see 
the Lord is to realize his presence with us. See Matt. 5:8. 15. Looking diligently. Being careful 
that no one lags behind and falls by the way so as not to reach the final reward. Lest any root of bitter- 
ness. Any bitter opposition, or element of disturbance causing members to sin. 16. Lest there be any’ 
fornicator, Of course such a sinner would not live the life of holiness enjoined. Or profane person. 
A worldly person who profanes holy privileges by placing on them a worldly estimate. Like Esau. See 
Gen. 25: 27-30. He illustrates what is meant by a profane person, For a savory meal he bartered away a- 
birthright bestowed by God. So any professing Christian who would sell his heavenly birthright for 
worldly advantages would be a profane person. 17. When he would have inherited the blessing. 
See Gen. 27: 31-34. The spiritual blessing that belonged to the birthright was denied to Esau though he- 
wept over the disappointment. No place of repentance. No way to correct the mistake and to secure: 
the blessing. It was too late for this, since he had forfeited his birthright. The apostle holds up his case: 
as a warning example. 


Ch. XII. J HEBREWS. 


333 





17 For ye know how that afterward, when he?* 
would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected: 
for he found no place of repentance, though he 
sought it carefully with tears. 

18 For ye are not come unto” the mount that 
might be touched, and that burned with fire, nor 
unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest, 

19 And the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of 
words; which voice they that heard entreated that* 
the word should not be spoken to them any more: 

20 (For they could not endure that which was 
commanded, And if so much as a beast touch the 
se tan ae it shall be stoned, or thrust through with 
‘a dart: 

21 And go terrible was the sight, that Moses, 
said, I exceedingly fear and quake:) 

22 But ye are come® unto mount Sion, and® unto 
the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem,’ 
and to an innumerable company of the angels, 

23 To the general assembly and church of the 
first-born, which are written in heaven, and to God 
the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men® 
made perfect, 

24 And to Jesus the mediator of the new cove- 
nant, and to" the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh 
better things than! that of Abel. 

25 See that ye refuse not him that speaketh: for 
if they escaped not who refused him! that spake on 





right. For ye know that 17 
even when he afterward 
desired to inherit the bless- 
ing, he was rejected (for he 
found no place of repent- 
ance), though he sought it 
diligently with tears. 

For ye are not come un- 18 
to a-mount that might be 
touched, and that burned 
with fire, and unto black- 
ness and darkness, and 
tempest, and the sound of 19 
a trumpet, and the voice of 
words; which voice they 
that heard intreated that 
no word more should be 
spoken unto them: for 20 
they could not endure that 
which was enjomed, If 
even a beast touch the 
mountain, it shall be 
stoned; and so fearful was 21 
the appearance, that Moses 
said, lexceedingly fear and 
quake: but ye are come 22 
unto mount Zion, and unto 
the city of the living God, 
the heavenly Jerusalem, 
and to innumerable hosts 
of angels, to the general 23 
assembly and church of the 
firstborn who are enrolled 
in heaven, and to God the 
Judge of all, and to the 
spirits of just men made 
perfect, and to Jesus the 
mediator of a new cove- 
nant, and to the blood of 
sprinkling that speaketh 
better than that of Abel. 
See that ye refuse not him 
that speaketh. For if they 
escaped not, when they re- 
fused him that warned 
them on earth, much more 





a Gen. 27:34. 6 Ex. 19:12; Deut. 4:11; Rom. 6:14; 8:15; 2 Tim. Weitie 


e Phil. 3:20. Psa. 68:17; Dan. 7:10; Judel4. g Phil. 3: 12. 


c Ex. 20:19. 
h Ex. 24:8; 1 Pet. 1:2. 


d Gal. 4:26; Rev. 3:125 21:2. 
i Gen. 4:10. 7 Num. 16. 








18-21. For ye are not come unto the mount, etc. Ye should be diligent “for,” etc. Mount 


Sinai and the inauguration of the law are described. It wasa mountain that could be touched, a moun- 
tain of earth. It burned on that occasion with fire. See Exod. 19: 12-19. 19. And the sound of a 
trumpet (Exod. 19: 16). The trumpet blast preceded the giving of the law. The voice of words. The 
voice of God proclaiming the Ten Commandments. They entreated. Filled with terror at the 
awful manifestation they entreated that God speak no more directly to them. (Exod. 20:19.) 20. For 
‘they could not endure. The command and penalty of Exod. 19: 12, added to their terror. 21. Moses 
said. Even Moses was filled with fearful awe (Exod. 19: 19). 

22-24. Ye are come unto Mount Zion. The law was given at Sinai; the gospel was to go forth 
from Mount Zion; that is, from Jerusalem. See Ps. 2: 6; Joel 2: 32; Rev. 21:2. It is used as a type or 
symbol of the kingdom of heaven. The heavenly Jerusalem. This heavenly city 1s where our Lord 
dwells and is our eternal home. In coming to Christ we have come into the covenant which gives us the 
right to a place in that city. An innumerable company of angels. The angels of heaven. 28. 
General assembly and church, etc. he universal church of Christ. The first born son in Israel 
inherited the birthright, but all the saints have the birthright and hence are called the first born. They are 
all enrolled, not on earthly registers, but their names are written in heaven. To God the Judge of all, 
who will inflict judgment in behalf of the persecuted church. The spirits of just men made per- 
fect. To the fellowship of all the sainted dead now perfected above. 24. ToJesus. To fellowship 
with Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant as Moses was of the Old. To the blood of sprinkling. 
To Christ’s atoning blood by which our hearts “are sprinkled from an evil conscience.” That speaketh 
~petter things than that of Abel. Abel’s blood cried for vengeance; Christ’s pleads for mercy. 

25-29. See that ye refuse not. The whole Old Testament shows that those who refused to listen 


384 HEBREWS. 


(Ch. XII. 





earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn 
away from him that speaketh from heaven; 

26 Whose? voice then shook the earth: but now 
he hath promised, saying,” Yet once more I shake 
not the earth only, but also heaven. 

27 And this word, Yet once more, signifieth* the 
removing of those things that are shaken, as of 
things that are made, that those things which 
cannot be shaken may remain. 

28 Wherefore, we receiving a kingdom which 
cannot be moved, let us have grace, whereby we 
may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly 
fear: 

29 For? our God és a consuming fire. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


Closing Admonitions. 


SUMMARY. A Life of Love. Purity. Regard for Rulers. Stability. 
Christ Our High Priest and Example. Benedictions. Closing Saluta- 
tions. 

1 Let brotherly love continue. 

2 Be® not forgetful to entertain strangers; for 
thereby* some have entertained angels unawares. 

3 Remember® them that are in bonds, as bound 
with them; and them which suffer adversity as 
being yourselves also in the body. 

4 Marriage 7s honourable in all, and the bed 
undefiled: but whoremongers and adulterers God 
will judge. 





shall not we escape, who 
tur away from him that 
warneth from heaven: 
whose voice then shook the 26: 
earth: but now he hath 
promised, saying, Yet once 
more will I make to trem- 
ble not the earth only, but 
also the heaven. And this 27 
word, Yet once more, signi- 
fieth the removing of those 
things that are shaken, as 
of things that have been 
made, that those things 
which are not shaken may 
remain. Wheretore,receiv- 
ing a kingdom that cannot 
be shaken, let us have 
race, whereby we may of- 
er service well-pleasing to 
God with reverence and 
awe: for our God is a con- 29 
suming fire. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


Let love of the brethren 1 
continue. Forget not to 2 
shew love unto strangers: 
for thereby some have en- 
tertained angels unawares. 
Remember them that are 3 
in bonds, as bound with 
them; them that are evil 
entreated, as being your- 
selves also in the body. 
Let marriage be had in 4 
honour among all, and Jeé 
the bed be undefiled: for 
fornicators and adulterers 





@Ex.19:18. 6 Hag. 2:6. 


Isa. 66:15; 2 Thes. 1:8; Heb. 10:27. 


¢ Psa. 102: 26; Matt. 24:35; 2 Pet. 3:10. d Wx. 24: 17; Deut. 4:24; 9:3; Psa.50:3; 97:33. 
e Matt. 25:35. fGen. 18:3. g Matt. 25: 36. 





to God’s message delivered by men did not escape. How can those escape then who refuse to listen to 


God’s own Son? 26. Whose voice then shook the earth. At Sinai (Exod. 19: 18). 


But now he 


' hath promised. See Haggai 2: 6, which declares the removal of the heavens and earth at Christ’s com- 


ing. 27. And this word, Yet once more. 
shaking after the time of Haggai. It is not 
Christ came and will continue until all that 
remains. Among the things removed is the covenant of Sinai. 


This means, says the apostle, that there is only one more. 
a material but moral and spiritual event. It began when 
is temporal or erroneous be removed and only the eternal 
28. Wherefore we, etc. We Chris- 


tians have received a kingdom which cannot be shaken and which is eternal. Hence we should serve God 


with reverence and godly fear since we are called to so high an estate. 
a consuming fire. Because, while God is very merciful and loving, 


disobedience, but will destroy those who despise his commandments. 
1-8. Let brotherly love continue. 


29. For our God is 
he will not overlook willful 


The love which binds brethren in the chureh together. 2. Be 


not forgetful to entertain strangers. Hospitality is a duty often emphasized in the New Testa- 


ment. Here it assumes the form of receiving stranger saints. 


Often they were driven from their homes 


by persecution, and the church elsewhere was wont to open its homes to them. Some have entertained 


angels unawares. 


See Gen. 18: 3. Also Matt. 25: 35. 3. Remember them that are in bonds. 


Another manifestation of brotherly love. The prisoners referred to are those imprisoned for Christ’s 
sake. The Christian must enter into full sympathy with all his suffering brethren. 


4-6. Marriage is honorable, Let it beheldin honor, but licentiousness God will judge, 


even though 


Che X11. 1 HEBREWS. 


335: 


5 Let your conversation be without covetous- 


ness; and be content with such things as ye have: 
for he hath gaid,? I will never leave thee, nor 
forsake thee. 

6 So that we may boldly say, The Lord” 7s my 
helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto 
me. 

7 Remember them which have the rule over you, 
who have spoken unto you the word of God; whose 
faith follow, considering the end of thezr conversa- 
tion; 

8 Jesus Christ® the same yesterday, and to-day, 
and for ever. 

9 Be not carried about with divers and strange 
doctrines: for,7t is a good thing that the heart be 
established with grace; not with meats, which have 
not profited them that have been occupied therein. 

10 Wet have an altar, whereof they have no right 
to eat which serve the tabernacle. 

11 For’ the bodies of those beasts, whose blood 
is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest for 
sin, are burnt without the camp. 

12 Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify 
the people with his own blood, suffered* without 
the gate. 

13 Let us go forth therefore unto him without 
the camp, bearing his* reproach. 





God will judge. Be ye free 5 
from the love of money; 
content with such things 
as ye have: for himself 
hath said, I will in no wise 
fail thee, neither will I in 
any wise forsake thee. So 6 
that with good courage we 


eay , 
he Lord is my helper; I 
will not fear: 

What shall man do unto 

me? 

Remember them that had 7 
the rule over you, which 
spake unto you the word 
of God; and considering 
the issue of their life, imi- 
tate their faith. Jesus 8 
Christ is the same yester- 
day and to-day,yea and for 
ever. Be not carried away 9 
by divers and _ strange 
teachings: for it is good 
that the heart be stablish- 
ed by grace; not by meats, 
wherein they that occupied 
themselves were not prof- 
ited. We have an altar, 
whereof they have no right 
to eat which serve the tab- 
ernacle. For the bodies of 
those beasts, whose blood 
is brought into the holy 
place by the high priest as 
an offering for sin, are 
burned without the camp. 
Wherefore Jesus also, that 12: 
he might sanctify the peo- 
ple through his own blood, 
suffered without the gate. 
Let us therefore go forth 13. 
unto him without the 
eamp,bearing his reproach. 


ll 








e Ley. 4: 11. 


6 Psa. 27: 1. 
f John 19: 17; Acts 7: 58. 


c John 8: 58; 1 Cor. 1; 24; Eph. 4: 5. 
g1iPet. 4:14. 


a Gen. 28:15; Psa. 37:25. @1 Cor. 9: 18. 








men may tolerate it. 5. Let your conversation. Your life. Without covetousness. Without 
manifesting a stingy or grasping spirit. He hath said (Josh. 1: 5). With such an assurance we may 
well be content with what we have. 6. So that we may boldly say. The words which follow are 
quoted from Ps, 118: 6. 

7-15. Remember them that had the rule over you. As the past tense is used the rulers named, 
it is thought, were dead. At the date of this epistle, James the brother of John, and “James the brother 
of our Lord,” both so closely connected with the Jerusalem church, had suffered martyrdom. The last 
named, whose martyrdom is recorded by J osephus, was put to death in A. D. 638. Whose faith 
follow. Imitate it. 8. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, etc. He is named as the end or object 
of the lives of the rulers just referred to. With them the unchangeable Christ was the all in all. Since 
he remains the same he is as able to help you as he was to help them. 9. Be not carried about, etc. 
Suffer no false teachers to delude you. It is a good thing, etc. Though more than thirty years had 
passed since the church was founded the temple service still continued, though the apostle has shown that 
it was done away in Christ. No doubt some of the Hebrew Christians had continued to observe its cere- 
monials. There were even teachers who taught “divers strange doctrines” concerning the need of keep- 
ing the law. The apostle, however, enjoins that the heart be established with grace, instead of 
resorting to sacrificial meats which had proved profitless to make the conscience perfect. 10. We have 
an altar. We have no need of the temple altar for we have an altar, that on which Christ offered him- 
self, to which those who cling to the tabernacle service have no right. Christ’s altar implies the abolition 
of the tabernacle and the old covenant. Those who cling to these show their lack of faith in Christ. 11. 
The bodies of those beasts. The sacrifices slain for a sin offering on the day of atonement. This 
blood was carried by the high priest before the mercy seat, but the bodies were burned without the camp 
(Lev. 16: 27), thus representing the penalty of sin. They were held to be accursed. 12. Wherefore 
Jesus also. In order to cleanse his people by becoming the complete atonement he was willing, as an 


336 HEBREWS. 


[Ch XIII. 





14 For* here have we no continuing city, but we 
seek one to come. 

15 By him therefore let us” offer the sacrifice of 
praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our 
lips, giving thanks to his name. 

16 But to do good and to communicate forget 
not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. 

17 Obey them that have the rule over you, and 
submit yourselves:° for they watch for your souls, 
as they that must give account; that they may do it 
with joy, and not with grief: for that 7s unprofita- 
ble for you. 

18 Pray for us: for we trust we have a good 
conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. 

19 But I beseech you the rather to do this, that 
I may be restored to you the sooner. 

20 Now the God of peace, that brought again 
from the dead our Lord Jesus,’ that great Shepherd 
of the sheep,° through the blood of the everlasting 
covenant, 

21 Make you perfect in every good work, to do 
his will, working in you that which is well pleasing 
in his sight, through Jesus Christ;* to whom de 
glory for ever and ever. Amen. © 

22 And I beseech you, brethren, suffer the word 
of exhortation; for I have written a letter unto you 
in few words. 

23 Know ye that® our brother Timothy is® set at 
liberty; with whom, if he come shortly, I will see 
you. 








For we have not here an 14 
abiding city, but we seek 
after the city which is to 
come. Through him then 15 
let us offer up a sacrifice of 
praise to God continually, 
that is, the fruit of lips 
which make confession to 
hisname. But to do good 16 
and to communicate forget 
not: for with such sacri- 
fices God is well pleased. 
Obey them that have the 
rule over you, and submit 
to them: for they watch in 
behalf of your souls, as 
they that shall give ac- 
count; that they may do 
this with joy, and not with 

rief: for this were unprof- 
itable for you. 

Pray for us: for we are 
persuaded that we have a 
ood conscience, desirin 
o live honestly in al 
things. And I exhort you 19 
the more exceedingly to do 
this, that I may be restor- 

ed to you the sooner. 

Now the God of peace, 
who brought again from 
the dead the great shep- 
herd of the sheep with the 
blood of the eternal cove- 
nant, even our Lord Jesus, 
make you perfect in every 21 
good thing to do his will, 
working in us that which 
is well-pleasmg in his 
sight,through JesusChrist; 
to whom be the glory for 
ever and ever. Amen. 

But Lexhort you, breth- 
ren, bear with the word of 
exhortation: for I have 
written unto you in few 
words. Know ye that our 
brother Timothy hath been 
set at liberty; with whom, 
if he come shortly, 1 will 
see you. 


17 


20 


23 





@Micah2:10. 6 Lev. 7:12; Psa. 50:14. c¢ Ezek. 38: 173.88: 2, 7. 


eZech. 9:11. fGal.1:5. g1Thes. 8:2. 


d Isa. 40: 11; Ezek. 84: 23; 87:24; John10: 11. 
Al Tim. 6:12. 





accursed thing, a sin offering, to be led without the gate and to suffer there. 


18. Let us go forth 


therefore unto him. Go forth from the unbelieving and rebellious camp which sent him forth to die. 
Let us follow him. Bearing his reproach. The reproach of the cross of Christ. 14. For here 
have we no continuing city. The temple itself, and Jerusalem the city of their race, were about 
to be destroyed. They were all pilgrims seeking a city as their fathers did (11; 13-16). They should then 
go forth like their fathers. 15. By him. Through Christ. Let us offer the sacrifice of praise. 
We need no bloody victims, but let us bring the sacrifice of praise continually for our great salvation. 
16-21. But. Thanksgiving is not all: there must be good deeds. Communicate. Give of our 
goods. Such sacrifices. These givings for God’s purposes are sacrifices that please him. 17, Obey 
them that have therule over you. Your elders or bishops. They watch for your souls. Give 
them deference on this account, and because they must give account to the Master of those committed to 
their trust. 18. Pray for us. Paul often makes this request. He refers to his uprightness of life 
perhaps because he had been arrested as an evil doer in Jerusalem. 19. I beseech you the rather 
for your prayers that I may be the sooner released and returned to you. Paul had been torn away from 
Jerusalem, and finally sent to Rome as a prisoner. The language here implies the imprisonment of the 
writer. 20. The God of peace, who gives us peace. That great Shepherd. Christ, “the Good 
Shepherd.” Through the blood of the everlasting covenant. The blood of Christ on the cross 
sealed the everlasting covenant of the Gospel of which the resurrection of Christ from the dead was the 
surety. 21. Make you perfect in every good work. By supplying what is defective. Working 
‘in you. See Phil. 2: 13. God works in us by his Spirit. 


Cherie HEBREWS. 337 





24 Salute all them that have the rule over you, tae oe oe 24 


and all the saints. They of Italy salute you. the saints. They of Italy 
25 Grace be with you all. \Amen. MGrace be Wi eu tale 
en. : 


‘Written to the Hebrews from Italy by Timothy. 





22-25. Suffer the word of exhortation. Though the epistle in part is argumentative even the 
‘argument is used to point the exhortation. Written . . inafew-words. Few with what might be 
said on such great themes. 28. Our brother Timothy is set at liberty. How intimately Timothy 
was associated with Paul all his epistles show. Timothy too joined him at Rome during his imprison- 
ment. This language implies that Timothy had been arrested and afterwards set free. Of this impris- 
onment, or just where it occurred, there is no other history. 24. Salute all them, etc. Salute for me 
the elcers an saints at Jerusalem and in Judea. They of Italy salute you. The epistle was, there- 
fore, wD) irom Italy, which harmonizes with Paul’s long imprisonment there. 


INTRODUCTION TO THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JAMES. 


This epistle stands first in order of seven which have been called ‘‘General,’’ from a- 
very early period, because of the fact that they were not addressed, like those of Paul, to 
particular churches or individuals, in most cages, but to the churches generally. This is 
directed to ‘‘the Twelve Tribes of the Dispersion,” a dedication which shows that it was. 
designed for the instruction of Jewish Christians scattered abroad among the Gentile 
countries. It was particularly appropriate that the man who is shown by the Acts of the 
Apostles and by the Galatian letter to have attained the highest influence in“ the 
churches of Judea should show his profound interest in the Christians of the Hebrew 
race by addressing this letter to the multitudes of kindred who had their homes in foreign 
lands. 

Yet there has been some dispute about the personality of the James who wrote this 
letter. There are three distinguished disciples which bear that name: James, the brother’ 
of John, one of the sons of Zebedee, one of the Twelve; James, the son of Alpheus, also 
an apostle,'called James the Less (Mark 14:40) ; and James, called by Paul in Galatians 
‘the brother of our Lord,” the man who appears in Acts, chapter 15, as wielding a pre- 
eminent influence in the church at Jerusalem. The epistle could not have been written 
by James, the brother of John, as he was slain by Herod (Acts 12:2) before its date. 
The authorship must be ascribed either to James, the son of Alpheeus, or to James, “‘the 
brother of the Lord.” 

From the earliest ages the latter has been agreed upon as the writer. To this conclu- 
sion all the known facts point. He was a permanent resident of Jerusalem, and pre-- 
eminent in the church; he seems to be the chief figure in ‘‘the Council of Jerusalem’’ 
described in Acts, chapter 15; he was one of the pillars of the church (Gal. 2:9) ; hence 
he could speak authoritatively to the Jewish Christians scattered abroad. It has, how- 
ever, been held by many that he is the same as James, the son of Alpheus, and a cousin 
of Christ, instead of a brother. The argument in favor of this hypothesis is ingenious. 
(1.) Itis held that Mary never bore any children but Jesus, and hence that ‘‘the breth- 
ren of the Lord’’ were her nephews. (2.)That Mary, the wife of Clopas (John 19:25) 
was sister of Mary, the mother of Jesus. (3.) That Alpheus and Clopas are different 
forms of the same name. (4.) That the brethren of Jesus, ‘‘Jamesand Joses and Simon 
and Judas,’”’ were the cousins of Jesus, and that at least two, James and Judas, were 
apostles. (5.) This is supported by the fact that Jesus on the cross commits the care 
of his mother to John, which is held to prove that she could have had no other sons. 

In answer to this theory it may be said that (1.) it is improbable that the wife of Clopas. 
was sister to Mary, a fact which would require two sisters to be of the same name. John 
names tavo pairs, Mary and her sister, and Mary, the wife of Clopasand Mary Magdalene. 
The sister was no doubt Salome, the mother of John, named as one of the four women in 
the other gospels, and whom John omits to name from the same motives which prevented 
him from ever naming himself. Hence John was the nephew of Mary, and this in con- 
nection with the fact that the brethren of Jesus were not then believers is a sufficient 
explanation of John being assigned the duty of caring for the mother of Jesus. (2.) We 


are told positively that the brethren of " 38) were not believers, and this, too, in the: 
338 


INTRODUCTION TO JAMES. 339 

So es ee ee ee aaa a, oe eee ae 
closing portion of the last year of our Lord’s ministry, a fact that clearly shows that none 
of these could have been of the number of the apostles. (3.) They are never called 
cousins of Jesus nor is there any proof that the Greek word which designates them as 
“‘brethren’”’ is ever used in the sense of cousins in the New Testament. (4.) When these 
brethren had become believers, after the resurrection, they are distinguished from the 
Twelve (Acts 1:14; 1 Cor.#9:5), a fact which cannot be explained if at least two of the 
four were of the Twelve. It is true that in Gal. 1:19 James is spoken of as an apostle, 
yet neither he nor Paul, the greatest of the apostles, was of the Twelve. These facts 
seem to me to clearly indicate that “‘James, the brother of the Lord,” the author of this 
epistle, was not of the Twelve, and was a brother to the Lord Jesus in the sense that he 
was a child of Mary. 

His prominence, however, in the early church may be gathered from the following 
references: Acts 12:7; Acts 15:19; Acts 21 :18; Gal. 1:19; Gal. 2:9; Gal. 2:21. The New 
Testament is silent concerning his later history, but Josephus, the Jewish historian, says 
that shortly before the war that ended in the destruction of J erusalem, about A. D. 63, ‘‘An- 
anias, the high priest, assembled the Sanhedrim, and brought before them the brother of 
Jesus, who is called the Christ, whose name was J ames,andsomeof hiscompanions * * 
and delivered them to be stoned.” (Antiq. xx. 9 :1). He was allowed to remain until 
not long before the overthrow of the Jewish state, and was then removed. Though not 
requiring the Gentile Christians to obey the law, he continued to teach its observance to 
the Jewish Christians, and to regard Christianity not so much the overthrow of the old 
covenant as its fulfillment and perfection. In this respect he did not have a clear vision 
like Paul but was on this account perhaps the better fitted to lead his own nation to 
Christ. 

The epistle was almost certainly written at Jerusalem, and probably during the last 
decade of the life of the writer, was addressed to Jewish Christians, is not doctrinal but 
full of practical instruction in the duties of life. There was some discussion among the 
Fathers whether it was entitled to a place in the Canon, but those doubts have mainly 
passed away. 








THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF 


JAMES. 


CHAPTER I. 


On Temptations. 


SUMMARY. Rejoicing in Trial. Seeking Wisdom. Stability Urged. The 
Source of Temptation. The Fountain of All Blessings. Pure and 
Undefiled Religion. 


1 James,? a servant of God and of the Lord 
Jesus” Christ, to the twelve tribes which® are scat- 
tered abroad, greeting. 

2 My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into 
divers temptations; 

3 Knowing this, that the trying of your faith 
worketh patience. 

4 But let patience have her perfect work, that 
ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing. 

5 If* any of you lack wisdom, let® him ask of 
God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraid- 
eth not; and?‘ it shall be given him. 

6 But* let him ask in faith, nothing wavering: 
for he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven 
with the wind and tossed. 

7 For let not that man think that he shall receive 
anything of the Lord. 

8 A double-minded man 7s unstable in all his 
ways. 

a Matt. 10: 3. 


6 Acts 26:7. cJohn7: 35; Acts2:5. d1 Kings 3: 9; Prov. 2:3. 


John 14: 183 15:7; 16:23. fJer. 29: 12. 





CHAPTER I. 


James, a servant of God 1 
and of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, to the twelve tribes 
which are of the Disper- 
sion, greeting. 

Count it all joy, my 2 
brethren, when ye fall into 
manifold temptations ; 
knowing that the proof of 3 
your faith worketh pa- 
tience. And let patience 4 
have tts perfect work, that 
ye may be perfect and en- 
tire, lacking in nothing. 

Butif any of you lacketh 5 
wisdom, let him ask of 
God, who giveth to all lib- 
erally and upbraideth not; 
and it shall be given him. 
But let him ask in faith, 6 
nothing doubting: for he 
that doubteth is hke the 
surge of the sea driven by 
the wind and tossed. For 7 
let not that man think that 
he shall receive anything 
of the Lord; a doublemind- 8 
ed man, unstabie in all his 
ways. 


é€ Matt. 7:7; 21:22; Mark 11: 24; 
g1 Tim. 2:8. 





1-4. James. 





See Introduction concerning the writer. He is called by Paul and by Josephus the 


brother of Jesus. Servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ. It seems probable from the title 
assumed that James was not an apostle. With only afew exceptions the Epistles begin with a reference 
to the apostleship of the writer. To the twelve tribes. The Jews are often so designated. See Acts 
21:7. Scattered abroad. Rather “of the Dispersion,” a term applied to Jews outside of Judea. 2. 
Countitalljoy. Instead of murmuring over trials and temptations, rejoice in them, because: 8. The 
trying of your faith by means of persecution and temptation worketh patience, rather, enduring 
fortitude. We are strengthened by trials overcome. 4. Let patience. Let endurance not be merely 
passive but have her perfect work; work out its complete results, that nothing may be wanting in your 
lives. : 

5-8. If any of you lack wisdom. This may be one of the wants. If so, go to God for it, that 
giveth to all men liberally. His people he will hear, and in answer to their requests he giveth liber- 
ally, and never upbraideth on account of their requests as men so often do. 6. Let him ask in faith. 
This is an essential condition to prevailing prayer. See Matt. 21: 21; Mark 11: 23. He that wavereth. 
Is undecided, of two minds. Like a wave of the sea. Driven hither ahd thither. 8. A double 
minded man. A man of no fixed, decided purpor340 ’ 


Ohl JAMES. 


9 Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he 
is exalted; 

10 But the rich, in that he is made low; because 
as the flower of the grass he shall pass away. 

11 For the sun is no sooner risen with a burning 
heat, but it withereth the grass, and the flower 
thereof falleth, and the grace of the fashion of it 
perisheth: so also shall the rich man fade away in 
his ways. 

12 Blessed? 7s the man that endureth temptation: 
for when he is tried, he shall receive the® crown of 
life, which the Lord hath promised to them that 
love him. 

13 Let no man say, when he is tempted, I am 
tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with 
evil, neither tempteth he any man: 

14 But every man is tempted, when he is drawn 
away of his own lust, and enticed. 

15 Then, when lust hath conceived, it bringeth 
forth sin; and sin, when it is finished, bringeth 
forth death. 

16 Do not err, my beloved brethren. 

17 Every good gift and every perfect gift is from 
above, and cometh down from the Father of lights, 
with® whom is no variableness, neither shadow of 
turning. 

18 Of “his own will begat he us with the word of 
truth, that we should be a kind of first-fruits® of 


his creatures. 
6 Rev.2:10. c¢ Num. 28:19; Mal. 3: 6. 


eb. 12:53 Rev. 3: 19. 
oo ‘ 2:3; Rev. 14:4, 





@ John 1:18; 1 Cor. 4:15; 1 Pet. 1:23. 


341 


But let the brother of 9 
low degree glory in his 
high estate: and the rich, 10 
in that he is made low: be- 
cause as the flower of the 
grass he shall pass away. 
For the sun ariseth with 11 
the ‘scorching wind, and 
withereth the grass; and 
the flower thereof falleth, 
and the grace of the fash- 
ion of it perisheth: so also 
shall the rich man fade 
away in his goings. 

Blessed is the man that 
endureth temptation: for 
when he hath been approy- 
ed, he shall receive the 
crown of life, which the 
Lord promised to them 
that love him, Let no man 
say when he is tempted, I 
am tempted of God: for 
God cannot be tempted of 
evil, and he himself tempt- 
eth noman: but each man 14 
is tempted, when he is 
drawn away by his own 
lust, and enticed. Then the 15 
lust, when it hath conceiv- 
ed, beareth sin: and the 
sin, when it is fullgrown, 
bringeth forth death. Be 16 
not deceived, my beloved 
brethren. Every good gift 17 
and every perfect boon is 
from above, coming down 
from the Father of lights, 
with whom ean be no vari- 
ation, neither shadow that 
is cast by turning. Of his 18 
own will he brought us 
forth by the word of truth 
that we should be a kind 
of firstfiruits of his creat- 
ures. 


13 


é Jere 





9-11. Let the brother oflowdegree. In the humble walks of life. Exalted. To be a child of God, 
a brother of Jesus Christ. 10. Therich, in that he is made low. The one should rejoice in exalta- 
tion; the other in humiliation. He is taught that his riches have no power to save, and that his life is as 


uncertain as that of the grass of the field. 11. For the sun. 
grass in Palestine dies. Thus shall the glory of the rich man fade. 


When the fierce sun of summer arises the 


12-15. Blessed is the man that endureth temptation. He that endures and continues faithful 


shall have the crown. 18. Letnomansay . . Lamtempted of God. Some men when they fall 
try to throw the blame on God, as if God had tempted them. It is impossible that God be tempted of sin, 
nor does he ever tempt men to sin, but: 14. Every man is tempted when he suffers his own lusts to 
lead and entice him. There can be no temptation unless something within us causes a sinful desire. 15. 
When lust hath conceived. The course of sin is described as that of a birth. The sinful desire is the 
conception; the sinful deed the birth; moral and eternal death the final result. 

16-18. Donoterr. Either about the source of sin or of all good gifts. 17. Every good gift, etc. 
All gifts that truly bless us are God’s gifts. Father of lights. God, the Creator of every light of the 
material world, and the source of all moral light. No variableness, etc. Godis unchangeable, always 
the same, nor does he cast a shadow of turning like the sun. The allusion is to the constantly chang- 
ing shadows of objects in the sunlight caused by the movement, not of the sun, but of the earth. 18. Of 
his own will begat he us. Not in caprice, but our birth as children of God was due to his eternal will. 
Kind of firsttruits. The early converts are often called first fruits of the gospel. 


342 JAMES. 


[Ch. I. 


See BS ee eee 


19 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, let every 
man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath: 

20 For the wrath of man worketh not the right- 
eousness of God. 

21 Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, and super- 
fluity of naughtiness, and receive with meekness 
the ingrafted word,? which is able to save your 
souls. 

22 But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers 
only, deceiving your own selves. 

23 For? if any be a hearer of the word, and not a 
doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural 
face ina glass: _ 

24 For he beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, 
and straightway forgetteth what manner of man he 
was. 

25 But® whoso looketh into the perfect law of 
liberty, and continueth therein, he being not a for- 
getful hearer, but a doer of the work, this? man 
shall be blessed in his deed. 

26 If any man among you seem to be religious, 
and bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own 
heart, this man’s religion zs vain. 

27 Pure religion, and undefiled, before God and 
the Father, is this, To® visit the fatherless and 
widows in their affliction,‘ and to keep himself 
unspotted from the world. 





a Acts 18: 26; Rom. 1:16; 1 Cor. 15:2; Eph. 1: 18. 6 Luke 6: 47. 
1Tim. 1:5. fRom. 12:2. 








c2 Cor. 3:18. 


Ye know this, my beloved 19 
brethren. But let every 
man be swift to hear, slow 
to speak, slow to wrath: 
for the wrath of man work- 20 
eth not the righteousness 
of God. Wherefore pales 21 
away all filthiness an 
pies Noes te wickedness, 
receive with meekness the 
implanted word, which is 
able to save your souls. 
But be ae doers of the 22 
word, and not hearers only, 
deluding your own selves. 
For if any one is a hearer 
of the word, and not a do- 
er, he is like unto a man 
beholding his natural face 
in a mirror: for he behold- 
eth himself, and goeth 
away, and straightway 
forgetteth what manner of 
man he was. But he that 25 
looketh into the perfect 
law, the law of liberty, and 
so continueth, being not a 
hearer that forgetteth, but 
a doer that. worketh, this 
man shall be blessed in his 
doing. 1f any man thinketh 26 
himself to be religious, 
while he bridleth not his 
tongue but deceiveth his 
heart, this man’s religion 
is vain. Pure religion and 27 
undefiled before our God 
and Father is this, to visit 
the fatherless and widows 
in their affliction, and to 
keep himself unspotted 
from the world. 


23 


24 


d John 18:17. elIsa. 1:16; 





19-25. Wherefore . . 


be swift to hear. Let each saint hear and learn, but be careful not to 


speak rashly, and especially in anger. 20. For the wrath of man. An angry man will show forth 
something very different from God’s righteousness. 21. Lay aside all filthiness. Every impurity of 
life. Naughtiness. ‘ Overflowing” of wickedness in the Revision. Wrath would cause such an over- 
flow. The engrafted word. The word of God planted in your hearts. 22. Beyedoers. He who 
is only a hearer deceiveth himself, See Matt.7: 21-23. 28, 24. Ifany be a hearer .. nota 
doer. The point of the comparison is this: Like a man who looks in the glass and soon forgets the 
impression, so the impression of the word on such a man is soon forgotten. The word must be impressed 
by the doing of it. 25. But whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty. The gospel, which 
sets men free. He who looks into it, is impressed by it, and obeys it shall be blessed in the doing. 

26,27. Ifany . . seem to be religious. He who professes religion and yet does not control 
his tongue is deceived. Unless he has grace enough to rule theunruly member, he has not enough for 
salvation. 27. Pure religion and undefiled. Combining pure hearts and pure outward lives. This 
genuine religion has two elements: (1) Kind and loving deeds, exemplified especially in helping the help- 
less, such as widows and orphans, and (2) living pure, unsullied lives, unstained by the sins prevalent in 
this sinful world, 


Ch. IL.) JAMES. 


CHAPTER II. 


Faith and Works. 


SUMMARY. Respect of Persons. The Royal Law. He Who Keeps the 
Law Must Offend in Nothing. Faith not a Living Faith if Alone. 
Its Life Must be Shown by its Fruits. It is Perfected by Obedience. 
The Lesson of Abraham’s Faith. 


1 My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord 
Jesus Christ,* the Lord of glory, with? respect of 
‘persons. 

2 For if there come unto your assembly a man 
with a gold ring, in goodly apparel, and there come 
in also a poor man in vile raiment; 

3 And ye have respect to him that weareth the 
gay clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou here in a 
good place; and say to the poor, Stand thou there, 
or sit under my footstool; »@. 

4 Are ye not then partail in yourselves, and are 
become judges of evil thoughts? 

5 Hearken, my beloved brethren, Hath¢ not God 
chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and 
heirs of the kingdom? which he hath promised to 
them that love him? 

6 But ye have despised the poor. Do not rich 
men oppress you, and draw you before the judg- 
ment-seats? 

7 Do not they blaspheme that 
the which ye are called? 


worthy name by 


343 


CHAPTER II. 


My brethren, hold not 1 
the faith of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, the Lord of glory, 
with respect of persons. 
For if there come into your 2 
synagogue a man with a 
gold ring, in fine clothing, 
and there come in also a 
poor man in vile clothing; 
and ye have regard to him 3 
that weareth the fine cloth- 
ing, and say, Sit thou here 
in a good place; and ye say 
to the poor man, Stand 
thou there, or sit under my 
footstool; are ye not divid- 
edin your own mind, and 
become judges with evil 
thoughts? earken, my 
beloved brethren; did not 
God choose them that are 
poor as to the world to be 
rich in faith, and heirs of 
the kingdom which he 

romised to them that love 
him? But ye have dishon- 
oured the poor man. Do 
not the rich oppress you, 
and themselves drag you 


before the judgement- 
seats? Do not they blas- 
pheme the honourable 


name by the which ye are 


called? Howbeit if ye ful- 8 
fil the royal law, accordin 
tothe scripture, Thou shal 
love thy neighbor as thy- 


8 If ye fulfil the royal law according to the scrip- 
ture,® ‘Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself, ye 





do well: 
a Acts 7:23 1 Cor. 2:8; Phil. 2:9. b Ley. 19:15; Deut. 1:17; 16:195 Prov. 24:23; 28:21; Matt. 22:16; Jude 16. 
ce John 7:48. @ Ex. 20:6; 1 Sam 2:30; Matt. 5:33 Luke 6:20; 12:32. ¢ Lev. 19:8; Matt. 22:39. 


1-4. Have not the faith of our Lord. The Gospel, the Christian profession. With respect to 
persons. God is no respecter of persons (Acts 10: 34), nor should Christians be. God respects character, 
not dress, or wealth, or earthly rank. 2. Come into your synagogue. See Revision. The place of 
worship, whether Jewish or Christian. James, a Jewish Christian of the strictest sort, uses the Jewish 
term. With a gold ring. An indication of wealth in that age, especially in connection with the fine 
clothing. A poor man, as shown by his mean clothing. 38. And have respect. Show respect not to 
the character but to the clothes, by giving one a welcome and a good seat, while the other is treated con- 
temptuously, allowed to stand or to sit in a very uncomfortable place. Does not this describe the spirit 
of half the churches of our time? 4. Are ye not then partial P Show partiality from outward appear- 
ance. Judges of evil thoughts. Judge between the two men under the influence of evil thoughts. 

5-9. Hath not God chosen the poor, etc.P Ye choose out the rich for favor, but God hath chosen 
in most part the poor to be rich in faith, etc. Seel Cor. 1: 16,17. God has made poor men heirs of the 
eternal inheritance. 6. But ye have despised the poor. Those whom God accepts you reject. Do 
not rich men oppress youP The oppressors of the poor are usually the rich. They are the money 
lenders, those who bring suit for debt, and hence draw the poor before the judgment seats. Perhaps 
also there is an allusion to the fact that they were the persecutors. ”. Do notthey blaspheme that 
worthy name, etc. The name of Christ. There is an allusion either to the fact that they were already 
called Christians, or that they were baptized in hisname. 8. The royal law according to the script- 
‘ure. The law of love for one’s neighbor, which is the fulfillment of the law. See Gal. 4:14. 9.° Butit 


344 JAMES. 


(Ch. II. 





9 But if ye have respect to persons, ye commit 
sin, and are convinced of the law as transgressors. 

10 For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and 
yet offend in one point, he* is guilty of all. 
«11 For he that said,» Do not commit adultery, 
said also, Do not kill. Now, if thou commit no 
adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a trans- 
eressor of the law. 

12 So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be 
judged by the law of liberty. 

13 For he shall have judgment without mercy 
that hath shewed no mercy; and mercy rejoiceth 
against judgment. 

14 What doth zt profit, my brethren, though a 
man say he hath faith, and have not works? can 
faith save him? 

15 If a brother or a sister be naked, and destitute 
of daily food, 

16 And one of you say unto them, Depart in 
peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye 
give them not those things which are needful to the 
body; what doth zt profit? 

17 Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, 
being alone. : 

18 Yea, aman may say, Thou hast faith, and I 
have works: shew me thy faith without thy works, 
and I will shew thee my faith by my works. 

19 Thou believest that there is one God; thou 
doest well: the® devils also believe, and tremble. 











self, ye do well: but if ye 9 
have respect of persons, ye 
commit sin, beiag convict- 
ed by the law as trans- 
gressors. For whosoever 10 
shall keep the whole law, 
and yet stumble in one 
point, he is become guilty 
of all. For he that said, 11 
Do not commit adultery, 
said also, Do not kill. Now 
if thou dost not commit 
adultery, but killest, thou 
art become a transgressor 
of the law. So speak ye, 12 
and so do, as men that are 
to be pened by a law of 
liberty. For judgement is 13 
without mercy to him that 
hath shewed no mercy: 
merey glorieth against 
judgement. 

hat doth it profit, my 14 
brethren, if a man say he 
hath faith, but have not 
works? can that faith save 
him? If a brother or sister 15: 
be naked, and in lack of 
daily food, and one of you 16 
say unto them, Go in 
peace, be ye warmed and 
filled; and yet ye give them 
not the things needful to 
the boay what doth it 
profit? Even so faith, if it 17 
have not works, is dead in 
itself. Yea, a man will say, 18 
Thou hast faith, and I 
have works: shew me thy 
faith apart from thy works, 
and I by my works will 
shew thee my faith. Thou 19 
believest that God is one; 
thou doest well: the devils 
also believe and shudder. 


@ Deut. 27:26; Matt. 5:19; Gal. 3:10. 6 Ex. 20:13. c Matt. 8:295 Mark 1:24; 5:7; Luke 4:34; Acts 16:17; 19:15. 





ye have respect to persons. Such partiality as that described in verse 3 would break this law, and 
hence would be a sin, and the sinner would be convinced, convicted as a transgressor. 
10-13. Whosoever shall keep the whole law, If the law is broken by “respect of persons,” the 


whole law is broken. He who wilfully breaks one command is a law breaker and is guilty before the law- 
- 11. He that said, etc. He that gave one command, gave the other commands. If you break any one 
of them you sin against the Divine Lawgiver. 12. Sospeak ye. So act as one judged by the law of 
liberty. The Gospel, which is not a law of outward compulsion, but of a new and willing spirit. See 
Rom. 8: 2,15. 18. He shall have judgment without mercy. We must show mercy if we expect. 
merey. Our own spirit determines our manner of judgment. See Matt.6:15. If we love our neighbor 
God will love us. 

14-18. What dothit profit. Professions are nothing unless their fruit is deeds. Even faith is of no: 
avail unless it demonstrates its life by works. 15. Ifabrother. A practical application is now made 
of the royal law. Be naked. Insufficiently clothed. 16. Depart in peace. Express to the needy 
only kind wishes; that he be warmed by receiving good clothing, and fed by food being provided. Such 
good wishes are worthless unless followed up by active help to the sufferer. 17. Evensofaith. Faith 
that has no power to bring one to obedience and to sway the life is as worthless as good wishes which end 
in words. Being alone. It cannot stand alone and be of any avail. Only when it shows its power in 
works is it of the slightest value. 18. A manmaysay. One may claim works, another faith. They 
must go hand in hand. One cannot show faith without works. The life lived is the proof of the faith 
held. If a man lives in obedience to Christ that is proof that he has faith in Christ. 

19. Thou believest that there is one God. That is very well, but can that alone save youP Even 
the demons believe that also. See Matt. 8; 29. Evil spirits confessed Christ, but this confession of faith. 
did not save them. 


Ch. IL] JAMES. 


20 But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith 
without works is dead? 

21 Was not Abraham our father justified by 
works,” when he had offered Isaac his son upon the 
altar? 

22 Seest thou how faith wrought with his works, 
and by works was faith made perfect? 

23 And the scripture was fulfilled which saith,° 
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto 
him for righteousness: and he was called® the 
Friend of God. 

24 Ye see then how that by works a man is justi- 
fied, and not by faith only. 

25 Likewise also,¢ was not Rahab the _ harlot 
justified by works, when she had received the mes- 
sengers, and had sent them out another way? 

26 For as the body without the spirit is dead, so 
faith without works is dead also. 





aGal5:6. 6 Gen. 22:9. ¢ Gen. 15:6; Rom. 4:33 Gal. 3:6. @2 Chron. 20:73 Isa. 41:8. 








345: 
But wilt thou know, O vain 20° 
man, that faith apart from 
works is barren? Was not 21 
Abraham our father justi- 
fied by works, in that he 
offered up Isaae his son 
upon thealtar? Thou seest 22 
that faith wrought with his 
works, and by works was 
faith made perfect; and 23 
the scripture was fulfilled 
which saith, And Abraham 
believed God, and it was 
reckoned unto him for 
righteousness; and he was 
called the friend of God. 
Ye see that by works a 
man is justified, and not 
only by faith. And in like 
manner was not also Ra- 
hab the harlot justified by 
works, in that she receiv- 
ed the messengers, and sent 
them out another way? 
For as_ the body apart 
from the spirit is dead, 
even so faith apart from 
works is dead. 


to 


4 
25 


26: 


e Josh. 2:1; Heb. 11:31. 





20-24. But wilt thou know, etc. “I will show by proof that th 


works by the case of Abraham, the great father of the faithful.” 
has no power to make alive unless it has power over the life. 


e faith that justifies produces. 
Faith without works is dead. It 
21. Was not Abraham our father. 


The father of the Jewish race; also the father of all his children by faith. See Gal. 3: 7-9. Justified by 


works. By a faith which showed itself in works. 


This is the argument of J ames, that faith is of no 


avail unless accompanied by works. Of this all Abraham’s life was a demonstration. He was told when 


in Mesopotamia to go forth into the land God would show him, and “‘ he went 
an act of faith (Heb. 11: 8). ‘By faith he sojourned in the land of promise 
acts of faith secured Divine approval, but the supremest trial was when h 


forth, not knowing whither Bs 
” (Heb. 11: 9). Each of these 
€ offered Isaac. See notes on 


Heb. 11:17. This victory of faith was followed by crowning approval and glorious promises. 22. Seest 


thou how faith wrought. Abraham’s faith wasa working faith. 
fect. The element of works is essential to make it complete. 


faith.” It must have energy to avail. Abraham’s faith “wrought.” 


By works was faith made per- 
Without works it is an imperfect, ‘‘a dead 
28. And the scripture was 


fulfilled. The scripture quoted is Gen. 15: 16. The case of the offering of Isaac was a complete outward 


demonstration that Abraham believed God, as the Scripture said. 


‘Abraham £7 Khalil, ‘‘The Friend.” 
justifying faith is a working faith. 


“He was called the friend of God.” 
Honored as no other mortal had been. See Isa. 41: 8, and 2 Chron. 20: 7. 


The Mohammedans still call 


24. Ye see then, etc. The case of Abraham proves that the 


25,26. Rahab the harlot. See note on Heb. 11: 31. This is one of the long roll of examples of faith 
shown by works given-by Paul. 26. For as the body without the spirit. The body is a lifeless, 
dead thing, without the spirit. So lifeless is faith unless it shows an energy in works. 

NotTE.—Some have thought, among these Luther, that Paul and James were not in agreement on the: 


subject of faith. Those who thus conclude mistake both these inspired men of God. 


Paul shows that 


works without faith will not justify, and hence lays the emphasis on faith; James shows that faith with- 


out works will not justify, and lays the emphasis on works. 


Neither teaches that either faith 


alone, or 


works alone will justify. Paul, indeed, shows that faith alone is worthless (1 Cor. 13: 2), and in Hebrews, 


chapter 11, he emphasizes works as the demonstration of faith. 


The two writers are in agreement, and 


all seeming disagreement is due to the fact that they are seeking to correct different errors, and hence look 


at the matter from different points of view. 


JAMES. 


65 
— 
for) 


(Ch. III. 


eee 


CHAPTER III. 


The Control of the Tongue. 


‘SUMMARY. Aspiring to Teachership. The Power of the Tongue. Its 
Untamable Nature. Its Contradictory Uses. Wisdom Shown in Its 
Proper Control. The Wisdom from Above Described. 


1 My brethren, *be not many masters, knowing” 
that we shall receive the greater condemnation. 

2 For® in many things we offend all. If ‘any 
man offend not in word,® the same zs a perfect 
man, and able also to bridle the whole body. 

3 Behold, we put bits in the horses’ mouths, that 
they may obey us; and we turn about their whole 
body. 

4 Behold also the ships, which, though they be so 
great, and are driven of fierce winds, yet are they 
turned about with a very small helm, whithersoever 
the governor listeth. 

5 Even so the tongue is a little member, and 
boasteth great things. Behold how great a matter 
a little fire kindleth! 

6 And the tongue ¢s a fire, a world of iniquity: so 
is the tongue among our members, that*t it defileth 
the whole body, and setteth on fire the course of 
nature; and it is set on fire of hell. 

7 For every kind of beasts, and of birds, and of 
serpents, and of things in the sea, is tamed, and 
hath been tamed of mankind: 





CHAPTER III. 


Be not many teachers, 1 
my brethren, knowing that 
we shall receive heavier 
judgement. For in many 2 
things we all stumble. If 
any stumbleth not in word, 
the same is a perfect man, 
able to bridle the whole 
body also. Now if we put 3 
the horses’ bridles into 
their mouths, that they 
may obey us, we turn about 
their whole body also. Be- 4 
hold, the ships also, though 
they are so great, and are 
driven by rough winds, are 
yet turned about by a very 
small rudder, whither the 
impulse of the steersman 
willeth. So the tongue also 5 
is a little member, and 
boasteth great things. Be- 
hold, how much wood is 
kindled by how small a 
fire! And the tongue isa 6 
fire: the world of iniquity 
among our members is the 
tongue, which defileth the 
whole body, and setteth on 
fire the wheel of nature, 
and is set on fire by hell. 
For every kind of beasts 7 
and birds, of creeping 
things and things in the 
sea, is tamed, and hath 
been tamed by~ mankind: 





a Matt. 23:8; Rom. 2:20,21. 6 Luke 6:37. c1 Kings 8:46; 1 John 1:8. 


J Matt. 15:11,18-20; Mark 7:15; 20:23. 


d Psa. 34: 


135; 1 Pet. 3:10. e Matt. 12:37. 





1,2. Be not many masters. 
in the church is meant. 


Do not many of you seek to be teachers. 
Shall receive the greater condemnation. 


The office of public teaching 
Those who profess to teach 


others will be judged more strictly than those of humbler profession. Of those who have much, much is 


required. See Matt. 7: 1. 
. account for the manner in which he uses it. 
make mistakes, These can hardly be excused in the teacher. 
trols his tongue gives proof of his ability to maintain entire self control. 

3-5. We put bits. 


Same is a perfect man. 


A lesson is to be given on the tongue. He who teaches will be held strictly to 
2. For in many things. 


All are liable to stumble and 
He who con- 


The word bridle (verse 2) suggests a figure. The bridle bit controls the whole 


horse. 4, Behold alsothe ships. These are controlled by so small a thing as the helm. Governor. 


Helmsman. James abounds in the sea figures. See 1: 6. 


5. So the tongue. 


Though so small it can 


control the body like a bridle, or the helm of aship. Itisa power. Boasteth great things. Claims 


great powers. How great a matter 
tongue may stir up great trouble. 


fire, 


As a spark may burn a house a little thing like the 


6-8. The tongueis afire. It will kindle up anger. A word often causes awar. A world of iniquity. 


Tt can stir up a world of sinfulness. 


The tongue moves man and he makes the world a world of sin. 


It defileth the whole body. Leads all the body into sin. Setteth on fire the course of nature. 
Literally “wheel of nature.” The idea is probably “putteth nature in a blaze,” referring to the wars 
and commotions due to its influence. Set on fire of hell. It is often inspired by hell itself. A bad 
tongue is the organ of thedevil. 7, Every kind ofbeasts. ‘Every nature of beasts” literally. Four 
orders are named: beasts or quadrupeds, birds, reptiles, in the Greek “ creeping things,” and fishes, or 
“things in the sea.” All of these have been subjected and controlled. 8. But the tongue can no 
aman tame. Man has never tamed this organ as a whole, Some may have ruled their own, but the 
‘organ itself still does its evil work in the world. It isan unruly evil. Not only an evil, but unruly. 


Ch. IIL] JAMES. 


347 





8 But the tongue can no man tame; 7 7s an 
unruly evil, full of deadly poison. 

9 Therewith bless we God, even the Father; and 
therewith curse we men, which are* made after the 
similitude of God. 

10 Out of the same mouth proceedeth blessing 
and cursing. My brethren, these things ought not 
so to be. 

11 Doth a fountain send forth at the same place 
sweet water and bitter? 

12 Can the fig-tree, my brethren, bear olive-ber- 
ries? either a vine, figs? so can no fountain both 
yield salt water and fresh. 

13 Who? zs a wise man, and endued with knowl- 
edge among you? let him shew out of a good 
conversation his works with meekness of wisdom. 

14 But if ye have’ bitter envying and strife in 
your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the 
truth. 

15 This? wisdom descendeth not from above, but 
4s earthly, sensual, devilish. 

16 For® where envying and strife zs, there is 
confusion, and every evil work. 

17 But! the wisdom that is from above is first 
pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be en- 
treated, full of mercy and good fruits, without par- 
tiality,? and without hypoerisy. 

18 And® the fruit of righteousness is sown in 
peace of them that make peace. : 


@ Gen. 1:26; 5:1; 9:63; 1 Cor. 11:7. 6 Gal. 6:4. ¢ Rom, 13:18. d Phil. 3:19. 
1:22. h Matt. 5:9. 





e1Cor. 38:3. f1 Cor. 2:6. 


but the tongue can no man 8 
tame; it is a restless evil, 
itis full of deadly poison. 
Therewith bless we the 9 
Lord and Father; and 
therewith curse we men, 
which are made after the 
likeness of God: out of the 10 
same mouth cometh forth 
blessing and cursing. My 
brethren, these things 
ought not so to be. Doth 11 
the fountain send forth 
from the same opening 
sweet water and bitter? can 12 
a fig tree, my brethren, 
yield olives, or a vine figs? 
neither can salt water yield 
sweet. 

Who is wise and under- 13 
standing among you? let 
him shew by his good life 
his works in meekness of 
wisdom. But if ye have 14 
bitter jealousy and faction 
in your heart, glory not 
and lie not against the 
truth. This wisdom is not 15 
a wisdom that cometh down 
from above, but is earthly, 
sensual, devilish. For 16 
where jealousy and faction 
are, there is confusion and 
every vile deed. But the 17 
wisdom that is from above 
is first pure, then peacea- 
ble, gentle, easy to be in- 
treated, full of mercy and 
good fruits, without vari- 
ance, without hypocrisy. 
And the fruit of righteous- 18 
ness is sown in peace for 
them that make peace. 


g1Pet. 


rrr ea 
Generally used. Full of deadly poison. Often charged with malice, envy, anger, slander, etc. 

9-12. Therewith bless we God. Its opposite uses are shown. We use it to pray and to bless God, 
and, sometimes, the same tongue will be used to curse his creatures. James rebuked evils that he had 
observed. 10. Out of the same mouth, These utterly inconsistent things come out of the same 
mouth. 11, Dothafountain. In nature such incongruity isnot shown. A fountain does not give out 


two kinds of waters. 12. Can the fig tree. 
Nor should the mouth bear blessing and cursing, good and evil. 


Neither does a tree bear two opposite kinds of fruits. 


13-16. Who is a wise man? Discreet and well informed? It must be shown in conversation, 
that is, in life, both words and deeds, meekness of wisdom. True wisdom will not speak boastfully. 
14. Glory not. If there is bitterness in the heart, let there be no boasting of your goodness. That 


would be 


to lie against the truth. 15. This wisdom. Wisdom (not real wisdom but false) which 


gives rise to envy and strife is not from heaven. Itis earthly, of the passions, of the devil, not of God. 


16. For where, etc. 
17,18. But the wisdom that is from above. 


God is put in contrast with the false, sensual wisdom named in verse 15. It is first pure. 


Where these exist in the heart every evil work will follow. 
The divine wisdom imparted by communion with 


The other is 


sensual; thisis pure. Then peaceable. The other is full of strife, this seeks for peace. Gentle. Not 


too rigid and 
mercy. Not unforgiving and unkind. Good fruits. 
full of good fruits. 
18. The fruit of righteousness. 


fruit as seed to produce peace. Them that make peace. These sowers are peacemakers. 


exacting. Easy to be entreated. Not obstinate, but capable of persuasion, Full of 
The other shows evil works; heavenly wisdom is 
Without partiality. Nota respecterof persons. Without hypocrisy. Sincere. 
This wisdom not only bears righteousness as a fruit but sows this 


See Matt. 


5:9. Sowing righteousness makes peace, because wrong is the fruitful mother of strife. 


348 JAMES. 





CHAPTER IV. 


Control of the Passions. 


SUMMARY.—Strifes from the War of Passions. Fornication with the 
World. Seeking the Grace of God. Humbling Ourselves Before the 
Lord. Evil Speaking of Brethren. The Uncertainties of this Life. 

1 From whence come wars and fightings among 
you? come they not hence, even of your lusts that 
war in your members? 

2 Ye lust, and have not: ye kill, and desire to 
have, and cannot obtain: ye fight and war, yet ye 
have not, because ye* ask not. 

3 Ye" ask, and receive not,° because ye ask amiss, 
that ye may consume ?¢ upon your lusts. 

4 Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not 
that* the friendship of the world is enmity with 
God? whosoever® therefore will be a friend of the 
world is the enemy of God. 

5 Do ye think that the scripture saith in vain,‘ 
The spirit that dwelleth in us lusteth to envy? 

6 But he giveth more grace: wherefore he saith, 
God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the 
humble. 

7 Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist® 
the devil, and he will flee from you. 

8 Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to 
you. Cleanse your hands, ye sinners; and purify 
your hearts, ye double-minded. 





(Ch. IV. 


CHAPTER IY. 


Whence come wars and 1. 
whence come  fightings 
among you? come they not 
hence, even of your pleas- 
ures that war in your mem- 
bers? Ye lust, and have 2 
not: ye kill, and covet, and 
cannot obtain: ye fight and 
war; ye have not, because 
ye ask not. Ye ask, and 3. 
receive not, because ye ask 
amiss, that ye may spend 
7 in your pleasures. Ye 4 
adulteresses, know ye not 
that the friendship of the 
world is enmity with God? 
Whosoever therefore 
would be a friend of the 
world maketh himself an 
enemy of God. Or think 5- 
ye that the scripture speak- 
eth in vain? Doth the 
spirit which he made to 
dwell in us long unto en- 
vying? But _he giveth 6. 
more grace. Wherefore the 
scripture saith, God resist- 
eth the proud, but giveth 
grace to the humble. Be 7 
subject therefore unto 
God; but resist the devil, 
and he will flee from you. 
Draw nigh to God, and he 8 
will draw nigh to you. 
Cleanse your hands, ye 
sinners; and purify your 


hearts, ye doubleminded. 


eJohn 15:19; 17:145 Gal. 1:10. 
h Eph. 4:27; 1 Pet. 5:9. 





@Psa. 10:4. 6 Job 27:9; Prov, 1:28. c Psa. 66:18. d@1John 2:15. 


J Gens 8:21. 
g Psa. 138:63 Prov. 3:24; Matt. 23:12; Luke 18:14. 2. 


42 Cor. 15:2 





1-3. Whence come wars and fightings? Peace has been spoken of at close of chapter 3, but the 
world is full of strife. Whenceisit? James shows it is due to human passions. Among you? James. 
was so Jewish, though a Christian, that sometimes he looked beyond the church to his fleshly brethren. 
He here seems to address them like another Amos, or Jeremiah. Even of your own lusts. They are- 
due to insatiate desires. 2. Ye lust, and have not. This inordinate desire unsatisfied leads to murder, 
or to hatred and envy, which are murder in embryo. Even then not obtaining they fight and war in order 
to satisfy their greed. Still they are not satisfied. They should haye humbly gone to God with their 
reasonable requests, but the lustful cannot truly pray. 8. Yeask, and receive not. Some even have- 
prayed for the things which would satisfy their lusts, but God hears not such prayers. 

4,5. Ye adulteresses. Adulterous spouses of Christ who commit fornication with the world. It 
is spiritual adultery that is meant. The friendship of the world. Since the prince of this world is 
opposed to Christ and the spirit of the world is also opposed, one cannot love the ways of the world and 
love God also. “Ye cannot serve God and mammon” (Matt. 6: 24). 5. Thatthe scripture saith in 
vain. The reference is to Deut., chapter 32, where God’s love and jealousy of his people are deseribed. 
Long unto envying. Long for our love even to the envy of the worldly objects which have secured it. 
The Revision suggests the idea, which harmonizes with the thought in verse 4. A freer translation. will 
make it plainer. ‘The spirit that he (God) hath placed in us desireth us jealously,” that is, desires we- 
should not commit adultery with the world, but be wholly devoted to God, as those espoused to God in 
Christ, and even envies the world which has secured our love. 

6-10. God giveth more grace. To enable us to overcome our love of the world. Wherefore the 
scripture saith. Quoted from Proy. 3: 34. The passage is quoted to show that the way to secure grace: 
more abundantly is to be humble before the Lord. 7. Submit yourselves therefore to God. To: 
secure his grace abundantly. Resist the devil, etc. He always flees before stout resistance, See the: 


Ch. IV.] JAMES. | 


349 





9 Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: let your 
laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to 
heaviness. 

10 Humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord, 
and he shall lift you up. 

11 Speak not evil one of another, brethren. He 


that speaketh evil of Ais brother, and judgeth his: 


brother, speaketh evil of the law, and judgeth the 
law: but if thou judge the law, thou art not a doer 
-of the law, but a judge. 

12 There is one lawgiver,* who is able to save and 
to destroy: who art thou that judgest another? 

138 Go to now, ye that say, To-day or to-morrow 
we will go into such a city, and continue there a 
year, and buy and sell, and get gain; 

14 Whereas ye know not what shall be on the 
morrow: for what 7s your life? It is even a vapour, 
that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth 
away. 

15 For that ye ought to say, If the Lord will, we 
shall live, and do this, or that. 

16 But now ye rejoice in your boastings: all such 
rejoicing is evil. 

17 Therefore to him that knoweth to do good, 
and doeth 7¢ not, to him it is sin. 


Be afflicted, and mourn, 9 
and weep: let your laugh- 
ter be turned to mourning, 
and your joy to heaviness. 
Humble yourselves in the 10 
sight of the Lord, and he 
shall exalt you. 

Speak not one against 11 
another, brethren. He that 
speaketh against a brother, 
or judgeth his brother, 
speaketh against the law, 
and judgeth the law: but 
if thou judgest the law, 
thou art not a doer of the 
law, but ajudge. One only 42 
is the lawgiver and judge, 
even he who is able to save 
and to destroy: but who 
art thou that judgest thy 
neighbour? 

Go to now, ye that say, 
To-day or to-morrow we 
will & into this city, and 
spend a year there, and 
trade, and get gain: where- 
as ye know not what shall 
be on the morrow. What is 
your life? For ye area 
vapour, that appeareth for 
a little time, and then van- 
isheth away. For that ye 
ought to say, If the Lord 
will, we shall both live, 
and do this or that. But 
now ye glory in your 
vauntings: all such glory- 
ingisevil. To him there- 
fore that knoweth to do 
good, and doeth it not, to 
him it is sin. 


13 


14 


15 


16 


1z 





a Matt. 10:28. 


6 Luke 12:47; John 9:41; 15:22; Rom. 1:205 2:17. 





‘Temptation of Christ. If not hurled back he presses the attack. 8. Draw nigh to God. If we wish 
God very near to us we must seek to dwell very near to him. Only sin keeps us afar off. Cleanse your 
hands. Of eyil doing. Purify your hearts. Of evil thoughts. 9. Be afflicted, and mourn. 
Mourn over your sins and sincerely repent of them. 10. Humble yourselves. “He that humbleth 
himself shall be exalted’ (Matt. 23: 12). 

11,12. Speak not evil one of another. The subject of the tongue is resumed. To speak evil is to 
make harsh, censorious judgments. Speaketh evil of the law. The “royal law” requires love of a. 
brother, and when this law is thus violated by a harsh judgment the law itself is condemned, But when 
‘a man sets himself up as a judge of the law he is no longer an humble and faithful doer of the law. 12. 
There is one lawgiver. The lawgiver is God, the Almighty. Shall man judge him? Judgest 
another? In disobedience to God who made the law which forbids it. 

13-17. Go to now, ye that say. Presumptuous judgments have just been rebuked. Shall we pre- 
‘sume on an uncertain future? The folly of laying plans as if we could command life is exposed. 14, 
What is your life? Who knows that he will have a to-morrow, since life is like a vanishing vapor? 
15. Ye ought to say. The proper way is to plan everything subject to the Lord’s will. 16. Ye 
rejoice in your boastings. It was a boastful manner to use such language as that of verse 13 in 
stating plans. 17. To him that knoweth to do good. The connection of thought is probably as fol- 
lows: “I have warned you that such boasting is wrong, and that the right way is to speak submissively 
(as in verse 15). If you know how to do the right and yet do it not the sin is the greater on account of 


your knowledge.” 


390 JAMES. 





CHAPTER V. 


Warnings to the Rich. 


SuMMARY.—The Sins of Rich Men. The Judgments Coming Upon 
Them. Patience Under Affliction. The Examples of Job and Elijah. 
Healing the Sick. Effectual Prayer. Restoring Sinners. 


1 Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for 
your miseries that shall come upon you. 

2 Your riches are corrupted, and your garments 
are moth-eaten. 


3 Your gold and silver is cankered; and the rust 


of them shall be.a witness against. you, and shall 
eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye* have heaped 
treasure together for the last days. 

4 Behold,” the hire of the labourers which have 
reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back 
by fraud, crieth: and°¢ the cries of them which have 
reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of 
sabaoth. 

5 Ye have lived in pleasure upon the earth, and 
been wanton; ye have nourished your: hearts, as in 
a day of slaughter. 

6 Ye have condemned and killed the just; and he 
doth not resist you. 

7 Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming 
of the Lord. Behold, the husbandman waiteth for 


[Ch. V. 


CHAPTER V. 


Go to now, ye rich, weep 1. 
and howl for your miseries 
that are coming upon you. 
Your riches are corrupted, 2 
and your garments are 
moth-eaten. Your gold 3 
and your silver are rusted; 
and their rust shall be for 
a testimony against you, 
and shall eat your flesh as 
fire. Ye have laid up your 
treasure in the last days. 
Behold, the hire of the la- 4 
bourers who mowed your 
fields, which is of you kept 
back by fraud, crieth out: 
and the cries of them that 
reaped have entered into 
the ears of the Lord of 
Sabaoth. Ye have lived 5 
delicately on the earth, and 
taken your pleasure; ye 
have nourished your hearts 
inaday of slaughter. Ye 6 
have condemned, ye have 
killed the righteous one; 
he doth not resist you. 

Be patient therefore, 
brethren, until the coming 
of theLord. Behold,the hus- 
bandman waiteth for the 
precious fruit of the earth, 
being patient over it, un- 


4 
. 


til it receive the early and 


the precious fruit of the earth, and hath long pa- 
tience for it, until he receive? the early and latter 
rain. 











a Rom. 2:5. 6 Ley. 19:13; Job 24:10. ¢ Deut 24:15. d Deut. 11:14, 








1-6. Goto now. The same expression is used in 4: 13. There it is a rebuke to those who haste to be 
rich; here to those who use riches wickedly. Yerichmen. James looks beyond the church of his day 
_ to his nation and to the church of after time. Weep and howl. Because of coming judgments for 
your sins. 2. Your riches are corrupted. Even their riches in which they trusted are ‘“‘corrupted,” 
or spoiled. Much of the wealth of that period was in stores of various kinds which time or improper 
care would destroy. Your garments are moth-eaten. The rich gathered great stores of garments, 
carpets, etc. See Matt. 22: 11,12. These would be liable to be eaten by moths if not used. 8. Your 
gold and silver are cankered. Rusted from disuse, These metals do not literally rust, but do tarnish 
from long disuse. The idea is that they show they have been hoarded, not used. A witness against 
you. The tarnish shows that you have hoarded instead of using. Shalleat your flesh. They shall 
punish you, as though heated by fire and eating into your flesh. This hoarded wealth will curse the 
possessor. You have heaped . last days. Instead of laying up treasure in heaven you have 
continued to pile up earthly treasure to the last, a matter of extreme folly. What James then thought of 
as “the last days,’’ the end of his nation, country and Jerusalem, was close at hand. 4. Behold, the 
hire of the laborers. These rich men are censured for two sins; viz., the improper use of wealth, and 
the sinful acquisition of wealth. The Bible is everywhere the friend and protector of the laborer. To 
keep back the hire of the laborer is denounced everywhere. See Lev. 19: 13; Deut. 24: 14; Jer. 22: 18; 
Mal. 3:5; Job. 24:6. The cries of them. Of the defrauded laborers. God willavenge them. 5. Ye 
have livedin pleasure. Have spent your wealth on your own pleasures. Nourished your hearts, 
as in a day of slaughter. The meaning is not entirely clear. Probably it is an allusion to the beasts. 
which are fatted and feasted for slaughter and food. They were feasting and engaging in pleasure when 
the awful destruction was near. 6. Ye.have condemned and killed the just. The murder of the: 


Ch. V.] JAMES. 


351 





8 Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts: for? 


the coming of the Lord draweth nigh. 

9 Grudge not one against another, brethren, lest 
ye be condemned: behold, the Judge” standeth 
before the door. 

10 Take,° my brethren, the prophets, who have 
spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of 
suffering affliction, and of patience. 

11 Behold, we count them happy which endure. 
Ye have heard of the’ patience of Job, and have 
seen® the end of the Lord:? that the Lord is very 
pitiful, and of tender mercy. 

12 But above all things, my brethren, swear® not, 
neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by 
any other oath: but let your yea be yea; and your 
nay, nay; lest ye fall into condemnation. 

13 Is any among you aftlicted? let him pray. Is 
any merry? let him sing psalms. 

14 Is any sick among you? let him call for the® 
elders of the church; and let them pray over him,’ 
anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: 

15 And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, 





latter rain. Be ye also pa- 8 
tient ; stablish your hearts: 
for the coming of the Lord 
is at hand. Murmur not, 9 
brethren, one against an- 
other, that ps be not judg- 
ed: behold, the judge 
standeth before the doors. 
Take, brethren, for an ex- 
ample of suffering and of 
patience, the prophets who 
spake in the name of the 
Lord. Behold, we call them 
blessed which endured: ye 
have heard of the patience 
of Job, and hath seen the 
end of the Lord, how that 
the Lord is full of pity, and 
merciful. 

But above all things, my 12 
brethren, swear not, nei- 
ther by the heaven, nor by 
the earth, nor by any other 
oath: but let your yea be 
yea, and your nay, nay; 
that ye fall not under 
judgement. 

Is any among you suffer- 13: 


ing? let him pray. Is any 
cheerful? let him sing 
praise. Is any among you 14 


sick? let him call for the 
elders of the church; and 
let them pray over him, 
anointing him with oil in 
the name of the Lord: and 15 








aPhil. 4:5. 6 Matt. 24:33. ¢ Matt.5:12. d See 


Pet. 5:1. «Mark 6:13. 


e Job. 42:10. Num. 14:18. 


g Matt. 5:34. A1 Tim. 5:173 





Just One, Jesus, was the crowning sin of Israel which brought upon them destruction. It was the rich 
and influential, not the poor, who sought his death. He doth not resist you. Compare Isaiah 53: 7. 
7-9. Be patient, therefore, brethren. James now turns from the rich, wicked Jews, to his suf- 


fering brethren. Let them be patient. Unto the coming of the Lord. That would bring relief. The 
primary reference is to the relief from Jewish persecution which followed the Lord’s coming in judgment 
‘ on the Jewish nation. Behold, the husbandman. The tiller of the soil has to sow and wait long in 
patience for fruit. Be you like him. Early and latter rain. The early rain was the November 
showers which prepared the ground for the seed; the latter rain, the spring showers needed to bring the 
harvest to maturity. Compare Deut. 11: 14. 8. Be ye also patient. Wait, like the husbandmen, for your 
harvest of joy. Thecoming. The relief which the Lord’s coming will bring, is near. See note on verse 
7. 9. Grudge not. Do not bear grudges against one another. The Lord will condemn this, and the 
judge standeth pefore the door, for the “‘coming of the Lord is nigh.” : 

10,11. Take, my brethren, the prophets. They suffered, were patient, endured to the end and 
secured the blessing. 11. We count them happy which endured. We believe of them that all such 
have hada final reward. Ye have heard of the patience of Job. The enduring patience, which 
refused to distrust God, is meant. The end of the Lord. The conclusion in the case of Job wrought 
by the Lord, and how his endurance was blessed. The blessing that came on him is a demonstration that 
the Lord is very pitiful, and full of tender mercy. me 

12,13. Above all things, swear not. This verse is an appropriation of Matt. 5: 33-37, the words 
of Christ. See notes there. Swearing is a besetting sin of the East unto this day. 13. Is any among 
you afflicted? Let him not swear, or engage in any improper use of the tongue, but let him pray. 
God is the Helper in such an hour. Is any merry? Let his joy be shown, not in wanton speech, but 
in singing praises. Prayer and thanksgiving are the appropriate expressions for each condition. 

. 14-16. Is any sick among you. In the early church, when miraculous gifts were imparted by the 
laying on of apostolic hands “as a sign to unbelievers,” one of these was the gift of healing. In most 
early churches founded by the apostles some one of the elders would have this gift. There is no more rea- 
son for the descent of this gift to our times than of any other miraculous power. This passage, then, 
describes what was peculiar to the early church. The sick were anointed by the elders with oil, a symbol 
of the Spirit which effected the healing, hands were laid, and prayer offered. See Mark 6; 13; also Isaiah 
1: 6,and Luke 10: 34. 15. The prayer of faith. The prayer for the sick must be offered in faith to be 
effectual. If he have committed sins. Often our sickness is due to sins.against our body. The Lord, 


9 


B02 JAMES. 


Ken aVe 





and the Lord shall raise him up;* and if he have 
committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. 

16 Confess your faults one to another, and pray 
one for another, that ye may be healed. The ef- 
fectual” fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth 
much. 

17 Elias was a man subject to like passions as we 


the prayer of faith shall 
save him that is sick, and 
) the Lord shall raise ‘him 
up; and if he have com- 
mitted sins, it shall be for- 
given him. 
fore your sins one to an- 
other, and pray one for 
another, that ye may be 
healed. The supplication 
of a vighteous man avail- 
eth much in its working. 


Confess there- 16 








are, and® he prayed earnestly that it might not) Elijah was 2 ian oy Eke 17 
3 5 rj assions with us, and he 
rain: and it rained not on the earth by the space of prayed fervently’ that It 
a a 4 mig not rain; and i 
three years and six months. rained not on the’earth for 
18 And he prayed again and the heaven gave three years and sixmonths. 
. . nh e@ prayed again; an 
rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit. tue Heaven cave cae 
19 Brethren, if any of you do-err irom the truth, | 2° cath) prouemeeterm 
and one convert him; aly... brethren, if any 19 
. ° mon y 
20 Let him know, that he which converteth the truth, ‘and ‘one convert 
4 . aaa e 4 ( im; let him know, that 20 
sinner from the | error of his way shall save a son) ee ee 
from death, and® shall hide a multitude of sins. ner from the error of his 
way shall save a soul from 
death, and ‘shall cover a 
‘ ‘ multitude of sins. 
@ Isa. 83:24; Matt. 9:2. 6 Gen. 20:17; Num.11:2. cl Kings17:1. d1Tim. 4:16. e Psa. 32:1; Proy. 10:12. 
‘who raises the sick in answer to prayer, will forgive these. 16. Confess your faults. This verse 


springs from the preceding. We all need healing of our sins. Let the brother confess his faults as a 
demonstration of repentance and let brethren pray for each other. Repentance, confession and prayer 
are the conditions of the forgiveness of sins committed by church members. 

17-20. Elias was a man subject, etc. The last verse has affirmed the power of the prayer of a 
righteous man. An example of its power is now given. Elias was a man like ourselves, yet great results 
‘followed his prayer. See 1 Kings 17: 1, and following chapters. He prayed earnestly that it might 
not rain. No mention is made in the Old Testament of this prayer, but it is announced prophetically. 
He prayed, either before or after, that rain might be withheld until Israel repented. Three years and six 
months. See Luke 4: 25. In the Old Testament the time is not exactly stated. “In the third year” the 
Lord spoke to Elijah about rain, but we are not informed whether the beginning of the “third year” was 
when rain ceased to fall, or when he went to Zarephath. It is probable that the latter is meant. 18. And 
he prayed again. Seei Kings 18: 42. This prayer was on Mt. Carmel after the trial which ended in the 
overthrow of the priests of Baal, and was followed the same day byrain. 19. If any of you do err 
from the truth. If a brother is led away from the gospel. One might be led into false doctrine, or into 
false practice. And one convert him. Bring him back from his errors and restore him. 20. Let 
him know. As an inducement to engage in this work of love let him know how great a work has been 
done. Save a soul from death. Not physical but eternal death. Hide a multitude of sins. The 
sins of those forgiven are said to be covered or hidden. This passage means that all the sins of the 
restored sinner, though many, shall be blotted out. See Ps. 32: 1. 


INTRODUCTION TO THE FIRST EPISTLE GENERAL OF PETER. 


Simon Peter, the author of this epistle, was by profession a Galilean fisherman, the 
son of Jonah, the brother of Andrew, who first brought him to Christ, and associated in 
business with the sons of Zebedee. When he first appeared his home was at Bethsaida, 
on the northwest shore of the sea of Galilee, but at a later period “‘the house of Andrew 
and Peter’? was in Capernaum, a city distant only a mile or two from Bethsaida. Like 
almost all the early followers of Christ he was a disciple of John the Baptist, by whom he 
was pointed to the Lamb of God. A little later he was called from his nets, and, along 
with his brother and the sons of Zebedee, he left all and followed Jesus. Henceforth, 
-during the ministry of the Saviour, he appears in the front ranks of the disciples. Chosen 
to be an apostle he was one of the three who were drawn most closely to Jesus, who were 
present when our Lord raised the dead maiden at Capernaum, saw the wonders of the 
Transfiguration, and were taken into the Garden of Gethsemane to witness its awful and 
mysterious agony. 

Always impetuous, it was Peter who first answered the great question of the Saviour 
at Ceesarea Philippi, who leaped from the boat on the wave to walk to his Master, who 
sso vehemently declared that he of all men would never deny him, who drew his sword 
to defend him, but who denied him thrice in the palace of the high priest, and then went 
forth to weep so bitterly over his failure in the moment of trial. He, with John, was the 
first of the apostles who appeared at the empty tomb, as well as the first of them to whom 
the risen Lord appeared. Fully forgiven and restored at the sea of Galilee (John, chap- 
ter 21), when the work of founding the church and preaching the Gospel under the 
Great Commission began, Peter for years was the most prominent of the apostolic band. 
It was he who came to the front on the day of Pentecost, and his bold, aggressive leader- 
ship during the earlier years of the church in Judea is unmistakable. More than once 
he was seized, threatened, imprisoned, and when his fellow-worker, James, the brother 
of John, was put to death, Peter would have shared his fate at the hands of Herod, had 
there not been a divine deliverance. 

As years pass the notices of Peter in the New Testament history are less frequent. He 
-was in Jerusalem when Paul came there from Damascus (Gal. 1:18; Acts 9:26) ; and also 
fourteen years later at the council of Jerusalem (Acts, chapter 15; Gal. 2:9), and Paul 
met him again at Antioch (Gal. 2:11), the first time he appears elsewhere than in Judea. 
After this it is only his epistles which give us hints of his further life and labors, but itis 
evident from these and the traditions of the early church that as an ‘‘apostle of the cir- 
cumcision” he finally turned from Judea to evangelize his own race in other Jands. 

This brings us to the questions of the Persons addressed in this epistle, the Object in 
writing to them, and the Place from whence he wrote. Our limits allow only the briefest 
answers. (1.) It was directed to ‘the Sojourners of the Dispersion,” who lived in five 
provinees of the Roman empire, all of which had been evangelized by the apostle Paul. 
See 1 Peter, chapter 1. The Dispersion was a term applied to the Jewish race in lands 
outside of Judea. Hence, not forgetful of his apostleship to the circumcision (Gal. 2:9) 
he addressed himself to Jews, but Jewish Christians, ‘‘the elect.” (2.) His object was 
eens to encourage them to press oe under trial and persecution. 

(2 ‘ 5) 


354 INTRODUCTION TO I. PETER. 





See chapter 4:12. This encouragement and exhortation is set forth in an impetuous tor- 
rent which is thoroughly characteristic of the impetuous Peter. His style is lively, ener- 
getic, and pleasing, if somewhat wanting in the logical connection and precision of the 
great apostle to the Gentiles. An indirect object of Peter in writing was, doubtless, to. 
give his support to the authority of Paul. The churches addressed were founded by Paul, 
but in them had subsequently appeared Judaizers (see introduction to Galatians) who: 
had sought to undermine his authority. Peter recognizes the work, and his teaching is 
an indirect endorsement of that of Paul. It served to show the Jewish Christians that. 
the two great apostles were in harmony. (3.) One question remains, where was the 
epistle written? Chapter 4:13 shows that Peter was at Babylon at the time. It seems 
strange that there should be any question in view of the fact that in all the ancient. 
world the word Babylon without any other explanations always means the great city on 
the Euphrates, or the territory adjacent, which took its name from the city. True, its 
former greatness was gone, and it was a Roman province, but it had been the home of tens 
of thousands of the Circumcision, the class to whom Peter directed his labors, ever since 
the Captivity. We know that inthe latter part of the first century and in the second the 
Rabbinical schools of Babylon vied in importance with that at Tiberias, and that “‘the 
Prince of the Captivity’? was a formidable potentate for a subject. It is opposed to all 
the facts of history to contend that there was not, at the date of this epistle, a great Jew- 
ish population on the banks of the Euphrates, and an indefinite passage of Josephus 
belonging to a period a generation earlier, would never have been used for this purpose 
had it not been that it is essential to the argument of the Papacy to give Peter a long res- 
idence at Rome. It is equally out of the question to assert that Peter in a plain, matter 
of fact letter, speaks of Rome by a name that was only applied to it later in a book of 
symbols, with the statement that it is used asasymbol. Babylon had carried Israel 
into captivity ; when Pagan Rome did the same thing she became a mystical Babylon; 
and spiritual Rome also merited the designation by carrying into captivity the church 
of God. There is no reasonable ground for doubt that Peter extended his labors for his 
own race to Mesopotamia and from thence wrote this epistle. It was probably written 
towards the close of Paul’s first imprisonment in Rome. There are reasons for thinking 
that Peter had seen the Ephesian letter, one of the epistles of Paul’s imprisonment, and. 
hence this Epistle was probably written as late, at least, as A. D. 63. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE GENERAL OF 


1p) igo) Bd ave 


CHAPTER I. 


be 
The Gospel the Foreordained Purpose of God. 


SUMMARY.—The Salutation. The Glorious Hope in Christ. It a Strength 
in Trial. The Prophets Looking Forward Earnestly to Its Revelation. 
Eyen the Angels Desiring to Look into the Mystery. A Godly Life 
Becometh Those Who Have Such a Hope. : 
1 Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to 'the strang- 

ers’ scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappa- 

docia, Asia, and Bythynia, 

2 Elect® according to the foreknowledge of God 
the Father, through* sanctification of the Spirit, 
unto obedience and sprinkling? of the blood of 
Jesus Christ: Grace unto you, and peace, be multi- 


CHAPTER I. 


Peter, an apostle of Je- 1 
sus Christ, to the elect who 
are sojourners of the Dis- 
persion in Pontus, Galatia 
Cappadocia, Asia, an 
Bithynia, according to the 2 
foreknowledge of God the 
Father, in sanctification of 
the Spirit, unto obedience 
and sprinkling of the blood 
of Jesus Christ: Grace to 
you and peace be multi- 


pled. 

Blessed be the God and 3 
Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, who according to 
his great mercy begat us 
again unto a living hope by 
the resurrection of Jesus 
Christ from the dead, unto 4 
an inheritance incorrupti- 
ble, and undefiled, and that 
fadeth not away, reserved 


lied. 
3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, which, according to his abundant 
mercy, hath® begotten us again into a lively hope, 
by‘ the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, 
4 To an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, 
and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for 

you, 
a John 7:35; Acts 2:5,9. 





6 Rom. 8:29. c2Thes. 2:13. d Heb. 12:24. eJames1:18. 1 Thes. 4:14. 





1,2. Peter, an apostle. The first letter of Peter opens as do the other apostolic letters. Peter 
claims no superiority. The New Testament knows nothing of his succession to Christ as the first of the 
Popes. To the elect sojourners (Revision). He does not address Jews generally but Jewish Chris- 
tians primarily, though in portions of the letter he seems to embrace Gentile Christians also. Disper- 
sion. The Jewish race outside of Judea. In Pontus. The letter is directed to the churches in five 
provinces of the Roman empire which Paul had evangelized, all lying in a group south of the Euxine sea 
and east of the Caspian. See map of Paul’s travels. 2. According to the foreknowledge of God. 
Their election and salvation was in accordance with God’s predetermined purpose to save men through 
the gospel, and hence, according to foreknowledge. In sanctification of the spirit. The means 
by which they become elect are pointed out. They were separated from the world by the gospel, the word 
of the Spirit, a sanctification which signifies ‘‘a setting apart to holy uses.” They were thus separated 
unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. In obeying this they were ‘‘ bap- 
tized into the death of Christ’? (Rom. 6: 1-4), and their sins were pardoned. The sanctification in this case 
precedes obedience and pardon. 

8-5. Blessed be the God. The ground of special thanksgiving is that the Father, out of his over- 
flowing mercy, hath begotten us. Has caused us to be born again as his children. Unto a lively 
hope. As children we have a glorious hope of eternal life through the resurrection of Jesus. 4. 
To aninheritance. The hope is not merely of eternal existence, but we become heirs of God, joint heirs 
with Christ. An inheritance incorruptible. It can never decay. Undefiled. It is sinless and 
eternal. 5. Who are kept by the power of God. This inheritance is reserved for those who are 


kept safe by God’s power, through faith, so that wes jane to the end. 
i) 


356 I. PETER. 


5 Who* are kept by the power of God through 
faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the 
last time: 

6 Wherein” ye greatly rejoice, though now for a 
season (if need be) ye are in heaviness through 
manifold temptations; 

7 That the trial of your faith, being much more 
precious than of gold that perisheth, though® it be 
tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and 
honour, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ: 

8 Whom,* having not seen, ye love;® in whom 
though now ye see fim not, yet believing, ye rejoice 
with joy unspeakable, and full of glory: 

9 Receiving the end of your faith, even the salva- 
tion of your souls. 

10 Of! which salvation the prophets have enquir- 
ed and searched diligentiy, who prophesied of the 
grace that should come unto you: 

11 Searching what, or what manner of time,® the 
Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, 
when it testified beforehand" the sufferings of Christ, 
and the glory that should follow. 

12 Unto! whom it was revealed, .that not unto! 
themselves, but unto us, they did minister the 
things which are now reported unto you by them 
that have preached the gospel unto you with* the 
Holy Ghost sent down from heaven; which! 
things the angels desire to. look into. 





aJohn 10:28. 6 Matt. 5:12. ¢ Psa. 66:10. d1John 4:20. 
4:6; 1 Pet. 3:19; 2Pet.121. g Rom. 8:9. 
j Heb. 11:39. & Acts 2:4. 





e John 20:29, fGen. 49:10; Dan. 2:44; H. 
h Psa. 22:6; Isa. 53:3; Dan. 9:26. 
1 Ex. 25:20; Dan. 8:13; 12:5,6; Eph. 3:10, 


[Ch. I. 


in heaven for you, who by 5 
the power of God are 
guarded through faith un- 
to a salvation ready to be 
revealed in the last time. 
Wherein ye greatly rejoice, 6 


; though now for a little 


while, if need be, ye have 
been put to grief in mani- 
fold temptations, that the 7 
proof of your faith, being 
more precious than gold 
that perisheth though it is 
proved by fire, might be 
found unto praise and glo- 
ry and honour at the reve- 
lation of Jesus Christ: 
whom not having seen ye 8 
love; on whom, though 
now ye see him not, yet be- 
lieving, ye rejoice greatly 
with joy unspeakable and 
full of glory: receiving the 9 
end of your faith, even the 
salvation of your souls. 


Concerning which salvya- 10 


tion the prophets sought 
and searched diligently, 
who prophesied of the 
grace that should come un- 
to you; 
time or what manner of 
time the Spirit of Christ 
which was in them did 
pore unto, when it testified 
eforehand the sufferings 
of Christ, and the glories 
that should follow them. 
To whom it was revealed, 
that not unto themselves, 
but unto you, did they 
minister these things, 
which now have been an- 
nounced unto you ee 
them that preached the 
peapet unto you by the 
oly Ghost sent forth 


ag. 2:7; Gal. 
@ Dan. 12:9. 





6-9. Wherein. 


a persecution was in progress, or threatened. Manifold temptations. 


In this glorious hope you rejoice. Though now for a season. 


searching what 11 


This implies that 
Trials which put faith and 


patience to the test. ‘7. That the trial of your faith. These persecutions try their faith as gold is 

tried by the fire, and the faith that stands the test, more precious than gold, will bear fruit unto 

praise and honor and glory at the appearing. ‘The present afflictions work out a far more exceeding 

and eternal weight of glory.” 8. Whom, Jesus Christ. Ye love. Though not having seen Christ, 

they knew him by faith. Yerejoice. Because they believe upon him whom they have not seen they are 

; filled with the unspeakable joy of a glorious hope. 9. The end of your faith. The object of the 
gospel, “the faith,” and of their faith was salvation. 

10-12. Of which salvation the prophets have enquired. This passage implies that the prophets 
used words and symbols, at the dictation of the Spirit, of which they did not comprehend the full mean- 
ing. They spoke of Christ and salvation, and then diligently inquired what the Spirit of Christ in them 
did signify by these words. 11. When it testified . the sufferings. They spoke of the suffer- 
ings of Christ (see Isaiah, chapter 53) but could not understand these predictions any better than the Jews 
of Christ’s time. See Luke 24: 25,26. 12. Unto whom it was revealed. The prophets were, how- 
eyer, taught that the subject matter of their predictions related to a future time, not to their own. They 
did minister the things. The things which were fulfilled by the gospel preached . . unto you. 
Paul and his companions, who preached under the influence of the Holy Spirit. Which things the 
angels desire to lookinto. The profound mysteries of the gospel were subjects of earnest inquiry to 
the angels, an indication that like the prophets they could not understand until the mystery was revealed. 

18-16. Gird up the loins of your mind. A figure drawn from the custom of girding the loins when 
about to start on a journey. So the Christian must prepare himself as ona journey. Besober. Let 


Ch. I.] I. PETER. 


357 





13 Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be 
sober, and hope to the end for the grace that is to 
be brought unto you at? the revelation of Jesus 
Christ: 

14 As obedient children, not fashioning your- 
selves according to the former lusts in your ignor- 
ance: 

15 But as he which hath called you is holy, so be 
ye holy in all manner of conversation; 

- Because it is written,” Be ye holy; for I am 
oly. 

17 And if ye call on the Father, who without re- 
spect of persons judgeth according to every man’s 
Aete pass the time of your® sojourning here in 

ear: 

18 Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not re- 
deemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, 
from your vain conversation received’ by tradition 
from your fathers; 

19 But with the® precious blood of Christ,’ as of 
a lamb without blemish and without spot: 

20 Who® verily was foreordained before the 
foundation of the world, but was manifest in these 
last times for you. 

21 Who by him do believe in God, that raised 
him up from the dead, and‘ gave him glory; that 
your faith and hope might be in God. 


a Luke 17: 30: 1 Cor. 1:7; 2 Thes.1:7. 6 Lev. 11: 44. 
eRey. 5:9. fEx. 12:5; John1:29. 





c2 Cor. 5:6; Heb. 11: 18; 12:28. 
g2Tim.1:9,10; Titus 1: 2,3; Rev. 13:8. 


from heaven which things 
peat desired to look into. 
Wherefore girding up the 13 
loins of your mind, be so- 
ber and set your hope per- 
fectly on the grace that is 
to be brought unto you at 
the revelation of Jesus 
Christ; as children of obe- 14 
dience, not fashioning 
yourselves according to 
your former lusts in the 
time of your ignorance: but 15 
like as he which called you 
is holy, be ye yourselves 
also holy in all manner of 
living; because it is writ- 
ten, Ye shall be holy; for IL 
am holy. And if yecall on 17 
him as Father, who with- 
out respect of persons 
judgeth according to each 
man’s work, pass the time 
of your sojourning in fear: 
knowing that ye were re- 18 
deemed, not with corrupti- 
ble things, with silver or 
gold, from your vain man- 
ner of life handed down 
from your fathers; but 19 
with precious blood, as of 
a lamb without blemish 
and without spot, even the 
blood of Christ: who was 20 
foreknown indeed before 
the foundation of the 
world, but was manifested 
at the end of the times for 
roe sake, who through 21 
im are believers in God, 
which raised him from the 
dead, and gave him glory; 
so that your faith and hope 


16 


d@ Ezek. 20:18; 1 Pet. 4:3. 


AGal. 4:4. ¢@Phil.2:9. 








there be sobriety of spirit. Hope to the end. Never let the glow of your hope cease until the great 


consummation, when Christ comes. 14. As obedient children. 


Christians. 
God. Not fashioning yourselves. 
former sinfnl life when in ignorance of the gospel. 


An invariable characteristic of all 
The division between God’s children and the children of this world turns on obedience to 
The spirit of obedience would cause them to turn away from their 
15. But as he which hath called you. God 


the Father, to whom the calling is assigned in the Scriptures. Obedient children will seek to please and to 
be like their father. Ouwr Father is holy, and the duty rests upon us of seeking holy lives. 16. Because 
it is written. Lev. 11: 44,and 19:2. We must not only submit to God’s commands but seek to imitate 
his holiness. 

17-21. If ye call on the Father. In prayer and worship. All call upon him who pray. Who 
without respect of persons. He judges us and all men according to deeds, not station or race. Hence, 
those who seek his blessings and promises should show a reverential fear. This is the first reason given 
for being “holy.” Of your sojourning. The whole life is a period of sojourning on the earth. 18. 
Ye were not redeemed. Gold or earthly wealth could never have wrought our redemption. From 
your vain conversation. Vain and profitless manner of life. Handed down from your fathers. 
This was true of Jewish Christians, but still more true of the heathen who had been converted. 19. But 
with the precious blood. The New Testament writers with one accord refer to Christ as *‘ the Lamb 
of God that taketh away the sin of the world.” See John 1: 29; Eph. 1: 4; 5: 27; Col. 1: 22; Heb. 9: 14. 
20. Who verily was foreordained. See John 1: 29. Christ was the center of God’s plan of salva- 
tion from the beginning. But was manifest. Though Christ was God’s plan from the beginning he was 
only manifested in these last times. In that period, the end of the Jewish age and near the end of the 
temple and of the Jewish nation. 21. For you. Christ was manifested for the sake of his people, 
who have become his people by faith. That your faith and hope might be in God. Faith, with 
Peter as well as Paul, is essential to salvation. The salvation is of God, not of ourselves, and is made 


ours by faith. 


358 I. PETER. 


[Ch. II. 





22 Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying 
the truth through the Spirit, unto unfeigned love 
of the brethren, see that ye love one another with a 
pure heart fervently: 

23 Being? born again, not of corruptible seed, but 
of incorruptible, by’ the word of God, which liveth 
and abideth for ever. 

24 For all flesh zs as grass, and all the glory of 
man as the flower of grass. . The grass withereth, 
and the flower thereof falleth away: 

25 But* the word of the Lord endureth for ever. 
And this is the word which by the gospel is preach- 
ed unto you. 


CHAPTER II. 


The Temple of Living Stones. 


SUMMARY.—Desiring the Sincere Milk. The Living Stone. The Spiritual 
Temple. The Stone the Builders Rejected. The Peculiar People. 
Letting Our Light Shine. Obedience to Authorities. The Glory of 
Suffering for Righteousness. 


1 Wherefore, laying aside all malice, and all 
guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil- 
speakings, 








night be in God. Seeing 22 
ye have purified your souls 
in your obedience to the 
truth unto unfeigned love 
of the brethren, love one 
another from the heart 
fervently: having been be- 
gotten again, not of cor- 
ruptible seed, but of incor- 
ruptible, through the word 
of God, which liveth and 
abideth. For, ; 
All flesh is as grass, 
And all the glory thereof 
as the flower of grass. 
The grass withereth, and 
the flower falleth: 
But the word of the Lord 25 
abideth for ever. 
And this is the word of 
good tidings which was 
preached unto you. 


23 


CHAPTER II. 


Putting away therefore 1 
all wickedness, and all 
guile, and hypocrisies, and 
envies, and all evil speak- 











2 As? new-born babes, desire the sincere® milk of | ings, as newborn babes, 2 
s i. I by , long for the spiritual milk 
the word, that ye may grow thereby; which is without guile, 
f 2 pate at ye may grow thereby 
_ 3 Ifso be ye have* tasted that the Lord zs grac-|(i3f Suiatlon: Ge we aae a 
ious: tasted that ‘the Lord is 
a John 1:13; 3:5; 1John3:9. 6James1:18. ciIsa.40:8; Lukel6:17. ad Matt.18:3. e1Cor.3:2. fHeb.6:5. 





22-25, Seeing ye have purified your souls. The Greek verb rendered “ purified? occurs seven 
times in the New Testament. In four of these, John 11: 55; Acts 21: 24,26; and 24: 18, it refers to eere- 
monial purification. In the other three it refers to moral purification; the cleansing of the lite from its 
sins, That seems to be the sense here. It refers not only to the forgiveness of sins but to the pure life 
that should follow. This purification is obtained in obeying the truth. That is, by obedience to the 
gospel. Through the Spirit. The Spirit is inseparable from the gospel. The gospel dispensation is 
that of the Spirit. See Acts 15: 8,9. Unto unfeigned love of the brethren. The Spirit of Christ in 
our hearts is the spirit of brotherly love. See that ye love. How can one profess to follow Christ 
unless he loves those for whom Christ died? With apure heart. Withasincere heart. 23, Being 
born again, At conversion. See John 3:1-6. Not of corruptible seed. A birth always implies a 
moving cause. In this birth the new life is planted by incorruptible seed, even by the word of God. 
See also Acts 10: 36,and James 1:18. The gospel preached and lodged in the heart, ‘“‘ the power of God 
unto salvation” (Rom. 1: 16) is the power that moves the soul to a new life. Which liveth. God’s word 
is living and eternal. It has life in it and hence communicates life. See Heb. 4:12. 24. All flesh is 
as grass (Isa. 40:6). God’s word lives forever, but the flesh is as evanescent as the grass. The fleshly life, 
like the grass, is soon felled by death, but a birth from the living and eternal word is a birth to eternal life. 
25. The word of the Lord endureth forever. Like its author it is eternal and never loses its power. 
This is the word. That word was the gospel, the very gospel preached to them by Paul and his fellow 
ministers. 

1-3. Wherefore. In view of the salvation and duty of brotherly love pointed out in chapter 1. Lay- 
ing aside all malice. The things to be laid aside are inconsistent with brotherly love. Malice. The 
mental state opposed to love. Guile. The mental state opposed to sincerity. See 1: 22. Hypocrisies. 
Guile exhibited in word and deed. HEnvies. “Love envieth not” (1 Cor. 13: 4). Evil speakings. 
Speaking evil of others. 2. Newborn babes. The new birth has been spoken of in 1: 23. They are 


Ch. II.J I. PETER. 


359 








4 To whom coming, as unto a living stone, dis- 
allowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and 
precious, 

5 Ye* also, as lively stones, are built up a spirit- 
ual house,” an holy priesthood, to offer up* spirit- 
ual sacrifices,? acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. 

6 Wherefore also it is contained in the scripture,° 
Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner-stone, elect, 
precious: and he that believeth on him shall not be 
confounded. 


7 Unto you therefore which believe he is prec- 


jous: but unto them which be disobedient, * the 


stone which the builders disallowed, the same is 
made the head of the corner, 

8 And& a stone of stumbling, and a rock of 
offence, even to them which stumble at the word, 
being disobedient; » whereunto also they were ap- 
pointed. 

9 But ye are! a chosen generation, ‘a royal priest- 
hood,* an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye 
should shew forth the praises of him who hath 
called you out of darkness into his marvellous 
light: 


aEph. 2:21. bIsa.66:21. 
8:4; Luke 2: 34. 


c Hos. 14:2; Mal. 1:11. d@ Phil.4: 18. 


h Rom. 9:22. i Deut. 10: 15. 





ee 


abes in Christ. Babes hunger for milk. Let babes in Christ earnestly desire the sincere milk of the 
This word, unadulterated, is the food upon which 
Christians must feed in order to grow. 8. If so be. For those who have tasted that the Lord is 


-word. In the Revision “ the spiritual, guileless milk.” 


gracious, or been converted, this is the proper food. See Ps. 34: 9. 
4,5. To whom coming. 





4 Ex. 19:5,6; Rev. 5: 10. 


gracious: unto whom com- 4 
ing, a living stone, rejected 
indeed of men, but with 
God elect, precious, ye al- 5 
so, as living stones, are 
built up a spiritual house, 
to be a holy priesthood, to 
offer up spiritual sacrifices, 
acceptable to God through 
Jesus Christ. 
is contained in scripture, 

Behold, I lay in Ziona 
chief corner stone,elect, 
precious: 

And he that believeth on 
him shall not be put to 
shame. 

For you therefore which 7 
believe is the preciousness: 
but for such as disbelieve, 

The stone which the 
builders rejected, 

The same was made the 
head of the corner; 

and, 

A stone of stumbling, 
and a rock of offence; 

for they stumble at the 
word, being disobedient: 
whereunto also they were 
appointed. But ye are an 9 
elect race, a royal priest- 
hood, a holy nation, a peo- 
ple for God’s own posses- 
sion, that ye may shew 
forth the excellencies of 
him who called you out of 
darkness into his marvel- 


elsa. 28:16. / Psa. 118:22; Matt. 21:42. g Isa. 


kJobn 17: 19. 


To Christ the Lord. A living stone. Christ is often called a Stone, or 


Rock, as the foundation upon which we build our spiritual life, and of the church; a “living stone” 


because he imparts life to all who build upon him, and himself lives eternally. See 1 John 1:1; Rey. 1: 18; 
not of men but of God who raised 
also verse 6. 5. Ye also, as living stones. Christians, born again to eternal 
life, become living stones also built into the spiritual temple of which Christ isthe corner stone. Spiritual 
house. The church. God’s spiritual temple of which the temple was a type. An holy priesthood. 


Acts 4:11. Disallowed. Rejected by the Jewish nation. Chosen, 


chim from the dead. See 


Christ, the High Priest, hath anointed them all as priests in his spiritual house. They need no human 


priest to stand between them and God. 
13: 15; Ps. 50: 23; Hos. 14: 3; Rom. 12: 1. 


Every Christian can offer up spiritual sacrifices. See Heb. 
The sacrifices of the Christian priest are prayer, praise, good 


deeds, the consecration of our bodies and substance to God’s service. Acceptable to God. When 


offered in the name of Christ. 
6-8. Behold, I lay in Zion. 
should be a Living Stone. 


pelieve. The prophecy is now 


-disobey ; 
See also Matt. 21: 42, and Acts 
from the Old Testament and applies 
4Zod’s spiritual temple. 8. A stone of 
-obedient. 
“Whereunto. 


4:11. The head of the corner. 


Unto stumbling over the stone and falling. 


See Isa. 28: 6, and Rom. 13: 33. Hence God had foretold that Christ 
Peter has not quoted the passage in full which declares that the stone is a 
tried stone,” “‘a sure foundation.” Elect. Hence, “chosen of God” (verse 5). Precious. Since itis 
“the chief corner stone” without which the structure could not be built. He that believeth on him. 
Hence this stone is a person, and faith in him is the basis of salvation. 7”. Unto you therefore which 
applied. He is precious to believers because they enjoy the promise 
embraced in ‘‘he that believeth,” ete. Unto the disobedient. Those who do not believe and hence, 
to these he is the stone which the builders disallowed, which is spoken of in Ps. 118: 22. 
Peter in Acts 4: 11, quotes this passage 
it with great force. The rejected Savior had become the Head of 
stumbling, and a rock of offence. He is this to the dis- 
To believers, ‘‘precious;” to the disobedient, a stone over which they stumble and fall. 
This is God’s appointment to the disobedient. 


Because it 6 


_ next verse Peter surely has in mind Gentile Christians. 10. Which in time past were not a people. 


360 I. PETER: 

10 Which? in time past were not a people, but are 
now the people of ode which had not obtained 
mercy, but now have obtained mercy. 

11 Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers 
and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war 
against the soul; 

12 Having your conversation honest among the 
Gentiles; that, whereas they speak against you as 
evil-doers, they may by your good works which they 
shall behold, glorify God” in the day of visitation. 

13 Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man 
for the Lord’s sake: whether it be to the king, as 
supreme; 

14 Or unto governors, as unto them that are sent 
by him for the punishment of evil-doers, and for 
the praisé of them that do well. 

15 For so is the will of God, that with well-doing 
ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men: 

16 As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak 
of maliciousness, but as the servants of God. 

17 Honour all men. Love the brotherhood. 
Fear God. Honour the king. 

18 Servants, de subject to your masters with all 
fear; not only to the good and gentle, but also to 
the froward. 





Ch. IT: 


: 
ous light: which in time 10° 


past were no people, but 
now are the peopie of God: 
which had not obtained 
merey, but now have ob- 
tained ee 

Beloved, beseeeh you 
as sojourners and pilgrims, 
to abstain from fileshly 
lusts, which war against 
the soul; having your be- 
haviour seemly among the 
Gentiles; that, wherein 
they speak against you as 
evil-doers, they may a 
your good works, whic 
they behold, glorify Godin 
the day of visitation. 

Be subject to every ordi- 
nance of man for the 
Lord’s sake: whether it be 
to the king as supreme; or 
unto governors, as sent by 
him for vengeance on eyil- 
doers and for praise to 
them that do well. For so 15. 
is the will of God, that by 
well-doing ye should put to 
silence the _ignorance of 
foolish men: as free, and 16. 
not using your freedom 
for acloke of wickedness, 
but. as_bondservants of 


11 


12 


God. Honour all men. 17 
Love the brotherhood. 
Fear God. Honour the 
king. 


Servants, bein subjection 18: 
to your masters with all 
fear; not only to the good 
and gentle, but aiso to the 





a Hos. 2; 23; Rom. 9:25. 6 Luke 19: 44. 





It is the result of their unbelief. The idea is that stumbling is their condition. When they reject Christ 


they stumble more and more. 


9,10. But ye are a chosen generation. God’s chosen race, like ancient Israel. Christians are 


now the chosen people (Isa. 43: 21). A royal priesthood. See Exod. 19: 6. The Hebrew passage which 
Peter refers to means “a kingdom of priests.” Either this is its meaning, or that all in it, ‘anointed 
ones” like Christ, are in some sense like him, priest-kings. An holy nation. Set apart to God. A 
peculiar people. Differing from the world in life. That ye should show forth. They differ from: 
the world that their holy lives may shine as a light and honor God. Out of darkness. In this and the 


Not the people of God. See Hosea 2: 23, which Peter quotes. The prophets in many places foretold the 
call of the Gentiles. See Rom. 9: 25, 26. 

11,12. I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims. They were all, like the fathers (Heb. 11: 13), 
only pilgrims and sojourners on the earth, seeking for a better home. Hence they should abstain from 
fleshly lusts which would destroy their prospects of that home. 12. Having your conversation. 
Daily life. Let it be such as to refute slanders of their enemies. Evil doers. See Acts17:6. The Jews. 
often accused Christians to heathen rulers of being seditious. Because they rejected the heathen gods 
they were accused of being atheists. The best way to answer these charges was to live them down. By 
your good works. Compare Matt.5:16. Day of visitation. The day when God will make all clear 
and the heathen shall be converted. 

13-17. Submit yourselves. Obey human laws. For the Lord’s sake. Because it is the Lord’s. 
will. Whether the king. The Roman emperor whom the Greeks styled king. 14. Governors. 
The magistrates placed over the provinces of the Roman empire. Rulers are necessary, both to punish 
the evil and to reward the good. Compare Rom., chapter 13. 15. That with well doing. Itis God’s 
will that thus you may silence the charge that you are seditious persons. 16. As free. Christians, freed 
from the bondage of sin and of the law, and having the free spirit of children, must not use their liberty~ 
as a cloke, an excuse, for wickedness. Servante@iiey are God’s servants. 17. Honor all men. 
Respect men of every station. Love the brotherhood. As Christ loved us. Fear God. With. 
reverential fear. ; 


Che BIG] [2 PETER. 


361 


a ey 


19 For this 7s thank-worthy, if a man for con- 
my toward God endure grief, suffering wrong- 

ully. 

20 For what glory zs ¢¢, if, when ye be buffeted 
for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if, 
when ye do well, and suffer for tt, ye take it 
patiently, this 7s acceptable with God. 

21 For even hereunto were ye called: because 
Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, 
that ye should follow his steps: 

22 Who? did no sin, neither was guile found in 
his mouth: 

23 Who,” when he was reviled, reviled not again; 
when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed 
himself to him that judgeth righteously: 

24 Who his own self bare our sins in his own 
body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, 
should live unto righteousuess:° by whose stripes ye 
were healed. 

25 For* ye were as sheep going astray, but are 
now returned® unto the Shepherd and Bishop of 
your souls. 


CHAPTER III. 


Various Practical Duties. 


SUMMARY.—Duties of Women. Of Husbands. Duties of Christians 
Towards Each Other. Attitude Towards Adversaries. Christian En- 
durance of Wrong. Christ’s Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 
Salvation of Those in the Ark. The Antitype is Baptism. 

1 Likewise, ye wives, de in subjection to your 
own husbands; that if any obey not the word, they? 
also may without the word be£ won by the conver- 
sation of the wives; 


6 Isa. 53:7; John 8: 48. c Isa. 53: 5. 


Isa. 58:9; John 8: 46. 
ba ke John 10:11; Heb. 13: 20. f1 Cor. 7:16. 








d Psa. 119: 176; Ezek. 34: 6. 
g Matt. 18: 15. 


froward. For this is ac- 19 
ceptable, if for conscience 
toward God a man endur- 
eth griefs, suffering wrong- 
ewe k For what glory is 209 
it, if, when ye sin, and are 
buffeted for it, ye shall 
take it patiently? but, if, 
when ye do well, and suffer 
for tt, ye shall take it pa- 
tiently, this is acceptable 
with God. For hereunto 21 
were ye called: because 
Christ also suftered for you, 
leaving you an example, 
that ye should follow his 
steps: who did no sin, nei- 22 
ther was guile found in his 
mouth: who, when he was 23. 
reviled, reviled not again; 
when he suffered, threat- 
ened not; but committed 
himself to him that judgeth 
Uiemiconshy who his own 24. 
self bare our sins in his 
body upon the tree, that 
we, having died unto sins, 
might live unto righteous- 
ness; by_ whose stripes ye 
were healed. For ye were 25. 
going astray like sheep; 

ut are now returned unto 
the Shepherd and Bishop 
of your souls. 

“4 


CHAPTER III. 


In like manner, ye wives, 1 
be in subjection to your 
own husbands; that, even 
if any obey not the word 
they may without the word 
be gained by the behaviour 
of their wives; beholding 


é Ezek. 34: 233 87: 243, 





18-20. 


Servants. Compare Eph. 6: 5, and Col.3: 22. The Greek word here is not that of the former 


passages, which means slaves. This may mean hired servants. Be subject. That is the duty of the 
relation. Nor is a faithful obedience due to good masters only, but to the froward. The perverse. 19. 
Thankworthy. “Acceptable” in the Revision. If aman suffers wrong for conscience sake, God notes 
his suffering and approves of his conduct. 20. For what glory isitP To bear with patience punish- 
ment for faults is no glory, but to bear patiently suffering inflicted for right doing is approved before God. 

21-25. Hereunto were ye called. It was the experience of the Christian calling in that age to 
suffer for right doing. Even so Christ our Lord suffered. Heisourexample. 22. Who did no sin. 
He had no fault. 28. When he was reviled. He resented neither insults nor the sufferings infiicted 
upon him. But committed. He gave our judgment between him and his enemies to God. 24. 
Who . bare our sins. Died for our sins, not hisown. He took our burdens. Onthetree. The 
wood of the cross. That we being dead tosins. “Crucified with him,” penitent, the repentant sin- 
ner is baptized into his death, and rising to a new life, lives unto righteousness. By whose stripes. 
See Isa. 53: 5,6. 25. Ye were as sheep. Led astray by sin. Are now returned. By coming to 
Christ. The Shepherd and Bishop. The Shepherd who died for the sheep; the Bishop who- 
watcheth over and careth for them. 

1-6. Likewise, ye wives, be in subjection, etc. See notes Eph.5: 21-24. Paul teaches the duty 


362 


2 While they behold 
coupled with fear: 

3 Whose® adorning, let it not ‘be that outward 
adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of 
gold, or of putting on of apparel; 

4 But let tt be the® hidden man of thie heart, in 
that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of 
a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of 
God of great price. 

5 For after this manner in the old time the holy 
women also, who trusted in God, adorned them- 
selves, being in subjection unto their own husbands: 

6 Even as Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him® 
lord: whose daughters ye are as long as ye do well, 
and are not afraid with any amazement. 

7 Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them accord- 
ing to knowledge, giving honour unto the wife, as 
unto the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together 
of the grace of life;4 that your prayers be not hin- 
dered. 


I. PETER. 





your chaste conversation 


(Ch. III. 


your chaste 
coupled with fear. 
adorning let it not be the 
outward adorning of plait- 
ing the hair, and of wear- 
ing jewels of gold, or of 


putting on apparel; but let 4 


it be the hidden man of the 
heart, in the incorruptible 
apparel of a meek and qui- 
et spirit, which is in the 
sight of God of great price. 
For after this manner 
aforetime the holy women 
also, who hoped in God, 
adorned themselves, being 
in subjection to their own 
husbands: as Sarah obey- 
ed Abraham, calling him 
lord: whose children ye 
now are, if ye do well, and 
are not put in fear by any 
terror. 

Ye husbands, 
manner, dwell with your 
wives according to knowl- 
edge, giving honour unto 
the woman, as unto the 
weaker vessel, as being al- 
so joint-heirs of the grace 
of life; to the end that 
your prayers be not, hin- 
dered. 


behaviour 2 
Whose 3 


in like 7 


8 Finally, de ye all of one mind, having compas-| mingay? Coe att tke 8 





ne ‘ eae sed 
7 & / it] oving as brethren, tender- 
sion one of another; love as brethren, de pitiful, be le, amare eno 


courteous: 
alsa. 3: 16-24. 








6 Psa. 45:13; Rom. 2:29. ¢ Gen. 18:12. dJob 42:8; Matt. 5: 23; 18: 19. 





of submission, and in 1 Cor. 7: 13-15 shows that it was not the duty of the believing wife to abandon her 
unbelieving husband. Peter goes farther here and teaches that the wife show obedience in order to win 
her husband. They also may without the word be won. That even those who have steeled 
themselyes against the gospel and who refuse to listen to it may be quietly won by the sweet, Christian 
lives of their wives. 2. While they behold your chaste conversation. Your pure lives. 
Coupled with fear. The shrinking from doing anything that is wrong. 8. Whose adorning. 
While urging those pure and holy lives which will sweetly preach Christ, Peter cannot pass by a foible 
often seen inthe sex. There is a better adorning than that of the body. Plaiting the hair. See notes 
on 1 Tim. 2:9,10. Compare Ps. 45:13. The allusion is to wearing ornaments of gold or silver over the 
hair, a pooon adornment of the time. Jewels of gold. For the extravagant dress of Roman 
women of the time, see Farrar’s Early Years of Christianity, page5. 4. Letit be the hidden man 
of the heart. The important part is to see that the heart is right and the spirit adorned with all the 
graces of holy life. Seek after inward rather than outward adorning. In the sight of God. God sees 
us all the time, and such adorning is of great worth in his sight. 5. Forafterthis manner. The 
holy women whose names are found in sacred history adorned themselves with “a meek and quiet spirit.” 
6. As Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord. See Gen. 18: 12: also1Sam.1:15. This desig- 
nation showed respect and submission. Women should follow the example of Sarah, who might be 
designated as “the mother of, those who are Abraham’s children by faith.” Are not putinfear. The 
fear that might result from not doing well. They were to be quiet, submissive, loving wives, but were 
not to be kept from Christian duty by “any fear” which might threaten because of their heathen 
surroundings, 

7. Ye husbands. Duties of Christian husbands are now briefly stated. They are to dwell with 
their wives. The fact that their wives are unconverted is no ground for separation, but if the wife is 
converted still stronger is the bond. According to knowledge. A knowledge that shows judgment, 
moderation and gentleness as toward one weaker than himself. Joint heirs. Hence “one in Christ 
Jesus.” The home life is to be regulated according to knowledge. That your prayers be not hin- 
dered, Mutual prayer is not possible uniess there is mutual love and forbearance. Nor can the 
husband’s prayers be acceptable unless he treats his wife aright. 

8-12. Be pitiful. Towards all the afflicted. Be courteous. Humble minded. See Revision. Not 
‘haughty. 9. Hereunto were ye called. Peter enjoins good deeds for evil, and blessing for reviling, 


Uh. III.] I. PETER. 


Ae, Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for rail- 
ing: but contrariwise blessing; knowing that ye are 
thereunto called,* that ye should inherit a blessing. 

10 For” he that will love life, and see good days, 
let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips 
that they speak no guile: 

11 Let him eschew evil, and do good; let him 
seek peace, and ensue it. 

12 For the eyes of the Lord are over the right- 
eous,” and his ears are open unto their prayers: but 
the face of the Lord 7s against them that do evil. 

13 And® who is he that will harm you, if ye be 
followers of that which is good? 

14 But® and if ye suffer for righteousness’ sake, 
happy are ye: and be? not afraid of their terror, 
neither be troubled; 

15 But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts: 
andé be ready always to give an answer to every man 
that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you 
with meekness and fear: 

16 Having a good conscience; that, whereas they 
speak evil of you, as of evil-doers, they may be 
ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation 
in Christ. 

17 For Zé is better, if the will of God be so, that” 
ye suffer for well-doing, than for evil-doing. 

18 For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, 
the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to 
God, being put to death! in the flesh, but! quicken- 
ed in the Spirit: 


b Psa. 34:12. cJohn9:31; James5: 16. d Prov. 16: (f3 


a Matt. 25: 34. 
g Psa. 119: 46; Col. 4: 6; 2 Tim. 2:25. A2 Tim. 3: 12. 


Jer. 1:8; John 14: 1. 








Rom. 8: 28. 
4Col.1:21. j Rom. 1:4; 8:11 


363 





not rendering evil for evil, 
or reviling for reviling; but 
contrariwise blessing; for 
hereunto were ye called, 


9 


that ye should inherit a 
10 


blessing. For, 

He that would love life, 
and see good days, 

Let him refrain his 
tongue from evil, 

And his lips that they 
speak no guile: 

And let him turn away 
from evil, and do good; 

Let him seek peace, and 
pursue it. 

For the eyes of the Lord 
are upon the righteous, 

And his ears unto their 
supplication: 

But the face of the Lord 
is upon them that do 
evil. 

And who is he that will 
harm you, if ye be zealous 
of that which is good? But 
and if ye should suffer for 
righteousness’ sake, bless- 
ed are ye: and fear not 
their fear,neither be troub- 
led; but sanctify in your 
hearts Christ as Lord: be- 
ing ready always to give 
answer to every man that 
asketh you a reason con- 
cerning the hope that is in 
you, yet with meekness 
and fear: having a good 
conscience; that, wherein 
ye are spoken against, they 
may be put to shame who 
revile your good manner of 
life in Christ. For it is 
better, if the will of God 
should so will, that ye suf- 
fer for well-doing than for 
evil-doing. Because Christ 
also suffered for sins once, 
the righteous for the un- 
righteous, that he might 


11 


12 


13, 
14 


16 


17 


18 





eMatt.5:10. fIsa. 


8: 12; 





because any other course would be inconsistent with the Christian calling. Called to a heritage of 


blessing they must live lives of blessing, for 
you desire to inherit blessing you must abstain from evil. 


“ag a man soweth so also shall hereap.” 10. For. If 
The conditions are stated by the Psalmist, 


Ps. 34: 13-17, from which the next three verses are quoted. 12. The eyes of the Lord. He ceases not 


to regard his righteous servants. 
his face. Is turned in displeasure upon evil 

18-17. Who is he that will harm you 
upon you? 
the lot of Christians, 
reward. It is only sowing in tears to reap in joy. 
fear of the wicked when danger comes, nor be troub. 
in your hearts Christ as Lord. Revision. Let Christ be 
the Lord. Ready always to give answer. 
meekness and fear. The answer to 
put modestly, meekly, 
element of strength when accused. A 
it is better, if the will of God be 
chasteneth children, it is better to suffer for righteousness, 

18-22. For Christ also suffered. 
eross. Once. Once only. He suffers 


doers. 


but instead of calling this an evil, blessed 


than for evil. 


Fear not with their fear. 
led because you are persecuted. 15, But sanctify 
honored and reverenced. Fear not man but 
To confess Christ as the ground of your hope. Yet with 
adversaries is to be made, not with arrogance and indignation, 
reverentially. 16. Having a good conscience. Before God. This is the 
life holy and pure is the best answer to false accusers. 1'7. For 
so. If God wills that we should suffer, for the Father sometimes 
See 2 Tim. 3: 12. 

Even Christ, the Holy One, our example, once suffered on the 
no more. Being put to death in the flesh. He was put to 


The ears. He not only sees, but hears when they cry to him. But 


? If you are zealous for good who ¢an inflict real harm 


Godis with you. 14. If ye should suffer. Ye may be called to suffer for Christ. That is 
are ye. See Matt.5: 10. Great is the 


Revision. With the 





364 I. PETER. (Ch. IIT.. 
7a ‘ x ‘ , bring us to God; being put 
19 By* which also he went and preached unto the ene ee ae he 
spirits” in prison; quickened in the spirit; in 19: 
20 Which sometime were disobedient, when once ! preached unto the spirits 
a a a1 7 in prison, which aforetime 20° 
the long-suffering of God waited in the days of | Wobe disobedient, when the 
Noah, while the ark® was a preparing,’ wherein lope go: a 
. “1 “ ays D 5 
few, that is, eight souls, were saved by water. while the ark was a pre- 
21 The? like figure whereunto even baptism doth | paint een tne saved 
also now save us, (not the putting away of the filth through water: which also 21 
0 aiter ru <eness 
of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience |now save you, even bap- 
toward God,) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ: | Hee ane ee tieely but 
292 Who is gone into heaven, and is‘ on the right | the interrogation of a good 
one consclence owarc od, 
hand of God; angels, and authorities, and powers, through ihe resurrection 
7 Tee) i of Jesus Christ; who is on 22. 
being made subject unto him. Oe and Ore od fae 
ing gone into heaven; an- 
gels and authorities and 
poyers being made subject 
unto him, 








a Gen. 6:3; 2Pet.1:21. 6Isa. 42:7; 61:1. emep et GR aes e Eph. 5:26. fPsa.110:1; Rom. 8: 343. 
ph. 1: 20. 








death by the wounds inflicted on his fleshly body. His natural, earthly life was ended. Quickened in 

the spirit. Put to death in the body his spirit was quickened. Having life in himself, as soon as the 

body failed through weakness the power of the the indestructible life began to show itself. 19. In 
which also he went and preached to the spirits in prison. Revision. The facts stated are (1) 

That Christ, put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the spirit, went and preached. (2) This. 
preaching of Christ in the spirit was to spirits. (3) Those spirits were in prison. The Greek word used 

for prison denotes a place of custody, not a place of punishment. These spirits (verse 20) were (4) 

aforetime disobedient. This states why they were held in prison. (5) The time of their disobedience is: 
stated. It was while the long-suffering of God was waiting in the days of Noah. They had 

then refused to obey the call to repentance. It is stated in Gen. 6: 3, that the long suffering of God 

waited 120 years. This difficult passage has been given two interpretations. The more common view is. 
that Jesus, after his suffering, during the interval before his resurrection, went without the body ina 

spirit form, to these antediluvians and preached to them. If this view is correct it only teaches that an 

offer of salvation was then made to these disobedient ones who had never before heard of Christ before 

their final judgment. It furnishes no comfort to those that have an opportunity and reject it in this life. 

It only shows that one opportunity is given to all. The other view is that Christ went ‘in spirit’ in the- 
person of Noah and by him preached to those who were afterwards held in prison on account of their 

disobedience. The first view seems more in harmony with the context; the second furnishes fewer 
theological difficulties. Wherein few, that is, eight souls. Only eight souls out of a great 
multitude were saved; these were saved through water, since it bore up the ark. The word rendered. 
“through” means “by means of.” 21. The like figure whereunto. Literally ‘‘ the antitype now 
saves us, Baptism.” Says Alford, ‘“Water saved them, bearing up the ark; it saves us, becoming to us 
baptism.” As they entered the Ark, we are “ baptized into Christ,” the Savior. See Gal. 3: 27. Not the 

putting away of, the filth of the flesh. Not as a Jewish ceremonial washing, which was only a 
purification of the flesh, but it is the answer of agood conscience. The Revision says, “the interro- 
gation of a good conscience.” “Inquiry” would be still better. The soul seeking the forgiveness of sins 
“inquires”? What shall I do to remove the sense of unforgiven sins and to make my conscience void of 
offence? The answer is “Repent and be baptized, etc.” See Acts 2: 38. He who obeys the word of the: 
Lord has the “inquiry” answered in baptism. Through the resurrection. Baptism would be mean- 
ingless and vain were it not for the resurrection of Christ. It points directly to the burial and 
resurrection of the Lord. See Rom. 6: 1-6. 22. Who is on the right hand of God. Christ’s. 
exaltation followed his death and resurrection, See Eph, 1; 20-23, . 


"Ch. IV.) I. PETER. 


365 





CHAPTER IV. 


Counsels to Suffering Saints. 


‘SUMMARY.—Christ Having Died for Us, We Should Live for Christ. 
Watchfulness in View of the Speedy End. The Trials of the Saints. 
Suffering as Christians. 

1 Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us 
in the flesh, arm yourselves likewise with the same 
mind: for he? that hath suffered in the flesh hath 
ceased from sin; 

2 That he no longer should live the rest of his 
time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will 
of God. 

3 For the time past of our life may suffice us to 


have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we 


walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of. wine, 
revelling, banquetings, and abominable idolatries: 

4 Wherein they think it strange that ye run not 
with them to the same excess of riot, speaking evil 
of you; 

3 Who shall give account to him that is ready” to 
judge the quick and the dead. 

6 For, for this cause® was the gospel preached 
also to them that are dead, that they might be 
judged according to men in the flesh, but live 
according to God in the Spirit. 











CHAPTER IV. 


Forasmuch then as Christ 1 
suffered in the flesh, arm 
ye yourselves also with the 
same mind; for he that 
hath suffered in the flesh 
hath ceased from sin; that 2 
ye no longer should live 
the rest of your time in the 
flesh to the lusts of men, 
but to the will of God. For 3 
the time past may suffice 
to have wrought the desire 
of the Gentiles, and to have 
walked in_lasciviousness, 
lusts, winebibbings, revel- 
ings, casoun ay and 
abominable idolatries: 
wherein they think it 4 
strange that ye run not 
with them into the same 
excess of riot, speaking 
evil of you: who shall give 5 
account to him that is 
ready to judge the quick 
and the dead. For unto 6 
this end was the gospel 
preached even to the dead, 
that they might be judged 
according to men in the 
flesh, but live according to 
God in the spirit. 


a Col. 3:5. 6 Acts 10:42; 17:31; Rom. 14: 10; 2 Tim. 4:13; James5:9. clPet. 3:19. 





1-6. Arm yourselves. The saints must be equipped for warfare and suffering. With the same 
mind. The mind that was in Christ when he suffered, a willingness to suffer to do the willof God. Hath 
ceased from sin. The idea seems to be that of Rom. 6: 7, “He that is dead is freed from sin.” Suffer- 


ing with Christ puts an end to (or ceases) our connection with sin. 2. 


live. 
The time past. That was enough time for sin. 


That ye no longer should 


Hence, because we have “ceased unto sin’? we should live, henceforth, to the will of God. 8. 
Have wrought the will of the Gentiles. Lived 


the unholy lives common among the heathen. To have walked. Peter describes the common sins, 
sins of the Gentile world, sins in which too many Jews imitated them. The first two are sins of unclean- 


ness. Hxcess of wine. Drunkenness. Revellings. 


making is meant. Banquetings. 


See Rom. 13: 13, and Gal. 5; 21. 
Carousings, as in Revision. 4. Wherein they. The outside world 


Riotous merry 


think it strange that you do not engage in these sins longer. Their enjoyment is in them, and they cannot 


understand how one can enjoy life without them. 
into their riotous sins. 5. Who shall give account. 


unholy lives, 


Speaking evilof you. Because you refuse to rush 
Those sinners, who not only persist in their 
but persecute the saints because they will not sin with them. Christ shall judge living and 


the dead. 6. For to this end was the gospel preached even to the dead. This passage has 
been explained as meaning those spiritually dead. But the dead must be the same as in verse 5, and there 
they are opposed to the living. Meyer holds that this is an expansion of 3: 20, 21. There he supposes 


Christ, in the Spirit, preached to the antediluvians. 


Here, he holds, that Peter affirms that all the dead 


who had lived before Christ came had the opportunity to hear; hence when the living and dead are judged, 


none can plead that they had no chance of 
follows: “ Whether you die or live Chris 
brethren who have died,” etc. This view 
with the cont 
to be preached. These had heard and 
“has the advantage of giving “the dea 
judged. Without some opportunity to 


life. Others hold that the meaning may be freely given as 
tis your judge. For this cause the gospel was preached to your 
avoids some difficulties but does not seem to harmonize fully 
ext. Others hold that Peter means all the dead who have died from the time the gospel began 
gone, but would be judged as well as the living. This interpretation 
da” the apparent meaning of that phrase. That they might be 
know of the gospel they could not be judged for its rejection. 


I. PETER. 








366 ECh. IV. 
a . 4 ; a But the end of all things 7 
7 But*® the end of all things is at hand: be ye/,,But tes he yo therclors 
therefore sober, and watch unto prayer. of sound mind, and be so- 
. . y rayer : rea 
8 And, above all things, have fervent charity | things being fervent tn ° 
s ci . atyd « -| your love among your- 
among yourselves: for charity” shall cover the mul lavene bor lets cen 
titude of sins. multitude of sins: using 9 
_ 9 Use hospitality one to another without* grudg- without murmuring, e- 10 
ing. cording as each hath re- 
A 5 ceived a gift, ministering 
10 Ast every man hath received the gift, even so | it among yourselves, as 
minister the same one to another, as good stewards | foia pice of God) ie aay eS 
of the manifold grace of God. ie were prasies oF 
11 If* any man speak, let him speak as _ the| any man ministereth, min- 
oracles of God; if any minister, let him do it as of | Wiven'ea Sunnie abet 
the ability which God giveth: that’ God in all| in all things God may be 
; . ; . s glorified through Jesus 
things may be glorified through Jesus Christ:% to Christ, whose is the glory 
5 eae and the dominion for ever 
whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever. | ang (eo mon 
Amen. ied think it not 12 
F . ° strange concerning the 
12 Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial among you, 
a . $ 3 : which cometh upon you to 
fiery trial which is to try you, as though some | }rove you, as though a 
strange thing happened unto you: Strange thing happened 
eat : Ore unto you: but insomuch 13 
13 But rejoice, inasmuch as? ye are partakers of as 6 are partakers” of 
ieee : z 3 rist’s sufferings, rejoice; 
Christ’s sufferings; that, when his glory shall be| that at the revelation of 
revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. | his glory also ye may re- 
; ‘ é h i joice with exceeding joy. 
14 If 'ye be reproached for the name of Christ, it ve are reproached for 14 
; ; oa é€ name of Christ, blesse 
happy are ye; for the’ Spirit of glory and of God| ie 7e  pecause me ‘Spirit 
resteth upon you: on their part he is evil spoken | of glory and the Spirit of 
ran t j t h E loa d God resteth upon you. For 15 
or, Dub ON your par e 1s giorimed. let none of you suffer asa 
15 But let none of you suffer as a murderer, -or| BY Gre: of 4 thier, or an 
as a thief, or as an evil-doer, or as a busybody in| in other’ men’s matters: 
other men’s matters. 








a Matt. 24:18; Rom. 13:12; Phil. 4:5; Heb. 10; 25; James 5:8; 2 Pet. 8:9; 1 John 2:18. & Proy. 10:12 


e2 Cor. 9:7. @1 Cor, 4:7. 
hk Rom. 8:17; Rev. 1:9. 


James 5:20. eder. 23:22. f Eph. 9:20. 


8 3 1 Cor. 18:7; 
; : g1 Tim. 6:16; Rev. 1:6. 
t Matt. 5:11. j Matt. 10:20; 2 Cor. 12:9. 








According to men in the flesh. These dead, who had heard, and received the gospel, though experi- 
encing the judgment of physical death that rested on all men, were called to live according to God in 
the spirit; that is, live on, an immortal life. 

7-11. The end of all things is at hand. The end of Jerusalem was not far off, and it does not 
seem that it was given to Peter to distinguish clearly between that and the end of all things, which truly 
draweth near. Watch unto prayer. Compare 1 Thess. 5: 6,8, and Matt. 24: 42. 8. Love covereth 
a multitude of sins. Compare Proy, 10: 12; 1 Cor. 13: 7. Love is a mantle which seeks to condone sin 
rather than to exaggerate it. 9. Using hospitality. A duty very needful in that age of persecution 
when Christians were so often driven from home. See notes on Rom. 12: 13; 1 Tim.3: 2. 10. Even as 
each hath received a gift. All these are to be freely used for others. Spiritual gifts (1 Cor. 12: 4, 28), 
are primarily meant, but the principle is of general application. As good stewards. Those to whom 
God has given gifts must use them, not as their own, but as God’s. 11. If any man speaketh. 
Through a gift of the Spirit. He must speak not his own words, but speak as though they were God’s 
oracles, speakers of a divine message. Ministereth. Let him act as one of God’s ministers and act in 
his strength. That God may be glorified. Since all is of God. 

12-14. The fiery trials. Persecutions. As though a strange thing. Christians, with the world 
against them, must expect to endure such things. 18. Rejoice. Because thus you are made partak- 
ers of Christ’s sufferings. See notes on Rom. 8: 17, and 2 Cor.1:7. At the revelation of his 
glory all who suffer with him will be glorified. 14 If ye be reproached for the name of Christ 
Because you are a Christian. Because the spirit of glory. Spirit is not found in the Greek. The 
idea is, that the sufferer for Christ is happy because the glory of Christ awaits him, and God’s spirit is 
with him. : 


Ch. V.] I. PETER. 


16 Yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him 
not be ashamed, but* let him glorify God on this 
behalf. 

17 For the time zs come” that judgment must 
begin at the house of God: and° if 7¢ first begin at 
us, what shall the end de of them that obey not the 
gospel of God? 


367 


but if @ man suffer as a 16 
Christian, let him not be 
ashamed; but let him glo- 
rify God in this name. For 17 
the time is come for judge- 
ment to beein. at the house 
of God: and if it begin first 
at us, what shall be the end 
of them that obey not the 
gospel of God? And if the 18 


siphees is scarcely say- 
ed, where shall the ungod- 
ly and sinner appear? 
herefore let them also 19: 
that suffer according to 
the will of God commit 
their souls in well-doing 
unto a faithful Creator. 


18 And‘ if the righteous scarcely be saved, where 
shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? 

19 Wherefore, let them that suffer according to 
the will of God* commit the keeping of their souls 
to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator. 


CHAPTER V. 


Conclusion. 


SuMMARyY.—A Charge to the Elders. The Young Exhorted. Humility 

Enjoined. Watchfulness. Salutations from Brethren at Babylon. 

1 The elders which are among you I exhort, who 
am? also an elder, and £a witness of the sufferings 
of Christ, and also" a partaker of the glory that 
shall be revealed: 

2 Feed‘ the flock of God which is among you, 
taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but 
willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; 

3 Neither as being lords/ over God’s heritage, 
but being ensamples to the flock: 

4 And when* the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye 
shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away. 


CHAPTER V. 


The elders therefore 1. 
among you I exhort, who 
am a fellow-elder, and a 
witness of the sufferings of 
Christ, who am also a par- 
taker of the glory that 
shall be revealed: Tend the 2 
flock of God which is a- 
mong you, exercising the 
oversight, not of con- 
straint, but willingly, ac- 
cording unto God; nor yet 
for filthy lucre, but of a 
ready mind; neither as 3 
lording it over the charge 
allotted to you, but mak- 
ing yourselves ensamples 
to the flock. And when the 4. 
chief Shepherd shall be 
manifested, ye shall re- 
ceive the crown of glory 
that fadeth not away. 











d Proy. 11:31. 
tJobhn 21:15. j Psa. 74:2. 


ec Luke 23: 31. 


5:41. ObIsa. 10:12; Jer. 25:9. 
vig fd : h Rom. 8:17; Rey.1:9. 


e Psa.81:5; Luke 23:46. fPhile.9. g Luke: 
24:48; Acts 1:8; 10:39. A 


k Heb. 13: 20 








15-19. Let none of you suffer as a murderer. Asanevildoer, 16. If any man suffer as 
a Christian. This name was now widely known, and good men suffered only because they were Chris- 
tians. 17. The time for judgment is come. It begins at the house of God, the church. In Matt., 
chapter 25, the righteous are judged first. If it begin first at us. If even the righteous are called to 
judgment, what shall be the fate of the disobedient? 18. Andif the righteous. A passage quoted 
from Proy. 11: 31. The idea is that if sufferings and judgments (chastenings) come upon good people, 
what hope is there for the wicked? 19. Wherefore let them also that suffer. Let all who suffer, 
not for evil doing but for righteousness sake, keep on in well doing and commit their souls to the care 
of the all seeing and faithful God. 

1-4. The elders therefore among you. That Peter means the officers, not the aged persons, is 
shown by verse 2. Who ama fellow-elder. An elder as well as an apostle. He exhorts them as one 
of themselves. And a witness. An eye witness of what Christ suffered and of his resurrection. A 
partaker of the glory. An heir of the glory that shall be revealed when Christ comes. 2. Feed the 
flock of God. “Tend” (Revision). The word means more than feed, See John 21: 15-17. Which is 
among you. The churches wherever you are. Taking the oversight. Acting as bishops (Acts 
20: 28). Not of constraint. Attend to the duties cheerfully, willingly. Not for filthy lucre. Not 
for sordid love of gain, but with alacrity. 8. Neither as being lords. Not with an arbitrary, despotic 
rule. Over God’s heritage. Rather, “ over the charge allotted you” (Revision). Ensamples to the 
flock. Instead of ruling imperiously, rather set an example that others may follow. 4. And when 
the chief Shepherd. Christ, to whom all the under shepherds shall give account. Shall receive the 
crown of glory. The eternal reward of faithful duty. . 


368 I, PETER. 


See ee es ei I ee ee ee 

5 Likewise, ye younger, submit yourselves unto 
the elder: yea, all* of you be subject one to another, 
and be clothed with humility; for God resisteth the 
proud, and giveth? grace to the humble. 

6 Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty 
hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time: 

7 Casting? all our care upon him; for he careth 
for you. 

8 Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary 
the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking 
whom he may devour: 

9 Whom resist stedfast in the faith, knowing 
that the same afilictions are accomplished in your 
brethren that are in the world. 

10 But the God of all grace, who hath called us 
unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye 
have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, 
strengthen, settle you: 

11 To him be glory and dominion for ever and 
ever. Amen. 

12 By? Silvanus, a faithful brother unto you, (as 
I suppose,) I have written® briefly, exhorting, and 
testifying that this is the true grace of God wherein 
ye stand. 


[Ch. V. 


Likewise, ye younger, be 5 
subject unto the elder. 
Yea, all of you gird your- 
selves with humility, to 
serve one another: for God 
resisteth the proud, but 
ie grace to the humble. 

umble yourselves there- 6 
fore under the mighty 
hand of God, that he may 
exalt youin due time; cast- T 
ing all your anxiety upon 
him, because he careth for 
you. Be sober, be watch- 8 
ful: your adversary the 
devil, as a roaring lon, 
walketh about, seeking 
whom he may devour: 
whom withstand stedfast 9 
in your faith, knowing that 
the same sufferings are ac- 
complished in your breth- 
ren who are mn the world. 
And the God of all grace, 
who called you unto his 
eternal glory in Christ 
after that ye have suffered 
a little while, shall himself 
perfect, stablish, strength- 
en you. To him be the do- 
minion for ever and ever. 
Amen. 

By Silvanus, our faithful 
brother, as I account him, 
I have written unto you 
briefly, exhorting, and tes- 
tifying that this is the true 
grace of God: stand ye fast 
therein. She that isin Bab- 13 
ylon, elect together with 





12 


you, Ssaluteth you; and so 


13 The church that is at’ Babylon, elected togeth- 
er with you, saluteth you, and so doth Marcus,® my 
son. 








3; Eph. 5:21. 


b Isa. 67:16; 66:2. c¢ Psa. 87:53 55:22; Matt. 6:25; Luke 12:11; il. 4:6: 
d2 Cor. 1: 19. 5 ; 3 ; Phil. 4:6; 


a Rom. 12: 10; Phil. 2: 
Heb. 13:5 e Heb. 13:22. fGen. 10:10; Rev. 17:5,18; 18:4. g Acts 12:12, 








5-7. Likewise, ye younger. Some scholars think that all who are not elders are meant. Among 
the Greeks “younger” sometimes meant those inferior in position. Perhaps the word enforces this 
sense as well as those younger in years. Be subject unto the elder. “Elders” in the Greek. The 
duty of submissiveness and humility is the thought of the passage. Yea, all be subject to one 
another. The literal rendering is “Wrap yourselves up in humility one to another.” Mutual deference 
must be shown, as well as mutual service. God resisteth the proud, ete. Quoted from Prov. 3: 34. 
6. Humble yourselves. Because “God giveth grace to the humble.” Under the mighty hand. 
God exalts as well as casts down. He lifts up the humble, therefore, ‘“Humble yourselves that you may 
be exalted.” In due time. In God’s own time; not our time, but God’s. 7, Casting. Simply sub- 
mitting, doing the Lord’s will, and casting all care on him. 

8-11. Be sober. Sobriety is necessary to vigilance. Be vigilant. Wide awake and watchful. The 
reason follows. An enemy is ready to spring upon them. The devil, asaroaring lion. He goeth 
about as the lion, seeking for prey. The lion while hunting only roars when it springs. So the devil is 
stealthy and does not give warning of his approach. 9. Whom resist. See James 4: 7. When. the 
devil is resisted he flees. Stedfast. Firm in the faith, Knowing that the same sufferings, etc. 
That your sufferings are not unusual, but that the brethren everywhere sufier as youdo. 10. And the 
God of all grace. Who bestows all grace. Who called you. God is always spoken of as the author 
of the calling. A little while. You may be called to suffer for a season, but it will soon be over. Make 
you perfect. He will supply every need, leaving nothing wanting. 

12-14. By Silvanus. Silas, the old companion of Paul. See Acts, chapter 16. It has been supposed 
that Paul, then a prisoner at Rome, had sent Silvanus to Peter. Our faithful brother, as I suppose. 
This implies that Peter had little personal acquaintance, Silvanus having been with Paul in the work 
among the Gentiles. Have written unto you. He sends this letter ‘‘by Silvanus.”” Thisis the true 
grace of God. The gospel which had been preached to them. 18. She that isin Babylon. See 


Ch. Way I. PETER. 369 


14 Greet ye one another with a kiss of charity, | dt Mark my son. ee 
Peace be with you all that are in Christ Jesus. Ue 
eace be unto you all 
Amen. that are in Christ. © 








Revision. The word church is not in the Greek. Peter probably referred to his wife. The salutations 
are allfromindividuals. Babylon. Seeremarksin Introduction. Alford says, “ There is no reason what- 
-ever for regarding this any place but the Chaldean capital.” So doth Mark, my son. Most likely 
John Mark, the author of the second gospel. See Acts 12: 12; 13: 5; 15: 37; Col. 4: 10. Salute one 
canother with a kiss of love. See notes on Rom. 16; 16; 1 Cor. 16; 20, 


(24) 


INTRODUCTION TO THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PETER. 


The Second Epistle of Peter is placed by Eusebius among the writings whose genuine- 
ness had been called in question by many, and it is not to be denied that there were 
differences in the early church concerning its right to a place in the Canon. Yet it seems 
to have been quoted by several of the Fathers in the second century, and in the third 
the great Origen went so far as to write a commentary upon it. It was finally received 
by ali the churches except the Syrian, in whose translation of the New Testament it was 
not embraced. Among the modern critics some have rejected it upon various grounds, 
but others not less able, such as Olshausen, Alford, Bruckner, and Schaff have pro- 
nounced it genuine. Upon the whole it seems probable that it was written by him 
whose name appears in the salutation, but written some time later than the first, near 
the close of his life, and specially directed against certain heresies which were beginning 
to appear. If there is some indefiniteness concerning the authorship, there is still more 
concerning the time and place where it was written. It contains no data for forming a 


conclusion. 
(870) 


THE SECOND EPISTLE GENERAL OF 


edo Daya 


CHAPTER I. 


Making the Calling and Election Sure. 


SUMMARY.— Greetings. Adding to Faith the Christian Graces. 
Followed Fables. The Transfiguration. 


CHAPTER I. 


Simon Peter, a servant 2 
and apostle of Jesus Christ, 
to them that have obtain 
a like precious faith with 


Not 


1 Simon Peter, a servant and an apostle of Jesus 
Christ, to them that have obtained* like precious 
faith with us, through the righteousness of God and 
our Saviour Jesus Christ: 

2 Grace and peace be multiplied unto you through 
the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord, 

3 According as his divine power hath given unto 


us in the righteousness of 
our God and Saviour Jesus 
Christ: Grace to you and 2 
peace be multiplied in the 
knowledge of God and of 
Jesus our Lord; seeing 3 
that his divine power hath 
granted unto us all things 
that pertain unto life and 
godliness, through the 
knowledge of him that eall- 


ed us by his own glory and 
virtue; whereby he hath 4 
granted unto us his pre- 
cious and exceeding great 
promises; that through 
these ye may become par- 
takers of the divine na- 
ture, having escaped from 
the corruption that is in 
the world by’ lust. Yea, 5 
and for this very cause 
adding on your part all dil- 
igence, in your faith supply 
virtue; and in your virtue 
knowledge; and in your 6 
knowledge temperance; 
and in your temperance 
patience; and in your pa- 


us all things that pertain unto life and godliness, 
through” the knowledge of him that* hath called us 
to glory and virtue: é 

4 Whereby? are given unto us exceeding great 
and precious promises; that by these ye might® be 
partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the 
corruption that is in the world through lust. 

5 And besides this, giving all diligence, add to 
your faith, virtue; and ‘to virtue, knowledge; 

6 And to knowledge, temperance; and to temper- 
ance, patience; and to patience, godliness; 








¢1 Thes. 2:12; 1John 2: 20,27; 2 Tim. 1:9; 1 Pet. 2:93 3:9. @2'Cor. 7:1. 


Laie 4:5. John 17:3. 
eA Hy Eph aos, | ee Hos. 4:63; 2 Cor. 6:4,6; 1 Pet.3:7; 2 Pet.3:18 


e2 Cor. 3:18; Eph. 4:24; Heb. 10:12; 1John3:2. fProv.1:75 19:2; 





1-4. Simon Peter. To his first epistle he only prefixed the name given him by the Lord. Here he 
calls himself by both names, as found in Luke 5: 8; John 13: 6; 20: 2; Acts 10: 5, and many other places. 
A servant. Of Jesus as the Lord. And apostle. Of Jesusas the Messiah. Tothemthat have 
obtained like precious faith. Who are also saints enjoying the precious promises. 2. Grace and 
peace. Theusual apostolic benediction. These come through the knowledge, etc. Those who have 
learned to know God and his Son have eternal life (John 17: 3). This knowledge is one that comes from 
fellowship with Christ. 3. Seeing that his divine power. It has granted us all things needful to 
live godly lives. Through the knowledge of him. These all come through the knowledge of God. 
By his own glory and virtue (Revision). God’s power 1s manifested in his glory and virtue. It is his 
moral excellency and glory that move upon men, not physical power. 4. Whereby. By his glory and 
virtue. Exceeding great and precious promises. The splendid promises of the gospel. That 
through these. The offers of the gospel. Partakers of the divine nature, One of the promises 
was communion with God and fellowship with Christ. See John 14: 23. Having escaped. All who 
come to Christ and are in him have escaped from sin and corruption. ' 

5-8. Yea, and for this very cause. Because God has called you with precious promises. What 
God has done calls on us to do our part. All diligence. No exertion must be spared. There must be 
the fullest co-operation with God. In your faith supply virtue. The Common Version is wrong. 
Faith is the basis of the Christian life and all are expected to possess it, but out of it must grow other 
excellencies. Virtue. Moral courage, the na3T1) of a trusting faith in God. Knowledge. The 


372 . Il. PETER. (Ch. I. 





7 And to godliness, brotherly kindness; and* to your scouhiness (epee 
A = rity. rethren; and in your love 
brotherly kindness, charity G d h of the brethren love. For 8 
8 For if these things be in you and abound, they | ir these things are yours 


A 7 af a 2 *¢_|and abound, they make 
make you that ye shail neither 6e barren nor unfruit- | 105 to be not idle nor un- 


ful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. iruitful. unto the knowl- 
edge of our Lord Jesus 


9 But he that lacketh these things” is blind, and Christ. For he that laek- 9 
«¢ |} eth these things is blind, 
cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten that he was coeue oaly re tee 


purged from his old sins. having forgotten thé 
cleansing from his old sins. 


10 Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence® | Whererote, brethren, vive 10 


i : ; 1@ « a4 the more diligence to make 
to make your calling and election sure; for if ye do your Calling sands qlee ion 


these things ye shall never fall: sure: for if ye do these 
things, ye shall never stum- 


11 For® so an entrance shall be ministered unto | pie: for thus shall berich 11 


“ 7 vq r ly supplied unto you the 
you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our entrance into the eternal 


Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. kingdom _of our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ. 


12 Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you Wherefore I shall be 12 
a 2 1 ready always to put you in 
always in remembrance of these things, though ye | [eady always to Put yon ae 


know them, and be established in the present truth. | things, though ye know 
them, and are established 


13 Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this | in tné truth whieh 18 With 
oO i 1 you. An hink 1t right, 13 

tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting you in| %.¢ ae tani tes oe 

remembrance; etade — you up by 
14 Knowing? that shortly I must put off this my brance Knowing that the 14 

; g ' 7 putting off of my taber- 

tabernacle, even as our? Lord Jesus Christ hath | putting off BOs 
shewed me. as our Lord Jesus Christ , 
: signified unto me. Yea, 5 

15 Moreover, I will endeavour that ye may be| Wii give diligence that at 


1 ‘ every time ye may be able 
able after my decease to have these things always | ¢yers set Mee te 


in remembrance. these things to remem- 
branee. For we did not 16 


16 For we have not followed cunningly-devised | folow’ cunningly devised 


a Gal. 6:10; 1 Thes. 8:12; 5:15; 1John 4:21, b1John 2:9. ¢ Eph. 5:26; Heb. 9:14; 1John1:7. diJohn3: 19. 
e2 Tim, 4:8. f Deut. 4:21; 31:14. g John 21: 18. 

















moral heroism must be guided by knowledge or it will run into “‘a zeal not according to knowledge.” 
6. Temperance. Self control. Patience. Unflinching, patient endurance. Godliness. A rever- 
ence for things divine shown by growing more and more into the divine hkeness. 7%. Brotherly kind- 
ness. An active good will towards the saints. Love. The heart element which gives brotherly kindness 
its power and sweetness. 8. For if these things bein you. Ii these qualities abound they will be 
fruitful, showing that they have knowledge of Christ im reality. ‘ 

9-11. He that lacketh these things. The qualities named in verses 5-7. Is blind. Shows that 
he has a defective moral vision. Cannot see afar off. Is short sighted; does not see what his future 
good requires. Hath forgotten. If he could remember how he was cleansed from his old sinful state, 
_ he would show greater diligence lest he should again fall into sin. 10. Wherefore .. give the 

more diligence. Diligence to the end is needful in order to salvation. Calling and election. The 
calling is first in order; the election comes when we accept the call. Sure, Our own efforts are needed to 
make them sure. Forif ye do these things. Those named above. Thus we will make the ‘‘calling and 
election sure.’ For then we shall never fall. 11. An abundant entrance. We will be richly 
prepared for entrance. Into the eternal kingdom. The heavenly kingdom. 

12-15. Wherefore. The language that follows anticipates his speedy decease (verse 15). 18. I 
think it meet. Right. AslongasIaminthistabernacle. In the body, the present home of his 
spirit. 14. Knowing that shortly I must put off, etc. Must die very soon. Even as our Lord 
Jesus Christ hath showed me. Christ had predicted his death as a martyr (John 21: 18,19). Itis to 
this prediction that Peter refers. 15. I will give diligence (Revision). He will so diligently admonish 
them that after his death they will remember his words. 

16-18. For we have not followed cunningly devised fables. There was no mistake or doubt 
about the gospel, no such fables as the myths of the Gentiles. When we made known unto you. 


Ch. IL] Il. PETER. 


373 





fables, when we made known unto you the power 
and comiug of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eye- 
witnesses of his majesty. 

17 For he received from God the Father honour 
and glory, when there came sucha voice to him 
from the excellent glory, This* is my beloved Son, 
in whom I am well pleased. 

18 And this voice which came from heaven we 
heard, when we were with him in? the holy mount. 

19 We have also a more® sure word of prophecy; 
whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a 
light that shineth in a dark place, until the day 
dawn, and the day-star arise in your hearts: 

20 Knowing this first, that® no prophecy of the 
scripture is of any private interpretation. 

21 For the’ prophecy came notin old time by the 
will of man; but® holy men of God spake as they 
were moved by the Holy Ghost. 


CHAPTER II. 


Warnings Against False Teachers. 


SuUMMARY.—False Prophets and False Teachers. The Judgment on the 
Fallen Angels. Judgment on the Antediluvians. The Perverseness 
of Wicked Men. The Example of Balaam, the Son of Bosor. 


1 But® there were false prophets also among the 
people, even as‘ there shall be false teachers among 
you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, 
even denying the Lord! that bought them, and 
bring upon themselves swift destruction. 





fables, when we made 
known unto you the power 
and coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, but we were 
eyewitnesses of his majes- 
ty. For he received from 
God the Father honour 
and glory, when there came 
such a voice to him from 
the excellent glory, This is 
my beloved Son, in whom I 
am well pleased: and this 
voice we ourselves heard 
come out of heaven, when 
we were with him in the 
holy mount. And we have 
the word of prophecy made 
more sure; whereunto yedo 
well that ye take heed, as 
unto a lamp shining in a 
dark place, until the day 
dawn, and the day-star 


17 


arise in your hearts: know- 20 


ing this first, that no 
prophecy of scripture is of 
private interpretation. For 
no prophecy ever came by 
the will of man: but men 
spake from God, being 
moved by the Holy Ghost. 


CHAPTER II. 


But there arose false 
prophets also among the 
people, as among you also 
there shall be false teach- 
ers, who shall _privily 
bring in destructive here- 
sies, denying even the Mas- 
ter that ought them, 
bringing upon themselves 








21 


1 


a@ Matt. 3:17; 17:5; Mark 1:11; 9:7; Luke 3: 22; 9:35. 6Ex.3:5; Josh.5:15. cIsa. 8:20. 
2:28; 22:16. e Rom. 12:6. f2 Tim.3:16; 1 Pet.1:1l. g2Sam. 23:2; Luke 1:70; Acts 1:16; 3:18. 
4 Matt. 24:11. j Heb. 10:29. 


d2 Cor. 4:4,6; Rey. 
hk Deut. 13:1. 





Preached the coming into the world and the divine power of Christ. But were eye witnesses. Since 
the apostles were personal witnesses of Christ’s glory, they knew whereof they spoke. 17. For he 
received from God the Father honor and glory. He cites one scene that he had witnessed where 
the divine glory rested upon Christ. The glory of the Transfiguration is the prophecy of the glory which 
will be revealed when Christ comes. There came such a voice. God honored the Son by the Divine 
declaration. See Matt.17:1-6. 18. And this voice we ourselves heard. Peter, and James and 
John, his companions on the holy mount. James was now dead, but John was still alive. 

19-21. We have also a more sure word of prophecy. Prophecy was a sure word, but when 
fulfilled in Christ and the gospel it seemed more sure. No class of evidence had more power with Jews 
than to show them that Jesus was the Christ of whom the prophets spoke. Whereunto. To prophecy, 
Take heed. Heed its predictions and statements concerning Christ. Asuntoalamp. It wasa lamp 
shining in the darkness of the past and giving some light before the day star arose. The day dawn. 
The full light of the New Testament. The day star. Christ. See Rev. 22:16. 20. Knowing this 
first. This is a reason for giving heed to the word of prophecy. Thatnoprophecy . . is of any 
private interpretation. Is not an interpretation of the knowledge and feelings of the prophet, but of 
the will of God. The next verse shows that this is the meaning. 21. Forno prophecy. Noscriptural 
prophecy is due to the will of man, but all came from men speaking from God when moved by the Holy 
Spirit. Prophecy is God’s word, not the words of man. 

1-3. There arose false prophets also among the people. In 1:19 the true prophets are referred 


374 II. PETER. : ECh. IT. 


‘ i icl : | swift destruction. And 2 
2 And many shall follow their pernicious ways; piled a re 


by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil } lascivious doings; by rea- 
k f son of whom the way of 
spoken or. , the truth shall be evil spo- 
3 And through covetousness shall they with cen ap ewah ne 3 
feigned words make merchandise of you: whose|ed words make merchan- 


* : ‘ ; dise of : whose sentence 
judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and | nowfrom of old linsereth 


irc j a not, and their destruction 
their damnation slumber eth not. ‘ é hot, ane feel fee e 
A For if God spared not? the angels” that sinned, spared not angels when 
but® cast them down to hell, and delivered seh down to heli and commit: 
7 ma ar PAG 1 ='| te em to pits of dark- 
into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judg i ke 
ment; judgement; and spared not 5 


5 And spared not the old world, but saved Noah,* | oancient world, but pre- 


. > yay , 1 q others, a preacher of right- 
the eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, others Bere ee 
bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly; | a flood upon the world of 


6 And® turning the cities of Sodom and Go-| {he weodly; and turning 6 


morrha into ashes, condemned them with an over- cones ne aabee 1py 
throw, making them an ensample unto those that overthrow, having made 
* H ae em an example unto 
after should live ungodl 3 ’ those that should live un- 
7 And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy | godly; and delivered right- 7 
: 5 eous Lot, sore distressed 
conversation of the wicked: by the lascivious life of the 
8 (For that righteous man dwelling among them, | Man avwelling wna tous 8 
in seeing and hearing, vexed Ais righteous soul from | im seeing and hearing, vex- 
5 Rs ed his righteous soul from 
day to day with their unlawful deeds:) day to day with their law- 


f 4 < A less deeds): the Lord 9 
9 The* Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly| trowetn now toc aciont 
out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto | the godly out of tempta- 


i “a tion, and to keep the un- 
the day of judgment to be punished; righteous under punish 














aJob 4:18; Jude 6. 6John 8:44; 1John3:8, c Luke 8:31; Heb. 20:2,38. d@Gen.7:1; Heb. 11:7; 1 Pet. 3: 20. 
e Gen. 19:24. 7 Psa. 34:17. ‘ 





to. Here the false prophets are spoken of in contrast. By ‘tthe people’? Israel is meant. The term 
“false prophet’’ occurs several times in the Old Testament. For example see Jer. 6: 13. Christ foretells 
the rise of false prophets (Matt, 24; 24). There shall be false teachers. Teachers of false doctrines. 
Paul often warns against such teachers. See Acts 20:30. Damnable heresies. ‘“ Destructive heresies” 
in the Revision. Party divisions caused by false teaching. A heresy is a schism, or that which tends to 
produce a schism. Denying the Lord that bought them. This is the culmination of false teaching 
in the church and has been fulfilled by those professedly Christian teachers who reject the divinity of 
Christ and the atoning power of his blood. Swift destruction. Sudden destruction. 2. Many 
shall follow their pernicious ways. “Lascivious doings” in the Revision. Immoral life is the 
result of the false doctrine, and thus a reproach is brought upon the truth. 3. And in covetousness. 
By their “feigned words,” crafty speeches, the false teachers shall use their followers as a source of gain. 

4-11. Forif God spared not the angels that sinned. In order to show that judgments on these 
wicked teachers are sure Peter cites examples. Even angels when they sinned were subjected to punish- 
ment. But cast them downtohell. The sinning angels were cast out of heaven. The word rendered 
“hell” is not Gehenna, but Tartarus, a Greek term used for the place of future punishment. Delivered 
them into chains of darkness, “ Pits’ in the Revision; possibly dungeons of darkness gives the 
idea, Compare Jude 6. Both passages point to a time when angels sinned, fell, and thus became angeis 
of darkness. 5. Andspared not the old world. The case of the antediluvians furnishes the second 
example of God’s swift justice. But preserved Noah with seven others. God did not then forget 
the righteous. A preacher of righteousness. By example as well as by word. See Gen. 5: 17, and 
1 Pet.3: 20. 6. Turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrhainto ashes. The third example of 
judgment on sin. See Gen.19: 29. 7. And delivered righteous Lot. The saving of the righteous 1s 
as marked as the punishment of the wicked. See Gen. 19: 1,7. Wexed,etc. See Gen.19:5. 8. For 
that righteous man, etc. Lot, seeing and hearing the wickedness around him, was sore distressed. 
9. The Lord knoweth, etc. These examples show that the Lord knows how to deliver the righteous 


Gh. ii] II. PETER. 


375 





10 But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in 
the lust of uncleanness, and despise government. 
Presumptuous are they, self-willed, they are not 
afraid to speak evil of dignities. 

11 Whereas* angels, which are greater in power 
and might, bring not railing accusation against 
them before the Lord. 

12 But these,” as natural brute beasts, made to be 
taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things that 
they understand not, and shall utterly perish in 
their own corruption; 

13 And shall receive the reward of unrighteous- 
ness, as they that count it pleasure? to riot in the 
day-time. Spots they are and blemishes, sporting 
themselves with their own deceivings, while they* 
feast with you: 

14 Having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot 
cease from sin; beguiling unstable souls: an heart 
they have exercised with covetous practices; cursed 
children: 

15 Which have forsaken the right way, and are 
gone astray, following the way of * Balaam the son of 
Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness ; 

16 But was rebuked for his iniquity: the dumb 
ass, speaking with man’s voice, forbade the mad- 
ness of the prophet. 

17 These are wells without water, clouds that are 
carried with a tempest; to whom the mist of dark- 
ness is reserved for ever. 





aJude9. bJer. 12:3. ¢Phil. 3:19. d Rom. 13: 13. 











ment unto the day of judge- 
ment; but chiefly them 
that walk after the flesh in 10 
the lust of defilement, and 
despise dominion. ae 
selfwilled, they tremble 
not to rail at dignities: 
whereas angels, though 11 
greater in might and pow- 
er, bring not a railing 
judgement against them 
efore the Lord. But these, 
as creatures without rea- 
son, born mere animals to 
be taken and destroyed, 
railing in matters whereof 
they are ignorant, shall in 
their destroying surely be 
destroyed, suffering wrong 13 
as the hire of wrong-do- 
ing; men that count it 
pleasure to revel in the 
day-time, spots and blem- 
ishes, revelling in their 
love-feasts while they feast 
with you; having eyes full 
of adultery, and that can- 
not cease from sin; entic- 
ing unstedfast souls; hav- 
ing a heart exercised in 
covetousness; children of 
cursing; forsaking the 15 
right way, they went 
astray, having followed the 
way of Balaam the son of 
Beor, who loved the hire of 
wrong-doing; but he was 
rebuked for his own trans- 
gression: a dumb ass spake 
with man’s voice and stay- 
ed the madness of the 
prophet. These are springs 
without water, and mists 
driven by a storm; for 
whom the blackness of 


12 


17 


e1Cor. 11:20, 21. jf Num. 22; Rey. 2:4. 


from every species of trial, and to hold the wicked in reserve for judgment. 10. Chiefly. Those next 
named will receive the greater punishment. Who go after the flesh. Follow its dictates and live 
impure lives. Despise government. Refuse to submit to authority. Not afraid to speak evil of 


dignities. 
and holy. 11. Whereas angels. The angels, 


A characteristic of this class is their presumption and a want of reverence for what is high 
superior in might and power, do not show such pre- 


sumption, or disrespect to any lofty power. Compare Jude 8. There is so striking a parallel between a 
part of this chapter and a part of Jude that it is thought that either Peter or Jude had the epistle of the 
other before him. Jude shows us that even Michael did not rail against Satan. 


12-16. But these, 
destined to the slaughter for man’s uses. 


the things that they understand not. How often the scoffer fulfils this description ! 
Their destruction is the legitimate reward of their own 
“in the day.” 
of coming destruction, they take pleasure in carousal for a day, 
plemishes. Marring the brightness and beauty of the church. 
Converting even these into scenes of revel. 14. Hav- 


receive the reward of unrighteousness. 
wrong doing. Count it pleasure toriotinthedaytime. Literally 
idea is that, like dumb brutes forgetful 
regardless of the morrow. Spots and 
Revelling in their love feasts (Revision). 
ing eyes full of adultery. Looking around with a lustful appetite. 
way of Balaam, the son of Bosor. See Numbers, chapter 31. 
cause for the sake of gain. 
brute he rode. 

17-19. These are springs without 
by astorm. The thought is the same. 


as natural brute beasts. As if utterly irrational. The brute beasts were 
So these men blindly rush to destruction. Speak evil of 


13. Shall 


I believe that the 


15. Having followed the 


Balaam sold himself out to an evil 
16. But was rebuked. By the voice that was put into the mouth of the 


water. They promise much but disappoint. Mists driven 
These mists promise rain but it fails to descend. For whom. 


\ 


376 II. PETER. 


[Ch. IIT. 





18 For when they speak great swelling words of 
vanity, they allure through the lusts of the flesh, 
through much wantonness, those that? were clean 
escaped from them who live in error. 

19 While they promise them liberty, they them- 
selves are the servants of corruption: for of whom 
a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in 
bondage. 

20 For! if after they have ‘escaped the pollutions 
of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again entangled 
therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with 
them than the beginning. 

21 For? it had been better for them not to have 
known the way of righteousness, than, after they 
have known 7¢, to turn from the holy commandment 
delivered unto them. 

22 But it is happened unto them according to the 
true proverb,? The dog zs turned to his own vomit 
again; and the sow that was washed to her wallow- 
ing in the mire. 


CHAPTER III. 


The End of All Things. 


SUMMARY.—The Purpose of the Second Epistle. The Sayings of Scoffers. 
God’s Apparent Delay to Give Opportunity for Repentance. The Day 
of the Lord. The New Heavens and New Earth. The Blameless 
Lives We Ought to Live. Paul’s Writings. Final Admonitions. 


1 This second epistle, beloved, [ now write unto 
you; in both which" I stir up your pure minds by 
way of remembrance; 





darkness hath been resery- 18- 
ed. For, uttering great 
swelling words of vanity, 
they entice in the lusts 
of the flesh, by las- 
civiousness, those who 
are just escaping from 
them that live in error; 
promising them liberty, 
while they themselves are 
bondservants of corrup- 
tion; for of whom a man 
is overcome, of the same is 
he also brought into bond- 
age. For if, after they have 
escaped the defilements of 
the world through the 
knowledge of the Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ, 
they are again entangled 
therein and overcome, the 
last state is become worse 
with them than the first. 
For it were better for them 
not to have known the way 
of righteousness, than, 
after knowing it, to turn 
back from the holy com- 
mandment delivered unto 
them. It has happened 22 
unto them accordiug to the 
true proverb, The dog turn- 
ing to his own vomit again 
and the sow that ha 
washed to wallowing in 
the mire, 


CHAPTER III. 


This is now, beloved, the 1° 
second epistle that I write 
unto you; and in both of 
them I stir up your sincere 
mind by putting you in re- 





a Acts 2:40. 6Gal.5:18. cJohn8: 34; Rom.6:16. d Matt. 12:45; Lukel1:26; Heb. 6:4: 10:26. G 
f Luke 12:47; John 15:22. g Prov. 26:11. 42 Pet. i: 13, ” ak Gosee 3 





For these apostates the ‘‘ blackness of darkness is reserved.” 18. For. This shows how they promise: 
great things and disappoint. They offer great swelling words, and entice those who are 

about to be delivered fromerror. 19. Promising liberty. Liberty fromall restraint, complete freedom 

to serve their own wills, such liberty as those who rail against God’s law are wont to offer. Servants of 
corruption. Those who offer liberty are themselves slaves, serving their own passions and lusts. He 

who is swayed by appetite or habit cannot be free. 

20-22. For if, after they have escaped the pollution !of the world. If one who has been 
converted is enticed back again into his sins his state is worse than before. That this is possible is taught. 
inmany places. 21. For it had been better, etc. To other sins there is then added the sin of reject- 
ing the way of righteousness after an experimental knowledge of it. 22. For itis happened. Their 
relapse is described in the proverbs. See Prov.1:1; 26:11. Such a repulsive course can be compared 
only with the most disgusting habits of unclean animals. ; 

1-4. This second epistle. This language implies a former letter written to the same persons to: 
whom this is addressed. I stir up your pure minds. In both letters his object was mainly to exhort 
them to holy lives. By way of remembrance. By reminding you of the claims of Christ as shown by” 
prophets and apostles. 2. That ye may be mindful of the words. Both of what was spoken by the 
prophets in the Old Testament, and of what the apostles have now spoken. Us the apostles. The 
Twelve, and Paul, who is alluded to in verse 15, 8, Knowing this first. The apostles and prophets. 
have reminded them that there will be scoffers in the last days. Under the last dispensation. 4. 


Ch. III.] Il. PETER. 


2 That ye may be mindful of the words which 
were spoken. before by the holy prophets,? and of 
the commandment of us the apostles of the Lord 
and Saviour: 

3 Knowing? this first, that there shall come in 
the last days scoffers, walking‘ after their own lusts, 

4 And saying,’ Where is the promise of his com- 
ing? for since the fathers fel asleep, all things 
continue as they were from the beginning of the 
creation. 

5 For this they willingly are ignorant of, that® by 
the word of God the heavens were of old, and the 
earth standing out of the water and in the water: 

6 Whereby* the world that then was, being over- 
flowed with water, perished: 

7 But the heavens and the earth which are now, 
by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto 
fire against the day of judgment and perdition of 
ungodly men. 

8 But, beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, 


377 


membrance; that ye should 
remember the words which 
were spoken before by the 
holy prophets, and’ the 
commandment of the Lord 
and Saviour through your 
apostles: knowing this 
first, that in the last days 
mockers shall eome with 
mockery, walking after 
their Own lusts, and say- 
ing, Where is the promise 
ot his coming? for, from 
the day that the fathers 
fell asleep, all things con- 
tinue as they were from 
the beginning of the cre- 
ation, For this they wil- 
fully forget, that there 
were heavens from of old, 
and an earth compacted 
out of water and amidst 
water, by the word of God; 
by which means the worid 
that then was, being over- 
flowed with water, perish- 
ed: but the heavens that 
now are, and the earth, by 
the same word have been 
stored up for fire, being 
reserved against the day 
of judgement and destrue- 
tion of ungodly men. 


2 


3 


4 


5- 


be] 


But forget not this one 8 
thing, beloved, that one 
day is with the Lord asa 
thousand years, and a 
thousand years as one day. 
The Lord is not slack con- 9 
cerning his promise, as 
some count slackness; but 
is longsuffering to you- 
ward, not wishing that any 
should perish, but that all 
should come to repentance. 
But the day of the Lord 10: 


that one day 7s with the Lord as a thousand years, 
and" a thousand years as one day. 

9 The‘ Lord is not slack concerning his promise, 
as some men count slackness; but is) long-suffering 
to us-ward, not* willing that any should perish, 
but! that all should come to repentance. 

10 But™ the day of the Lord will come as a thief 
in the night; in the which” the heavens shall pass 








adudel7. 61Tim.4:1. ¢2 Pet. 2:10. 
g Matt. 25: 41; 2 Thes. 1:8; Heb. 1: ll. 
18:23; 83:11. 7 Rom. 2:4; 1 Tim. 2:4. 


d@1sa.5:19; Jer. 17:15; Matt. 24:48. eGen. 1:6; Heb. 11:3. J Gen. 7:11. 
A Psa. 90:4. 7 Hab. 2:3; Heb. 10:37. j Isa. 30:18. & Ezek, 


m Matt. 24:43. m Matt. 24:35; Rey. 20:1]. 





Where is the promise of his coming? This question is asked by the scoffers, as though the coming” 
of Christ was so long delayed that all hope had ended. They take advantage of the disappointment to try 
to destroy faith. Allthings continue. The scoffers assert that the regular order of nature continues 
right on as it was from the beginning. They forget the deluge. 

5-7. For this they willingly are ignorant of. Their ignorance which causes them to speak thus 
is wilful. They obstinately forget all the lessons taught by the deluge. There the fixed order was inter- 
rupted. That there were heavens. This alludes to the beginning of creation. See Gen. 1: 1, 2. By the 
word of God. See Gen. 1: 6,9. And the earth. The Revision translates, “compacted out of the 
water.” That is, water is a principal element in its formation, a fact seen in three-fourths of its surface 
being sea, and water being found in the depths of the earth everywhere, and being found largely in earthly 
combinations. 6. Whereby. By means of the waters of heaven and earth; “the windows of heaven being 
opened and the fountains of the great deep broken up,” the old world was overflowed and perished. 7, 
By the same word. The heavens and earth of old were formed by the word of God, but the same word, 
which has always been sure, declares that they are reserved for fire. See Ps. 50: 3; 97: 3; Isa. 66: 15, 24; 
Dan.7: 9; Mal.4:1. Against the day ofjudgment. This destruction by fire will be when the Lord is: 
revealed in judgment and when perdition comes on ungodly men, 

8-13. But, beloved, be not ignorant. Delay was the objection of the scoffers, but time is no ele- 
ment in the counsels of God. He has eternity in which to work out his purposes. He can as well take a 
thousand years as a day. If he seems to us short lived creatures to delay it is for wise purposes. See 
Ps.90:4. 9. The Lord is notslack. If the day of the Lord seems delayed it is not due to slackness. 
It is rather because God is long suffering and is giving time to call the world to repentance. See 2 Tim. 
2:4. 10. Butthe day of the Lord willcome. This expression usually, but not always, refers to the 


378 II. PETER. 





away with a great noise, and the elements shall 
melt with fervent heat, the earth also, and the 
works that are therein, shall be burnt up. 

11 Seeing then that all things shall be dissolved, 
what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy 
conversation and godliness ; 

12 Looking for and hasting unto the coming of 
the day of God, wherein the heavens, being on fire, 


[Ch. IIL. 


will come as a thief; in the 
which the heavens shall 
pass away with a great 
noise, and the elements 
shall be dissolved with fer- 
vent heat, and the earth 
and the works that are 
therein shall be burned up. 
Seeing that these things 
are thus all to be dissoly- 
ed, what manner of per- 
sons ought ye to be in all 
holy living and godliness, 





: : looking tor and earnestly 12 
shall? be dissolved, and the elements shall” melt desiring the coming of the 
: : i ay of God, by reason 0 
with fervent heat? : é é which the heavens being 
13 Nevertheless we, according to his promise, | on fire shall be dissolv d, 
is Cc h herei and the elements shall 
look for® new heavens and a new earth, wherein | meit with fervent heat? 
- aneas But, according to his prom- 13 
dwelleth righteousness. fee ee loc Tee wea ea 
14 Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for eng and a new earth, 
. "7° wherein r! 
such things, be diligent, that ye may be found of | Gousness, me 
4 1 7 / ° Wherefore, beloved, see- 14 
him in peace, without spot, and blameless: tay that te io ee 
15 And account that the long-suffering of our | things, ive diligence that 
Lord ¢s salvation; even as our beloved brother Paul without spot and. Blame- 
2S a0 rai ic | 1 ess in his sight. And ac- 15 
also, accor ding to the wisdom given unto him, hath | Gini? that the iongsufter- 
written unto you; mag of our Lord ig salvas 
16 As also in all his epistles, speaking® in them brother Paul also byes 
3 ° ing to e wisdom given 
of these things: in which are some things hard to | oe oe 


be understood, which they that are unlearned and 
unstable wrest, as they do also the other scriptures, 
unto their own destruction. 

17 Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these 





also in all his epistles, 
speaking in them of these 
things; wherein are some 
things hard to be under- 
stood, which the ignorant 
and unstedfast wrest, as 





a@ Psa. 50: 33 Isa. 34:4. 0 Micah1:4. cIsa. 65:17; 66:22; Rev. 21:1. 


1 Cor. 15: 245 1 Thes. 4: 15. 


d Rom.2:4; 1 Pet. 3: 20. 


e Rom. 8: 193 





second advent. Such is its meaning here. As a thief. When people are not expecting it. Compare 
1 Thess. 5: 2; Matt. 24: 483. The heavens shall pass away. See Luke 21: 33. The elements shall 
melt. The material of which they are composed. The earth also and the works. The earth and all 
man’s creations. That the world shall come to an end seems to be written in its very constitution. A 
slight change in the constitution of the’ atmosphere, or the decomposition of its water would wrap it in 
flame. Science finds the elements of final dissolution in the relations of the earth and sun. According to 
the ratio of increase in two centuries the world will not have resources to feed its population. In afew 
hundred years the coal resources of the world will fail. These and many other facts point to a necessary 
and inevitable change. 11. What manner of persons ought ye tobe. Since we have no abiding 
home on this earth and seek one beyond, we should live ina state of preparation. 12. Looking for, 
Looking for, preparing for, and desiring the Lord’s coming. Dreadful as that day will be for the impeni- 
tent it is a day of relief and of glorious attainment to the saint. 18. We, according to his promise. 
See Isa. 65: 17; also 66: 22. The heavens and the earth are not to be blotted out, but changed, purified and 
made better for the home of the righteous. : 

14-18. Wherefore, beloved. Now follows an earnest exhortation to holiness in view of the coming 
of the Lord. 15. Account that the long suffering of our Lord is salvation, That God’s long 
suffering is designed to promote salvation. Even as our beloved brother Paul . . hath written 
to you. We cannot tell what epistles of Paul are alluded to. We have at least three which were writ- 
ten to the same churches Peter was addressing. See 1 Pet.1:1,2. 16. As alsoin all his epistles, 
Peter knew of many epistles, then, that Paul had written, and knew also that they contained some very 
profound argument, which a Jew especially found it difficult to understand (See Galatian Letter). The 
unlearned and unstable. Theignorant and vacillating wrest. Pervert and give meanings that were 
never meant. As also the other scriptures. The other scriptures may mean the Old Testament, or 
New Testament writings already written. The point to be noted is that already when Peter wrote Paul’s 
epistles were accepted as a part of the Scriptures. To their own destruction, This should be awarn- 


Chr Jite| -— II. PETER. 379 


- ra a - >| they do also the other 
things before,* beware lest ye also, being led away 1 RI 
with the error of the wicked, fall from your own | destruction. Yetherefore. 17 

tedfastness: beloved, knowing these 
stearastness : : , things beforehand, beware 

18 But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of | lest, being carried away 


- : A with the error of the wick- 
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. To him be |ed, ye fall from your own 


stedfastness. But grow in 18 

glory, both now and for ever. Amen. the grace and knowledge 
of our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ. To him be 
the glory both now and for 
ever. Amen. 


oo 
aEph. 4:14. 


os eSSSSSSaeseseseseseee 
ing to all in our day who twist the Scriptures from their real meaning. 17. Seeing ye know these 
things before. That there shall be false teachers; hence beware of them. 18. Growin grace. How 
they may so grow was shown in i Peter 2: 2. And inthe knowledge of our Lord. The two kinds of 
growth must keep equal pace. He who grows in the one will grow in the other. 





INTRODUCTION TO THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 


This Epistle was written by John, the Son of Zebedee, the beloved Disciple, am 
Apostle of Jesus Christ. The outlines of his history and character have been fully 
given in the Introduction to the Gospel of John (People’s Testament, Vol. I.) to which 
I refer the reader. Prominent in the Savior’s earthly ministry, the active companion 
of Peter in the founding of the church in Judea, he was soon overshadowed in the Acts 
of the Apostles by the towering personalities of Peter and Paul. He is only named four 
times in the Acts, and his name only occurs once in the Epistles of Paul (Gal. 2: 9) in a. 
passage which probably names the only occasion when he and Paul ever met face to 
face. The opinion of the early church was that his residence was in Palestine until the 
time approached for the overthrow of the Jewish state, and probably until he had been 
released from the sacred charge of the mother of Jesus by her death; that he then 
removed to Asia Minor to make his home at Ephesus among the great body of Gentile 
churches which had been robbed of the care of their founder, the great apostle to the 
Gentiles, by his martyrdom, and that in Ephesus he wrote the Epistles which are 
inscribed to him in the New Testament. 

Like the Gospel: by the same writer, the Epistle does not mention the name of its 
author, and we are indebted for the knowledge of the authorship to the uniform testi- 
mony of the early church, as well as to the similarity of thought and expression of the 
Gospel and the Epistle. I do not think the hypothesis of those destructive German 
eritics who have a mania for novelties, that the writer of Ephesus was not the Apostle 
John, but a Presbyter John of the second century, is worthy of serious consideration. 
Such a figment is incredible in view of the fact that the second century testifies that 
John the Apostle long lived at Ephesus, and died there, leaving the legacy of his life 
and writings to the churches. We have still extant the writings of those who affirm 
that they had been trained by men of God who had been trained under the direction 
of the aged apostle during his Ephesian residence. It may be added that this epistle is 
repeatedly quoted in the writings of the Fathers belonging to the second century, and 
is named, as well as the other two Epistles of John, in the first Canon of the New 
Testament writings, the Canon Muratori, which belongs to the last half of the second 
century. 

Its date is only a matter of conjecture. It is evident from the various false doctrines 
which the writer evidently had in view that it belongs to a later period than any other 
writings of the New Testament save those of John himself. It was probably written 
when John remained as the only survivor of the apostolic band, after his gospel, and 
when certain heresies began to assume form. Why it should appear without either the 
names of the author or of the churches to which it was addressed is uncertain, but it 
does demonstrate that it is a genuine Epistle, and no part of a forgery, as some German 
writers have held. A forged Epistle would have been ascribed to an apostolic writer 
in order to gain its acceptance. The examples afforded by certain forged epistles of the 
early centuries, the so called Epistle to the Laodiceans for instance, settle this point. 
The peculiarities of the Epistle, which cannot be discussed in our limited space, will be: 


best seen in the notes on the text. 
(380) 


THE FIRST EPISTLE GENERAL OF 


JOHN. 


CHAPTER I. 


Fellowship with God. 


‘SSUMMARY.—The Word of Life. Eternal Life Manifested. God is Light. 
Those in Fellowship with Him Must Walk in the Light. 


1 That? which was from the beginning, which we 


have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, 
which we have looked upon, and our® hands have 
handled, of the Word? of life; 

2 (For the life was manifested, and we have seen 
zt, and bear witness, and shew unto you that eternal 
life which was with the Father,* and was manifested 
unto us;) 

3 That which we have seen and heard declare 
we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with 
us; and‘ truly our fellowship zs with the Father, 
and with his Son Jesus Christ. 

4 And these things write we unto you, that your 
joy may be full. 

5 This then is the message which we have heard 
of him, and declare unto you, that God? is light, 
and in him is no darkness at all. 


c Luke 24:39. d Rev. 19:13. 


62 Pet. 1:16. 
g John 1:9; 8:12; 9:5; 12:35; Rev. 1:5. 


@ Micah 5:2. 





CHAPTER TI. 


That which was from the 1 
beginning, that which we 
have heard, that which we 
have seen with our eyes 
that which we beheld, an 
our hands handled, con- 
cerning the Word of life 
(and the life was manifest- 2 
ed, and we have seen, and 
bear witness, and declare 
unto you the life, the eter- 
nal life, which was with 
the Father, and was mani- 
fested unto us) ; that which 3 
we have seen and heard 
declare we unto you also, 
that ye also may have fel- 
lowship with us: yea, and 
our fellowship is with the 
Father, and with his Son 
Jesus Christ: and these 4 
things we write, that our 
joy may be fulfilled. 

And this is the message 5 
which we have heard from 
him, and announce unto 
you, that God is light, and 
in him is no darkness at 


eJohn1:1,2. fJohn 15:43 17:21; 1 Cor. 1:9. 





1-4, That which was from the beginning. Compare John 1:1; see notes there. Compare also 


-Gen. 1:1. Johni:1 shows that The Word, manifested as Christ, was from the beginning. Which we 
have heard, . . . looked upon, . . handled. In its incarnate form in the person of Jesus 
Christ. The Word of life. Christ, the revealed Word, when it became flesh and dwelt among men 
(John 1: 14); “in whom also was life” (John 1:4). 2. The life was manifested. They had seen the 
Life manifested in the person of Christ. And bear witness. The office of the apostle, having seen 
and known the Eternal Life as he lived on earth, was to bear witness of him to the world. 8. That ye 
also may have fellowship. To declare what they had seen and heard was simply to preach the gospel. 
This knowledge communicated to others brought those who accepted it into a fellowship of knowledge 
and hope. Those are in fellowship who are partakers of the same faith, hopes and privileges. With us. 
All the saints entered into fellowship with the apostles, but the apostles were in fellowship with the 
Father. This grand fellowship, that of the saints with the Father and the Son, is simply a guarantee that 
no good thing will be withheld from us; that “all things are ours.” There is a fellowship of peace, of 
concord, of eternal life and glory. 4. These things write we. This assurance of the divine fellow- 
ship is given in order that they may rejoice with the fulness of joy in the glorious hope. 

5-7. This then is the message. The message heard from Christ, now declared is, that God is 
light. The source whence all light, whether it be physical, or moral or spiritual, comes; the Enlightener 
of the universe. The term denotes luminous clearness, the free and benevolent source from whence flow 
light, intelligence, purity and blessing, absolutely (38 ne alien intermixture, since in him is no dark- 


I. JOHN. 


6 If we say that we have fellowship with him, 
and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth: 

7 But if we walk in the light, as he is in the 
light, we have fellowship one with another, and the 
blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all 
sin. 

8 If? we say that we have no sin, we deceive our- 
selves, and the truth is not in us. 


382 





9 If” we confess our sins, he is faithful and just! 


to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all 
unrighteousness. 

10 If we say that we have not sinned, we make 
him a liar, and his word is not in us. 


Ch. Il. 


all. If we say that we have 6 
fellowship with him, and 
walk in the darkness, we 
lie, and do not the truth: 
but if we walk in the light, 7 
as he is in the light, we 
have fellowship one with 
another, and the blood of 
Jesus his Son cleanseth us 
from all sin. If we say 8 
that we have no sin, we de- 
ceive ourselves, and the 
truth is not in us. If we 9 
confess our sins, he is 
faithful aud righteous to 
forgive us our sins, and to 
cleanse us from all un- 
righteousness. If we say 10 
that we have not sinned, 
we make him a liar, and 
his word is not in us. 


CHAPTER II. 
The New Life. 


SuMMARY.—The Advocate with the Father. The Propitiation. The Old 
and the New Commandment. The Love of the World and the Love of 
the Father Inconsistent. The Unction of the Holy Spirit. Antichrist. 
The Anointing Which Teacheth All Things. 


1 My little children, these things write I unto 
you, that ye sin not. And if any man sin,° we 
have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the 
righteous: 

2 And‘ he is the propitiation for our sins; and 





CHAPTER II. 


My little children, these 1 
things write I unto you, 
that ye may not sin. And 
if any man sin. we have an 
Advocate with the Father, 
Jesus Christ the righteous: 





@1 Kings 8:46; Eccl. 7:20; James 3:2. 6 Psa. 32:5; Prov. 28:18. ¢c Heb. 9:24. d@ Rom. 3:25. 








ness at all. Light represents truth, knowledge and holiness. Darkness represents ignorance, error, 
falsehood and sin. 6. If we say .. . and walk in darkness. To claim a fellowship with him 
who is Light and to walk in the darkness of error, of ignorance, and of sinfulness are utterly inconsistent. 
Do not the truth. He who obeys not the truth walks in darkness. ‘7. But if we walk in the light. 
We walk in the light by following Christ, the Light of the world. Wehavefellowship. All who are 
walking in the light have the common life. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from 
allsin. Cleansed by the blood of Christ, and thus made holy, we are fitted for the heavenly communion. 

8-10. If wesay that we havenosin. To say that we have reached a sinless state in which we no 
longer need the blood of Christ to cleanse us is a deception. This language is in square opposition to the 
claims of the ‘‘ Perfectionists” of allages. 9. If we confess oursins. Instead of affirming that we 
are sinless we should confess our sins. Faithful and just. If we confess our sins the Lord will be 
faithful to his promise of mercy, and just in requiring us to have the atonement of Christ, to forgive us 
oursins. 10. If wesay that we have not sinned. God says we have sinned. He declares “ There 
is none righteous; nc, not one.” Hence if we affirm that we are sinless we make God a liar. 

Norse.—I1t must be noted that these words concerning sin, found in verses 8-10, are not addressed to 
Gentile sinners, but to a generation which had grown up in the church. Indeed, of all the epistles, this is 
the only one which can truly be said to have been addressed to a Christian generation. Hence, it would 
naturally emphasize, not the unconverted sinner’s need of pardon, but of the Christian’s constant need of 
a pardoning Savior. It is the Christian who cannot say that he has no sin, and who must find pardon by 
confessing his sins to Christ. Acts 2: 38 shows how the alien sinner may obtain remission; 1 John 1: 9 
shows how the Christian, when he sins, may obtain remission. 

1,2. My little children. From so aged a teacher as John, now probably more than four score, and 
at least fifty years in the service of Christ, this fatherly style of address is very appropriate. That ye sin 
not. He writes to exhort them to a pure and holy life, the only life permissible to those born again. And 
if any sin. The word “man” is not found in the Greek. The meaning is, ‘‘ If any brother, any of you, 
should be overtaken by sin,” there is a way of forgiveness. They must not sin, but if unhappily one does 
sin, let him go to Christ, the Advocate. We have an advocate. Who pleads with the Father not to- 


he ah I. JOHN. 383: 


not for ou ] a als ; and he is the propitiation 2 
rs only, but* also for the sins of the whole foe cour sing? One oe 





world. ours only, but also for the 
3 Aud hereby we do know that we know Dim ely ae: a 
we keep his commandments. him, if we keep his com- 


5 & - |mandments. He thatsaith, 4 
4 He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his|1 Know him, and keepeth 
, . 5 no 1s commandments, is 
commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not|” liar, and the truth is not 
in him. iy him: put whose mecpera 5 
° O 3 Q oy nIS word, in im verily 
5 But whoso” keepeth his word, in him verily is | hath the love of Bod guy 


the love of God perfected: hereby know we that eee ee ae 


7 7 that saith he abideth im 
we are in him. him ought himself also to 


6 He* that saith he abideth in him, ought him-|waiceven as lo walten 


a ° Beloved, no new com- 7 
self? also so to walk, even as he walked. mandment write I unto 


-ethr e a you, but an old command- 
7 Brethren,* I write no new commandment unto Pent Wieh eee ae 


ou, but an old commandment which! ye had from the beginning: the old com- 
) ¥ g 


the beginning. The old commandment is the word Neelalt yo header aero 8: 


which ye have heard from the beginning. Ae ee 


8 Again,® a new commandment I write unto you, | trucin himandin vor be 


which thing is true in him and in you;" because the fee eet a ee 


. igen ; ; light already shineth. He 9 
darkness is past, and the! true light now shineth. ee ee 


9 He that saith he is in the light, and hateth his| tight, and hatethhistrowk. 


SRS : r, isin the darkness 
brother, is in darkness even until now. TniLaon OE ect Ge aa 


7 5 = 7 his brother abideth in the 

_10 He that loveth his brother abideth in the ent, and there ts none oc: 

light, andi there is none occasion of stumbling in | easion of stumbling in him. 
hi E ; But he that hateth his 11 

1m: a popher ts is the Harkness: 

1 ta 7 4 and walketh in the dark- 

11 But he that hateth his brother is in darkness, neni aid eee eee 


and walketh in darkness, and knoweth not whither | whither he goeth, because 


he goeth, because that darkness hath blinded his een Pande 


eyes. 


@John 1:29. 6 Titus2:11. cJohn15:4. d Matt. 11:29. e2John5. JiJohn 3:11. g John 13:34. h Rom. 18; 125 
Eph. 5:8; 1 Thes. 5:5. 7 John 1:9; 8:12; 12:35. 72 Pet.1:10. &£John 12:35, 











withdraw his love because we may have been betrayed into sin. 2. He is the propitiation. The 
mercy seat of the Tabernacle where God met man was called the propitiation. Christ is our mercy seat, 
where God meets us in mercy and forgiveness. And not for ours only. Christ’s offering is for all. 
“ He tasted death for every man.” 

38-6. And hereby we do know that we know him. The evidence that we havea saving knowl- 
edge of Christ is loyal obedience to his commandments. 4. He that saith, etc. If one claims to have 
a saving knowledge of Christ, yet lives in disobedience, his life puts the lie to his words. 5. But whoso 
keepeth his word, etc. Itis by keeping his commandments that the love of God is made perfect in us, 
Obedience is the result and proof of love, and also gives love the opportunity to flow over the whole life. 
Compare John 14: 21. Hereby. By our loyal obedience. 6. He that saith he abidethin him. Who 
so abideth in Christ, and lives by the life Christ imparts, must show that life by a life like that of Christ. 
See John 15: 4. 

7-11. I write no new commandment. He writes in substance what was commanded from the: 
beginning when he bids them walk as Christ walks. The beginning. Their first hearing of the gospel. 
The old commandment is the word. The Gospel. Its substance is condensed by Christ into the 
words: ‘‘Follow me.” 8. Again, a new commandment. Yet this commandment, the substance of 
which is brotherly love, is in one sense new (see John 13: 34), because it was first taught them by Christ. 
Which thing is true. Its truth is shown in the life of Christ and in your life. Because the dark- 
nessis past. The truth of the new commandment is shown because you have come out of the darkness 
and are walking in the light that shineth. He that keeps the new commandment walks in the light. 9. 
He that saith he is in the light. If one hates his brother he demonstrates that he is in darkness. 
10. He that loveth, etc. On the other hand, brotherly love shows that one abides in the light. None 
occasion of stumbling. Because he walks in the light and can see where he walks. 11. But he that 


O84 IL. JOHN. 


PCh. Al: 





12 I write unto you, little children, because* your 
gins are forgiven you for his name’s sake. 

13 1 write unto you, fathers, because ye have 
known him” that is from the beginning. I write 
unto you, young men, because ye have overcome the 
wicked one. I write unto you, little children, be- 
cause ye have known the Father. 

14 I have written unto you, fathers, because ye 
have known him that ts from the beginning. I have 
written unto you, young men, because* ye are 
strong, and¢ the word of God abideth in you, and 
ye have overcome the wicked one. 

15 Love not the world, neither the things that 
are inthe world. If¢ any man love the world, the 
love of the Father is not in him. 

16 For all that ¢s in the world, the lust of the 
flesh,? and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of 
life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. 

17 And the world passeth away, and the lust 
thereof: but he that doeth the will of God® abid- 
eth for ever. 

18 Little children,” it is the last time: and as ye 
have heard: that antichrist shall come,/ even now 
are there many antichrists; whereby we know that 
it is the last time. 

19 They went out from us, but they were not of 
us; for* if they had been of us, they would no 
doubt have continued with us: but they went out, 
that! they might be made manifest that they were 
not all of us. 





I write unto you, my little 12 
children, because your sins 
are forgiven you for his 
name’s sake. J write unto 
ee fathers, because ye 

now him which is from 
the beginning. I write un- 
to you, young men, because 
ye have overcome the evil 
one. I have written unto 
you, little children,because 
re know the Father. I 14 

ave written unto you, 
fathers, because ye know 
him which is from the be- 
ginning. I have written 
unto you, young men, be- 
cause ye are strong, and 
the word of God abideth 
in you, and ye have over- 
come the evil one. Love 
not the world, neither the 
things that are in the 
world. Jf any man love 
the world, the love of the 
Father is notin him. For 
all that is in the world, the 
lust of the flesh, and the 
lust of the eyes, and the 
vainglory-of life, is not of 
the Father, but is of the 
world. And the world 17 
passeth away, and the lust 
thereof: but he that doeth 
the will of God abideth for 


ever. 

Little children, it is the 18 
last hour: and as ye heard 
that antichrist cometh, 
even now have there arisen 
many antichrists; where- 
by we know that it is the 
last hour. They went out 19 
from us, but they were not 
of us; for if they had been 
of us, they would have 
continued with us: but 
they went out, that they 
might be made manifest 
how that they all are not 


13 





a Luke 24:47; Acte 4:12. 61John1:1. 
_J Heel. 5:11. 9g Psa. 125:1; Prov. 10:25. 


c Eph. 6:10. 


da Jer. 31:33; John 8:31. 
h Heb. 1:2. 


e Matt. 6:24; Gal. 1:10; James 4:4. 
42 Thes. 2:3. 


j Matt. 24:5. & Matt. 24:24. 21 Cor. 11:19. 





hateth, etc. He who hates is not following Christ, the Light, and hence walks in the darkness, hence is 
blinded. He cannot see the dangers that beset him on account of the darkness. 

12-14. I write unto you, littie children. John calls all the saints ‘little children.” Then he 
divides them into three classes, “‘ fathers,” ‘ young men,” and ‘little children” (verse 13), but the Greek 
word rendered “little children” in verse 13 is a different one from that of versesland12. 18. I write 
unto you, fathers. These fathers have known him. Not known Christ in the flesh but have walked 
with him long and realized his presence. Young men, The special excellence of these Christian young 
men is that they have overcome the temptations of the evil one. Little children. These have known 
the Father, and can say, “ Our Father, who art in heaven.” 14. Lhave written. This verse, imitating 
the Hebrew parallelism, repeats verses 12 and 13 with slight variations. 

15-17. Love notthe world. An exhortation to all three classes just named. The love of the world 
and of God are not reconcilable. See notes on James 4:4. By “the world”? is meant the ways of the 
world, its passions, pleasures and pursuits. 16. For all that is in the world. This sinful world is 
comprehended under three heads. The lust of the flesh. The desires which spring from the appetites 
and passions. The lust of the eyes. The desires that are aroused by appeals made to our eyes. The 
pride of life. The vain glory of the world; its foolish display. Sensuality, avarice and pride, nearly, 
but not quite, illustrate what is meant. 17. And the world passeth away. All these things are 
transient, but he who does the will of God builds on eternal foundations. 

18-25. Little children, it is the last time. We are in the last dispensation. Ye have heard 

-that antichrist shallcome. False Christs and those opposed to Christ. See Matt. 24: 4. Anti-Christ 


Ch. IL] no SOHN: 


385 





20 But? ye have an unction” from the Holy One, 
cand ye know all things. 

21 I have not written unto you because ye know 
not the truth, but because ye know it, and that no 
he is of the truth. 

22 Who is a liar, but he that denieth that Jesus 
is the Christ? He is antichrist, that denieth the 
Father and the Son. 

23 Whosoever denieth the Son, the same hath 
not the Father: [but the that acknowledgeth the 
Son, hath the Father also.] 

24 Let that therefore abide in you which ye? 
have heard from the beginning. If that which ye 
have heard from the beginning shall remain in you,°® 
ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father. 

25 And* this is the promise that he hath promised 
us, even eternal life. 

26 These things have I written unto you concern- 


of us. And ye have an 20 
anointing from the Holy 
one, and ye know all 
things. I have not written 21 
unto you, because ye know 
not the truth, but because 
ye know it, and because no 
lie is of the truth. Who is 22 
the liar but he that denieth 
that Jesus is the Christ? 
This is the antichrist, even 
he that denieth the Father 
and the Son. Whosoever 23 
denieth the Son, the same 
hath not the Father: he 
that confesseth the Son 
hath the Father also. As 24 
for you, let that abide in 
you which ye heard from 
the beginning. If that 
which ye heard from the 
penne abide in you, ye 
also shall abide in the Son, 
and in the Father. And 25 
this is the promise which 
he promised us, even the 
life eternal. These things 26 
have I written unto you 
concerning them that 
would lead you astray. 27 


And as for you, the anoint- 
ing which ye received of 
him abideth in you, and ye 
need not that any one 
teach you; but as his 
anointing teacheth you 
concerning all things, and 
is true, and is no lie, and 
even as it taught you, ye 


ing them that seduce you. 

27 But the anointing, which ye have received of 
him, abideth in you; and ye® need not that any man 
teach you: but as the same anointing" teacheth you 
of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as 
it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him. 


cJohn 14:7. d2John6. 
A John 16:18. 











6 Mark 1:24; Acts 3:14. 
g Jer. 31: 33; Heb. 8:10. 


-a Isa. 44:3; 2 Cor. 1:21; Heb. 1:9. elJohn1:3. fJobhn17:3. 


is Anti-Christianity. Whereby we know that it is the last time. Their appearance is a part of the 

“series of events which leads to the final consummation. 19. They went outfrom us. This implies 
‘that these antichrists were apostates. The worst men are often those who were once outwardly religious 
and have fallen away. If they had been of us. Had they been true and genuine Christians they could 
hardly have fallen into such a state of enmity. Their going away and bitter opposition show that they 
were not real converts. 20. But yehaveanunction. Yeare anointed with the Holy Spirit. Christian 
means an anointed one; Anti-Christ would mean against the Anointed. Hence John reminds them that 
they have been anointed by the Holy One. Knowallthings. All things needful to guard against these 
opposers and seducing teachers. It is the privilege of those who have this anointing to know Christ 
experimentally (John 14: 22,23). 21. I have not written, etc. John writes to them as those who 
know the truth, and know how to discern between the truth and lies. 22. Whoisaliar, etc.P Hence 
they will know how to reject these antichrists who lyingly deny Jesus Christ. 23. Whosoever deni- 
eth the Son. All who deny the Father and the Son are antichrist; so also those who reject the Son can- 
not have the Father. 24. Let that therefore abide inyou. The truth concerning the Father and 
the Son which Anti-Christ denies. Ye shall continue. He who remains steadfast in this faith will 
continue inthe Son, etc. 25. And thisisthe promise. This promise is made to all who abide in 
the Son and in the Father. 

26-29. These things have I written, etc. All these words about Anti-Christ; all from verse 18 
to the end of the chapter is to put them on their guard against false teachers. 27. But the anointing 
which you havereceived. Seeverse20. This anointing is spoken of because it furnishes them ameans 

‘of guarding against the false teachers and seducers. The passage does not teach a continuous revela- 
tion, or that we are to be led by the inner light, but that God has given us means of knowing whether men 
speak the truth. Ye need not that any manteach you. There is another fountain of knowledge so 

that ye need not the aid of these opposing teachers. As the same anointing teacheth you all 

things. The Holy Spirit bestowed upon you. It was the promise of Christ that the Spirit should guide 

you into all truth (John 16; 13). The Holy Spirit was thus imparted to the apostles and through them 

spiritual gifts were imparted everywhere in the early church. Among these gifts were wisdom, knowl- 
25 


386 I. JOHN. 


(Ch. IIt. 











28 And now, little children, abide in him; that, 
when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and 
not be ashamed before him at his coming. 

29 If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that 
every one that doeth righteousness is born of him. 


CHAPTER III. 


Children Born of God. 


SUMMARY.—The Marvellous Love of the Father. Sons of God Should Be 
Sinless. Christ Manifested to Remove Sin. Love the Proof that We 
Abide in God. The Spirit a Proof that We Abide in God. 


1 Behold what manner of love the Father hath 
bestowed upon us, that? we should be called the 
sons of God! therefore the world knoweth us not,° 
because it knew him not. 

2 Beloved, now are we the sons of God; and® it 
doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know 
that, when he shall appear, we® shall be like him; 
for wef shall see him as he is. 

3 And every man that hath this hope in him 
purifieth himself, even as he is pure. 

4 Whosoever committeth sin transgresseth also 
the law: for sin is the transgression of the law. 

5 And ye know that he was manifested to’ take 
away our sins; and® in him was no sin. 

6 Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not: whoso- 
ever sinneth hath not seen him, neither known him. 





abide in him. And now, 28 
my little children, abide in 
him; that, if he shall be 
manifested, we may have 
boldness, and not be 
ashamed before him at his 
coming. If ye know that 29: 
he is righteous, ye know 
that every one also that 
doeth righteousness is be- 
gotten of him. : 


CHAPTER III. 


Behold what manner of 
love the Father hath be- 
stowed upon us, that we 
should be called children 
of God: and such we are. 
For this cause the world 
knoweth us not, because it 
knew him not. Beloved, 2 
now are we children of 
God, and.it isnot yet made 
manifest what we shall be. 
We know that, if he shall 
be manifested, we shall be 
like him; for we shall see 
him even as he is. And 3 
every one that hath this 
hope se¢ on him purifieth 
himself, even as he is pure. 
Every one that doeth sin 4 
doeth also lawlessness: 
and sin is lawlessness. 
And ye know that he was 5 
manifested to take away 
sins; and in him is no sin. 
Whosoever abideth in him 6 
sinneth not: whosoever 
sinneth hath not seen him, 








a Acts 22:14. bJohn1:12. ¢Jolin 15:18; 17:25. d1 Cor. 2:9; 2Cor. 4: 


e Psa. 17:15; Rom. 8: 29. f Job 
19: 26; Psa. 16; 11; Matt. 5:8; 1 Cor. 13:12; 2 Cor. 5:7. g Isa. 53: 


Nie 
I2; Heb. 1:8. 42 Cor. 5: 21. 





edge, prophecy, and discerning of spirits. These extraordinary gifts continued until the Holy Spirit had 
prepared the New Testament to guide the church (1 Cor. 13: 8). Now we have the Word of God, which 
the Holy Spirit has given us, and the presence of the Spirit with us to fit us for understanding. The word 
and the unction still “‘teach us all things.” 28. Abide in him. By continuing in the truth taught 
of God. 29, If we know that heisrighteous. A life of righteousness shows that we have the life. 
of Christ, and hence is proof that we have been born of him. 

1-8. Behold, what manner of love, ete. The last verse of chapter 2 speaks of the saints as born 
of God. That thought suggests the wonderful love in allowing us to be born again and thus to become 
God’s children. Sons of God. What greater glory than to be acknowledged as sons of the King of 
Kings! Therefore. If the world does not know the Father it will not know his children. 2. Now 
are we, etc. Already we have the great privilege of being sons, and it doth not yet appear what 
ure shall be. Our future glory is not yet manifest. Even we ourselves cannot understand it. But we 
know. One glorious revelation has been made. At the coming of Christ we shall belike him. Then 
we shall be like him in body. See Phil. 3:21. We shall also be found morally in hisimage. For we 
shall see him as heis. To look upon him has power to change us into his glory. See 2Cor.3:18. 8. 
Every man that hath this hope. To have a hope of being like Christ leads us to try to be like Christ; 
hence, to be pure as he is pure. 

4-10. Whosoever committeth sin, etc. The very act of sinning is a breaking of law. “Sinis law- 
lessness” (Revision). 5. Was manifested to take away oursins. Christ came, not only to take 
away our sins by their remission, but to take away our disposition to sin. 6. Whosoever abideth in 
him sinneth not. One ceaseth to abide in him when he engages in sinning. See note at the end of the 
Epistle. Hath not seen him, etc. ‘“ Whosoever sinneth,” that is, sins habitually, thereby shows that. 
he hath not experimental insight and knowledge of Christ. There is no fellowship with the Sinless One. 


Ch. IIT] I. JOHN. 





7 Little children, let no man deceive you: he? 
that doeth righteousness is righteous, even as he is 
righteous. 

8 He? that committeth sin is of the devil; for the 
devil sinneth from the beginning. For this purpose 
the Son of God was manifested,° that he might 
destroy the works of the devil. 

9 Whosoever’ is born of God doth not commit 
sin; for® his seed remaineth in him: and he cannot 
sin, because he is born of God. 

10 In this the children of God are manifest, and 
the children of the devil: whosoever doeth not 
righteousness is not of God, neither he that loveth 
not his brother. 

11 For this is the message that ye heard from the 
beginning,‘ that we should love one another. 

12 Not as® Cain, who was of that wicked one, 
and slew his brother. And wherefore slew he him? 
Because his own works were evil, and his brother’s 
righteous. 

13 Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate 
you. 

14 We know that we have passed from death 
unto life, because we love the brethren. He that 
loveth not his brother abideth in death. 

15 Whosoever" hateth his brother is a murderer: 
and ye know that no ‘murderer hath eternal life 
abiding in him. 

16 Hereby! perceive we the love of God, because 
he laid down his life for us: and we ought to lay 
down our lives for the brethren. 





387 


neither knoweth him. My 7 
little children, let no man 
lead you astray: he that 
doeth righteousness is 
righteous, even as he is 
righteous: he that doeth g 
sin is of the devil; for the 
devil sinneth from the be- 
ginning. To this end was 
the Son of God manifested, 
that he might destroy the 
works of the devil. ho- 9 
soever is begotten of God 
doeth no sin, because his 
seed abideth in him: and 
he cannot sin, because he 
is begotten of God. In 
this the children of God 
are manifest, and the chil- 
dren of the devil: whoso- 
ever doeth not righteous- 
ness is not of God, neither 
he that loveth not his 
brother. For this is the 11 
message which ye heard 
from the beginning, that 
we should love one anoth- 
er: not as Cain was of the 12 
evil one, and slew his 
brother. And wherefore 
slew he him? Because his 
works were evil, and his 
brother’s righteous. 

Marvel not, brethren, if 13 
the world hateth you. We 14 
know that we have passed 
out of death into life, be- 
cause we love the breth- 
ren. He that loveth not 
abideth in death. Whoso- 
ever hateth his brother is 
a@ murderer: and ye know 
that no murderer hath 
eternal life abiding in him. 
Hereby know we love, be- 
cause he laid down his life 
for us: and we ought to lay 
down our jlives for the 


10 


i 


5 





a Wzek. 18:5; Rom. 2:13. 6 Matt. 18:38; John 8:44. 


ec Gen. 3:15; Luke 10:18; John 16:11. 


d@iJohn5:18. e1 Pet. 


1:23. FJohn 15:12. g Gen.4:4. A Matt. 5:21; 1John 4:20. i Gal. 5:21; Rey. 21:8. 7 John 3:16; Rom.5:8; Eph.5:2,25. 





7. Let no man deceive you. Do not be deluded into the belief that any one can be righteous unless 
he practices righteousness. 8. He that committeth sin is of the devil. <A sinful life is a proof of 
the devil’s power. Christ came to destroy the works of the devil, and it is his work to destroy sin in all 
his disciples. 9. Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin. The thought is that he does 
not live a life of sin. The spirit born of God, the new creation, does not sin, and cannot sin and remain 
God’s child, but sometimes the old nature revives and for a moment exerts its power. ‘It isnomore I 
that do it but sin that dwelleth in me” (Rom. 8: 20). See note at end of the Epistle. His seed remain- 
eth in him. The principle of divine life, and hence he cannot live a sinful life. Because he is born 
of God. ‘‘ That which is born of the Spirit is spirit.” This new nature cannot sin. If we sin, it is the 
old nature revived. Unless at once we repent and flee to him he will depart from us. 10. In this, etc. 
Thus is the distinction clear between God’s children and those of the devil. God’s children are full of 
love and live holy lives. Those of the devil are the opposite. 

11,12. This is the message. God’s charge has always been that we should love each other. 12. 
Not as Cain, who was of that wicked one. Cain, who hated and slew his brother, is an extreme 
type of the children of the devil. This hater and murderer is condemned far more severely in the Script- 
ures than the disobedient Adam. 

18-18. We know that we have passed from death unto life, etc. If our hearts are filled with 
brotherly love this shows that we are God’s children; and the opposite is also true. 15. Whosoever 
hateth . . isamurderer, Has the germs from which murder springs lurking in his heart. Hatred 
led Cain to murder; so it does many others who sin likewise. No murderer. It is impossible for a man 


388 I. JOHN. 


17 But? whoso hath this world’s good, and seeth 
his brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels 
of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of 
God in him? 

18 My little children, let us not love in word, 
neither in tongue; but in deed, and in truth. 

19 And hereby we know” that we are of the 
truth, and shall assure our hearts before him. 

20 For if our heart condemn us, God is greater 
than our heart, and knoweth all things. 

21 Beloved,° if our heart condemn us not,? then 
have we confidence toward God. 

92 And® whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, 
because we keep his commandments,‘ and do those 
things that are pleasing in his sight. 

93 And this is the commandment, That we should 
believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and 
love one another, as he gave us commandment. 

24 And he that keepeth his commandments® 
dwelleth in him: and hereby we know that he 
abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given us. 


CHAPTER IV. 
Trying the Spirits. 


SuMMARY.—How to Distinguish the Spirits of Truth and Error. Lovea 
Proof that We Are Born of God. God’s Great Love for Us. How We 
Secure the Indwelling of God. How Love is Made Perfect. 

1 Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the 
spirits whether they are of God; because many! 
false prophets are gone out into the world. 





bd John 18: 37. c Job 22:26. d Heb. 10:22. 


a Deut. 15:7; Luke 3:11. 
14:18 g John 17:21, hk Ezek. 37:27; Rom. 8:9. 


13. fdohn 8:29. 





(Ch. IV. 


brethren. But whoso hath 17 
the world’s goods, and be- 
holdeth his brother in 
need, and shutteth up his 
compassion from him, how 
doth the love of God abide 
in him? My little children, 
let us not love in word, 
neither with the tongue: 
but in deed and truth. 
Hereby shall we know that 
we are of the truth, and 
shall assure our heart be- 
fore him, wWwhereinsoever 
our heart condemn us; be- 
cause God is greater than 
our heart, and knoweth all 
things. Beloved, if our 21 
heart condemn us not, we 
have boldness toward God; 
and whatsoever we ask, we 
receive of him, because we 
keep his commandments, 
and do the things that are 
pee his sight. And 23 
this is his commandment, 
that we should believe in 
the name of his Son Jesus 
Christ, and- love one an- 
other, even as he gave us 
commandment. And he 24 
that keepeth his command- 
ments abideth in him, and 
hein him. And hereby we 
know that he abideth in 
us, by the Spirit which he 
gave us. p 


18 


19 


20 


22 


CHAPTER IV. 


Beloved, believe not evy- 1 
ery spirit, but prove the 
spirits, whether they are 
of God: because many false 
prophets are gone out into 


é Psa. 34:15; Matt. 21:22; Mark 11:24; John 
tJder. 29:8. j Matt. 24:5. 





to have the spirit of murder in him and yet have eternal life. 16. Hereby perceive we the love. 
The love of God in Christ is meant. His love is shown on the cross. Christ is love. If we love as he 
Yoved we must be willing even to die for each other. 1'7. But whoso, ete. If this be true, what shall 
be said of one who refuses to succor his suffering brother with his goods? 18: Let us love not in 
word. Our love must not show itself in empty professions. 

19-22. Hereby we know, etc. Because our love is active and practical. Assure our hearts. 
Have a good conscience. 20. For if our heart condemn us. If we have a troubled conscience 
because we have not kept the law of love, God, who is greater and whose condemnation is a far more seri- 
ous affair, knoweth all things and seeth our failure induty. 21. If our heart condemn us not, 
etc. Then we have a conscience void of offense before God and are assured that he will hear us. 22. 
And whatsoever we ask. We can then believe that he will hear our prayers because we are keeping 
his commandments. 

28,24. Andthisis his commandment. The commandments may be summed up in one, with two 
parts, viz.: Faith in Jesus Christ, and love of the brethren. 24. He that keepeth his command- 
ments. By keeping them we dwell in him and hein us. See John 14: 23. We know that he abideth 
inus, by the Spirit. The Spirit that dwells in us is manifest by its fruits. If we bear the fruits of the 
Spirit in our lives it is proof that Christ dwells in us. If we are led by the Spirit we are the sons of God 
(Rom. 8: 14). 

1-6. Believe not every spirit. The last chapter has closed concerning the Spirit, but some are 
moyed by other spirits than that of Christ. Try the spirits. Test the spirit that moves teachers and 


Ch. IV.] I. JOHN. 


389 


en 


2 Hereby know ye the Spirit of God; Every? 
spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in 
the flesh is of God: 

3 And” every spirit that confesseth not that 
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God: and 
this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have 
heard that it should come; and even now already is 
it in the world. 

4 Ye are of God, little children, and have over- 
come them; because greater is he that is in you, 
than® he that is in the world. 

> They" are of the world; therefore speak they 
of the world,* and the world heareth them. 

6 We are of God:* he that knoweth God heareth 
us: he that is not of God heareth not us. Hereby 
know we® the spirit of truth, and the spirit of 
error. 

7 Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of 
God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and 
knoweth God. 

8 He that loveth not knoweth not God; for® God 
is love. 

9 In this was manifested the love of God toward 
us, because that God sent his only begotten Son 
into the world, that we might live through him. 

10 Herein is love, not that we loved God,'! but 
that he loved us, and sent his Son ¢o be the propit- 
iation for our sins. — 

11 Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to 
love one another. 





the world. Hereby know 2 
ye the Spirit of God: every 
spirit which confesseth 
that Jesus Christ is come 
in the flesh is of God: and 3 
every spirit which confess- 
eth not Jesus is not of 
God: and this is the spirit 
of the antichrist, whereof 
ye have heard that it eom- 
eth; and now it is in the 
world already. Ye are of 4 
God, my little children, 
and have overcome them: 
because greater is he that 
is in you than he that is in 
the world. They are of the 5 
world: therefore speak 
they as of the world, and 
the world heareth them. 
We are of God: he that 6 
knoweth God heareth us; 
he who is not of God hear- 
eth us not. By this we 
know the spirit of truth, 
and the spirit of error. 
Beloved, let us love one 7 
another: for loveis of God; 
and every one that loveth 
is begotten of God, and 
knoweth God. He that loy- 8 
eth not knoweth not God; 
for God is love. Herein 9 
was the love of God mani- 
fested in us, that God hath 
sent his only begotten Son 
into the world that we 
might live through him. 
Herein is love, not that we 10 
loved God, but that he lov- 
ed_us, and sent his Son 
to be the propitiation for ° 
our sins. Beloved, if God 11 
so loved us, we also ought 
to love one another. 0 12 
man hath beheld God at 
any time: if we love one 





a1 Cor. 12:3; 1John 5:1. 61 John 2:22; 2John7. c John 12:31; 14:30; 16:11; Eph. 2:2; 6:12. @John 3:31. e John 
15:19; 17:14. fJohn 8: 47; 10: 27; 1 Cor. 14: 87; 2 Cor. 10:7. gIsa.8: 20; Johni4: 17. 
h Ex. 34:6, 7; Micah 7:18. «John 15:16; Titus 3:4. 





see whether it be of God. Verse 2 tells how to test. Because many false prophets. There were 
many false teachers in that age as well as in ours, and some claimed to be inspired. 2. Every spirit. 
He who confesses from the heart that Christ has come in the flesh shows that he has the Spirit of God. 
In the flesh. One of the heresies was that Christ had come but that there had been no incarnation. 3. 
Every spirit that confesseth not. If Christ is denied, it is not God’s Spirit, which always speaks 
truth, but that of antichrist. See noteson2:18,19. 4. Ye .. haveovercomethem. Thesaints had 
overcome these false prophets, because they were of God, and the Spirit in them was mightier than the 
evil spirit, that of the prince of the world, which was in the false prophets. 5. They are of the world. 
The false teachers, They are not of God. The world hears them because they are of its spirit and speak 
of it. 6. We areof God. Hence speak God’s message, and those that know God accept the message. 
Hereby know we, etc. By the principles given in verses 2-5 we distinguish between the spirit of truth 
(the Holy Spirit) and that of error. 

7-11. Love one another. He that is born of God must love because the Father is love; hence love 
shows that we are of him and know him. On the other hand (8) he who knows not God does not love. 
9. In this was manifested the love of God. Christ is its supremest manifestation. See notes on 
John 3:16. 10. Hereinis love. Love manifested. The heights of love aresshown, not only in sending 
the Son, but sending him to be a propitiation for our sins; to become asin offering for us, and to die 
for us. See notes on 2:2. 11. Beloved. If we are of God, and God so loves us, we must love one 


another, 


390 I. JOHN. 





12 No* man hath seen God at any time. If we 
love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love 
is perfected in us. 

13 Hereby? know we that we dwell in him, and 
he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit. 

14 And* we have seen, and do testify, that the® 
Father sent the Son ¢o be the Saviour of the world. 

15 Whosoever® shall confess that Jesus is the Son 
of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God. 

16 And we have known and believed the love 
that God hath to us. God is love; and he that 
dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him. 

17 Herein is our love made perfect, that we’ may 
have boldness in the day of judgment:® because as 
he is, so are we in this world. : 

18 There is no fear in love; but perfect love cast- 
eth out fear: because fear hath torment. He that 
feareth is not made perfect in love. 


[Ch. IV. 


another, God abideth in 
us, and his love is perfect- 
ed in us: hereby know we 
that we abide in him, 
and he in us, because 
he hath given us of his 
Spirit. And we have be- 
held and bear witness that 
the Father hath sent the 
Son to be the Saviour of 
the world. Whosoever 
shall confess that Jesus 1s 
the Son of God, God abid- 
eth in him, and he in God. 
And we know and have be- 
lieved the love which. God 
hath in us. God is love; 
and he that abideth in love 
abideth in God, and God 
abideth in him. Herein is 
love made perfect with us, 
that we may have bold- 
ness in the day of judge- 
ment; because as_ he is, 
even so are we in this 
world. There is no fear in 
love: but perfect love cast- 
eth out fear, because fear 
hath punishment; and he 
that feareth is not made 


13 


14 


19 We love him, because he first loved us. erfect in love. We love, 19 
6 ecause he first loved us. 
20 If a man say, I love God, and hateth his | ita man say, I love God, 20 


brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not his 
brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God 
whom he hath not seen? 


21 And® this commandment have we from him, 
That he who loveth God love his brother also. 





and hateth his brother, he 
is a liar: for he that loveth 
not his brother whom he 
hath seen, cannot love God 
whom he hath nét seen. 
And this commandment 
have we from him, that he 
who loveth God love his 
brother also. 


21 





@ Ex. 33:20; Johni:18; 1Tim. 6:16. 6 John 14: 20. 
1 John2: 28; 3:19. 


e John 1: 14. 
g 1John 3:3. 


dJobn 3: 17. 
h John 13: 34. 


e Rom. 10:9. fJames 2: 13; 





12-16. No manhath seen God. He is invisible to mortal eyes, yet we may have a sense of his pres- 
ence in us. If we love each other he dwellsin us. His loveis perfected. It is made complete by our 
loving each other. It is incomplete unless his love for us is supplemented by brotherly love. This love in 
us is the proof that Godisinus. 18. Hereby know we, etc. We know that God dwells in us by the 
Spirit given us. But we know we have the Spirit by its fruits. The first and greatest of these is love 
See Gal. 5: 22. 14. We have seen and do testify. See John 15: 27. This is John’s personal testi- 
mony as an apostle. 15. Whosoever shall confess, etc. In verse 2 confession of Jesus Christ in 
word and life is declared proof of the indwelling of the Spirit; here it is proof of God dwelling in us, 
which means the same thing. 16. We know and have believed (Revision). The love of Godisa 
matter of knowledge and was a matter of faith. Love binds us to God. 

17-21. Herein is our love made perfect. When love is perfected in us we will have no fear of the 
judgment day. Those who love God supremely will not be terrified at his presence. Because as he is, 
so are we, etc. The great ground of boldness is that we are as Christ; purified like him, made sinless 
like him, filled with love like him and appear at judgment in his likeness. This transformation begins 
when we are converted, hence, in this world. 18. There is nofearinlove. There may be rever- 
ential fear, but there is no terror. Fear of God gives way to love. Fearhathtorment. Because it fills 
us with forebodings. 19. Welove him. His wonderful love in Christ fills every redeemed soul with 
love. 20. Ifa man say. Yet no one can claim to love God who hates his brother. We cannot love 
the unseen God when we hate the brother who is in God’s image. 21. This commandment. It is 
God’s will that he who loves the Father should love the children also. 


Ch. V.] I. JOHN. 





CHAPTER V. 


Conclusion. 


SUMMARY.—How We Show that We Love God. Overcoming the World. 
The Three Witnesses. The Witness in Ourselves. Prayer. Praying 
for a Brother Who Sins Not unto Death. 


1 Whosoever? believeth that Jesus” is the Christ 
is born of God:° and every one that loveth him that 
begat, loveth him also that is begotten of him. 

2 By this we know that we love the children of 
God, when we love God, and keep his command- 
ments. 

3 For “this is the love of God, that we keep his 
commandments: and® his commandments are not 
grievous. 

4 For! whatsoever is born of God overcometh 
the world: and this is the victory that overcometh 
the world, even our faith. : 

5 Who is he that overcometh the world, but the 
that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God? 

6 This is he that came "by water and blood, even 
Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water and 
blood: andi it is the Spirit that beareth witness, 
because the Spirit is truth. 

7 For there! are three that bear record in heaven, 
the Father,* the Word, and the Holy Ghost:' and 
these three are one. 

8 And there are three that bear witness in earth, 
the spirit, and the water, and the blood: and these 
three agree in one. 





b1 John 2:22. cJohn 15:23. d John 14:15; 2 John 6. 


h John 19:34. 


a John 1:12. 
g 1 Cor. 1:57. 


Rey. 19:13. 7 Deut. 6:4; John 10:30. 








391 


CHAPTER V. 


Whosoever believeth that 1 
Jesus is the Christ is be- 
gotten of God: and who- 
soever loveth him that be- 

at loveth him also that is 

egotten of him. Hereby 2 
we know that we love the 
children of God, when we 
love God, and do his com- 
mandments. For this is 3 
the love of God, that we 
keep his commandments: 
and his commandments are 
not grievous. For what- 4 
soever is begotten of God 
overcometh the world: 
and this is the victory that 
hath overcome the world, 
even our faith. And who 5 
is he that overcometh the 
world, but he that believ- 
eth that Jesus is the Son 
of God? This is he that 6 
came by water and blood, 
even Jesus Christ; not 
with the water only, but 
with the water and with 
the blood. And it is the 7 
Spirit that beareth witness, 
because the Spirit is the 
truth. For there are three 8 
who bear witness, the Spir- 
it, and the water, and the 
blood: and the three agree 


e Micah 6:8; Matt. 11:30. /John 16:33. 
4 John 15:26. 9 Isa. 48:16; Haggai 2: 5,7; 1 Cor. 12:4-6. kAJobhn 1:1; 


1-5. Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ. This belief, accepted in the heart, confessed 
with the mouth, and perfected by the obedience of faith (Rom. 1:5; James 2: 22), makes one a child of 


God. 2. By this we know, etc. 


But all born of God must love God’s children. The proof that we 


have this love is that we so love God as to obey his commandments, one of which is to love our neighbor 


as ourselves. 3. 
14: 23. We may test our love thus. 
have the new life, overcome the world, in the sense 
This is the victory. The source of victorious power. 
power. 5. Who is he that overcometh? Only the men 0 


Christ. 


This is the love of God. Its outward manifestation is in obedience. See John 
4. Whatsoever is born of God. All who are born again, and 
that they do not love it and obey its dictates. 

As faith gains in strength the world loses its 
f faith; those who believe upon Jesus 


6-10. This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ. The subject of faith in 


Christ calls out a statement concerning some of the const 
and the blood refer primarily to the baptism that 
and the blood which he shed at its close. J ohn came 
(John 1: 31). 
cross flowed the water and the blood (John 19: 34 
of them witnesses, testify of him. We are baptize 
to his shed blood. Not by water only. 
alone; Calvary came also with its shed 
ness is usually borne in words. The Spiri 


-with mighty power that the crucified Jesus was Lord and Christ (Acts 2: 4; 4: 31; 5: 32). 


antly testifying witnesses of Christ. The water 
revealed him at the beginning of his earthly ministry 
baptizing in order that Christ should be made manifest 
It was while in the waters of the Jordan that Christ was manifested and anointed. On the 
). Two rites, both monumental institutions, hence both 
d into his death (Rom. 6: 1-3); the Lord’s Supper points 
The revelation of Christ in water at the baptism does not stand 
ding of blood. It is the Spirit that pbeareth witness. Wit- 
t which descended on the apostles on Pentecost bore witness 


7. There are 


392 I. JOHN. 


9 If we receive? the witness of men, the witness 
of God is greater: for? this is the witness of God 
which he hath testified of his Son. 

10 He that believeth on the Son of God hath* 
the witness in himself: he that believeth not God 
hath? made him a liar; because he believeth not 
the record that God gave of his Son. 

11 And this is the record, that God hath given to 
us eternal life; and this life is in his Son. 

12 He® that hath the Son hath life; and he that 
hath not the Son of God hath not life: 

13 These‘ things have I written unto you that 
believe on the name of the Son of God, *that ye 
may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may 
believe on the name of the Son of God. 

14 And this is the confidence that we have in 
him, that, if we ask anything according to his will, 
he heareth us.. ‘ 

15 And if we know that he hear us, whatsoever 
we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we 
desired of him. 

16 If any man see his brother sin a sin which ts 
not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall" give him 
life for them that sin not unto death. There! is a 
sin unto death: I) do not say that he shall pray for 
it. 

17 All unrighteousness is sin: and there is a sin 
not unto death. 





aJohn 8:17. 6 Matt. 13:6. c Rom. 8:16; Gal. 4:6. d@John3:33. eJohn 5:24. 
h Job 42:8. 





[Ch. V~ 


in one. If we receive the 9 
witness of men, the wit- 
ness of God is ee ee for 
the witness of God is this, 
that he hath borne witness 
concerning his Son. He 
that believeth on the Son 
of God hath the witness in 
him: he that believeth not 
God hath made him a liar; 
because he hath not be- 
lieved in the witness that 
God hath borne concerning 
his Son. And the witness 
is this, that God gave unto 
us eternal life, and this life 
isin his Son. He that hath 12 
the Son hath the life; he 
that hath not the Son of 
God hath not the life. 

These things have I writ- 13° 
ten unto you, that ye may 
know that ye haye eternal 
life, even unto you that be- 
lieve on the name of the 
Son of God. And this is 14 
the boldness which we 
have toward him, that, if 
we ask anything according 
to his will, he heareth us: 
and if we know that he 15- 
heareth us whatsoever we 
ask, we know that we 
have the petitions which 
we have asked of him. If 16: 
any man see his brother 
sinning a sin not unto 
death, he shall ask, and 
God will give him life for 
them that sin not unto 
death. There is a sin unto 
death: not concerning this 
do I say that he should 
make request. All unright- 17 
eousness is sin: and there 
is a sin not unto death. 


AL 





f John 20:31. g 1 John 1:1,2. 


4 Mark 3:29; Heb. 6:4,6; 10:26. 9» Jer. 7:16. 





three that bear record in heaven. This verse is not found in the Revision or in any ancient MS. It- 


is no doubt an interpolation. 8. There are three that bear witness. 


shown how these three bear witness. These three agree in one. 


In notes on verse 6 I have- 


They bear testimony to the same 


end. 9. If we receive the witness of men. Wedoreceive human testimony. We have human tes- 
’ timony of many and unimpeachable witnesses to the facts of the life of Christ, but we have also the 
greater witness of God. We have the Father’s testimony on record, and we have it constantly repeated. 
in his transforming grace. Every one born again to a new life is anew demonstration. 10. He that 
believeth on the Son. He hath the witness in his changed heart and life. He that believeth not: 
God. He makes God a liar by rejecting the witness God gives to the Son. 

11-18. This is the witness (Revision). God gives us eternal life through hisSon. We know that we: 
have it because we know that we have a new life. 12. He that hath the Son hath life. We lay hold 
of the Son by faith in him and thus come to life. 18. These things have I written. He writes that. 
they may understand how they may know that they have eternal life. Tests have been given. For exam=- 
ple see 5: 1,2; 4: 13, ete. That ye may believe. Put the fullest trust in the name of Christ. 

14-17. And this is the confidence. We may be assured our prayers will be granted, if we ask 
according to his will. There is this condition. 15. If we know that he hearus. Hear us with. 
open ears. Then we may know that we have what we ask. It will be granted. 16. If a man see his. 
brother sin. Then a brother can be overtaken by sin. Not unto death. There is a sin not unto 
death, and one unto death. The sin described in Heb. 6: 4-6 is evidently unto death; that described in 
Gal.6: 1 is one not unto death. In the latter case the sinners can be restored, and we may pray for them 
with the assurance that they will be. This implies both work and prayer. 17. All unrighteousness. 
All wrong doing is sin, but the condition of soul that sets it against righteousness and against Christ as, 
steel is a sin unto death. Such a soul repels Christ the life. 


Ch. V.] I. JOHN. 


18 We know that whosoever is born of God 
sinneth not: but he that is begotten of God keepeth 
himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not. 

19 And we know that we are of God, and the 
whole world leth in wickedness. 





393: 


__ We know that whosoever 18. 
is begotten of God sinneth 
not; but he that was be- 
gotten of God keepeth him, 
and the evil one toucheth 
him not. We know that we 19 
are of God, and the whole 
world lieth in the evil one. 


And we know that the Son 20 
of God is come, and hath 
given us an understanding, 
that we know him that is 
true, and we are in him 
that is true, even in his Son 
Jesus Christ. This is the — 
true God, and eternal life. 
My little children, guard 21 
yourselves from idols. 


20 And we know that the Son of God is come, 
and hath given us an understanding, that we may 
know him that is true; and we are in him that is 
true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This*is the 
true God, and eternal life. 

21 Little children, keep yourselves from idols. 
Amen. 








@ Isa. 9:63 44:6; 54:5; John 20:28; Acts 20:285 Rom. 9:5; 1 Tim. 3:16; Titus 2:13; Heb. 1:8. 


18-21. Whosoever is born of God sinneth not. Does not live a life of sin. He will not sin unto: 
death, though he may be overtaken in a fault. See note at endof chapter. That wicked one toucheth 
him not. Cannot lay hands on him so as to hold him. 19. We know that we are of God. The 
church is God’s temple in which he dwells, and around it the world of wickedness. 20. And we know 
that the Son of God is come. Not only by testimony from men but by God’s witness. We have life 
in Christ, and Christ dwells in us. This is the true God and eternal life. In Christ the true God is 
revealed to us and in him we have eternal life. 21. Keep yourselves from idols. Flee from idolatry, 
the besetting sin of that age. So too we need to flee from the idols of our age. Whatever takes our 
worship from God is an idol. 

NOTE.—SIN IN THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. —A comparison of passages will show that an extreme. 
and false doctrine might be reached by pressing one class to the exclusion of another class. I give a list: 

I. If we say we have no sin we deceive ourselves, 1: 8. If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and right- 
eous to forgive our sins,1: 9. If we say we have not sinned we make hima liar, 1:10. If any man sin 
(man is not in the Greek) we have an Advocate with the Father, 2:1. I write these things that you may 
sin not, 2:1. If any man see his brother sinning a sin not unto death, 5:16. There is a sin not unto 
death, 5: 17. 

These passages all refer to Christians; they teach their liability to sin; show how they may obtain par- 
don, and show how also they should labor to save an erring brother. On the other hand there is another 
class which teaches that the Christian is freed from sin. 

II. The blood of Jesus his Son cleanses from all sin, 1: 7. Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not, 3: 6. 
He cannot sin because he is begotten of God, 3: 9. Whosoever is begotten of God sinneth not, 5; 18. 

If this second class of passages was alone considered they would teach apparently the absolute holiness 
of thesaint. The two classes are to be interpreted in the light of each other. They teach that the germ of 
sin, dormant, perhaps, remains in us as long as we are in the flesh. “ The flesh lusteth against the Spirit.” 
We “may be overtaken in a fault,” the dormant germ waken, and we be betrayed into sin for the moment. 
The sin is due to the temporary revival of the old nature. The new nature, the spiritual being born of the: 
new birth, is not disposed to sin, and will be destroyed if the sin is wilful and continued. One born of 
God cannot engage in wilful sin. Nor can he who abides in Christ. He who becomes a wilful sinner does. 
not abide in Christ, nor remain a child of God. 


THE SECOND EPISTLE OF JOHN. 


There has always been a difference of opinion and discussion concerning the Second 
and Third Epistles ascribed to John, the apostle. Neither the ancient church nor the 
modern critics have been entirely agreed concerning the writer, the persons addressed, 
or even concerning their title to a place in the Canon. The limited space to which I am 
confined will not allow me to enter at length into these controversies, further than to 
say that every hypothesis which refers the authorship to any one else than John, the 
apostle, rests upon filmy foundations. The conjecture that they were written by a ‘‘Pres- 
byter John,’”’ who was a contemporary of the apostle, and also lived at Ephesus, is based 
upon a fragment preserved from Papias, a Father in the second century, who mentions 
what he had learned from “‘the elders,”’ or ancients, and among them names “‘the Elder 
John,”’ who was a personal disciple of Christ. Since in the very same sentence he names 
seven apostles and calls them not apostles, but “elders,” or ‘‘ancients,’’ those are hard 
pressed who assume that he meant by the ‘Elder John,” some other personal disciple 
of Christ than the son of Zebedee. There is no evidence that any “‘John the elder” lived 
in the apostolic age, a separate life from John the apostle. In addition, the language, 
doctrine, and style of the two epistles point to the author of the fourth gospel, and 
especially to the writer of the First ae 4) ohn. 


THE SECOND EPISTLE OF 


JOHN. 


SUMMARY.— The Address to an Elect Woman and Her Family. The 
Commandment of Love. Antichrists. Godspeed Not To Be Given to 
These Opposers. Greetings. 


1 The? elder unto the elect lady and her child- 
ren,’ whom I love in the truth: and not I only, but 
also all they that have known the‘ truth; 

2 For the truth’s sake, which dwelleth in us, and 
shall be with us forever: 

3 Grace be with you, mercy, and peace, from 
God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, 
the Son of the Father, in truth and love. 

4 I rejoiced greatly that I found of thy children® 
walking in truth, as we have received a command- 
ment from the Father. 

5 And now I beseech thee, lady, not® as though I 
wrote a new commandment unto thee, but that 
which we had from the beginning, that* we love 
one another. 


The elder unto the elect 1 
lady and her children, 
whom I love in truth; and 
not I only, but also all 
they that know the truth; 
for the truth’s sake which 2 
abideth in us, and it shall 
be with us forever: Grace, 3 
mercy, peace shall be with 
us, from God the Father, 
and from Jesus Christ, the 
Son of the Father, in truth 
and love. 

I rejoice greatly that I 4 
have found certain of thy 
children walking in truth, 
even aS we received com- 
mandment from the Fa- 
ther. And now I beseech 5 
thee, lady, not as though I 
wrote to thee a new com- 
mandment, but that which 
we had from the beginning, 
that we love one another. 
And this is love, that we 6 


should walk after his com- 
mandments. This is the 
commandment, even as ye 
heard from the beginning, 
that ye should walk in it. 


6 And this is love, that we walk after his com- 
mandments. This is the commandment, That," as 
ye have heard from the beginning, ye should walk 
in it. : 











c John 8:32; 2 Thes. 2:13; 1 Tim. 2:4; Heb. 10:26. d3John3. e1John 2:7. 


61 John 3:18. 
g John 14:15; 1John 5:3. A1John 2:24, 


J John 15:12. 


a@1 Pet. 5:1. 








1-8. The elder. John, unlike Peter and Paul, nowhere in his writings speaks of himself as an apos- 
tle. Peter also speaks of himself as an elder. John probably uses the term here, not officially, but in 
reference to his great age, as the only survivor of the apostles, and perhaps then the only personal dis- 
ciple of the Lord living. Unto the electlady. The term is Kyria in the Greek, a term which we know 
to have been a female proper name. Hence many of the best commentators from the time of Athanasius 
have held that this is the name of the sister. If not a proper name Kyria would be the feminine form of 
Kurios (Lord), the term applied to Christ, a worldly title unaccountable in the church, which does not rec- 
ognize artificial distinctions of rank. To avoid this difficulty some have held that by “Kyria”’ the church 
ismeant. Itis better to regard the term a proper name. Whom. That is, the mother and her children, 
2. For the truth’s sake. Those who love in truth love for the truth’s sake. 8. Grace be with 

-you. The usual benediction of the saints. The Lord Jesus Christ. The Revision omits Lord, a word 
which occurs nowhere else in John’s Epistles. i 

4-6. I rejoiced greatly. Because he had found her children walking in the truth, by keeping the 
commandment of the Father. The commandment referred to, the one which sums up all, is love. 5. 
And now I beseech thee, lady. Kyriain the Greek. If lady at all it would mean “your ladyship.”’ 
Not as though I wrote anew commandment. Love embraces all, Compare1 John 2:7. Seenotes 
there. 6. And this is love,etc. Keeping the commandments is the demonstration of love. Compare 


1 John 5: 3, and John 14: 15; 14: 23. 
; (395) 


396 II. JOHN. 


7 For many deceivers are entered into the world, 
who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the 
flesh. This is a deceiver and an antichrist. 

8 Look to yourselves, that we lose not those 
things which we have wrought, but that we receive 
a full reward. 

9 Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in 
the doctrine of Christ, hath not God. He that 
abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the 
Father and the Son. 

10 If there come any unto you, and bring not 
this doctrine, receive him not into your house,’ 
neither bid him God speed: 

11 For hethat biddeth him God speed is partaker 
of his evil deeds. 

12 Having many things to write unto you, I would 
not write with paper and ink; but I trust to come 
unto you, and speak face to face, that our joy may 
be full. 

13 The children of thy elect sister greet thee. 
Amen. 








For many deceivers are 7 
gone forth into the world, 
even they that confess not 
that Jesus Christ cometh 
in the flesh. This is the 
deceiver and the antichrist. 
Look to yourselves, that 8 
ye lose not the things 
which we haye wrought, 
but that ye receive a full 
reward. hosoever goeth 9 
onward and abideth not in 
the teaching of Christ, 
hath not God: he that 
abideth in the teaching, 
the same hath both the 
Father and the Son. If 10 
any one cometh unto you, 
and bringeth not this 
teaching, receive him not 
into your house, and give 
him no greeting: for he 11 
that giveth him ee 
partaketh in his evil works. 

Having many things to 
write unto you, I would 
not write them with paper 
and ink: but I hope to 
come unto you, and to 
speak face to face, that 
your joy may be fulfilled. 
The children of thine elect 138 
sister salute thee. 





a Rom. 16:17; 1 Cor. 5:11; 2 Tim. 3:5. 








7.11. For many deceivers are entered into the world. 


See notes on 1 John 2: 18; 2: 22-24,. 


and 4:1. Antichrist. Opposed toChrist. 8. Look to yourselves. Let not these deceivers lead you 


astray. 


The full reward. Belonging to all saints who continue to abide in Christ. 9. Whosoever 


transgresseth. He that lives a life of transgression cannot abide in Christ. Abideth in the doc- 


trine. The teaching, the Gospel. 10. If therecome . 


and bring not this doctrine. That of 


Christ. If he be a deceiver, an opposer of Christ, one who denies that ‘‘ Jesus Christ came in the flesh.” 
Receive him not into your house. Do not recognize him as a prother and extend to him a brotherly 
welcome. He is not to befellowshipped. Neither bid him God speed. Give him no encouragement 
in his work of destruction. To give him God speed is to wish for his success. 11. For he that bid- 
deth, etc. He that gives him these prayerful greetings and encouragement becomes a partaker, to that 
extent, in his evil deeds. aoe 

12,18. Having many things. Though many more things occurred that he wished to write about,. 
he hopes soon to see her and speak face to face. 18. The children of thy elect sister. It is usually 
‘supposed that this refers to a sister in the flesh, also one of the elect, whose children, probably grown up 
and Christians, were at that time with John. 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF JOHN. 


That this third epistle was written by the author of the second, is agreed. The writer 
‘is ‘‘The Elder;’’ the closing verses are almost a verbatim copy of those of the second. 
All that has been said concerning the authorship of the second, therefore, applies to the 
third. The only hypothesis which is more than baseless conjecture is that which 
ascribes it to John the apostle, in his extreme old age, during his residence at Ephesus. 
Like the second this is addressed to an individual of whose personality we are uncertain, 
as the name Gaius, or Caius, occurs shy ao) in the New Testament. 


vary 


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF 


JOHN. 


SUMMARY.—Gaius Commended. His Hospitality. His Treatment of Vis- 
iting Brethren. The Wicked Conduct of Diotrephes. The Good Report 
of Demetrius. Benediction. 


1 The elder unto the? well-beloved Gaius, whom 
I love in the truth. 

2 Beloved, I wish abcve all things that thou 
mayest prosper and be in health, even as thy soul 
prospereth. 

3 For I rejoiced greatly when the brethren came 
and testified of the truth that is in thee, even as? 
thou walkest in the truth. 

4 I have no greater joy than to hear that my° 
children walk in truth. 

5 Beloved, thou! doest faithfully whatsoever thou 
doest to the brethren, and to strangers; 

6 Which have borne witness of thy charity before 
the church; whom if thou bring forward on their 
journey after a godly sort, thou shalt do well: 

7 Because that for his name’s sake they went 
forth,® taking nothing of the Gentiles. 

8 We therefore ought to receive such, that we 
might be fellow-helpers to the truth. 





The elder unto Gaius the 1 
beloved, whom I love in 
truth. 

Beloved, I pray that in 2 
all things thou mayest 
prosper and be in health, 
even as thy soul prosper- 
eth. For I rejoiced greatly, 3 
when brethren came and 
bare witness unto thy 
truth, even as thou walk- 
est in truth. Greater joy 4 
have I none than this, to 
hear of my children walk- 
ing in the truth. 

Beloved, thou doest a5 
faithful work in whatsoev- 
er thou doest toward them 
that are brethren and 


Strangers withal; who bare 6 


witness-to thy love before 
the church: whom thou 
wilt do well to set forward 
on their journey worthily 
of God: because that for 7 
the sake of the Name they 
went forth, taking nothing 
of the Gentiles. We there- 8 
fore ought to welcome 
such; that we may be fel- 
Iow - workers with the 
truth. 


@ Acts 19:29; 20:4. 62John4. clOor. 4:15. d Luke 12:42. e1Cor.9: 12,15; 2 Cor. 11:73 12:13. 








1-4. The elder. See notes on II John 1:1. The well beloved Gaius. This name is mentioned in 
Acts 19: 29; 20: 4; Rom. 16: 23; 1 Cor.1:14. The hospitality of the Corinthian Gaius named in Rom. 16: 23 
agrees well with what John says of him whom he addresses. 2. Even as thy soul prospereth. He 
wishes Gaius all good things, but most of all prosperity of soul. 8. For I rejoiced greatly. Certain 
brethren had been where Gaius lived, had enjoyed his hospitality and had spoken well of him to John on 
their return. 4. I have no greater joy. That which gave him the greatest joy was to know that the 
saints walked in the truth. My children. The aged John was wont to call the saints his children. See 
1 John 2: 1, 12, 18, 28; 4: 4; 5: 21. 

5-8. Thou doest a faithful work. In his kindness to brethren and strangers. In those early ages 
hospitality to the saints sent on evangelistic missions, and especially to persecuted saints driven from 
home, was a very important duty. 6. Which have borne witness to thy love. These traveling 
brethren reported to the Church how Gaius had aided them. Thou shalt do well. A polite exhorta- 
tion to continue such hospitality in the future. The hospitality was wont to be shown not only by open- 
ing the home to these saints, but by helping them on their journey. '7. Because. The persons named 
were engaged in the work of Christ (his name’s sake). Taking nothing. They could not ask aid of 
the Gentiles. The Greek form does not imply that the Gentiles had tendered presents which had been 
rejected ( Winer’s Greek Grammar of the New Tee sesy 388, note 1). 


III. JOHN. 


9 I wrote unto the church: but Diotrephes, who 
loveth to have the pre-eminence among them, 
receiveth us not. 

10 Wherefore, if I come, I will remember his 
deeds which he doeth, prating against us with 
malicious words: and not content therewith, neith- 
er doth he himself receive the brethren, and forbid- 
deth them that would, and casteth them out of the 
church. 

11 Beloved*, follow not that which is evil, but 
that which is good. He” that doeth good is of 
God: but he that doeth evil, hath not seen God. 

12 Demetrius® hath good report of all men, and 
of the truth itself: yea, and we also bear record; 
and ye know that our record is true. 

138 I had many things to write, but I will not 
with ink and pen write unto thee: 

14 But I trust I shall shortly see thee, and we 
shall speak face .to face. Peace be to thee. Our 
friends salute thee. Greet the friends by name. 








399 


I wrote somewhat unto 9 
the church: but Diotre- 
phes, who loveth to have 
the preeminence among 
them, receiveth us_ not. 
Therefore, if I come, I will 10 
bring to remembrance his 
works which he doeth, 
prating against us with 
wicked words: and not 
content therewith, neither 
doth he himself receive the 
brethren, and them that 
would he forbiddeth, and 
casteth them out of the 
ehurch. Beloved, imitate 
not that which is evil, but 
that which is good. He 
that doeth good is of God: 
he that doeth evil hath not 
seen God. Demetrius hath 
the witness of all men, and 
of the truth itself: yea, we 
also bear witness; and 
thou knowest that our wit- 
ness is true. 

I had many things to 
write unto thee, but [ am 
unwilling to write them to 
thee with ink and pen: but 14 
I hope shortly to see thee, 
and we shall speak face to 
face. Peace be unto thee. 
The friends salute thee. 
Salute the friends by name. 





11 


12 


13 





@ Psa. 37:27; Isa. 1:16; 1 Thes. 5:15; 1 Pet. 3:11. 61John 2:29; 3:6. c1Thes. 4: 


12; 1 Tim. 3:7. d John 21:24. 





9-12. Iwrote somewhat unto the church. Of which Gaius was a member. 


The letter referred 


to is not extant. But Diotrephes. This man is not elsewhere named. He was evidently an ambitious 
and unscrupulous church official, who rebelled against the apostle’s authority (receiveth us not), and 
who refused to heed the letter. The letter may have been sent by those whom Gaius entertained. 10. 
Wherefore if I come. It may be necessary for him to come. If he does, he will arraign Diotrephes 
for his deeds. Prating against us. Excusing himself by maligning John. Neither doth he him- 
self receive the brethren. The messengers John sent. He forbiddeth. Seeks to prevent any of 
the church from hearing or extending hospitality to these messengers. Casting them out of the 
church. Seeks to have them denied Christian fellowship. 11. Follow not that which is evil. The 
wicked example of one like Diotrephes. 12. Demetrius hath the witness of all. Of this Deme- 
trius we know nothing more. Perhaps he was a member of the same church as Diotrephes, whose example 
is contrasted. ; 

13,14. [had many things to write. These verses correspond with the 12th and 13th of the Second 
Epistle. See notes there. 14. The friends. An uncommon title in the New Testament, where it is 
almost supplanted by the dearer title of ‘“‘ brethren” or the holier one of ‘* saints.” 


THE EPISTLE OF JUDE. 


The author of this epistle introduces himself as ‘‘Jude the brother of James.”’ Among 
‘the apostles there was a ‘‘Judas(Jude)James,’’ the word son or brother being unexpressed, 
and some have concluded that the ‘‘Judas, not Iscariot,’’ of the twelve is the writer of this 
letter. It is more likely, however, that he was the brother of the James of Jerusalem, 
who became so prominent in the history of the Palestine church, and whom Paul speaks 
of as a ‘‘pillar.’’ In the last fifteen years before the overthrow of Jerusalem he became 
* the most influential personage among the Jewish Christians, and it was only natural that 
Jude, if his brother, should refer to that relationship in order to secure a more favorable 
hearing. That James was “‘the Lord’s brother’ (Gal. 1:19), but among the brethren of 
the Lord there was a Jude also, whom we have every reason to believe to be the writer 
of this epistle. For a fuller discussion of the question see the Introduction to the Epistle 
of James. There reasons will be found for the conclusion that James was not an apostle, 
and it would follow also that Jude was not of the twelve. Since the authors of the sec- 
ond and third gospels and of Acts were not apostles, it need not be thought strange that 

two of the epistles were by other holy men. 

_ Another question of some interest arises from a comparison of Jude with Second Peter. 
“The reader will find that Jude 3-18 is almost identical with 2 Peter 1:5 and 2:1-18. One 
or the other writer certainly had before him the work of the other. Critics are divided 
concerning which was the earlier writer, and reasons can be given for assigning the pri- 
ority toeach. It seems to me probable that the “‘Speaker’s Commentary”’ is right in 
deciding in favor of Peter, and that Jude was written at adate not much later. It is 
probable that he found a part of Peter’s epistle expressed his ideas so well that he modi- 
‘fied it somewhat and inserted it in his letter. It is more likely that he would thus honor 
an apostolic letter of the renowned Peter than that Peter would borrow from him. On 
this hypothesis this epistle was written between A. D. 65 and 70, or shortly before the 
siege of Jerusalem. We have no data for determining where it was written, but there 
seems to be no doubt that, like the epistles of Peter and of James, it was primarily 
addressed to Jewish Christians. It contains a salutation with reasons for writing (verse 
4); then three examples of the punitive justice of God; following this is a particular 
account of the wicked ways of certain false teachers against which he would warn them; 
after this comes a concluding portion in which disciples are warned and exhorted, and 
the whole closes with one of the Stee ied of the Bible. 


THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF 


pe E:. 


1 Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and* brother | @2ad2® 2 servantof Jesus 1 
-of James, to them that are sanctified by God the James, to analy ans 
Father, and” preserved in Jesus Christ,‘ and called: Father, and kept for Jesus 

2 Mercy unto you, and peace, and love, be multi- Tow eee 
plied. Coed aitlet aay 
3 Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write) ing all diligence to write 


unto you! of the common salvation, it was needful | Mego eee conmon 


-for me to write unto you, and exhort you, that ye |e to write unto you ex- 

: 5 horting you to contend 
should earnestly contend for the faith which was eamestly for the | faith 
‘once delivered unto the saints. ; ieered nin a ae 
4 Wor there are-certam men crept in unawares, | Por Rete ate ceriain pene 

a _ erept in privily, even they 
~who were before of old ordained to this condemna- who were of old set forth 
tion; ungodly men, turning ‘ the grace of our God ungodly men, turning thé 
into lasciviousness, and® denying the only Lord God, | grace of our God into las- 

3 Civiousness, and denying 
-and our Lord Jesus Christ. our only Master and Lord, 
5 I will therefore put you in remembrance, | “Now 1 desire to put you 5 


- 7 4 > in remembrance, though ye 
though ye once knew this, how that} the Lord, oe ee 


having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, all, how that the Lord, 
afterward" destroyed them that believed not. of tite Lind of Bev phautor: 


.@ Luke 6:16; Acts 1:13. 6John17:11. cRom.1:7. d@Titus1:4. eRom. 9:21; 1Pet.2:8. fHeb. 12: 15; Titus 
2:11. g2QPet. 2:1; Titus 1: 16; 1 John 2:22. hNum. 14: 29; 26: 64; Heb. 3: 17,19. 

















1,2. Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ. See Introduction for his identification, Had he been 
-an apostle he would hardly have omitted to state it. See Salutations of the Epistles of Paul and Peter. 
Brother of James. James, “the brother of our Lord,” the James of Jerusalem. The brethren of Jesus 
were James and Joses, and Jude and Simon (Matt. 13: 55). Called. Those invited who have accepted 
are styled the called. 

8,4. WhenI gave all diligence. His thought was that when he purposed to write diligently and 
carefully some need impelled him to write at once, more briefly perhaps than he had purposed. 
Earnestly contend for the faith which was once, etc. He exhorts to contend for the faith 
delivered once for all, the faith without innovation, the gospel of the apostles in distinction from the adul- 
terations of false teachers. The doctrine of a progressive revelation after the apostles 1s not found in the 
New Testament. 4. For there are certain men. Men who have crept in without their character 
“being understood. Who were before of old ordained to this condemnation. Whose coming was 
predicted and whose lives were placed under condemnation. See verse 14 and also verse 17. This con- 
demnation. The condemnation which comes on all the ungodly. Turning the grace of our God. 
Of the gospel. Instead of self restraint they live lascivious lives. The warrant for this was found mn 
“the freedom of the children of God.” From the very times of the apostles there have been Antinomians 
who have held that what was sin to others might be permitted to the sanctified. They asserted that the 
Spirit was not defiled by the sins of the body. Denying our only Lord Jesus Christ. Lord God is 
not found in the best MS. Their denial of Christ was a denial that he had come in the flesh. These 

-sectaries held that the flesh was wholly sinful. 
5-7. I willtherefore put youin Si cap Tg Of how God sends judgments on sinners. How 


402 JUDE. 








6 And? the angels which kept not their first 
estate, but left their own habitation, he hath re- 
served in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto? 
the judgment of the great day. 

7 Even as* Sodom and-Gomorrha, and the cities 
about them, in like manner, giving themselves over 
to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set 
forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of 
eternal fire. 

8 Likewise also these jilthy dreamers defile the 
flesh, despite dominion, and" speak evil of dignities. 

9 Yet® Michael the archangel, when contending 
with the devil, (he disputed about the* body of 
Moses,) durst not bring against him a railing 
accusation, but said, The? Lord rebuke thee. 

10 But these speak evil of those things which 
they know not: but what they know naturally, as 
brute beasts, in those things they corrupt them- 
selves. 

11 Woe unto them! for they have gone in the 
way! of Cain, and ran) greedily after the error of 
Balaam for reward, and ‘perished in the gainsaying 
of Core. 

12 These are spots in your! feasts of charity, 
when they feast with you, feeding themselves with- 
out fear: clouds they are without water, carried 
about™ of winds; trees whose fruit withereth, with- 
out fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots; 











ward destroyed them that 
believed not. And angels 
which kept not their own 
principality, but left their 
po habitation, he hath 
ept in everlasting bonds 
under darkness unto the 
judgement of the great 
day. Even as Sodom and 
Gomorrah, and the cities 
about them, having in like 
manner with these given 
themselves over to forni- 
cation, and gone after 
strange flesh, are set forth 
as an example, sufferin 
the punishment of eterna 
fire. Yet in like manner 
these also in their dream- 
ings defile the flesh, and 
set at naught dominion, 
and rail at dignities. But 
Michael the archangel, 
when contending with the 
devil he disputed about the 
body of Moses, durst not 
bring against him a railing 
judgement, but said, The 
Lord rebuke thee. But 
these rail at whatsoever 
things they know not: and 
what they understand nat- 
urally, like the creatures 
without reason, in these 
things are they destroyed. 
Woe unto them! for they 
went in the way of Cain, 
and ran riotously in the 
error of Balaam for hire, 
and perished in the gain- 
saying of Korah. These 
are they who are hidden 
rocks in your love-feasts 
when they feast with you, 
shepherds that without 
fear feed themselves; 
clouds without water, car- 





& 


& . 


Ro} 


@ Matt. 8:29; John8:44; 2 Pet. 2:4. 6 Rev. 20:10. c Gen. 19:24; 2 Pet.2:6. d Ex.22:28. e Dan. 10:13; 12:13 Rev. 
12:7. 7 Deut. 34:6. g2Pet.2:11. hk Zech. 3:2. @Gen.4:5; 1] John3:12. jy Num. 22:7. 
kNum. 16:1. 21Cor.11:21, m Eph. 4: 14. 





that the Lord, ete. Having saved the people out of Egypt, the people were destroyed for their sins in 
the wilderness. See Num. 14: 29. 6. And the angels which kept not their first estate. See note 
on 2 Pet.2: 4. These angels, then, had fallen. Created holy, they had sinned and become wicked angels, 
or evil spirits. Left their own habitation. Their own proper home. Some see a reference to Gen. 
6: 2. He hath reserved. God hath imprisoned them and kept them for judgment. ‘7. Even as 
Sodom and Gomorrha. See notes on 2 Pet. 2: 6,10; also Gen. 19: 24. For their lasciviousness terrible 
destruction came upon them. Set forth for an example. Utterly destroyed by fire they are an 
example that points to the eternal fire. 

8-10. Likewise also these filthy dreamers. These men who are agitated by impure dreams. 
Despise dominion. See notes on 2 Pet.2:10. 9. Yet Michael the archangel. Michael is brought. 
forward as a contrast with those who speak evil of dignities. He is called by Daniel ‘the Great. 
Prince,” and here the archangel, or head angel. Yet in addressing the devil, a fallen angel, he did not rail 
at him, but only said ‘‘ The Lord rebuke thee.” The reference is not to a statement of the Bible, but 
to a Jewish tradition which held that the burial place of Moses was placed under the charge of Michael. 
10. But these speak evil of those things which they knownot. Of spiritual and unseen things. 
But what they know naturally. By the natural senses. In these things they corrupt themselves. 

11-18. Woe unto them! The denunciation of woes, common in the Lord’s ministry, is only found. 
here in all the rest of the New Testament. Gone in the way of Cain. Living selfish lives, full of hate. 
After the errorof Balaam. Like Balaam trying to make a gain of godliness. See notes on 2 Pet. 2; 15. 
Perished in the gainsaying of Core. Like Balaam they are false prophets. Like Korah, who 
profanely thrust himself into the priesthood and perished, they intrude irreverently into holy places. 
12. These are spots in your feasts of charity. See notes on 2 Pet. 2:13. They engaged in rev 


JUDE. 


13 Raging* waves of the sea, foaming out their 
own shame; wandering stars, to whom is reserved 
the blackness of darkness for ever. 

14 And Enoch also,” the seventh from Adam, 
prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the ‘Lord com- 
eth with ten thousand of his saints, 

15 To execute judgment upon all, and to convince 
all that are ungodly among them of all their ungod- 
ly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and 
of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners 
have spoken against him. 

16 These are murmurers, complainers, walking 
after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh 
great swelling words, having’ men’s persons in 
admiration because of advautage. 

17 But, beloved, remember ye the words which 
were spoken before of the apostles of our Lord 
Jesus Christ; 

18 How that they told you there should be mock- 
ers in the last time, who should walk after their 
own ungodly lusts. 

19 These be they® who separate themselves, sen- 
sual, having not the Spirit. 

20 But ye, beloved,‘ building up yourselves on 
your most holy faith, praying in® the Holy Ghost, 

_ 21 Keep yourselves in the love of God, looking 
for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal 
life. 





403 
ee eee ee et ee 


ried along by winds; au- 
tumn trees without fruit, 
twice dead, plucked up by 
the roots; wild waves of 
the sea, foaming out their 
own shame; wandering 
stars, for whom the black- 
ness of darkness hath been 
reserved forever. And to 
these also Enoch, the 
seventh from Adam,proph- 
esied, saying, Behold, the 
Lord came with ten thou- 
sands of his holy ones, to 
execute judgement upon 
all, and to convict all the 
ungodly of all their works 
of ungodliness which they 
have ungodly wrought,and 
of all the hard things 
which ungodly sinners 
have spoken against him. 
These are murmurers, 
complainers, walking after 
their lusts (and their 
mouth speaketh great 
swelling words), shewing 
respect of persons for the 
sake of advantage. 

But ye, beloved, remem- 
ber ye the words which 
have been spoken before 
by the apostles of our Lord 
Jesus Christ; how that 
they said to you, In the 
last time there shall be 
mockers, walking after 
their own ungodly lusts. 
These are they who make 
separations, sensual, hay- 
me not the Spirit. But ye, 
beloved, building up your- 
selves on your most holy 
faith, praying in the Holy 
Spirit, keep yourselves in 
the love of God, lookin 
for the mercy of our Lor 


17 


18 


19 
20 


21 





6 Gen. 5:18. c Dan. 7:10; Heb. 11:5. 


alsa. 47: 50. 
10:25. Col. 2:7. 


g Rom, 8:26; Eph. 6:18. 


d Prov. 28:21; James 2:1,9. 


e Hos. 4:14; 9:10; Heb. 








ellings at the Agape, the love feasts. 
on 2 Pet. 2:17. Trees without fruit. Fruitless, barren. 


hope of fruit. 18. Raging waves of the sea. Roaring and foaming like the sea waves. 


Clouds they are without water. Rainless clouds. 
Twice dead. Doubly dead, hence, no 
Wander- 


See notes 


ing stars. Stars not fixed in their places, but shooting like meteors, and then going out. ‘Shooting 
stars” is not far from the idea. To whom is reserved, etc. As the shooting stars go out in darkness, 
so these will pass into eternal darkness. ’ 

14,15. And Enoch also. This prophecy of the holiest man of the antediluvian world might have 
been preserved by tradition. Itis found in the Book of Enoch, a work long lost, but recovered in modern 
times In Abyssinia, supposed to have been composed the century before Christ. Wherever Jude met it he 
was familiar with the prophecy. The seventh from Adam. To the Jew there was a sacredness in 
seven. Prophesied of these. These blasphemers. The prophecy is quoted. 15. To execute judg- 
mentuponall. Fora general judgment. Toconvince. To convict all ungodly men of their ungodly 

eds. 
eae: These are murmurers. They murmur at God’s providence and complain of hislaws. Hav- 
ing men’s persons in admiration. Being respecters of persons for the sake of self interest. 17. 
Remember ye the words spoken before of the apostles. This language implies that Jude 
was not an apostle. 18. How that they told you there should be mockers. See 2 Pet. 3:3; 1 
Tim. 4:1; 2 Tim.3:1. Last time. In the last dispensation. 19. These be they. Already this is 
being fulfilled. Who separate. Who separate themselves from God and the communion of saints. 
Sensual. Living an animal rather than a spiritual life. , : 

20-23. Building up yourselves. Instead of separating from the faith. Praying in the Holy 
Spirit. See notes on Eph. 6: 18. 21. Keep yourselves in the love of God. By holy lives and 





404 JUDE. 
Jesus Christ unto eternal 


92 And of some have compassion, making a dif-| Jesus Corse anne eee 28 


ference: merey, who are in doubt; 
23 And others’ save with fear, pulling” them out one Oe ee ae 

of the fire; hating even the® garment spotted by the | 9 some have mercy ware 

flesh. ment spotted by the flesh. 
24 Now? unto him that is able to keep you from! ape Yo suard you trom 


| e p 7 p stumbling, and to set you 
falling, and® to present you faultless before the | Smplne, agence of his 


presence of his glory with exceeding joy, glory without blemish in £ 
: : exce , to oO 
25 To! the only wise God our Saviour, be glory God our Saviour, through 
] ini esus Christ our Lord, be 
and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ee ae 
ever. Amen. and power, before all time, 
and now, and for ever- 
more. Amen. 











a Rom. 11: 14; 1 Tim. 4:46. 6 Amos4:11; Zech. 3:2. ¢ Zech. 8: 4,5; Rev. 3.4. @Eph.3:20. e€ol.1:22. 
FAT Ts 





prayer. 22. Onsome have mercy, who arein doubt. See the Revision. The thought is to be very 
gentle and pitiful to those disturbed by doubt. 23. And some save, snatching them out of the 
fire. By snatching away from sin by the most vigorous effort. By stern preaching. Some have mercy 
with fear. Mercifully point out their danger. Hating even the garment, ete. All the while abhorr- 
ing their sins. & 

24,25. Now untohim. God. Whoisable. To work out our full salvation. Before the pres- 
ence of his glory. In his glorious presence. 25. The only God our Savior. Our Savior “through 
Jesus Christ.” Be glory. Not only glory forever and ever, but eternal and nniversal dominion. 


INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION. 


When we open the Book of Revelation we discover, at once, a marked difference 
between it and any other portion of the New Testament. It is not history like the gos- 
pels and Acts, nor practical discussions and instructions like the epistles, but we at once 
seem to breathe the atmosphere of prophets like Ezekiel and Daniel. As Ezekiel and 
Daniel were permitted to behold visions which revealed certain great events of the future, _ 
in a series of symbolic images, so there passes before the eyes of John a series of won- 
derful visions of which he makes record, and has left that record to the church for inter- 
pretation. The book is a book of prophecy. ‘‘God gave to him to show unto his servants 
the things which should shortly come to pass.’’ In order to any clear understanding of 
the book we must never lose sight of its object, as stated in the opening sentence. Its 
object is to reveal the future. Nor is its aim to reveal some limited events of the future, 
but to show the things which must come to pass. In other words, its aim is to unfold the 
outlines of coming history as far as that history affects the fortunes of the church. 

There is, unfortunately, no portion of the New Testament concerning which there 
has been more disagreement, and which has been less understood. The plan of the 
People’s Testament will not allow me to occupy much space with these discussions, and 
I will confine myself to certain points which cannot well be passed over without preju- 
dice to the correct understanding of the text. Among these questions are those of the 
Author, the Date when the work was written, the Place where it was written and the 
Principles of Interpretation. 


THE AUTHOR. 


I have alluded in the introductions to John’s epistles to the theory of certain 
rationalistie critics that these were written by a ‘‘Presbyter John,’”? whom they 
assume to have lived in the times of John, the apostle. There is no real evidence that 
such a personage ever lived. That John should speak of himself as an elder is no more 
strange than that Peter should so describe himself, and the fragment from Papias, which 
speaks of John the elder, who was a disciple of Christ, is more satisfactorily explained by 
the hypothesis that he alludes to the apostle, especially in view of the facts that seven 
apostles are named in the same paragraph, and all are spoken of as “elders,” and that 
Irenzus says that Papias was a disciple of John, the apostle. Yet there has been an 
effort to show that this mythical John is the John named in the first verse of Revelation. 

Without discussing whether the ‘“‘Presbyter John’ had any separate existence, it is a 
sufficient answer to this hypothesis to state that there is no book of the New Testament 
to whose authorship the testimony of history is more definite. Only a few years passed 
after the death of John, the apostle, until it was quoted and ascribed to him by writers who 
either knew him in person or who derived their information from those who sat at his 
feet. Among those early witnesses is Papias, born about A. D. 70, a disciple of John 
himself (‘‘a hearer’’ of John, according to Irenzeus) of whose writings only fragments 
have been preserved, but who is known aOR) quoted Revelation as the work of John. 


406 INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION. 


To him may be added Ireneus, born between A. D. 115 and A. D. 125, who tells us that 
he was long a pupil of Polycarp, of whom he states that Polycarp had learned many things 
of the aged apostle at whose feet he had long sat. Of course, with such opportunities 
he could not be ignorant of what John had written, yet he declares explicity that he is 
the author of the Apocalypse. Several more fathers of the second century are quoted as 
giving the same testimony, but it will suffice to add that it is named in the Canon Mura- 
tori, the first canon of the New Testament Scriptures, dated about A. D. 170, and all 
doubts concerning its genuineness seem to belong to later times. Nor is any fact of 
history better established than that John’s last years were spent in that part of Asia with 
which the Book of Revelation is locally associated. 





THE DATE. 


Only two dates for the composition are named, (1.) that always assigned to it by the 
ancient church, near the end of the reign of the Emperor Domitian, which extended 
from A. D. 81 to A. D. 96, and (2.) that which has been urged by certain modern critics, 
the latter part of the reign of Nero, about A. D. 65-68. ‘The first date is supported by the 
historical testimony. It is urged in behalf of the second that there are internal evidences 
in its favor, but when these are examined they are found to resolve themselves into cer- 
tain theories of interpretation and were it not for the necessity of these, this date would 
never have been proposed. Before stating the grounds for assigning the date to the lat- 
ter part of the reign of Domitian, about A. D. 95, 96, I will briefly consider the reasons 
urged in favor of the date in the reign of Nero. It is held (1.) that the work must have 
been written while the temple was still standing (Rev. 11:1) and that chap. 11:2 and 
chap. 20:9 prove that the City of Jerusalem was still standing but in a state of siege. It 
seems strange to me that a Bible student could use this argument. Every New Testa- 
ment student knows that both the temple and Jerusalem are used elsewhere as symbols 
of the church, and how much more likely that the terms would be used as symbols in 
a book which is largely composed of symbols from beginning to end! It seems strange 
that in a vision composed of symbols any one should insist that John on Patmos, a thous- 
and miles distant, literally saw the temple or Jerusalem. Besides, when John in chap. 
11:8 speaks of the city as ‘‘spiritually called Sodom and Egypt,’’ he shows that he cannot 
mean the literal Jerusalem. A holy city is the symbol of the church; a wicked city of an 
apostate church; a city trodden down by the Gentiles of a church overcome by worldly 
influence. The language of chap. 20:9 utterly excludes the Jewish capital in the reign of 
Nero.* (2.) Itis held that chap. 17:11 refers to Nero, and hence a forced and, as will 
be shown in the text, an erroneous interpretation is made the basis for determining the 
date. The theory itself is skeptical in that it convicts John of holding and sanctioning a 
popular error. (3.) It is also urged that there are certain solecisms in the Greek 
original which are wanting in John’s gospel, and from this it is argued that the Revela- 
tion must have been written much earlier than the gospel, before John had fully mas- 
tered the language. Upon this point I quote from Prof. Wm. Milligan, of the University of 
Aberdeen, Scotland, than whom, probably, no man living is a more thorough scholar in 
New Testament Greek: ‘‘The solecisms are not such as proceed from an ignorance of 
the Greek language, and they would not have been removed by greater familiarity with 


* The exegetical assumption of modern critics that this passage (Rev. 11: 1) proves - 
salem to have been still standing at the time when the Agoetinn was Seiten ohare tener noe 
deep fall of these critics into a false literalism.—Lange on Revelation, page 26. 


INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION. 407 


it. However we attempt to account for them, they are obviously designed, and rather 
imply a more accurate knowledge of the grammatical forms from which they are inten- 
tional departures. At the same time there are passages in the book (as for example- 
-chap. 18) which, in their unsurpassed and unsurpassable eloquence, exhibit a command 
of the Greek tongue, on the part of the writer, that long familiarity with it can best 
explain, were explanation necessary.’”* (4.) It is said that the Jewish imagery belongs 
to John’s earlier rather than his later years. To this it may be replied that no New Tes- 
tament writer shows a stronger Jewish feeling than is found in John’s gospel. Itis 
John who states, ‘Salvation is of the Jews’? (John 4:22) ; that Jesus is “‘the King of 
Israel’ (John 1:40), and Old Testament thoughts and figures constantly appear in the 
fourth gospel. 





THE REAL DATE. 


It is thus seen that the argument in favor of the early date is easily answered. On the 
other hand the historical argument in favor of the later date is convincing to the mind 
which can be swayed by historical evidence. Commencing with the positive and definite 
statement of Irenzeus there is unbroken agreement for nearly four centuries that the date 
-of the work belongs to the persecution of the reign of Domitian. To properly weigh the 
statement of Irenzus, elected Bishop of Lyons in A. D. 178, and born in the first quarter of 
the second century, it is needful to keep in mind that he was a disciple of Polycarp, who 
suffered martyrdom in A. D. 155. In one of his letters Irenzeus speaks to a fellow disci- 
ple of how intimate they had been with Polycarp and how often they had heard him tell 
of John the apostle, and how much they had been told of John by the aged saint who 
had once been under the instruction of the apostle. Hence it is apparent that Irenzus 
must have known from Polycarp the leading facts of John’s history, and especially the 
circumstances connected with his exile to Patmos. This witness, whose opportunity for 
knowing the facts is unquestioned, declares, “Revelation was seen no long time since, but 
almost in our generation, towards the end of the reign of Domitian” (A.D. 96). With this 
plain statement agree all the church fathers who speak of the subject, not only of the 
second century, but for three centuries. “There is no variation in the historical accounts. 
All statements support the conclusion that St. J ohn was banished to Patmos by Domi- 
tian (A. D. 81-96)—some writers placing the exile in the fourteenth of his reign,—and all 
agree that the Visions of which Revelation is the record were received in Patmos.”’t 

One writer in the fourth century makes the blunder of assigning the banishment to the 
reign of Claudius Cesar, a blunder which finds no endorsers, a blunder which is sup- 
posed to have been a verbal mistake, but it isnot until the sixth century that we find the 
opinion expressed that the banishment belonged to the persecution of the reign of Nero, 
_and up to the twelfth century there are only two writers who endorse this date. They 
cannot be called witnesses, since the earliest of them was separated from the death of 
John by a period greater than that which separates us from the discovery of America by 
Christopher Columbus. Hence, it ig no misstatement of the facts to say that the histor- 
ical proof, in favor of the later date, is uniform, clear and conyincing. 





* Winer (Grammar of the Greek Testament), discussing the solecisms of the Apocalypse, says, “In some 
imstances they are the result of design, in others they are to be referred to carelessness on the part of the 
writer. . . - In this light they should always be considered, and not ascribed to the ignorance of the 
writer, or regarded Hebraisms. . . - But, with all the simplicity and the oriental tone of his language, 
the author knows well and observes well the rules of the Greek syntax.”’—Page 672. It should always, 
too, be kept in mind that Revelation is written, not as a calm, sedate, elaborate composition, like John’s 
-Gospel, but with the fire and ecstasy of a prophet. This accounts for differences of style. 

+ Lhe Bible (Speaker’s) Commentary. New Testament, Vol. 1V, page 482. 


408 INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION. 





INTERNAL TESTIMONY. 


The historical conclusion is corroborated by convincing internal testimony. I con- 
dense from Godet’s Bible Studies, second series, certain points which bear upon the 
question of Date: (1.) ‘The condition of the churches indicated” in the second and 
third chapters renders the early date improbable. These churches were not founded 
before A. D. 55-58. Paul wrote to two of these churches, Ephesus and Colosse, in A. D. 
62 or 63; Peter wrote to all the churches of that region several years later still; Paul 
wrote his second letter to Timothy, at Ephesus, probably as late as A. D. 67; in these 
letters there is no hint of John being in that section of the world, or of the spiritual decay 
revealed in the letters to the angels of the churches of Ephesus, Sardis and Laodicea; 
yet this theory requires us to believe that not later than A. D. 68 or 69, John found these 
churches spiritually dead. There is no reasonable doubt but that the second and third 
chapters of Revelation describe a condition which could only have arisen a generation 
later than the date of Paui’s last intercourse with these churches. (2.) Godet notes the 
fact that an ecclesiastical organization reveals itselfin the seven churches which did not 
reveal itself until about the close of the first century. In each church there is one man, 
“the angel of the church,” through whom the whole church is addressed. ‘There is no 
hint of any individual enjoying a distinction like this until about the beginning of the 
second century. (8.) The expression, “The Lord’s-day,’”’ does not occur in the 
earlier apostolical writings. They always speak of the ‘‘First Day of the week”’ instead. 
The term used in A. D. 68 was “the First Day of the week,’’ but the writers of the sec- 
ond century from the beginning use “‘the Lord’s-day.”’ This term, then, points to a. 
period near the begining of the second century as the date of Revelation. (4.) The 
expressions in chap. 2:9 and 3:9 point to a complete separation between the church and 
the synagogue. This complete separation did not take place until the epoch of the 
destruction of Jerusalem. Such language as we find in these two places can only be 
accounted for by a fact so momentous as the overthrow of the Jewish state, and hence 
belongs to a later date. 

This discussion might be continued, and it is of importance to any correct interpreta-- 
tion that the date should be clearly settled, but I believe that enough has been said to. 
show that all the facts point to ‘‘near the end of the reign of Domitian, or about the year 
A. D. 96.”? It might be of service to add that the persecution of Nero, as far as known,, 
was local and confined to Rome; that death, instead of banishment, was the favorite 
method of punishment with him; that it is not probable that he would have put to death 
Paul and Peter and banished John; and that there is no evidence that John, as early as 
A. D. 68, had ever visited the region of the seven churches. On the other hand, the per- 
secution of Domitian was not local; we know also that he sent other Christians into 
exile; we know also that the later years of John’s life were passed at Ephesus, and in. 
the region of which it was the center. 


THE PLACE. 


That the visions of Revelation were seen upon the island of Patmos is a fact that rests: 
upon the testimony of the writer himself. It is the universal testimony of the early 
church, that John survived the destruction of Jerusalem, that when the storm of war 
was gathering around that devoted city he, in obedience to the Lord’s warning (Matt. 
24:16), fled from the coming desolation, and finally took up his abode in Ephesus, in. 


INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION. 409° 








the midst of the churches of Asia, founded by the apostle Paul. During his long sojourn 
in this region, which extended until the close of his life, he was banished in the perse- 
cution of the latter part of the reign of Domitian. Patmos, the place of exile, is simply 
a rocky prison house in the sea. It consists of three rocky masses connected by isth- 
muses, is about thirty miles in circuit, lies in the south part of the Aegean sea, and one 
of a group called the Sporades. It is seldom visited as it is reached by no regular lines 
of ships and has comparatively little intercourse with the mainland. The writer passed 
between it and the shore of Asia in 1889, and was enabled by comparison with the adja-. 
cent islands to form a realistic conception of the prison house of John. Its mountain 
peaks are bare, there is some grass in the valleys on which a few sheep and cattle are 
pastured, and there are some fruit trees, but the general appearance is lonely and deso-- 
late. Yet it is set in one of the brightest of seas with an almost cloudless sky above, 
and from its higher points John could sweep his vision over a range of forty miles, 
embracing the surrounding islands and the mountains of Asia in the distance. 

Though the visions were granted while John was an exile on Patmos many have held, 
it seems to me with too little reason, that the work was actually written in Ephesus. 
There is nothing in proof of this view but conjecture. It is also opposed to the fact that. 
the first of the seven letters is addressed to ‘‘the angel of the church at Mphesus’”’ (2:1). 
Had John, at the time of writing, been a resident of Ephesus, this fact cannot be reason- 
ably explained. It is better to accept the plain inference of the narrative, that the vis-. 
ions were not only seen in, but that they were recorded in Patmos. 


SYSTEMS OF INTERPRETATION. 


There is probably no other portion of the Scriptures concerning the meaning of which 
the interpreters so widely differ. This has caused some readers to conclude that the 
work is a tissue of confused and perhaps incoherent utterances, thrown out in prophetic 
ecstacy, the interpretation of which is a hopeless attempt; and they have supposed that. 
the attempted explanations only illustrated the vagaries and the failures of the eccmmen- 
tators. The differences are due to the different systems of interpretation employed. Of 
these there are three principal ones, all containing some truth, but all also in danger of 
being pushed to extreme erroneous conclusions, and it is probable that every interpreter, 
who is not rationalistic, accepts some of the results of all three of these systems. These 
are: (1.) The Preterist. According to this system the successive visions apply to. 
events chiefly in the history of the Jewish nation and of Pagan Rome. These events 
have occurred long since in the past. Many rationalistic writers insist that all events 
described must have taken place before the visions were written, and that there is no 
such thing as prediction. Hence these critics are called Preterists, but this view is not 
confined to them. It isheld by most Roman Catholic commentators and by some Prot- 
estants. (2.) The Futurists. These insist that the predictions apply mainly to events 
yet in the future, and will be fulfilled in the future history of the literal Israel. They 
assert that Israel will again occupy Palestine, that the temple will be literally rebuilt; 
that the holy city shall be literally trodden down for 1,260 days by the Gentiles etc., etc. 
The Preterist system is right in asserting that much of Revelation applies to what is now 
past, and the Futurist is right this far, namely, thata portion applies to what is still future. 
(3.) The Historical. In my opinion this system is more nearly correct, and yet it needs: 
to be modified by the others, and carefully guarded. It holds that a succession of his- 
torical events, future when John wrote but now in part in the past, are portrayed by a. 


410 INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION. 








series of visions. The error must be avoided of supposing that the book is continuously 
historical from the beginning to the end. If it is borne in mind that there is more than 
one series of visions; that when one series ends another follows which is synchronous, at 
least in part; that a part of the events portrayed by symbols is not in the past, while 
another portion is in the future, I think the results of the Historical system will be found 
to be clear, harmonious, and surprisingly in correspondence with the visions of the 
prophet. It perhaps cannot be expected that even those who adopt this system will 
agree in every detail, but we do find that the great expositors of the historical school, 
embracing the majority of English commentators, are in substantial agreement. 

It must always be kept in mind, however, that this book is a book of prophecy, 
intended to ‘‘shew the things which were shortly to come to pass.”” John wasaSeer. He 
recorded what he saw. The future was portrayed to him in a series of visions. The pic- 
tures which passed before his eyes represented future events. Hence, each is a symbol- 
ical representation of what was then future, and may now be past history. Thus, when 
the first seal is opened in chap. 6:1, 2, and a warrior is seen with a bow in his hand rid- 
ing on a white horse in conquest, this must be interpreted as a sense-image which appro- 
priately represents an event or epoch of history which was future when John was an 
exile on Patmos. Symbolical pictures follow each other in rapid succession as the seals 
are opened and the trumpets blown, a correct interpretation of which is to be sought not 
in a literal fulfillment, but in events of which the sense-visions might be appropriate 
symbols. It will be a help in understanding the text to have an explanation of the 
meaning of the various symbols employed as they are ordinarily used in prophetic writ- 
ings; hence, I give a 


TABLE OF SYMBOLS. 


In this table I aim to give only the leading Symbols used by John, with their apparent 
meaning. The definitions have been obtained from Mede, Elliott, Lange, Campbell, 
Archdeacon Lea, and other sources. 

Adultery,—Idolatry or apostasy; especially the latter. As Christ is represented asa 
bridegroom and the church as a bride, apostasy, or unfaithfulness to him, would be 
spiritual adultery, and a false church properly represented as a harlot. 

- Angel.—Any agent or messenger of the divine will. The term may be a symbol of any 
movement of nations, or in history which carries out the divine purposes. 

Ascension to Heaven.—Exaltation in power and glory. Prosperity. 

Babylon.—The city which carried Israel into captivity. Hence, a symbol of any power 
that renders them captive, whether it be Pagan or Papal Rome. 

Balances,—A symbol of justice, but when used to denote the weighing out of food, a 
symbol of scarcity. 

Black.—The color of mourning; hence a symbol of calamity and sorrow. 

Black Horse,—The horse was not used as a beast of burden by the ancients, but for pur- 
poses of war. Hence it is a symbol of war, and a black horse is a symbol of calam- 
itous war. 

Blood.—A symbol of the carnage of war. 

Beast.—The term rendered beast in the Revision means a savage wild beast. Hence it 
is a symbol of a cruel, tyrannical persecuting power. The term used in chap. 4, ren- 
dered beasts in the Common Version, is not the same. Instead of ‘‘Four Beasts” 
that should be rendered ‘‘Four Living Creatures.” 


INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION. 411 





Binding,.—This symbol means to restrain, to hold; also to deprive of power and render 
helpless. 

Book.—The record of the divine will. To seal a book is to conceal its meaning, since 
ancient books were rolls and could not be read when sealed. To open seals is to dis- 
close the meaning. To devour a book is to. become master of its contents. The 
book with seven seals is the book of human destiny, an outline of the great events 
which connect themselves with the church until its final triumph. The opening of 
its seals is the revelation of future history. 

Bow.—tThe bow, a warlike weapon, when held in the hand is a symbol of war. 

Bride.—tThe spouse of Christ, the Church, the New Jerusalem. 

Bridegroom.—Jesus Christ. 

Candlestick.—A symbol of a church, which should be a light in the world. The seven 
golden candlesticks are the seven churches. A symbol of any light-giving agency. 

Chain.—A symbol of bondage or affliction. To chain is to render powerless. To bind 
Satan with a chain is to destroy his power. 

-Cloud—An emblem of power and majesty. To ride upon the clouds is to appear in 
glory and exaltation. 

Crown.—The symbol of royal majesty. To enjoy exaltation and honor. To receive the 
crown of life is to receive the honors of eternal life. 

Darkness.—The well known symbol of calamity and affliction. 

Day.—‘‘I have given you a day fora year.’”’ One revolution of the earth on its axis isa 
symbol of its annual revolution in its orbit. ‘‘Twelve hundred and sixty days” 
means as many years. 

Death.—A symbol of destruction. 

Dragon,—The old pagan Roman Empire. The dragon was originally a symbol of a 
monarch. In Revelation it means the persecuting monarchy of Rome. 

Earth.—The ancient civilized world, which corresponded in John’s time with the 
Roman Empire. Political powers. 

Earthquake.— Political and moral revolutions and convulsions of society. The shaking 
of the established order of things. The subversion of states and fortunes. 

Eclipse.—Or the darkening of heavenly bodies, means the obscuration of the glory of 
kings and potentates of which sun, moon and stars are symbols. 

Egypt.—The place of spiritual bondage. A condition of sinfulness. Opposition to 
Christ. 

Euphrates.—The symbol of the Turkish power. To be “bound by the Euphrates”’ is to 
be restrained at that river. 

‘Elders.—Probably princes of righteousness. 

False Prophets.—A false spiritual power which falsely claims divine authority for its 
teaching. 

Fire.—F ierce destruction. Never the symbol of a blessing, but of a curse. 

Fire from Heaven.—Divine destruction; but fire brought down from heaven by the two- 
horned dragon, means excommunication and anathemas of a false spiritual power. 

Flood.—Symbol of overpowering. Distress from persecution or any cause. 

Forehead.—A mark in the forehead means a public profession. 

Fornication.—Idolatry. See Adultery. 

Grave.—To put into the grave, signifies to consign to oblivion. ‘‘Not to suffer dead 
bodies to be put into the grave,’’ means that they shall be remembered. 

~Hail.—Ravages and destruction. 

Hand.—A mark in the hand means the manner of life, or practice. 


412 INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION. 





Harlot.—An idolatrous community. The great Harlot is the apostate church. See 
Adultery. 

Heavens and the Earth.—The world. The political and religious universe. A new 
heavens and new earth imply a passing away of the old order of things and the 
establishment of a new order. 

Horse.—Used only for warlike purposes by the ancients and hence a symbol of war. 
The color of the horse indicates the condition of his rider and the state of the war. 

Horns.—‘“‘The great horn is the first king;”’? Daniel. A symbol of kings, kingdoms, or 
power. Seven horns indicate enormous power. 

Incense.—The prayers of the saints. 

Islands.—European states. In the prophets the ‘‘isles of the sea’’ meant the countries 
in and beyond the Mediterranean ; hence, Europe. 

Jerusalem.—The capital of Judea and the seat of the temple becomes a symbol of the 
church of Christ. The “‘holy city’’ is contrasted with the ‘“‘great city,’’ Jerusalem 
with Babylon, or the true with the false church. 

Jezebel.—An unholy woman is a symbol of an unholy influence in the church. 

Key.—A symbol of power to deliver or imprison, to open heaven or hell, or to shut 
them; of power to save or destroy. 

King,—Supreme power of any kind. A government; a kingdom. 

Lamb.—The symbol of a sinless, sacrificial offering. The Lamb of God is Christ 
slain as a lamb from the foundation of the world. 

Lion.—A symbol of kingly power. 

Locusts.—The locusts, a devouring pest bred in the deserts of Arabia, are a symbol of 
devouring Arabian armies. The Arabians under Mohammed. 

Manna.—The bread of life. The truth of Christ. 

Measuring Reed.—The standard by which the church is measured. The Word. 

Mountain.—Some person or power conspicuous among men. Highly elevated. A great 
prince or government. A burning mountain is a baleful, destructive power. 

Moon.—A symbol of powers, rulers and great nien which are not supreme. A light. 
which shines by reflecting another light. 

Merchants.—A symbol of those who make a gain of godliness and traffic in religioup 
privileges. 

Palm.—A symbol of joy or victory. 

Pale Horse.—An image of desolating war, and a reign of death. 

Red Horse.—An image of cruel, bloody war, distinguished by awful carnage. 

River of Life——Christ is the fountain of life. The abundant, ever flowing life that 
Christ bestows, is fitly symbolized by a river. The viver, and tree, of life mean essen- 
tially the same. 

Rod.—The symbol of rule. The rod of iron is a symbol of resistless sway. 

Scarlet.—This color, the color of blood, symbolizes bloody cruelty. A scarlet woman is 
a persecuting church, 

Seven.—Lhe perfect number. Completeness. 

Stars.—Shining lights in the world. Conspicuous men, eee in the church or the: 
state. 

Sun.—As the great light giver, in one sense a symbol of Christ. Also a supreme ruler. 
The moon and stars indicate great lights of society, but inferior to the sun. 

Sword.—A symbol of slaughter. Also of conquest. A sword in the hand indicates con- 
quest by carnal weapons. A sword proceeding from the mouth indicates con- 
quests by the word of God. 


INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION. ; 413 


‘Temple of God.—The church of which the tabernacle and temple were types. The tem- 
ple of God in heaven, open, is the abode of God, heaven itself, the church above. 

Throne,—A symbol of authority. 

‘Trumpet.—The blast of a trumpet signifies the forward march of armies, carnal or spir- 
itual. Also the proclamation of war or peace. 

Time.—Time, times and half a time is an annual revolution of the earth, a year, two 
years, a half year, or three and a half years. ‘‘Seven times’’ passed over Nebuchad- 
nezzar, or seven years. 

“Wine Press.—A symbol of an effusion of blood and of distress. 

White.—To be clothed in white is to be innocent, pure, and to be triumphant. 

White Horse.—Triumphant and glorious war. See Horse. 

Whore.—Apostate church. See Adultery. 

Winds.—Symbol of commotion; of mighty movements. The ‘Four Winds”’ are four 
invasions of the Roman Empire.  . 

Witness.—The two witnesses are the two Testaments, for such is the meaning of the 
latter word. 

“Woman.—The ‘‘woman clothed with the sun” is the pure and faithful church. The 
Great Harlot is the false, faithless, apostate church. The church is often symbolized 
by a bride, ora woman bearing children. A pure woman represents a faithful church ; 
an adulterous woman, ‘‘a harlot,’’ a false, apostate church. 


THE SCOPE OF REVELATION. 


John states that the book is a record of things “‘which should shortly come to pass.” 
He saw outlined in his vision events which were at that time in the future, but which 
were ‘‘shortly”’ to become history. No one would suppose that it was the divine purpose 
to reveal all the changing history of nations, races and kingdoms for the last eighteen hun- 
dred years, and hence, a question necessary to interpretation is: To what countries and 
series of events do the predictions apply? If we turn to the Old Testament prophets we 
will be guided to a correct answer. The central thought in all their predictions is the 
future history of the people of God. All that they utter is related, either directly or 
indirectly, to the fortunes of Israel, temporal and spiritual, the typical nation, and the 
spiritual nation, or in other words, to the fortunes of the Jews and of the Church. With 
this great object before them they predict the fate of the great Gentile nations with 
whom the Jews came in contact, who influenced their fortunes, or became their oppress- 
ors. Hence we have Assyria, Babylon, Tyre, Egypt, etc., made burdens of prophecy. 

Exactly the same is true of New Testament prophecy. The prophets speak of the fut- 
ure of Israel and of the Church, and necessarily reveal much concerning the opposing 
and persecuting nations. It was not in the mind of Christ to give in Revelation the 
outline of all history, but to outline the fortunes, tribulations and triumphs of the Church. 
‘The Church was, in the,earlier centuries, almost, wholly within the bounds of the vast, 
persecuting empire of Pagan Rome. Hence this opposing power would come before the 
prophetic vision, and we will find that the symbolism often refers to the Roman power. 
Let it be ever present to the mind of the reader that John was the victim of Roman per- 
gecution, and an exile on Patmos when he wrote; that he had never been beyond the 
boundaries of the Roman Empire, and that there is no historical authority for suppos- 
ing that any apostle ever stepped upon soil that a Roman citizen would call foreign. 
Since this mighty empire affects so closely the interests of the Church, it is in harmony 


414 INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION. 








with all we know of prophecy to expect it to be the subject of prophetic vision. That: 
Pagan Rome is, to a greater or less extent, the subject of the predictions is agreed by 
almost all interpreters, but the agreement is by no means so marked that Papal Rome, 
the great spiritual despot upon which the mantle of the pagan empire fell, is also an 
important element in the explanation of the visions. I believe that a close and 
unbiased study of the text compels the conclusion that a great apostasy, a false church, 
a persecuting spiritual power, is revealed, which mightily influences the fortunes of the 
Church, and that its characteristics are found strikingly exhibited in certain periods 
of the history of the Papacy. There arises a great apostasy, a false church that pro- 
duces for the time a mighty influence upon the saints of Jesus Christ. This is alsoa. 
subject of prophecy. I am then prepared to affirm that the general scope of the Book of 
Revelation is similar to that of the Old Testament prophets; that its primary object is to 
outline the history of the church; that, in subordination to this primary object, it por- 
trays the fortunes of the two great persecuting powers, Pagan and Papal Rome. The 
changing fortunes of the Church are portrayed, running like a golden thread through the 
dark panorama of history, until at last, in God’s good time, the battle is fought to the 
end, the victory won, and the triumphant Church enjoys the fruition of all its sufferings: 
and labors and the glories of the New Jerusalem. ; 


DIVISIONS. 


In order to an understanding the reader must keep in mind that there is more than 
one series of visions, and that these overlap each other, revealing different features of 
the same period. The whole book might be divided as follows: 

PART I. Chapters I--IV.—This part embraces the Introduction, the Vision of the: 
Son of Man, the Letters to the Seven Churches, and Vision of the Opened Heaven and 
the Throne of God. 

PART II. Chapters V--XI.—This part opens with a Vision of a Book sealed with 
Seven Seals in the Hands of Him who sits upon the Throne—the Book of Destiny ; the: 
Contents hidden by the seals. The Lamb of God prevails to open the seals; that is, to: 
Reveal the Future, As each is opened a vision appears which presents a Symbol repre-- 
senting a Period of Human history. Six seals are opened in succession, followed by a 
' pause before the opening of the seventh seal. When the seventh geal ig opened it is 
found to embrace Seven Thunders and Seven Trumpets. The trumpets are blown in suc- 
cession, each followed by Great Events, and when the last is blown the End comes when 
Christ triumphs over all. The Seven Seals, with the Seven Trumpets, contained under 
the last seal, reach to the end of time. 

PART III. Chapters XII--XVIII.—This part opens with a Vision of a Woman, a 
symbol of the Church; an Enemy of the Woman which appears as a Seven-headed and 
Ten-horned Beast, understood to be a symbol of Pagan Rome; a Two-horned Beast, 
which I understand to be Papal Rome; there also appears sitting on the Seven-headed 
Beast a False Woman, a symbol of a False Church. The figures change and these oppos- 
ing powers under the name of Babylon are overthrown. 

PART IV. Chapters XIX--XX.—These chapters describe the Great Victory over 
the opposing powers, the Millennial Period, and the Final Uprising and Defeat of Satan. 

PART V. Chapters XXI--XXII.—These chapters describe the Glorious Home of 
the Redeemed Saints, and embrace Closing Exhortations. 


WHE “REVELATION 


OF JOHN. 
CHAPTER I. 


The Vision of the Son of Man. 


SUMMARY.—Preface. John to the Seven Churches. In the Spirit on the 
Lord’s Day. The Revelation of the Son of Man. The Seven Stars and 


Seven Candlesticks. CHAPTER I. 


1 The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which? God Ge wick Ge : 
gave unto him, to shew unto his servants things ae eee eee 
which must shortly come to pass; and” he sent and | (hich must shortly come 
signified z¢ by his angel unto his servant John: signified if by his angel 

2 Who bare record of the word of God, and of | who pare Caen FORE 


ata oe : 7 ¢ | word of God, and of the 
the testimony of Jesus Christ, and of all things testimony of Jesus Christ, 


that he saw. even of all things that he 
saw. Blessed is he that 3. 


3 Blessed? zs he that readeth, and they that hear readeth, “and “they that 
= a 7 ear the words of prophe- 
the words of this prophecy, and keep those things | (yi? word Baca 


which are written therein: for the time zs at hand. | which are written therein: 
for the time is at hand. 


4 John to the seven churches which are in Asia:| Johntothesevenchurch- 4. 
es which are in Asia: 


Grace be unto you, and peace, from® him which is, Grace to you and peace, 
t i . ° a g tom him which is and 
and* which was, and which is to come: and® from | Vor, him which is ond 


the Seven Spirits which are before his throne; to come; and from the sev- 


a John 12:40, 6b Rey. 22:16. clJohn1:1. d Prov. 8:34; Luke 11:28; Rev. 22:7. ¢ Ex. 3:14; Isa. 43:13; John 8:585: 
17:5; Col. 1:17; James 1:17, fJohn1:1l. g Zech. 3:9. 











———. 
1-3. The Revelation. Apocalypse, or uncovering, so the Greek word means. The curtain of the 
future is lifted. Of Jesus Christ. The revelation is made by Jesus Christ. See chapter5. God gave 
him to shew. See chapter 5. He who sits on the throne gave to the Son the sealed book of the future to 
open it. Shortly come to pass. The series of events began to unfold in a few years after John wrote, 
and has rolled on through all the centuries. Lange renders the Greek translated “shortly ” by the phrase 
“in quick succession,” which is nearly its meaning. It implies successive order. He sent and signi- 
fied. The things “which must shortly come to pass.” By his angel. Here, and throughout the 
Apocalypse the office of unveiling the different scenes appears to be assigned to a particular angel. See 
4:1; 21: 9; 22:1; 22: 8,ete. Tohis servant John. A usual designation of the prophets. See Isa. 49: 5; 
Amos 3: 7; Rev. 19:10. 2. Who bare record. John is meant, who made the record of all he saw and 
heard. 8. Blessed is he that readeth. There is a reference to the custom that had already grown 
up, at the close of the first century, of reading the apostolic writings publicly in the churches. The bene- 
diction is pronounced on the public reader; on those that hear, and lastly upon those that keep the words 
contained in this prophecy. Thetimeis at hand. The period to which the prophecy relates is near. 
4-8. John to the seven churches which are in Asia. The churches are named inverse ll. The 
term “Asia” did not mean in the first century what it does now, but only the Roman province called Asia, 
of which Ephesus was the capital. All the seven churches are in that province. It is supposed that 
SEVEN, the perfect and sacred number, were chosen, because the seven were to symbolize the whole 
Church of Christ. There were in the province of Asia more than seven churches at this time, as we know; 
Colosse, Miletus (Acts 20: 17) and Hierapolis aoe 415) being named in the New Testament. Grace be 





ANG REVELATION. 


[Ch. I. 











5 And from Jesus Christ,? who zs the faithful 
-witness, and the? first-begotten of the dead, and° 
the Prince of the kings of the earth. Unto? him 
‘that loved us,® and washed us from our sins in his 
-own blood, 

6 And hath made us kings and priests unto God 
and his Father; to! him de glory and dominion 
for ever and ever. Amen. 

7 Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye 
shall see him,” and they also which pierced him; 
and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of 
him. Even so, Amen. 

8 I'am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the 
ending, saith the Lord, which is, and which was, 
and which is to come, the Almighty. 

9 I John, who also am your brother, and compan- 
ion in tribulation, and) in the kingdom and patience 
of Jesus Christ, was in the isle that is called Pat- 
mos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of 
Jesus Christ. 

10 IX was in the Spirit on! the Lord’s day, and 
heard behind me a great voice, as of a trumpet, 





en spirits which are before 
his throne; andfrom Jesus 5 
Christ, who is the faithful 
witness, the firstborn of 
the dead, and the ruler of 
the kings of the earth. 
Unto him that loveth us, 
and loosed us from our 
sins by his blood; and he 6 
made us to be a kingdom, 
to be priests unto his God 
and Father; to him be the 
glory and the dominion for 
ever and ever. Amen. Be- 
hold, he cometh with the 
clouds; andevery eye shall 
see him, and they which 
pierced him; and all the 
tribes of the earth shall 
mourn over him. Even so, 
Amen. 

I am the Alpha and the 8 
Omega, saith the Lord 
God, which is and which 
was and which is to come, 
the Almighty. 

I John, your brother and 9 
partaker with you in the 
tribulation and kingdom 
and patience which are in 
Jesus, was in the isle that 
is called Patmos, for the 
word of God and the testi- 
mony of Jesus. I was in 10 
the Spirit on the Lord’s 
day, and I heard behind 
me a great voice, as of a 


ct 





.adohn 8:14. 6 Col. 1:18. 


John 19:37. 


ce Eph. 1:20. dJohn13:34. e Heb. 9:14. 
iIsa. 41:4. j Rom. 8:17. & Acts 10:10. 





unto you. 


I Am. See Exod. 3: 14. From the seven Spirits. The Holy Spirit. 


F1 Tim. 6:16. 
7 John 20:26; Acts 20:7; 1 Cor. 16:2. 


g Dan. 7:13. h Zech. 12:10; 


The benediction, like that in the apostolic epistles, shows that Revelation is an epistle also, 
addressed directly to seven churches and through them to all the church. From him which is. 


The 


The numeral seven indicates 


fulness, perfection. It is the sacred number. The sevens are constantly repeated through Revelation. 
There are seven churches, seven spirits, seven seals, seven trumpets, seven thunders, seven vials, ete. 5. 
And from Jesus Christ. Some of the glories of Christ, the third whose grace 1s invoked, are named. 
The faithful witness. Because all that he says is faithful and true. The first born of the dead. 
See notes on Col. 1: 18. Through Christ’s resurrection from the dead life and immortality were brought 
to light for us all. Hence he is called the “‘first born.” The prince. The rightful ruler of all the rulers 
of the earth. Unto him that loveth us. The tense is present, as in the Revision. His love never 
ceases. Washed us. Rather, as in the Revision, ‘loosed us.” This was done by the shedding of his 
blood. 6. Andhemadeus. Here the Revision must be followed. He made us ‘‘ to be a kingdom ; 
to be priests unto his God.’’ His disciples are constituted a kingdom; a kingdom in which each one 
is a priest. No disciple needeth a priest to offer incense or sacrifice for him, for he can go directly to the 
Father through Jesus Christ. See notes on 1 Pet. 2: 9. Christians are called priests, but are never called 
kings in a correct translation of the New Testament. '7. Behold,hecometh. Christ. With clouds. 
See Matt. 24: 30; 26: 64; Acts1:9,11. The clouds denote the glory and terrors of his coming. Every eye 
shall see him. He will then come to meet all mortals. They which pierced him. Israel, the nation 
which rejected and crucified him is meant. See Zech. 12: 10, which is here quoted. All the tribes of the 
earth shall mourn over him. In consternation because he is coming to judge the world. 8. Iam 
the Alpha and the Omega. The first and last letters of the Greek alphabet; hence ‘the beginning and 
the end.” All begins with God and he closes the drama of earthly history. 

9-11. I John. He here names himself for the third time. The fourth and fifth times are in 21: 2 and 
22:8. Companion in tribulation. A partaker of the sufferings of the church hke you. Kingdom 
and patience. In the kingdom they were called to patient endurance. Wasin the isle thatis called 
Patmos. For description of this island see Introduction. ‘It appears to be the certain result of his- 
torical evidence that the Apostle John was banished to the island of Patmos during the reign of Domi- 
tian (A. D. 81-96) and in the fourteenth year of that reign, and was recalled from Patmos to Ephesus by 
the Emperor Nerva in A. D. 96.” — Bible Commentary (Speaker’s) on Revelation. For the word of God. 
Banished on account of preaching the word of God. 10. I was in the Spirit, Was iifted to that 


REVELATION. 





ah. I,] 417 
11 Saying, Iam Alpha and Omega, the first and | trumpet saying, what thou 11 
the last: and, What thou seest write in a book, and | Sst, vzite in @ book, and 
send z¢ unto the seven churches which are in Asia; ono. orice: 
unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto Perga- gamun.and unto Thyatira, 
mos, and unto Thyatira, and unto Sardis, and unto Pula dehio om Unie 
Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea. vee inated ee 
. 5 Spak 
12 And I turned to see the voice that spake with with me. And having turn- 
me. And, being* turned, I saw seven golden can-| iesteks and be tron et 13 
dlesticks ; ‘ the Pi grt one 
pe . 5 5 ike unto a son of man, 
13 And in the midst of the seven candlesticks? | clothed with a garment 
one like unto the Son of man, clothed® with a gar- | ¢pWn {0 the foot, and girt 
e g ; - golden girdle. And his 14 
ment down to the foot, and girt about the paps | golden girdle. ee 
with a golden girdle. white as white wool, white 
14 His head and his hairs were white like wool, | *i.¢neW 3,07 ye is 


as white as snow; and°® his eyes were as a flame of 
fire: 


his feet like unto burnish- 
ed brass, as if it had been 
refined in a furnace, and 


his voice as the voice of 
many waters. And he had 16 
in his right hand seven 
stars: and out of his mouth 
proceeded a sharp two- 
edged sword: and _ his 
countenance was as the 
sun shineth in his strength. 


15 And‘ his feet like unto fine brass, as if they 
burned in a furnace;® and his voice as the sound of 
many waters. 

16 And he had in his right hand seven stars; and" 
out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword; 
and! his countenance was as the sun shineth in his 
strength. 











6 Dan. 7:13. e¢ Dan. 10:5. dDan.7:9, 


é Rey. 2:18. Ezek. 1:7. 
Aisa. 49:25 Eph. 6:17; Heb. 4:12. 


g Wzek. 43:2. 
¢ Acts 26:13. 


ax. 25:37; Zech. 4:2. 





: spiritual exaltation in which revelations are given. On the Lord’s day. The day of the Lord’s Resur- 
rection, the first day of the week. In the earlier apostolic writings the day was called “the first day of 
the week,” but by the close of the century it began to be called “ the Lord’s day,” as here. Epistles of 
Barnabas, Ignatius and Dionysius, written near this time, so style it, and the name is of common occur- 
rence from this time onward, and is confined to Sunday. It is not confounded with the “Sabbath day” 
for many centuries. See Dr. Wm. Smith’s Unabridged Dictionary of the Bible, article Lord’s Day. 
Heard behind mea great voice. Heard but didnot see the speaker. 11. Iam Alphaand Omega. 
These words are omitted in the Revision, as not found in the best MS. Whatthou seest. In all the 
visions of the Book of Revelation. Write in a book. The Greek says ‘in a roll,” which was the form 
of books in the East at that time. Unto Ephesus. The seven churches are now named. For notes on 
these churches and the cities where they were located see chapters 2 and 3. Two of the churches named 
had received epistles from the Apostle Paul. 

12-16. I saw seven golden candlesticks. The first things seen when he turned to see whence the 
voice came were the seven golden candlesticks, which symbolized the churches (verse 20). 18. Andin 
the midst. It is a beautiful thought that he who said “I will be with you always.”’ is represented as 
moying in the midst of the churches. Like unto the Son of man. A term used in Dan. 7: 13 and 
applied by the Savior to himself, but never applied to him by the New Testament writers except here, 
Rey. 14: 14 and Acts 7:56. A garment down to the foot. The long robe of a high priest girt about 
with the golden girdle of a king. 14. His head and his hair were white. White is the color of 
purity and of triumph. The idea here is not age but heavenly glory. His eyes were as a flame of 
fire. Bright, piercing, all seeing, flashing light, and also a consuming fire of the wicked. 15. Feet like 
unto fine brass. Shedding forth splendor like burnished brass heated ina furnace. His voice. His 
voice was mighty like the sound of surging waters. 16. Inhis right hand seven stars. ‘“‘ The seven 
stars are the angels of the seven churches” (verse 20). And out of his mouth went a sharp two- 
edged sword. This two-edged sword is a symbol of the word by which Christ’s conquests are won. 
See Eph. 6: 17; Heb. 4: 12, and compare Rey. 19: 15. His countenance. The glory of his countenance 


zis the same that was manifested at the Transfiguration. 


a 


418 REVELATION. (Ch. 1. 


r 1 And when I saw him, I 17 
17 And* when I saw him, I fell at his feet as| fey athhis feet as one dead, 


dead. And? he laid his right hand upon me, saying | And he laid his right hand 
; upon me saying, Fear not; 
unto me, Fear not;° I am the first and the last: Lam the first and the last, 


a , : and the Living one; and I 
18 J¢ am he that liveth, and was dead; and | {2 ead; and behold, I am 


behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen; and® have alive for evermore, and I 
have the keys of death and 
the keys of hell and of death. of Hades. Write therefore 19° 


19 Write the things which thou hast seen, and | the Hist tes which 

the things which are, and the things which shall be are, and the things which 

all come to pass hereatl- 

hevactter | Shall t I f£ 
erea ter; ter; the mystery of the 20 


etary ar i seven stars which thou 

20 The mystery of the seven stars which thou | soyen Sony riebt hand, 
sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden can- and the seven golden can- 
s Ss i C star 
dlesticks. ‘The seven stars are‘ the angels of the) are the angels « pp eae 
seven churches; and the® seven candlesticks which | churches: and the seven 








[J 


&. 





are the angels of the seven 
| candlesticks are seven 


thou sawest are the seven churches. _ churches. 





a@ Ezek. 1:28. 6 Dan. 8:18. cIsa. 41:4; 44:6; 48:12. d@ Rom. 6:9. ¢ Psa. 68:20; Rev. 20:1. f Mal. 2:7. 
g Lech. 4:2; Matt. 5:15; Phil. 2: 15. 





17-20. I fell at his feet as one dead. Overcome with awe. No sinful man can stand before God. 
and live; hence the impression made by the appearance of the Lord is that of terror. Fear not. But 
when the Lord spoke to the disciple it was with the old love. How often before had Jesus said ‘‘ Fear 
not.’ Iam the first and the last. See verse8. The attributes claimed for Jehovah are also claimed 
for Christ. 18. He that liveth and was dead. Put to death but living. Have the keys of death 
and of Hades. Not only a victor over death, but the very gates of death and Hades are under his con- 
trol. Hence he can deliver from the dead whom he will. 19. Write. Not only the vision just seen, but 
the things which are, viz., the description of the state of the churches given in chapters 2 and 3, and 
also the things which shall be, viz., the revelation of future history recorded in chapters 6-20. 20. 
The mystery of the seven stars. The Lord himself at once explains what the seven stars and seven 
candlesticks symbolize. The seven candlesticks represent ‘the churches, or organizations appointed to 
“let their light shine,’ and become “the light of the world.” And the seven stars are the angels of the 
churches. These were, I think, the evangelists of the churches. See note below. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


THE APPEARANCE OF CHRIST. — He was arrayed in a priestly robe and girt with a kingly girdle of 
gold. Heavenly purity was indicated by the dazzling whiteness of his head and hair, and the splendor 
that shone from his countenance was like that of the unclouded sun. . Every manifestation of the divine 
glory is accompanied with brilliancy and splendor, “In him there is no darkness at all.’ The burning 
bush of Horeb, the glory of Sinai, the Shekinah of the tabernacle, the City of which God and the Lamb: 
are the light, the transfigured Savior of Hermon, the Son of Man of Patmos, and all the visions of the 
prophets of both covenants, indicate that whenever Deity manifests itself, there is a revelation of heay- 
enly splendor. The Son of Man, the Man of Sorrows, the Lamb of God, is also the Bright and Morning 
Star, and the Sun of Righteousness. It is thus, crowned with majesty, garbed in light, and shining as the 
sun, that John beholds the Son of Man walking amid the golden candlesticks and holding the seven stars- 
in his hands. 

THE SEVEN STARS.—I shall not take up space to discuss the various views as to the nature of the 
angels of the churches. It has been held that they were heavenly angels, were diocesan bishops of the- 
cities, were pastors or elders, or were messengers sent from the churches to visit John in Patmos. .The 
word angel means a messenger, and is equally applicable to the messengers of God and those of men. 
John the Baptist is called in Mark 1: 2, an angel, or messenger, and the term is often applied to human 
beings. Itis certain that it is in this passage. John is told to write to these angels, and certainly the let- 
ters were not sent to the angels of heaven. Nor does this language suggest the idea of messengers sent to: 
visit John in Patmos. In that case the letters might be sent by them to the churches, but would certainly 
not be written to them. It becomes evident, therefore, that the angels were men filling some office in con- 
nection with the churches. There is not the slightest evidence that diocesan bishops existed until much 
later than this age, and hence I do not think that they are meant. The term can hardly apply to an elder, 
for there seems to have been a plurality of elders in all the churches, and It is not likely that one would 
pe singled out. It is my judgment that the angels were the preachers or evangelists of the churches. As. 


Ch. IT.) REVELATION. 419 





CHAPTER II. 


Letters to the Churches. 


SUMMARY.—The Letter to the Metropolitan Church of Ephesus. To the 
Angel of the Martyr Church of Smyrna. To the Angel of the Church 
at Pergamos, Persecuted by the Heathen. To the Angel of the Church 
at Thyatira, Defiled by Idolatry. CHAPTER II. 


1 Unto the angel of the church of* Ephesus] 2 ?t®, He ee eerie 


write: s ith» .!_ These things saith he that 
write; These things saith” he that holdeth the holden hone ee 


seven stars in his right hand, who walketh in the/nis right hand. he that 


: : Iketh in the mid 
midst of the seven golden candlesticks; easier cre ren oe 


G i Fe ; ‘ I know thy works, and thy 2 
2 I* know thy works, and thy labour, and thy new ee 
patience, and how thou canst not bear them which| thou canst not bear eal 


: . . and didst tr 
are evil: and thou" hast tried them* which say they | 2,4, es 


are apostles, and are not, and hast found them liars ; Sp ie eee, 
3 And hast borne, and hast patience, and for my|and thou hast pationce 3 


. d di > 
name’s sake hast laboured, and hast‘ not fainted. BAO ia aes 


@ Acts19. 6 Rey.1:16. cPsa.1:6. d@1John4:l. e2 Cor. 11:18; 2 Pet. 2:1. fGal. 6:9; Heb. 12:3, 5. 











these evangelists not only labored at home, but were often sent out, and were messengers to carry the 
good tidings, there is a fitness in applying the term to them. We know from the epistles of Paul and from 
church tradition, that Timothy was long the evangelist at Ephesus, and it is possible that he may have 
lived and labored until the time of John’s banishment. If so, he was the angel to whom the epistle to the 
church at Ephesus was directed. Then we conclude that the seven stars held in the hand of the Lord, 
supported and strengthened by him, shining with his light, are the seven preachers of the churches of 
Asia. 

The second and third chapters differ from all the rest of Revelation in that they are letters dictated by 
the Lord to the Seven Churches which have been chosen to represent the entire church of God. The 
description of their varied conditions and the commendations, rebukes, promises and warnings given them, 
are a fitting introduction to a book which is designed to reveal the various phases of the church in his- 
tory, its fortunes, its lapses, its tribulations, persecutions and final triumph. While these Seven Epistles 
differ in details they will be found to have the same general plan and to have the following features in 
common: 1. An order to write to the angel of the church. 2. A glorious title of Christ taken from the 
imagery or language of the vision of chapter 1. 3. A description of the condition of the church, whether 
good or bad, admonitions and exhortations. 4. A promise to those who persevere and triumph. 5. A 
closing injunction to “‘hear what the Spirit saith to the churches.” Four epistles are contained in chap- 
ter 2, and three in chapter 3. A close examination will show that there is a distinction. In the last four 
epistles the closing promise is placed after the injunction to “ hear what the Spirit,” ete.; in the first three 
epistles the promise is before the injunction. The distinction makes two groups of epistles, one of three 
and the other of four, just as the seven seals, the seven trumpets and the seven vials are divided into two 
groups each, of four and three. 

THE CHURCH AT EPHESUS. 1-8. Unto the angel. See note on the Angels of the Churches at close 
of chapteri. The church of Ephesus. The city of Ephesus was the capital of the Roman province of 
Asia, and the greatest city. Asa great center it was sought by the Apostle Paul, who founded the church 
and labored there more than three years (see Acts, chapter 18) and afterwards addressed to it the Epistle 
to the Ephesians. At a later period he placed Timothy there and addressed two epistles to him. All early 
church tradition declares that John from about A. D. 70 made this city his home until his death. There 
is not now standing a single house upon the site of the ancient city, though the ruing are of the most 
imposing character. The Turkish village of Agasalouk, upon the Smyrna and Aidan R. R., is about 
two miles distant. These things saith he, etc, See 1: 13, 16,20. 2. I know thy works. The 
manner of life of the church. There was much to commend. Patience. Rather, endurance. Perse- 
verance in the face of difficulties. Hast tried them which say they are apostles. False teachers 
who made false claims. Every age of revolution throws up such false teachers. We often find traces of 
them in the epistles. 1 John 4: 1 shows how to test them. The Ephesian church had put them to the test 
and rejected them. 3. Hast not fainted. Though called to bear afflictions for Christ they had not 


wearied. 


420 REVELATION. 


(Ona. 





4 Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, 
because thou hast left thy first love. 

5 Remember therefore from whence thou art. 
fallen, and repent, and do the first works;* or else 
I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy 
candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. 

6 But this thou hast, that thou hatest the deeds 
of the Nicolaitanes, which I also hate. 

7 He?” that hath an ear, let him hear what the| 
Spirit saith unto the churches; To him that over- 
cometh will I give® to eat of? the tree of life, which 
is in the midst of the paradise of God. 

8 And unto the angel of the church in Smyrna 
write; These things saith® the first and the last, 
which was dead, and is alive; 

9 I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, 
(but thou? art rich,) and J know the blasphemy of® 
them which say they are Jews, and are not, but are 





the synagogue of Satan. 


grown weary. But I have 4 
this against thee, that thou 
didst leave thy first love. 
Remember therefore from 5 
whence thou art fallen, 
and repent, and do the first 
works; or else I come to 
thee, and will move thy 
eandlestick out of its 
place, except thou repent. 
But this thou hast, that 6 
thou_hatest the works of 
the Nicolaitans, which I 
also hate. He that hath 7 
an ear, let him hear what 
the Spirit saith to the 
churches. To him that 
overcometh, to him will I 
give to eat of the tree of 
life, which is in the Para- 
dise of God. 

And to the angel of the 
church in Smyrna write; 

These things saith the 
first and the last, which 
was dead, and lived again: 
I know thy tribulation, 
and thy poverty (but thou 
art rich), and the blas- 
phemy of them which say 
they are Jews, and they 


are not, but are a syna- 








@ Matt. 21:41. 6 Matt. 11:15; Rey. 13:9... cRev.22. dGen. 2:9. 


e Rev. 1:8. Luke 12:21; 1 Tim. 6:18; 
James 2:5. g Rom. 2:17. 








4-7. Nevertheless. After these words of promise a stain on the garments of the church is pointed 
out. Thou hast left thy firstlove. They have not maintained the ardor and devotion of the love of 
their earlier history. Nothing but the fervent love of the Bride can satisfy the Bridegroom. This change 
shows that many years must have passed since the last communication of Paul to the Ephesian church. 
5. Remember from whence thou art fallen. Note what this exhortation includes: 1. They 
had been at a height of excellence. 2. They had fallen from that height; there had been a spiritual 
declension. 3. Repent. The comparison and its proof that they were retrograding should bring repent- 
ance. 4. Do the first works. There must be the first love, and the fruits of that love in a renewal of 
their first works. Unless this is done Christ will come. Not in person, but in providence and judg- 
ments. The church with a waning love will be repudiated. Will remove thy candlestick. “Thy” 
refers to the Angel of the church through whom the address is made. To remove the candlestick would 
be to suffer the church to cease to exist. How signally this has been fulfilled in the case of Ephesus is 
seen in the fact that not one vestige of the church remains, and of the city itself naught but mouldering 
ruins. What concerns us, however, is that this warning is addressed to every church which has lost its first 
love. Unless it repents, and does its first works, its candlestick will finally be removed from its place. 
6. But this thou hast. There is another ground of commendation. They hate the deeds of the 
Nicolaitanes. Opinions are not agreed concerning this sect, but it is probable that the followers of a 
Nicolaus are meant who taught that Christian liberty meant license to commit sensualsins. '7. He that 
hath an ear. The call to solemn attention found at the close of each epistle. To him that over- 
cometh. The Christian life is a battle and must also be a victory. The Greek word rendered “ over- 
eome” is peculiar to John. It occurs once in his Gospel, siz times in his epistles, and sixteen times in 
Revelation, but only three times in all the rest of the New Testament. To eat of the tree of life. The 
symbol of eternal life. The tree is seen in Eden (Gen. 2: 9; 3: 22), here, and in the New Jerusalem (Rey. 
22:2). Paradise of God. Since the tree of life is found in both, Paradise and the New Jerusalem must 
mean the same. Paul uses the term as a synonym of the ‘Third Heaven,” or Heaven itself (2 Cor. 12:2-4). 

THE CHURCH ATSMYRNA. 8-11. Thechurchat Smyrna. The history of its planting is unknown, 
but it was probably founded by some of the evangelists under Paul’s supervision. During the second cen- 
tury the church was prominent, and it has never ceased to exist. When I visited the city in 1889, I was told 
that there were more than 70,000 professing Christians in the place. The city, so old that its beginnings 
are unknown, is still the second in commercial importance of the Turkish empire. The first and the 
last. See 1:18. 9. Thy tribulation. Affliction. And thy poverty. Most of those first enlisted 
for Christ were poor. See 1 Cor. 1: 26-29. But thou artrich. Rich in faith, hope and fruits. And I 
know the blasphemy. Reviling of the Jews against the Lord. Say they are Jews. Those who 
say that they are Jews were of the Jewish race, but were not of the true Israel. “He is nota (true) Jew 


Ch. Ii.) REVELATION. 


10 Fear? none of those things which thou shalt 
suffer: behold, the devil shall cast some of you into 
prison, that ye may be tried; and ye shall have 
tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death, 
and I will give thee® a crown of life. 





421 


gogue of Satan. Fear not 10 
the things which thou art 
about to suffer: behold, 
the devil is about to cast 
some of you into prison, 
that ye may be tried; and 
ye shall have tribulation 
ten days. Be thou faithful 


unto death, and I will give 
thee the crown of life. He 11 
that hath an ear, let him 
hear what the Spirit saith 
to the churches. He that 
overcometh shall not be 
hurt of the second death. 

And to the angel of the 12 
chureh in Pergamum 
write; 

These things saith he 
that hath the sharp two- 


11 He* that hath an ear, let him hear what the 
Spirit saith unto the churches; He that overcometh 
shall not be hurt of the® second death. 

12 And to the angel of the church in Pergamos 
write: These things saith he* which hath® the sharp 
sword with two edges; 

13 I know thy works, and where thou dwellest, 


even where Satan’s seat is: and thou holdest fast | edged Sword: 1 | know 18 
my name, and hast not denied my faith, even in| where Satan's throne is: 
those days wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, Pad le ore 
who was slain among you," where Satan dwelleth. — | yy faith, even Late Rens 
14 But I have a few things against thee, because | faithiul one, who was kill- 
thou hast there them that hold the doctrine of! | So 2moRe ya. Wier Baran 
Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a stumbling-block | fev, things against theo, 
before the children of Israel,i to eat things sacri-| some that hold the teach- 
ficed unto idols,* and to commit fornication. A Serene tere 
15 So hast thou also them that hold the doctrine | block before the children 
of the Nicolaitanes, which thing I hate. sacrificed ‘to idols, and to 
commit fornication. So 15 


hast thou also some that 
hold the teaching of the 
Nicolaitans in like man- 
ner. Repent therefore; or 16 


16 Repent; or else I will come unto thee quickly, 
and! will fight against them with the sword of my 
mouth. 


a Matt. 10: 22; Isa. 40:10, 14. 
h Lev. 17:7; Deut. 32: 16,17. 











e Rey. 20:14. fRev.1:16. g Josh. 5:13. 


bMatt. 24:13. cJames1:12. d Rey. 13:9. 
k%1Cor. 6:18. 


t Num, 25:1; 30:16; 2 Pet. 2:15; Jude il. j Acts 15:29. 
l Isa. 11:4; 2 Thes, 2:8. 





who is one outwardly,” etc. (Rom. 2: 28). John denies the right of these Jewish opposers to use the term 
“Jews” in the sense of God’s chosen people. Their synagogue was the synagogue of Satan. Such 
strong language implies a complete separation of the church and synagogue, an event that occurred at 
the period of the destruction of Jerusalem. See Acts 21: 20-26. 10. Fearnone,etc. The church shall 
suffer, but it need not fear for the reasons about to be given. The devil shall cast. He may use the 
Jews as instruments but he is the real agent. Shall have tribulation ten days. Whether the “ ten 
days” of persecution means a short time, or a definite period symbolized by “ten days” is uncertain. A 
day is often a symbol of a year. Ten persecutions are named by church historians and two persecutions 
of ten years each. It might refer to one of the latter which should bear very heavily on that church. 
The Diocletian persecution continued ten years and three months. Be thou faithful unto death. 
Unto martyrdom. The crown of life. Nota royal crown but the garland crown of victory over death. 
See 2 Tim. 4:8. 11. Shall not be hurt of the second death. Those who win the victory shall live 
forever. To die the second death is to be sent from the judgment throne into hell. See Rev. 20: 14. 

Tur CHURCH AT PERGAMOS. 12-17. Pergamos. The farthest north of the Seven Churches, a city 
once the capital of the kingdom of Pergamos, which was great and flourishing when John wrote. It still 
exists with about 14,000 population, of whom over 3,000 profess to be Christians. Which hath the sharp 
sword. See 1: 16. 18. Where thou dwellest, even where Satan’s seat is. In a center of 
heathen idolatry. Pergamos was a notorious center of idolatry. Thou holdest fastmy name. Honor 
and trust in the name of Christ. Hast not denied my faith. Still continue firm in the profession of 
Christ though persecuted. Wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr. Some faithful saint who 
had suffered martyrdom among them because he was a faithful witness of Christ. 14. ButI havea 
few things against thee. Much has been to the credit of the church, but there is another side. Hold 
the doctrine of Balaam. Teachers like Balaam who seduce the true Israel into sin. Balaam showed 
Balak how to lead the children of Israel astray. See Num. 25: 2, and 31:16. In the same way there were 
false teachers at Pergamos who taught that Christians might join in idol feasts and in heathen fornication. 


422 REVELATION. ' [Ch. IT. 


A ° else I come to thee quick- 
17 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the iy aoe Pe er 


Spirit saith unto the churches; To him that over-| against them with the 
s ¢ L $ d sword of my mouth. He 17 
cometh will I give to eat of the hidden manna, and! that hath an ear, let him 


will give him a white stone, and in the stone® a new | peat what the Spirit saith 
name written, which no man knoweth, saving he| that overcometh, to him 
A : will 1 give of the hidden 

that receiveth zz. manna, and T will give him 
7 treaty a white stone, and upon 

18 And unto the angel of the church in Thy atira hye Roane eae eer 
write; These things saith the Son of God, who? | ten, which no one knoweth 


é : * but he that receiveth it. 
hath his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet | ““snd to the angel of the 1s 


“ees 15 sq s church in Thyatira write; 
are like fine brass ; . ; These things saith the 
19 1 know thy works, and charity, and service, | Son of God, who hath his 


: : ree eyes like a flame of fire, 
and faith, and thy patience, and thy works; and the| and nis feet are like unto 


~ p G 3 burnished brass: I know 19 
last to be greater than the first. P thy works. aun iy ore 
20 Notwithstanding I have a few things against and faith and ministry and 


: atience, and that thy last 
thee, because thou sufferest that woman‘ Jezebel, | Works azo more than the 


: A . ‘ first. But I have this 20 
which callest herself a prophetess, to teach and to auaiiat @eectier Heee 


seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to | sufterest the woman Jeze- 


‘ P : bel, which calleth herself 
eat things sacrificed unto idols. a prophetess; and she 


9 2 ad n, > Pn i- | teacheth and seduceth my 
21 And I gave her space* to.repent of her formi-| teacheth and seduceth my 


cation; and she repented not. cation, and to eat things ot 
. . sacriice: 3. 
22 Behold I will cast her into a bed, and them) gave her time that she 


. ni 74 Sh ny -| should repent; and she 
that commit adultery with her into great tribula willetichet repent ener 


tion, except they repent of their deeds. fornication. Behold, I do 22 
23 And I will kill her children with death; and them that commit adultery 
- es e | wi her into great tribu- 
all the churches shall know that* I am he which | wit Pr ren eee 
searcheth the reins and hearts: and‘ I will give) of her works. And I will 23 


unto every one of you according to your works. a EMS 














a@ Rey. 8:12; 19:12. 6 Rev.1:14._ cl Kings16:31. @dRom.2:4. e1Sam. 16:7 


3 Psa. 7:9; John 2:24; Acts 1:24; 
Rom. 8:27. jf Psa. 62:12; Matt. 16:27; 2 Cor. 5:10. 





15. Sohast thou also them, etc. For Nicolaitanes see note on verse 6 above. 16. Repent there- 
fore. This may save the sinner, whether an alien, or a church member. To repent one must leave off his 
sins. I will make war against them. Those who teach and practice these pernicious doctrines. 
With the sword of my mouth. See1: 16. With all the power of the wordof God. 17. I will give 
to eat of the hidden manna. The bread of life, the bread from heaven. The living bread is Jesus 
Christ, unseen in the earth and hence called hidden. Willgive him awhite stone. Among theGreeks 
a white stone was a symbol of acquittal, as a black stone was of guilt. The white stone implies justifica- 
tion, innocence and victory. A new name written. All conjectures concerning this new name are 
idle. It is only given to those who have finally overcome and cannot be known to us here, but implies their 
new relation to God and the Lamb in their triumphant state. 

THE CHURCH IN THYATIRA, 18-23. In Thyatira. This is the first of the second group of four 
epistles. Thyatira has been mentioned in Acts, chapter 16, as the home of Lydia, who was converted at 
Philippi. It is likely that the church began when she and her household returned. The three churches 
before named were on or near the coast; the others were in the interior. Thyatira was southeast of Per- 
gamos, and northeast of Smyrna. It is still a place of about 17,000 population, of whom nearly 3,000 pro- 
fess to be Christians. Like unto a flame offire. See1: 14,15. 19. And the last to be more than 
the first. See Revision. Instead of retrograding their works grew more excellent. 20. Notwith- 
standing. Of the seven churches only two are blameless. Sufferest that woman Jezebel. Either 
a person or a party of which the wicked wife of Ahab was a type. As a woman in Revelation is a symbol 
of the church, true or false, I believe this symbol is used to designate a faction in the church at Thyatira 
of an idolatrous spirit. This faction had teachers who claimed the gift of prophecy. They taught the 
doctrine of Balaam named in verse 14. See note there. See also verse24. 21. I gave her space (time) 
torepent. The long suffering and mercy shown in the delay of judgment are here pointedout. 22. Be- 
hold, I willcast her into a bed. Sickness and a bed are symbols of affliction and punishment. Them 


Ch. II.]j REVELATION. 


423 





24 But unto you I say, and unto the rest in Thya- 
tira, (as many as have not this doctrine, and which 
have not known? the depths of Satan, as they 
speak, )? I will put upon you none other burden: 

25 But that which ye have already hold fast till I 
come. 

26 And he that overcometh, and keepeth my° 
works unto the eud, to’ him will I give power over 
the nations: 

27 Andé he shall rule them with a rod of iron; as 
the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shiv- 
ers; even as I received of my Father. 

28 And I will give him‘ the morning star. 

29 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the 
Spirit saith unto the churches. 


CHAPTER III. 


The Epistles to the Seven Churches Continued. 


SuMMARY.—Letter to the Church at Sardis; the Spiritually Dead Church. 
Letter to the Tried and Faithful Church of Philadelphia. Letter to 
the Lukewarm Church of Laodicea. 

1 And unto the angel of the church at Sardis 
write; These things saith he that hath the seven 
Spirits of God, and the seven stars; I know thy 
works, that thou hast a name that thou livest,® and 
art dead. 





| death; and all the church- 


es shall know that I am 
he which searcheth the 
reins and hearts: and I 
will give unto each one of 
you according to your 
works. But to you I say, 
to the rest that are in Thy- 
atira, aS many as have not 
this teaching, which know 
not the deep things of Sa- 
tan, as they say; I cast 
upon you none other bur- 
den. Howbeit that which 
ye have, hold fast till I 
come. And he that over- 
cometh, and he that keep- 
eth my works unto the 
end, to him will I give au- 
thority over the nations: 
and he shall rule them 
with a rod of iron, as the 
vessels Of the potter are 
broken to shivers; as I also 
have received of my Fa- 
ther: and I will give him 
the morning star. He that 
hat. n ear, let him hear 
what the Spirit saith to 
the churches. 


CHAPTER III. 


And to the angel of the 
church in Sardis write; 

These things saith he that 
hath the seven Spirits of 
God, and the seven stars: 
I know thy works, that 
thou hast a name that 
thou livest, and thou art 








ar Cor. 2:11. b Acts 15:28; 


49:14; Dan. 7:22; Rev. 19:15. f2 Pet. 1:19; Rev. 22:16. ¢g BHph. 2:1. 





that commit adultery with her. 


24 


25 
26 


27 


28 
29 


eJoln6:29. d Matt. 19:28; Luke 22: 29; 1 Cor. 6:3; Rev. 3:21; 20:4. ¢ Psa. 2:8,95 


This is the term applied to idolatrous Israel (Jer. 3:9; Ezek. 16:32). 


To practice the idolatrous rites of this faction would be spiritual adultery. 28. Iwill kill her child- 
ven. Her children are the adherents; those who perpetuate the immoral practices. The threat implies 
that they shall come to certain destruction. And all the churches shall know, etc. By reason of 
the judgments inflicted. Some have strongly urged that by “Jezebel” is meant a Sybil, half heathen, 
half Christian, claiming prophetic powers, who is known to have lived at Thyatira. 


24-29. Butto youl say, to 

to do with Jezebel. As many as 

“and a faction. 
wisdom of Satan taught by these false teachers. 

other than to avoid the sins of the false faction and teachers. 


the rest that are in Thyatira (Revision). To all who have naught 
have not this doctrine. Jezebel then represents a false doctrine 
Which know not the deep things of Satan. Have not learned the mysteries and 
I will put upon you none other burden. None 
Compare Acts 15: 28,29. 25. Hold fast. 


To the gospel as it has been taught you. 26. Keepeth my works unto the end. Until death. I 


will give power over the nations. In ; 
saints who have endured shall share his authority. 27. 


jron-. A sceptre of iron means a firm and enduring power. Lule. 


the coming period when Christ shall rule all kingdoms the 
And he shall rule them with a rod of 
Shall rule as a shepherd is the mean- 


ing of the Greek word. The rule will not be a cruel, put a guardian rule. As the vessels of a potter. 


So the nations shall be broken in pieces 
him the morning star. The Morning 


means that Christ will give them a fellowship with himself; they shall share his dominion. 


TuE CHURCH AT SARDIS. 1-6. The church in Sardis. 


and all become one under the rule of Christ. 28. I will give 
Star is one of the titles of Christ. See Rev. 22: 16. This, then, 


The city of Sardis, once the capital of the 


great kingdom of Lydia and the home of Croesus, the rich king, lay in the interior nearly a hundred miles 
east of Smyrna and Ephesus. Though it had lost its former greatness it was still a considerable eity in 
the first century. The church there was planted, no doubt, by some of the companions of Paul. The 
former city has now ceased to exist, and only extensive ruins remain to testify of its greatness. Like the 
church at Ephesus, which had lost its first love, the Sardian church which had ‘a name to live and was 














494 REVELATION. Ch, TH. 

2 Be watchful, and strengthen the things which gra siabiahthe eee ee 
remain, that are ready to die; for I have not found | remain, which were ready 

% to die: for I have found no 
thy works perfect before God. works of thine fulfilled 

y P 7 befor God. Remember 3 

3 Remember therefore how thou hast received | before my God. Remember 
and heard, and hold fast, and repent. If* therefore eres and didst hears 
thou shalt not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, | therefore thou shalt not 
and thou shalt not know what hour I will come ters Pe Rg oe gar: 

know what hour I will 
“pes thee. I . ° * I come upon thee. But thou 4 

4 Thou hast? a few names even in Sardis which hasta few names in Sardis 
have not® defiled their garments; and they shall a ee BOE ae ene 
walk with me* in white: for they are worthy. walk with me in white: for _ 

5 He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed | oyetcometh shall Hewett © 
7 7 ray eo s1]e 7a arrayed in white garments; 
in white raiment; and [ will not blot out his name ger Mae 
out of the book‘ of life, but% I will confess his his mame out of the book 

: @, Vv SS 
name before my Father, and before his angels. anaes before, ia 

6 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the berry: peer ce ae 
Spirit saith unto the churches. him hear what the Spirit 

r 9 od 5: Saltn to enurehes. 

7 And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia | “ana to ‘the angel of the 7 
write; These things saith he" that is holy,' he that erent Beet eiaeatpina 
is true, he that hath) the key of David;* he that jc nese things saith he that 

is holy, he that is true, he 

openeth, and no man shutteth;! and shutteth, and that hath the key of Da- 
‘ : F peneth, an 

no man openeth ; mone shall ates and ton 

8 I know thy works: behold, I have set before shutteth, and none open 
thee™ an open door, and no man can shut it: for (behold, i hace set betore 

i y r ee a door opened, whic 
thou hast a little strength, and hast kept my word, pov a 
and hast not denied my name. hast a little power, and 
a Luke 12:39. 6 Acts1:15. cJude23. d Rey. 7:9,13. e EX. 82:32; Psa. 69:28. / Phil. 4:3; Rey. 1:97. 


g Matt. 10:32. A Isa. 6:3; Acts 3; 14; Heb. 7:26. 


& Matt. 16:19. 7 Job 12:14. m2 Cor. 2:12. 


¢ John 14:6; 1 John 5:20. 7 Isa. 22:22; Luke 1:325 Rev. 1:18. 





dead,” has had its candlestick removed for many centuries. Hath the seven Spirits of God. See 
notes on 1: 4: also 1:16. The perfect number seven denotes fulness. He hath the fulness of the Spirit 
whom he sends into the earth to do his work. Thou hasta name, ete. Though nominally Christian 
and living the Christian life they were really Spiritually dead. 2. Be watchful. Be on the watch. 
Awake! Strengthen the things which remain. What graces and Christian life remain cherish and 
strengthen before they disappear entirely. I have not found thy works perfect. Complete, filled up 
to the standard God requires. 8. Remember. Remember the teaching formerly received, cling to ib, 
and repent of the falling away from it. I will come on thee as a thief. Suddenly; in a sudden judg- 
ment. 4, Butthou hastafew names. Though the church as a wholeis condemned, there were true 
saints who were commended. Names. Persons. Not defiled their garments. Not been defiled by 
sin. Shall walk with me in white. In the robes of purity and triumph. 5, Shall be clothed in 
white raiment. This is the usual promise to him who overcomes; he shall wear the white raiment of 
the redeemed; though the names of those who are spiritually dead shall be blotted out of the book of life 
his name shall not be; and he will be confessed before the Father, that is, acknowledged. Book of life? 
Compare 13: 8; 17: 8; 20: 12,15; 21: 27; Phil. 4: 3. The book of life means the roll of those who have- 
become heirs of immortality. Confess his name. Compare Matt. 10: 32, and Luke 12: 8. 

THE CHURCH AT PHILADELPHIA. 7-18. The church in Philadelphia. This city was in the 
interior, southeast of Sardis, and had never attained the eminence of most of the other seats of the Seven 
Churches. That the church itself was poor and wanting in worldly endowments seems to be indicated by 
verse 8. Yet this church and that of Smyrna alone escape censure. Philadelphia is yet a city of 18,000: 
inhabitants, though bearing a Turkish name, has five churches and a Christian population of about 3,000. 
He that hath the key of David. See notes on 1:18. The key of the kingdom of God as the Son of 
David. Hence he caly opens and shuts, or determines who shall enter in, or be shut out. 8. Ihave set. 
before thee an open door. Compare Acts 14: 27; 1 Cor. 16: 9; 2 Cor. 2: 12; Col. 14:3. The open door 


Ch. III.] REVELATION. 


9 Behold,* I will make them of the synagogue of 
Satan, which say they are Jews, and are not, but do 
lie; behold, I will make them to come and worship 
before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee. 

10 Because thou hast kept the word of my pa- 
tience,” I also will keep thee from the hour of 
temptation, which shall come upon all the world, 
to try them that dwell upon the earth. 

11 Behold, I come quickly: hold that fast which 
thou hast, that no man take thy crown. 

12 Him that overcometh will I make® a pillar in 
the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: 
and? I will write upon him the name of my God, 
and the name of the city of my God, which is new. 
Jerusalem,® which cometh down out of heaven 
from my God; and J will write upon him my new 
name. 

13 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the 
Spirit saith unto the churches. 

14 And unto the angel of the church of the 
Laodiceans write; These things saith the? Amen, 
the faithful and the true" Witness, the beginning of 
the creation of God; 


2 


a 


4 


| didst keep my word, and 
didst not deny my name. 
Behold, I give of the syna- 9 
gogue of Satan, of them 
which say they are Jews, 
and they are not, but do 
lie; behold, I will make 
them to come and worship 
before thy feet, and to 
know that I have loved 
thee. Because thou didst 10 
keep the word of my pa- 
tience, I also will keep 
thee from the hour of trial, 
that hour which is to come 
upon the whole world, to 
try them that dwell upon 
the earth. I come quickly: 
hold fast that which thou 
hast, that no one take thy 
crown. He that overcom- 
eth, L will make him a pil- 
lar in the temple of my 
God, and he shall go out 
thence no more: and [ will 
write upon him the name 
of my God, and the name 
of the city of my God, the 
new Jerusalem,which com- 
eth down out of heaven 
from my God, and mine 
own new name. He that 
hath an ear, let him hear 
what the Spirit saith to the 
churches. 

And to the angel of the 14 
church in Laodicea write; 

These things saith the 
Amen, the faithful and true 


5 


witness, the beginning of 
the creation of God: I 15 





15 I know thy works, that thou art neither cold 
nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot. 


d Rey. 14:1. e Gal. 4:26; Heb. 
h Isa. 55:43; 1 John 6:20. 








c Gal. 2:9. 12:22; Rey. 21. Rev. 22:4. 


g 2 Cor. 1:20. 


a@ Isa. 49:23; 60:14. 62 Pet. 2:9. 





means great opportunities; generally for preaching the gospel. It probably means here, a way opened to 
convert the Gentiles. Thou hast a little strength, and didst keep, etc. Though their strength was 
not great they had remained faithful in much opposition. Hast not denied myname. The Pagan 
authorities often tested Christians by commanding them to blaspheme the name of Christ under penalty of 
death. 9. I will make them of the synagogue of Satan. See notes on 2: 9. The bitter Jewish 
opposers are thus described. I will make them to come and worship before thy feet. Acknowl- 
edge that the Lord is with thee. It seems also to imply the conversion of these Jewish opposers. 10. 
Hast kept the word of my patience. Hast endured and kept my word. In the hour of tempta- 
tion. Of stern and cruel trial. Some great erisis of trial and sorrow which should come on all the world. 
We may not know just what our Lord referred to, but we can believe that he fulfilled his promise. The 
Lord’s coming is promised in 2: 25; in 3: 3, and here. In the first instance it is said he will ‘‘come;”’ in the 
second, ‘‘as a thief;” here, that he will come “quickly.” 11. That no man take thy crown. Not 
the crown of royalty (Diadema in the Greek) but the garland crown (Stephanos) given as areward. The 
crown of the saints is always the latter, a term which the Greeks did not apply to theroyalcrown. 12. I 
will make a pillar. A term implying strength, permanence and honor. Inthetemple. Not in any 
material temple, but in the church, either on earth or in heaven. The latter is here meant. The New 
Jerusalem has no temple in it because it is all temple. Gono more out. Always dwell there. I will 
write upon. When one enters the church, the spiritual temple below, three names are recorded in his 
baptismal formula. When he enters the kingdom above, three names are again written upon him; the 
name of God, of the heavenly city, and Christ’s heavenly name. 

Tun CHURCH AT LAODICEA. 14-22. The church in Laodicea. Laodicea was situated in the 
valley of the Lycus, near Colosse and Hierapolis. All three of these churches are named by Paul in the 
Colossian letter, and an epistle, now probably lost, was sent to Laodicea. The city of Laodicea was very 
proud of its wealth in the latter part of the first century, a fact we learn from profane history. The 
church was probably founded by Epaphras, a companion of Paul. The condemnation of the Lord in this 
epistle is severe, and its extinction is threatened. The site of the ancient city is uninhabited now, and of 
course the church has long since ceased to exist. Saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness. 


A426 REVELATION. 


(Ch. III. 








16 So then because thou art lukewarm, and 
neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my 
mouth. 

17 Because thou sayest,* I am rich, and increased 
with goods, and have need of nothing; and knowest 
not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, 
and blind, and naked: 

18 I counsel thee” to buy of me gold tried in the 
fire, that thou mayest be rich;° and white raiment, 
that thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of 
thy nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine eyes 
with eye-salve, that thou mayest see. 

19 As’ many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be 
zealous therefore, and repent. 

20 Behold,* I stand at the door, and knock: if? 
any man hear my voice, and open the door,? I will 
come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with 
me. 

21 To him that overcometh® will I grant to sit 
‘with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and 
am set down with my Father in his throne. 

22 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the 
Spirit saith unto the churches. 





know thy works, that thou 

art neither cold nor hot: L 

would thou wert cold or 

hot. So because thou art 16 
lukewarm, and neither hot 
nor cold, I will spew thee 
out of my mouth. Because 
thou sayest, I am rich, and 
have gotten riches, and 
have need of nothing; and 


17 


-knowest not that thou art 


the ‘wretched one and mis- 
erable and poor and blind 
and naked: L counsel thee 
to buy of me ea refined 
by fire, that thou mayest 
become rich; and_ white 
garments, that thou may- 
est clothe thyself, and that 
the shame of thy naked- 
ness be not made manifest ; 
and eyesalve to anoint 
thine eyes, that thou may- 
est see. AS many as I iove, 
I reprove and chasten: be 
zealous therefore, and re- 
pent. Behold, I stand at 20 
the door and knock: if any 
man hear my voice and 
open the door, I will come 
in to him, and will sup 
with him, and he with me. 
He that overcometh, I will 21 
give to him to sit down 
with me in my throne, as I 
also overcaine, and sat 
dc¢wn with my Father in 
his throne. He that hath 22 
en ear, let him hear what 
the Spirit saith to the 


19 


{ churches. 





1 Co 8. Osa. 55:1; Matt. 13:443 25:9. ¢2 Cor. 5:3. 
Song 


a Hos. 12:83 4: 
é :2;Isa.1:18. f Luke 12:37. g John 14:23. 


I. 
James 1:12. 5 


d Job 5:17; Prov. 3:11; Heb. 12:5,6; 
h Matt. 19:28; 1 Cor. 6:2; 2 Tim. 2:12; Rev. 2:26, 








° 

‘See notes on 1:5; also on 2 Cor.1: 20. The beginning of the creation. The Being from which the 
-ereation begins, the Word that made all things. 15. I know thy works. The same statement has 
been made of all the churches, but in all the others there has been something to praise. Thou art 
neither cold nor hot. Neither acting hostile to Christ, nor zealous for him. Christ would rather that 
men should be opposers than formal, apathetic professors. 16. So then because thou art lukewarm. 
This lukewarmness was most offensive, and hence the Lord declares that they shall be rejected like nau- 
-seous food. The figure indicates loathing. 17. Because thou sayest, I am rich. Worldly pros- 
perity had, probably, made the church indifferent. Knowest not that thou are wretched. Because 
rejected by the Lord. Poor. Destitute of the true riches. Blind. Blinded by the god of this world. 
18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold. ‘In Christ are all the treasures of wisdom” (Col. 2: 3). 
White raiment. That they may have the wedding garments (Matt. 22: 11-13). Anoint thine eyes 
with eye salve. The unction of the Holy Spirit (1 John 2:20). 19. AsmanyasI love, rebuke and 
chasten. See Heb. 12:5,16. 20. Behold, I stand at the doorand knock. The language implies 
that Christ isnear. If they will open the door by repentance he is ready to enter and bless. If any man 
hear my voice. Hearandobey. Then the Lord will enter and they shall partake together of the rich- 
ness of the feast. 21. Will I grant to sit with mein my throne. He shall reign with Christ; that 
is, as a coadjutor of Christ. As Ialso overcame. As the result of his overcoming ‘God exalted him to 
be a prince and a Savior,” and ‘“‘to sit at the right hand of the Majesty of the heavens.” As he was 
-exalted, so he will exalt all his brethren who win the victory over sin and temptation. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


THE FATE OF THE SEVEN CHURCHES.—In view of the promises and threats of the Savior to these 
‘Seven Churches a concise view of their subsequent history would be helpful. Two of the churches, 
Smyrna and Philadelphia, are praised without the slightest censure. Three, Ephesus, Sardis, and Lao- 
dicea, are severely blamed and threatened with extinction. Two more, Pergamos and Thyatira are both 
praised and blamed, and admonished to repent. The two first, Smyrna and Philadelphia, are now and have 
been since the first century, the seats of churches and of a large Christian population. Of Philadelphia the 


Cho IV} REVELATION. 427 





CHAPTER IV. 


The Open Door in Heaven. 


SuMMARY.—The Voice from Heaven. The Throne and He Who Sat on 
the Throne. The Twenty-four Elders. The Four Living Forms. Their 
Cry Nightand Day. The Doxology of the Twenty-four Elders. CHAPTER IY. 


1 After this I looked, and, behold, a door was| ard tenuis dot opened » 


' 7 ‘ . Qt 1 1 in heaven, and the first 
opened in heaven: and the first voice which I heard |”, Reaven, Pisard «voice 


was as it were of a trumpet talking with me; which as of a trumpet, speaking 
said, Come up hither, and I will shew thee things Wp uithes oma (M0 shee 


kee i 2 thee the things which must 
which must be hereafter. Cone io pues neveatier 











skeptical dibbon says: ‘‘ Philadelphia alone has been saved by prophecy or by courage. At a distance 
from the sea, forgotten by the emperors, encompassed on all sides by the Turks, her valiant citizens 
defended their religion and freedom alone for four score years, and then capitulated with the proudest of 
the Ottomans. Among the Greek colonies and churches of Asia Philadelphia is still erect —a column in 
a scene of ruins, a pleasing example that the paths of honor and safety may sometimes be the same.” — 
Decline and Fail of the Roman Empire, Chapter LXIV. The three churches so severely censured and 
threatened, Ephesus, Sardis and Laodicea, ceased to exist many centuries since, and even the cities have long 
- been uninhabited. The two remaining churches, Pergamos and Thyatira, were never entirely blotted out 
and a small Christian population is found in both places to this time. 

ALLEGED OPPOSITION TO PAUL.— Renan and some rationalistic critics of Germany have been deter- 
mined to see in Revelation a strong Judaizing spirit and a bitter opposition to Panl and his work among 
the Gentiles. Their interpretations illustrate how far astray a man may be led who has a theory to sus- 
tain. They insist that the Nicolaitanes, the followers of Balaam, “‘ that woman Jezebel,” and those ‘‘ who 
say they are Jews and are not,” are all adherents of Paul. These interpretations are so improbable that 
they cannot be even considered unless they have some historical basis. That is wanting. Had John been 
the extreme Judaizer supposed he never would have taken refuge among Gentile churches planted and 
trained by Paul. Had he sought to revolutionize them traces of his effort would have remained in the 
writings of the men who had seen, heard and been taught by John. Of this extreme aversion to Paul and 
his work, Polyearp, Papias and Ireneus knew nothing. It remained unknown to the whole world until 
discovered by certain modern rationalistic critics. On the other hand, there is not the slightest discord 
between the teaching of Paul in his epistles and the Book of Revelation. - 


CHAPTER IV. 


It is generally agreed that with this chapter the third section of Revelation begins. Chapters 4 and 5 
are preparatory visions. It is not until chapter 6 is reached that the future begins to be uncovered. In 
these chapters there is revealed through the open door of heaven the Almighty upon the throne in glory 
surrounded by adoring creatures. The symbolism declares that he holds in his hands the destinies of the 
world and the knowledge of the future. Then it is declared that to the Lion of the tribe of Judah it has 
been given to open the book of destiny and to reyeal the future. To the Son, who appears in a symbolic 
form, the book is given, amid the praises of Elders and living creatures. 

It is noteworthy that the two greatest prophets of the Old Testament, those who had the clearest visions 
-of the reign of Christ, were permitted to behold a similar scene as a preparation for their revelations, 
Ezekiel (Ezek. 1) and Isaiah (Isa. 6) are each allowed to behold the glory of God. <As the Old Testament 
prophets, when about to enter upon their work, were inaugurated to the office of making known the future 
by avision of the Almighty, so John, the New Testament prophet, the last prophet of the world, was per- 
mitted to have a similar vision. Though the visions differ, the most striking symbols are beheld by all 
three of the prophets. All see and describe the throne of God, with its sublime surroundings; all speak 
of the One who-sits on the throne, though they make no attempt to describe his person; all record his 
glory; Ezekiel beholds living creatures around the throne, full of eyes, with four wings and two hands; 
Tsaiah sees the seraphim with six wings who ery, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts. In John’s vision 
the four beasts are about the throne, full of eyes, with six wings who ery, Holy, holy, holy, the Lord God 
Almighty. In the case of all the prophets the vision of God is preparatory and indicates that he is about 
to impart the secrets of the future, hitherto held in his own bosom. . 

1-8. Afterthis. “After these things,” as in the Revision. After the letters to the churches had been 
dictated. “The things which shall be hereafter” are yet to be shown. I looked. Rather, “1 saw in 


428 REVELATION. [Ch.IV.. 


2 And immediately* I was in the Spirit: and, | Stiaightway tran there — 
behold,” a throne was set in heaven, and one sat on | was a throne set in heaven, 
and one sitting upon the 

the throne. throne; and he that sat 3 


3 And he that sat was to look upon like a jasper | 7a ooo Da sania: 


and a sardine stone:° and there was a rainbow round and there was a rainbow 

about the throne, in sight like unto an emerald. like! any emerald 46. lek 
4-And round about the throne. were four and | upom, And round apeu's 

twenty seats: and upon the seats I saw four and_| twenty thrones: and upon 

‘age a] e : heats the thrones Z saw four and 

twenty elders sitting, clothed in white raiment; and twenty elders sitting, ar- 

they had on their heads crowns of gold. pec ied ciate bee 
5 And out of the throne proceeded lightnings, | of gold. And out of the 5 

. ° a 4 = throne proceed lightnings 

and thunderings, and voices: and there were seven | ana voices and thunders, 

lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are Sue eae 
the seven Spirits of God. throne, eae Largan : 

re ‘ en Spirits of God; and be- 

6 And before the throne ¢here was a® sea of glass, | fore the throne. a8 it were 

7 a a fq ida > a glassy sea like unto crys- 

like unto crystal: and* in the midst of the throne, oe ee 

and round about the throne, were four beasts full of | the “throne, and round 


: about the throne, four liv- 
eyes before and behind. ing creatures full of eyes 


' 7 And? the first beast was like a lion, and the|betore and behind. And7 
‘ : the first creature was like 
second beast like a calf, and the third beast had ala lion, and the second 
3 s reature x é 
face as a man, and the fourth beast was like a flying | the thira croarane Rane 
eagle Z face as of a man, and the 
See fourth creature was like a 


a@Rey. 1:10. bisa. 6:1; Jer. 17:2; Ezek. 10:1; Dan. 7:9. ¢ Ezek. 1:28. d Ex. 37:23: 2 Chron. 4:20; Ezek. 4:13; 
Zech. 4:2, ¢ Ex. 38:8. fEzek.1:5. g Num. 2:2; Ezek. 0:14. 

















vision.” A door was opened in heaven. Heaven standing open so that the throne within could be 
seen. The first voice which I heard. The same voice that he had heard at first. See 1: 10. Come: 
up hither. Through the opened door. The things which must come to pass hereafter. Hence, 
we know that what John sees in the vision just opening belongs to events still future when he wrote. 
2. Iwasinthe spirit. At once he was lifted to that spiritual exaltation which enabled him to behold 
the heavenly visions. A throne. The throne of God was revealed and One sat on the throne. 8. He 
that sat was to look upon like a jasper stoneand asardius. We learn from 21: 11 the qualities of 
the jasper meant; a stone of dazzling brilliancy, a mountain of light, clear as crystal. The two probably 
symbolize the splendor, holiness and judgments of God. Rainbow round about the throne. The 
rainbow was a pledge of God’s faithfulness to his covenants (Gen. 9: 13). God sits upon the throne, 
splendid, dazzling, terrible, but compassed about by the Covenant of Grace. 

4-6. Round about the throne were four and twenty seats. Rather “thrones.” The central 
throne was encompassed by twenty-four lesser thrones. Four and twenty elders sitting. These 
ancients were (1) twenty-four in number; (2) they were clothed in white, the color of victory and purity ; 
(8) on their heads were golden crowns, not the diadem which means a kingly crown, but the golden erown 
of honor (Stephanos). Critics are not agreed as to the signification of these elders, but most of them think 
that they symbolize the glorified church of God gathered around the throne. They disagree as to the sig- 
nificance of the number twenty-four. There were twenty-four courses of priests. There were twelve 
tribes, and twelveapostles. Possibly the number of the latter was doubled to symbolize the entire church, 
Jew and Gentile. In a note below I will give my own view of the Twenty-four Elders. 5. Lightnings 
and voices and thunders. These seem to portray the threatenings and judgments which proceed from 
the throne. Seven lamps of fire. These bright light-giving lamps symbolize the Holy Spirit in the 
fulness of its manifestation, indicated by the seven Spirits of God. See note on1:4. 6. A sea of 
glass like unto crystal. This deep, transparent sea before the throne is supposed to symbolize the 
purity and calmness of the Divine rule. It stands solid, calm and clear. In the midst of the throne. 
The four forms which are next deseribed were to the right and left of the throne and in the midst between_ 
these extremes. The throne was intheir midst. Fourliving creatures. See Revision. Four “beasts,” 
as in Common Version, is an incorrect idea. The Greek for “beasts” is different. They are four Zoa, 
“liying forms.” Full of eyes. Their eyes looked backward as well as forward. The description of 
these wonderful objects is next given. See notes at end of chapter. 

7-8. The first creature was like a lion. It looked like a lion, but was notalion. It had other 


Ch. IV.] REVELATION. 429 


8 And the four beasts had each of them six | fiyingeagle. And the four 8 
we eh ° . . x ures, Navin 
wings about him; and they were full of eyes within: | each one of them” six 


and they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, | oes? appt ina ates 


holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is at PoE ah er tag es 
to come. holy, holy is the Lord God; 


9 And when those beasts give glory, and honour | MO Aypntys nen was 


and thanks to him that sat on the throne, who liv-|t® come. And when the 9 
living creatures shall give 


eth for ever and ever, glory and honour and 


10-The four and twenty elders fall down before | Othe throne, to him that 


him that sat on the throne, and worship him that liveth for ever and ever, 
the tour and twenty elders 10 


liveth for ever and ever, and cast their crowns | shall fall down before him 


A G that sitteth on the throne, 
before the throne, saying, and shall worship him that 


11 Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, | liveth for ever and ever,and 
shall cast their crowns be- 

and honour, and power: for thou hast created all fore the throne, saying, 11 
] a orthy art thou, our Lor 
eusy ons and for thy pleasure they are and were and our God, to receive the 
Pp % glory and the honour an 
Seer the power: for thou didst 
ereate all things, and be- 





cause of thy will they were, 
and were created. 








alsa. 6:2. 








characteristics. Like acalf. Had a body similar to that of the ox. Had the face of aman. Other- 
wise its structure differed from that of men. Like a fiying eagle. It will be seen that four depart- 
ments of animated nature are represented. That of the wild beasts of prey; that of domestic animals; 
the human species, and the fowls of the air. Each is represented by what, in the eyes of a Hebrew, would 
be regarded as its highest type. 8. The four living creatures. Their common characteristics are 
now pointed out. All have six wings each; they are all full of eyes, and they all unite in a ceaseless cry 
of praise to God. Full of eyes within. They were full of eyes before and behind, and when the wings 
were lifted John saw that they were full of eyes within also. The eyes, sleepless, possibly symbolize never 
resting, wakeful activity. They have norest. They never rest from praising the Lord. 

9-11. And when the living creatures shall give glory and honor and thanks to him that 
sitteth on the throne. Shall utter such praises as are given in verse 8. Then the twenty-four elders also 
join in swelling the anthems. It will be noted that these two classes, whatever they signify, are both about 
the throne, and both engaged in harmonious praise of the Almighty. 10. Cast their crowns before 
thethrone. There are four elements in this worship: (1) They fall down; (2) they adore; (3) they cast 
their crowns before the throne, an act of homage which gives Him who sitteth there all the glory of their 
crowns; (4) they offer ascriptions of praise. 11. Worthy art thou, etc. The chorus in which they 
join ascribes all glory to God as his right as the Creator. Because of thy willthey were. Notasin 
the Common Version. They do not say that God created all things “for his pleasure” but that his will 


was the efficient cause. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


The meaning of the Twenty-four Elders and the Four Living Creatures has been the subject of much dis- 
cussion. It has been held by many discreet commentators that the first symbolizes the Redeemed Church, 
* and the latter the Animated Creation, joined around the throne in the praises of the Almighty. It is 
always with hesitation and a degree of pain that I differ from those whose opinions I have studied with 
profit, but I am compelled to think that none of the explanations are entirely adequate. I give below my 
reasons, and what I think the correct view: 

Tur Four Livind CREATURES.— What is symbolized by these forms? If the reader will turn to 
Ezek. 1, he will find that the exiled prophet of the old dispensation saw by the river Chebar of Babylon, the 
same beings that John described in this chapter. While there are minor differences, the general features 
are the same. Each prophet, John and Ezekiel, sees (1) four living creatures; both see (2) four faces, like 
those of a man, a lion, an ox or ealf, and a flying eagle; (3) the living creatures of each prophet are full of 
eyes; (4) ineach case they are winged. There is one minor difference in the wings: John sees six wings, 
while Ezekiel mentions four wings and a pair of hands under the wings, making the six members. The 
-seraphim of Isaiah, chapter 6, had six wings. The similar appearance, and the fact that the same Greek 


430 REVELATION. PGh, FV. 





term is used to represent them, proves beyond doubt that the “four beasts’ of John are the “ four living 
creatures” of Ezekiel. If we therefore can ascertain the significance of the symbols beheld by the Old 
Testament prophets, we will be able to ascertain what the same symbols mean in Revelation. We are not 
left in doubt about the identity of the beings described by them. In the tenth chapter Ezekiel describes 
certain beings that he beheld the second time; and in verse 22 he says: “And the likeness of their faces. 
was the same faces which I saw by the river Chebar, their appearances and themselves.” He also says in 
verse 13, that these are the “living creatures I saw by the river Chebar.” Again, in verse 20 he affirms the 
same thing, and says: “I knew they were cherubim.” Isaiah, on the other hand, declares that the figures he 
saw were seraphim. 

Here, then, is solid ground. The four living creatures, or “ beasts,” of John are not the four elements, 
four quarters of the earth, four continents, or four evangelists, but are cherubim or seraphim. The forms 
seen by these prophets are probably symbolical of their nature and work. The information given in the 
Scriptures is scanty, but they are always represented as being very near the throne of God. When man 
sinned, it was cherubim who guarded the way to the tree of life. In the tabernacle cherubim hovered over 
the mercy seat and were figured upon the curtains. The Almighty is addressed elsewhere as the One who. 
dwells between the cherubim. The brightness of the glory of the Lord is represented as attending them 
in Ezekiel; and in the vision of John they are “‘in the midst of and around the throne.” In the fifth chap- 
ter the Lamb stands “‘in the midst of the throne and of the four beasts.” In some way the cherubim are 
immediately about the throne of God. : 

The forms seen by Isaiah, Ezekiel and John have a symbolical significance. These angelic intelligences 
represent the courage of the lion, the patient strength of the ox, the intellect of the man, and the swift- 
ness of the eagle. They are full of eyes, or see all things; their wings are always in motion, or they are 
distinguished by tireless activity, and they continually ery, ‘‘ Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty ;’? or, 
without ceasing they minister to the glory of God. Thus much ean be said concerning the ‘‘ four beasts,” 
or “living creatures,” or “cherubim,” without indulging in speculation. Cherubim are present at the fall 
of man; cherubim also celebrate his redemption and.the triumph of the reign of Christ. Whether they 
also symbolize four forms of earthly creation is a matter left to conjecture. 

THE FOUR AND TWENTY ELDERS.—What has been said will aid us to determine the meaning of 
these heavenly elders. It has been usually held that they were men, representative of the redeemed. The 
number has been troublesome, but they have been supposed to represent the twelve apostles and twelve 
patriarchs. I think that a careful examination of all the passages in which they occur will show that 
they are of kindred character to the cherubim (the four beasts) and to the angels. 1. They are about the. 
throne.—(4: 4.) 2. When the cherubim give glory to God, they also worship.—(4: 10.) 38. Together they 
sing the new song.—(5:9.)* 4. When the angels honour the Lamb, these unite in saying, Amen.— (5: 14.) 
5. When the innumerable multitude of redéemed, clothed in white robes, praise God for salvation, the 
angels and elders, and four beasts are not with these redeemed ones, but about the throne, and join 
together in a separate ascription of praise from that offered by men—(7; 9-12.) 6. One of the elders 
informs John concerning those arrayed in white robes, and it is evident that he does not belong to their 
number.—(7: 13.) 7. When the final triumph comes, and the seventh trumpet angel proclaims that “the 
kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ,” the four and twenty elders. 
who were sitting on their seats before the throne fell upon their faces and gave thanks to God.—(11: 17.) 
8. In chapter 14, the Lamb has one hundred and forty and four thousand saints about him, who sing a. 
new song “before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders.” From all these passages, it will 
be seen that the elders are grouped, not with the martyrs, or redeemed, or the one hundred and forty 
and four thousand; not with saved men, but with the angels and the cherubim about the throne of God. 
This distinction marks their character. They belong to the heavenly intelligences; to the same class as. 
the cherubim and angels. They are princes of heaven. They are twenty-four in nnmber. This number 
is probably associated with the twenty-four courses of priests engaged in the service of the temple, the 
institutions of which were “patterns of things in the heavens.” They are of the retinue that surround the, 
throne and serve in the presence of God, and they constantly join in the adoration of the angelic hosts, 
and are incessantly employed in carrying out God’s plans for the salvation of the world. 


* See the New Song in the Revised Version. The New Song praises the Lamb for redeeming men and 
making them a kingdom and priests, but the Four Living Creatures and the Twenty-four Elders neither: 
here nor elsewhere offer praises for their own redemption. They do not belong to the redeemed. 


Ch. V.| REVELATION, 





CHAPTER V. 


The Book With Seven Seals. 


SuMMARY.—The Book in the Hand of God. John’s Grief Because No One 
Can Open It. The Assurance of the Elder. The Lamb that Had Been 
Slain. The New Song. The Grand Chorus of Angels, Elders and Liy- 
ing Creatures. 


1 And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on 
the throne* a book written within, and on the back- 
side, sealed with” seven seals. 

2 And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a 
loud voice, Who is worthy to open the book, and to 
loose the seals thereof? 

3 And‘ no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither 
under the earth, was able to open the book, neither 
to look thereon. 

4 And I wept much, because no man was found 
worthy to open and to read the book, neither to 
look thereon. 


431. 


CHAPTER V. 


And I saw in the right 1. 
hand of him that sat on 
the throne a book written 
Within and on the back, 
close sealed with seven 
seals. And Isaw a strong 2 
angel proclaiming with a 
great voice, Who is worthy 
to open the book, and to 
loose the seals thereof? 
And no one in the heaven, 3 
or on the earth, or under 
the earth, was able to open, 
the book, or to look there- 
on. And I wept much, be- 4 
cause no one was found 
worthy to open the book, 
or to look thereon: anc one 
of the elders saith unto me, 5 


5 And one of the elders saith unto me, Weep 
not: behold,? the Lion of the tribe of Juda,* the 
Root of David, hath‘ prevailed to open the book, 
and to loose the seven seals thereof. 


Weep not: behold, the Lion 
that is of the tribe of Ju- 
dah, the Root of David, 
hath overcome, to open the 
book and the seven seals 











a@Ezek.2:9. bisa. 29:11; Dan. 12:4. cJohn1:18. d Gen. 49:9,10; Heb. 7:14. eIsa.11; Rom. 5:12; Rey. 22:16. 


f Heb. 2:10; 7:25 








1,2. And Isaw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a book. The book is in the 
right hand of God. It is not a printed book, such as we have on our shelves. There were no printed books 
then in existence. It is a manuscript, written upon both sides, and rolled together in the form of a scroll, 
and sealed with seven seals. We learn, from what is recorded in the next chapter, that these seals were: 
so arranged that when they were loosed in succession each one permitted a part of the book to be read. 
Possibly there were seven leaves to the book, since as each seal was loosed, a leaf of the book was 
revealed. The parchment was written on each side; the book was full, complete, nothing more to be: 
added to what it contained. This sealed book is the book of the future, sealed to human vision, unknown 
even to the angels of heaven, and containing the record of “what shall be hereafter,” to the end of time. 

8. Andno one inthe heaven, orontheearth . . . was able to open the book. Noone 
(the word man does not occur in the Greek) was found able to open the book, for no one can penetrate the 
future. It is held in the strong right hand of Him who sits on the throne, the omnipotent disposer of the 
future, who controls the destiny of churches, men and nations. The sweep of the panorama, that has 
pictured forth upon its canvas the destiny of the Church and the world, cannot begin until the seals of 
this book are opened. Had no one been found able to open the seals, the closing book of the Bible would. 
never have been written. , 

4,5. And I wept much, because, etc. The exiled apostle is filled with anxiety to penetrate the 
secrets of futurity, and to know the fortunes of that Church which he loved better than he loved his own 
life. He was then a prisoner on a rocky isle of the sea. It wasa time of persecution. He was separated 
from the saints, and ardently desires to know the results, in the future, of all the struggles, sufferings and 
plood of a persecuted people. 5. One of the elders saith unto me, Weep not. It is one of the 
twenty-four elders that assures him that the book will be opened ; and let it be distinctly noted that such 
a duty as instructing a prophet in heavenly things was never laid upon a human being under either cove- 
nant. Such duties mark the elders as belonging to the angelic realm. The Lion of the tribe of Judah. 
«Judah is alion’s whelp” (Gen. 49: 9); see also Isa. 11; 1, 10. Jesus was of the tribe of Judah, the root of 


David, or descended from David. 


A32 REVELATION. 


6 And I beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the 
throne and of the four beasts, and in the midst of 
the elders, stood a* Lamb, as it had been slain, 
having seven horns and seven” eyes, which are® the 
seven Spirits of God sent forth into all the earth. 

7 And he came and took the book out of the 
right hand of him that sat upon the throne. 

8 And when he had taken the book, the four 
beasts and four and twenty elders fell down before 
the Lamb, having every one of? them harps, and 
golden vials full of odours,® which are the prayers 
of saints. 

9 And‘ they sung a new song, saying,® Thou art 
‘worthy to take the book, and to open the seals 
thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast® redeemed us 
to God by thy blood! out of every kindred, and 
tongue, and people, and nation; 

10 Andi hast made us unto our God kings and 





[Ch. V. 


thereof. And I saw in the 6 
midst of the throne and of 
the four living creatures, 
and in the midst of the 
elders, a Lamb standing, 
as though it had been 
slain, having seven horns, 
and seven eyes, which are 
the seven Spirits of God, 
sent forth into all the 
earth. And he came, and 7 
he taketh it out of the 
right hand of him that sat 





on the throne. And when 8 


he had taken the book, the 
four living creatures and 
the four and twenty elders 
fell down before the Lamb, 
having each one a harp, 
and golden bowls full of 
incense, which are the 
prayers of the saints. And 
they sing a new song, say- 
ing, Worthy art thou to 
take the book, and to open 
the seals thereof: for thou 
wast slain, and didst pur- 
chase unto God with thy 
blood men of every tribe, 


and tongue, and people, 
and nation, and madest 10 
them go de unto our Goda 
kingdom and priests, and 
they reign upon the earth. 
And I saw, and I heard a 11 
voice of many angels round 
about the throne and the 
living creatures and the 
elders; and the number of 


priests: and we shall reign on the earth. 

11 And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many 
angels round about the throne, and the beasts, and 
the elders: and the number of them was* ten 
thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of 
thousands; : 





aIsa. 58:7; John 1:29; 1 Pet. 1:19; Rev. 13:8. 6 Zech.3:9; 4:10. cRev.4:5. d Rev, 14:25 15:2. e Psa. 141:25 
Rev, 8:3,4. fPsa. 40:38; Rey.14:3; 15:3. gRev.4:11. AHeb. 9:12; 2Pet.2:1; LJohnl:7. ¢Dan.4:13 6:25. 
j Bx. 19:36. &£ Psa.68:173 Dan. 7:10; Heb. 12:22. 





8, '7. When John looked to behold the Lion of Judah, the root of David, who should open the book, he 
beheld the only being in the universe who could take it from the hand of God. There is none other to 
whom the future is revealed. He only, to whom all power in heaven and earth has been given, can control 
the events of earth. He only can hold in his hand the book of destiny, open its leaves, and reveal its 
recordto men. John looked to see this mighty one who was deemed worthy to exercise the prerogative 
of God. But he appears in symbolic form, as a Lamb, the Lamb of God slain for sins; a sacrificial Lamb 
bearing wounds, the marks of having been slain. The Lion had become a Lamb. The Lamb became a 
Lion, a conqueror, and “‘prevailed,” so as to be able to hold and open the book, or to hold the reins of all 
power, by submitting unto death. Seven horns, and seven eyes. This symbolic Lamb has seven 
horns, the perfect number joined to the well-known symbol of power; the seven horns denoting omnipo- 
tence; also seven eyes, defined by John to symbolize the omniscience of him who hath the Spirit without 
measure. See note on “the seven Spirits of God” in 1: 4. 

8. Whenhetookthe book. The deliverance to him of the book was a signal for the four living 
creatures and the elders to fall before the Lamb, as they had fallen before the throne. They recognize in 
the fact that he has the book “‘that all power in heaven and earth is given into his hands.” Hence, they 
offer him homage as Divine. Having every one of them harps. For praise. The grammatical 
construction seems to include both living creatures and elders. Golden vials full of odors. These 
symbolize the prayers of the saints. The imagery represents these heayenly assistants presenting these 
in heaven in behalf of the saints on earth. The comforting thought is that these prayers are not lost, 
but are presented at the throne of God and before the Lamb. : 

9-14. They sung a new song. To the music of their harps. A song that could not be sung until 
the Lamb had taken the book. Didst purchase unto God with thy blood men of every tribe, etc. 
See the Revised Version. The Common Version is incorrect, as is now admitted by all scholars. The 
song does not sing: of what Christ has done for those who are singing, but of what he has done for men. 
The singers are not of those redeemed. 10. Hast made them. Not “us,” as in Common Version. 
Kings and priests. A kingdom and priests. See noteon1:6. And they (not we) shall reign on 

~the earth. As coadjutors of Christ. See noteon2:10. 11. And I beheld . . . many angels. 


aon. Vig REVELATION. 


12 Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb 
that was slain to receive power, and riches, and 
wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and 
blessing. 

13 And* every creature which is in heaven, and 
on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are 
in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, 
Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, de unto 
him that sitteth upon the throne,° and unto the 
Lamb, for ever and ever. 

14 And the four beasts said, Amen. And the 
four and twenty elders fell down and worshipped 
him that liveth for ever and ever. 








CHAPTER VI. 


The Opening of the Seals. 


SSUMMARY.—The Warrior on the White Horse. The Warrior with the 
Great Sword. The Black Horse and He that Had the Balances. The 
Pale Horse, Death and Hades. The Fifth Seal, the Seal of Persecu- 
tion. The Sixth Seal Opened. A Period of Judgment. 

1 And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the 

‘seals; and I heard, as it were the noise of thunder, 

-one of the four beasts saying, Come and see. 


ures said, Amen. 





433 


them was ten thousand . 
times ten thousand, and 
thousands of thousands; 
saying with a great voice, 
Worthy is the Lamb that 
hath been slain to receive 
the power, and riches, and 
wisdom, and might, and 
honour, and glory, and 
blessing. And every ere- 13 
ated thing which is in the 
heaven, and on the earth, 
and under the earth, and 
on the sea, and all things 
that are in them, heard I 
saying, Unto him that sit- 
teth on the throne, and 
unto the Lamb, be the 
blessing, and the honour, 
and the glory, and the do- 
minion, for ever and ever. 
And the four living creat- 
And the 
elders fell down and wor- 
shipped. 


12 


CHAPTER VI. 


And I saw when thel 
Lamb opened one of the 
seyen seals, and I heard 
one of the four living 
creatures saying as witha 
voice of thunder, Come. 








@ Phil. 2:10. OEph. 3:21. cJohn 5:28. 





“The countless multitude of angels also unite in the praises of the Lamb. 18. And every creature. 
All animated creation gives glory to the Lamb. 14. And the four living creatures said, Amen. 
They, then, though they may be in sympathy with, are different from the animated creation. Four orders 

_join in these honors to the Lamb: (1) The Living Creatures; the Cherubim; (2) the Twenty-four Elders; 
(8) the Angels; (4) all Animate Creation. 


ADDITIONAL NOTE. 


THE DoxoLoGiEes.—The action of this chapter is wonderfully dramatic. The Being upon the throne 
with the sealed book in his right hand; the proclamation of the strong angel calling for some one who 
was worthy to open the book; the declaration that no created being of the universe could open it; the 
apostle Weeping, in his anxiety to know concerning the future, and from disappointment that no one 
-eould open the book; the assurance of the elder that the Lion of the tribe of Judah had prevailed to 
open it; the appearance of the slain Lamb who prevails as the Lion, and his taking the book out of the 
right hand of God, are all calculated to fix the attention with breathless interest, and to strike the imag- 
ination with startling power. And the picture grows still grander as the heavenly tenants sing their 

'doxologies in praise of the victory of the Lamb. First, the four living creatures and the elders sing a 
‘new song; then a countless number of angels, about the throne, the living creatures and the elders 
join in the chorus. These praises ring through the heavens, and the reverberations reach from heaven 
to earth, and every creature “in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the 
sea” join in the ascription of praise to the Lamb. To these praises the cherubim respond, Amen! and 
the elders fall down and worship Him that liveth forever and ever. 


CHAPTER VI. 


The wonderful scene in heaven when the Sealed Book is given to the Lamb, pictured in the last chapter, 
shows the transcendent importance of the Sealed Book itself, of the act of placing it in the hands of the 
Lamb of God, and of the events which will be unfolded as its pages are opened. These seals are opened 
in succession and with the opening of each seal John sees and records an impressive vision. No system 

«of interpretation which does not make these represent events which follow each other in time is reasona- 


(28) 


434 REVELATION. (Ch. VI. 


a z nates b And I saw, and behold, a 2 
2 And I saw, and behold,? a white horse: and” he | itte horse, and he that 


that sat on him had a bow;° and a crown was given spline en hada bow; and 
. * ner 1V' unto him 
unto him: and he went forth conquering, and to|a crown: Ea hea 
5 forth conquering, and to 
conquer. conquer. 








a Zech. 6:3; Rev.19:11. 6 Psa. 45: 45; LU XX. c Rey. 14:14. 





ple. The vision following the opening of the first seal must portray a period or events nearest to the times: 
of John, while the seventh seal must relate to the remotest events, and when the last symbol that it con- 
tains is reached we must have been carried to the end of time and to the consummation of the history of 
the church and of the fate of the world. As each geal is opened a symbol is seen which is designed to: 
outline the character of a new epoch. 


THE FIRST SEAL. 


1,2. And Isaw when the Lamb opened one of the seals. The statement “I saw” means that 
when the Lamb opened one of the seals John saw the vision which is described in what follows. As it 
were the noise of thunder. A deep, impressive, awe-inspiring sound. Come and see. Attend. 
closely to the vision. 2. And I saw, and pehold a white horse. Let the reader note particularly 
what John saw, and then remember that it is symbolieal, and that instead of looking for a literal fulfill- 
ment, we are to ask the meaning of the symbols. There are several features of the vision that fix our 
attention: 1. The horse. 2. His white color. 3. The armed warrior. 4. His crown. 5. His bow. 6. His. 
mission. Itis certain that none of these features would have been named if they did not possess a signfi- 
cance. What do each of these symbols mean? I will consider them in order: (1) The horse. He was 
never used by the Jews or Orientals as a beast of burden. The ox and the ass were devoted to that office, 
and the horse was reserved for war. Whenever the horse is mentioned by the prophets it will be found in. 
connection with war-like employments. That the horse is always associated with war can be seen by con- 
sulting Job 29: 25; Ps. 76: 6; Prov. 21: 31; Jer. 8:6; Ezek. 26: 10. Hence this symbol points to a period of 
war, though it alone does not declare whether the conflict is carnal or spiritual, is triumphant or disas- 
trous. (2) The white color. As there are three more horses in succession under the three following 
seals, each of different colors, the color must have a meaning. White must have a different significance 
from red, or black, or pale. What is indicated by the color of the first horse? White is the color of pros- 
perity, of happiness, and of triumph. Whenever a Roman General was given a triumph his chariot was 
was drawn by milk white horses. In Rey. chapter 19, the Mighty Conqueror who wears many crowns is. 
seen riding on a white horse. Commentators are agreed that the white horse signifies prosperous, victori- 
ous wars. (3) The rider. His significance is due to his arms, his crown, and the white horse he rides. 
It is enough to state here that he represents either some conqueror, or a conquering age. (4) The crown. 
“Phere was a crown given to him.” This crown is not “the diadem’”’ (diadema) but the ‘* garland crown ’’ 
(stephanos). The last was the crown given as a reward for victory in battle, for great achievements, or for 
victory in the games. The Hero of chapter 19 wears many diadems, kingly crowns, but this rider wears. 
the garland crown, the stephanos. It is important to note this distinction, (5) The bow. He is armed 
with a usual weapon of war in that age. The bow may simply signify that the rider is a great, warlike 
figure, or there may be a special significance in the fact that he is armed with a bow instead of a sword or 
spear. 

Tur MEANING OF THE First SEAL.—In ascertaining the meaning of a series of prophetic symbols, 
portraying events which follow successively, it is of great importance to interpret the first aright. A 
wrong start will lead astray along the whole line of interpretation. Before giving my own views I will 
indicate briefly those of leading commentaries concerning the significance of the White Horse and His: 
Rider. “A symbol of Christ’s victorious power.”—Godet. “A symbol of the conquering Gospel.”— Alford. 
“The Rider is Christ.”’—Archdeacon Lee in Speaker’s Commentary. “It is our Lord riding prosperously.”— 
Dr. Wm. Milligan of Aberdeen. ‘Christ going forth to judgment.” — Hengstenberg. ‘The Rider is. 
Christ.”—Lange. “The Roman Empire. The Persian Empire was symbolized by a ram (Dan. 8: 3); the: 
Macedonian Empire by a goat (Dan. 8: 5), and here the Roman Empire by a white horse and his rider.” — 
Elliott. “The prosperous period of the Roman Empire extending from the Emperor Nerva to the end of 
the Antonines.’’— Barnes. 

The preponderance of interpretation is in favor of the view that the symbol signifies the conquests of . 
Christ, either in person or through the gospel. It is with some hesitation that I dissent from the view 
that spiritual conflicts and victories are signified. (1) Four horses in succession follow. The latter three- 
cannot refer to spiritual changes. If the first horseman represents a spiritual power the others cannot 
represent carnal powers. If they refer to events in the secular world, the meaning of the first must also: 
be sought there. (2) It has been urged that the Rider upon the white horse in chapter 19 is the same as: 


Cho VE} REVELATION. 435 


2 : ¢ And when he opened the 3 
3 And when he had opened the second seal, I id a ee 


heard the second beast say, Come and see. second living creature say- 














that of the first seal. There is nothing common but the white horse. The Rider of chapter 19 is clothed, 
armed and crowned differently. He wears garments sprinkled with blood, has upon his head many 
diadems (kingly crowns) and out of his mouth proceeds the sword of the Word of God. This warrior 
holds a bow and wears a garland instead of a diadem. (3) Christ appears often in Revelation, and there is 
always something symbolical about the manner in which he is represented. In the fifth chapter he 
appears under the symbol of a Lamb; and again, in chapter 14, it is the Lamb who stands on Mt. Zion. 
In the fourteenth verse of the same chapter one “like the Son of Man” is seen upon a white cloud, with 
a sharp sickle in his hand, to indicate that the harvest time has come, when the earth shall be reaped. 
In chapter 1, the Son of Man is seen, radiant as the sun, with a two-edged sword proceeding out of his 
mouth. In chapter 19 one sat upon a white horse, who was called Faithful and True, wearing upon his 
head many crowns, clothed in a vesture sprinkled with blood, and out of his mouth proceeded a sharp 
sword, emblematic of the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God. The sword is constantly used 
as a symbol of the Word, which is Christ’s instrumentality for reducing the world to his sway. The 
conquering Savior is constantly pictured forth with the sword proceeding out of his mouth, but never 
appears with a bow. 

For these reasons I accept, in part at least, the view of Elliott and Barnes, and believe that a series of 
events afiecting the fortunes of the church but immediately connected with the vast empire which 
embraced the whole church within its boundaries is signified. The first four seals, all kindred in their 
imagery, can only be satisfactorily explained by referring them to events in the history of that empire. The 
Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, by the skeptical Gibbon, is the best commentary on the seals. Nor de 
I think that the Horsemen are to be sought in individuals, but are representatives of great epochs. The 
First Seal must refer to some period of prosperity and triumphant war closely following John’s exile to Patmos. 
As it has an earthly signification, it is probable that we must look for an epoch in the history of the 
Roman Empire, beginning near the opening of the second century. An age which meets every character- 
istic wonderfully is the age of prosperity and conquest beginning with the reign of Nerva, embracing 
that of Trajan, Adrian, and the two Antonines. This glorious period has been called THE AGE OF THE 
ANTONTNES. John was an exile on Patmos in the last year of the reign of Domitian, A. D. 96. In that 
year the tyrant was slain. The humane Nerva succeeded him upon the Roman throne. With his reign 
begins a new epoch, at once the most brilliant and the most prosperous in Roman history. He was the 
founder of a new family of Czsars. He adopted as his son and successor, the war-like Trajan. His 
incessant wars were uniformly triumphant, and during his reign the Roman Empire reached its greatest 
dimensions. Vast as were the limits of the empire under Julius and Augustus Cesar, the empire ruled 
by Trajan was much more vast. In order to show that it was an age of conquest I quote Gibbon, vol. 
1,page 7. “The degenerate Parthians, broken by intestine discord, fled before his arms. He descended 
the river Tigris in triumph, from the mountains of Armenia to the Persian Gulf. He enjoyed the honor 
of being the first, as he was the last, of the Roman generals who ever navigated that remote sea. His 
fleets ravaged the coasts of Arabia; and Trajan vainly flattered himself that he was approaching the 
confines of India. Every day the astonished senate received the intelligence of new names and new 
nations that acknowledged his sway. They were informed that the kings of Bosphorus, Oolchos, Iberia, 
Albania, Osrhoene, and even the Parthian monarch himself had accepted their diadems from the hands 
of the Emperor, ete.” This age of conquest, when the Empire reached its greatest limits both in Asia 
and Europe, was also an age of prosperity. Gibbon (Vol. I., page 95) declares that “If a man was called 
upon to fix the period in the history of the world, during which the condition of the human race was most 
prosperous and happy, he would without hesitation name that which elapsed from the death of Domitian 
to the accession of Commodus.”’ 

We have found that the symbols are strikingly fulfilled in the epoch of Roman history, known as the 
age of Trajan, or of the Antonines, beginning with the reign of Nerva. 1. It began immediately after 
John wrote. 2. It was a period of prosperity. 3. It was the period of the mightiest extent of Roman 
power. 4. It furnished one of the mightiest conquerors of the Roman name. 5. He was entitled to wear 
the garland crown of victory. 6. This fulfillment is within the scope of prophecy, which embraces the 
Roman Empire. 7. I might add also that the bow itself may have a special significance. Before this age 
the emperors were all of Roman stock, and until the death of Nero were of the line of Julius Ozsar. 
Nerva, the founder of a new line of six Cesars, was of Greek descent, and is said to have been of Cretan 
stock. The Cretans were a race of bowmen, the most famous of the ancient world. Some have seen this 


fact pointed out in the bow. THE SECOND SEAL. 


3,4. And there went out another horse that wasred. The second living creature said, Come 


436 REVELATION. [Ch VI. 





a 2 + , "3 ing, Come. And another 4 
4 And® there went out another horse that was Ang, Pome, eo a Pod 


red; and power was given to him that sat thereon to horse: and to him ‘that sat 
a i ven 
take peace from the earth, and that they should Like pene ods cunline care | 


kill one another: and there was given unto him a/|n¢ that they should Slay 
great sword. was given unto him a great 
5 And when he had opened the third seal, I BN ee Hoeven e. 
heard the third beast say,Come and see. And [| third seal, tneanits tana 
beheld, and lo a” black horse; and he that sat on Come. And I saw, and be. 


. . . . lt » . 
him had a pair of balances in his hand. hele ee ee 


6 And I heard a voice in the midst of the four | balancein hishand. And 6 
I heard as it were a voice 

beasts say, A measure of wheat for a penny, and_| in the midst of the four 

three measures of barley for a penny; and see thou | fing Creatures sayin a 


hurt not the oil and the wine. penny, and three meas- 








a Zech. 6:6. 6Zech. 6:2. c Rev. 9:4. 





and see, and immediately the first vision is replaced by a second, of a startling character. There appears 
in the field of view a second horse, no longer white, but as red as blood. Upon the horse sat one with a 
great sword in his hand, to whom “was given power to take peace from the earth, and to make men that 
they should slay one another.’ The horse is the symbol of war, but the changed color indicates that the 
conditions of war are entirely changed. It is no longer triumphant war in the dominions of their 
enemies, while within all is peace, but the land is drenched in blood. During the period of the first seal 
the fertile provinces of the Roman Empire never saw the face of a hostile soldier, unless borne as a 
captive from the distant frontiers, where the Roman generals waged triumphant wars in the countries of 
their enemies. All was peace within. But now a period of internal war is indicated. The ‘earth’ 
contemplated by John was the Roman earth, or empire. From it peace shall be taken away. Nor 1s it to 
be destroyed by foreign invaders. ‘‘They are to kill one another.” In as plain language .as symbolism 
can disclose, it is indicated that the next great feature of history is that the land shall be torn by 
civil war. y 

THE FULFILLMENT.—The next period is marked in the history of man by the most prolonged and 
sanguinary, civil commotion that history records. ‘Peace was taken from the earth” for ninety-two 
years. During this long period of nearly a century, the Roman Empire, that portion of the ‘“earth”’ 
which was the seat of civilization and of the Christian religion, was constantly torn by bloody contests 
between rival competitors for power. The history of this epoch is epitomized by Sismondi in the follow- 
ing language: “With Commodus commenced the third and most calamitous period. It lasted ninety-two 
years, from 192 to 284. During that period thirty-two emperors, and twenty-seven pretenders alternately 
hurled each other from the throne by incessant civil warfare. Ninety-two years of almost incessant civil 
warfare taught the world on what a frail foundation the virtue of the Antonines had placed the felicity of 
the empire.’”’—Sismondi’s Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. I., page 36. A full history of this dark and 
unhappy period is also given in the first volume of Gibbon. During the ninety-two years there were 
thirty-four emperors,.besides nineteen pretenders, known as tyrants. Of these all but two died violent 
deaths. What could more strikingly represent such a period of civil contention, of incessant civil 
warfare, of fratricidal bloodshed, than the red horse and its rider, “to whom was given a great sword, and 
_ the power to take away peace, that men should kill one another?” I suppose that no such prolonged and 
terrible period of civil warfare can be pointed out in the history of the world, and there is certainly a 
wonderful correspondence between the vision and the events of history. 


THE THIRD SEAL. 


5,6. And TI beheld, and lo a black horse, etc. Again there appear a horse and arider.. Again 
the color of the horse is changed, as well as the instrument held in the hand of the horseman. If the 
white and red colors, the bow and the great sword, had a significance, this must be true also of the black 
color and the balances. It has been found that the horse, whatever his color, is the symbol of war. The 
black horse makes it plain that the land is torn by calamitous war, and is filled with sorrow, mourning 
and despair. Black is the color of mourning. The prophet (Jer. 14:2) says: “Because of the drought 
Judah mourneth, and the gates thereof languish; they are in deep mourning (lit. black) for the land.’’: 
The balances used for weighing food are a symbol of scarcity and famine. ‘Bread by weight” always 
implies scarcity. See Lev. 26:26; Ezek. 4: 16,17. The prices named also signify the same. The measure 


Ch. VI.] REVELATION. 437 


= ures of barley for a penny; 
7 And when he had opened the fourth seal, I eo en oe 


heard the voice of the fourth beast say, Come and | hut thou not 
And when he opened the 7 
see. _ |fourth seal, I heard the 
8 And I looked, and behold a pale horse: and his | Yeice of the fourth living 
creature saying, Come. 
name that sat on him was Death, aud hell followed | And I saw and behold, a 8 


. . . © ] . : 
with him: and power was given unto them over the Hea ee ee 


a ; > Death; and Hades follow- 
fourth part of the earth,? to kill with sword, and aa ate Hine ee 


with hunger, and with death,” and with the beasts yras given unto them au 
; hority over e four 
of the earth. part of the earth, to kill 
with sword, and with fam- 
ine, and with death, and by 














@ Ezek. 14:21. 6 Ley. 26: 22. 





was about a quart, and the penny about sixteen cents, which would make the wheat worth about $5 per 
bushel; or, of it be borne in mind that one dollar in that age would usually purchase as much as $5 now, 
the wheat would be about $25 per bushel in modern currency. Oil and wine, though common foods, are 
entirely prohibited. An age of war, mourning, calamity aad famine is certainly symbolized. 

THE FULFILLMENT.—The first and second seals mark distinet epochs, clearly separated from each 
other. We can determine the exact number of years that belongs to each period. It is not possible to 
separate, with the same distinctness, the events indicated by the third and fourth seals. The prophecies 
are fulfilled with startling accuracy, and the occurrences symbolized by each seal follow each other in the 
same order as the seals, but the events overlap, and are related to each other as effects to cause. During 
the terrible period of civil commotion, indicated by the red horse, the era of blood and anarchy produces 
the events symbolized by the black horse, and as the combined result of the two preceding seals there 
follow the events indicated by the pale horse. There is a period of extreme taxation, enormous prices, 
great scarcity, want and famine, due to the destruction of armies and the untilled fields during a period of 
civil war of ninety-two years. There is first the civil war as the cause, and second the scarcity and famine 
as the effect. I will verify this by historical quotations under the next seal, which also relates to this 
calamitous period. 


THE FOURTH SEAL. « 


7,8. Behold a pale horse, and his name that sat on him was death. Again, for the fourth 
time John beholds a horse. It is still a time of war. The horse is now pale, the bloodless color of the 
dead. Upon him sits an undescribed figure, called by the apostle DEATH. Behind the dread destroyer 
follows Hades, the unseen world, swallowing up the dying mortals and hiding them from human vision. 
The means employed to destroy men are described. Death and Hades employ (1), the sword or war; (2) 
hunger, or famine; (3) death, or pestilence, for so is the word here used often translated, and such is its 
meaning in this place; and, finally (4), the destruction caused by the wild beasts of forests and field, The 
evident meaning of this symbolism is so plain that all can understand its application, and we need only 
ask if the facts correspond. Do we find the scarcity, want, hunger, and pestilence, indicated by the 
prophecy, during the latter portion of this period of civil commotion? Do we have an awful reign of 
Death in the forms signified by the seal ? 

THE FULFILLMENT.—Let the reader turn to the tenth chapter of the first volume of Gibbon’s Rome. 
It details a condition of things which existed in the reign of Gallienus, when the ninety-two years of civil 
war were drawing towards a close about A. D. 268. During that reign nineteen pretenders to the throne 
aroused rebellions which were quenched in blood. The chapter closes with a passage which I ask the 
reader to compare carefully not only with verses 7 and 8, but with verses 6 and7. ‘ But along and gen- 
eral famine was a calamity of a more serious kind. It was the inevitable consequence of rapine and 
oppression, which extirpated the produce of the present and the future harvests. Famineis almost always 
followed by epidemical diseases, the effect of scanty and unwholesome food. Other causes must, however, 
have contributed to the furious plague, which, from the years two hundred and fifty to the year two hun- 
dred and sixty-five, raged without interruption in every province, every city, and almost every family of 
the Roman Empire. During some time five thousand persons died daily in Rome; and many towns that 
had escaped the hands of the Barbarians, were entirely depopulated. Applying this authentic fact to the 
most correct tables of mortality, it evidently proves, that above half the people of Alexandria had per- 
ished; and could we venture to extend the analogy to the other provinces, we might suspect that war, 
pestilence, and famine, had consumed, in a few years, the moiety of the human species.” 

Note the correspondence. John in round numbers states that one-fourth of the people of the Roman 


438 REVELATION. 


9 And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw 
under* the altar the” souls of them that were slain 
for the word of God, and for® the testimony which 
they held: 

10 And they cried with a loud voice, saying,@ 





and they cried with a great 10 
How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not voice, saying, How long, O 
+ a aster, e€ Holy an true, 
judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on | Main or oy jude and 
the earth? avenge 4 en them 
. . at dwell on the earth? 

11 And white robes were given unto every one of | Aid there was given them 11 


them; and it was said unto them, that® they should 
rest fora little season, until their fellow-servants 
also, and their brethren, that should be killed as 
_they were, should be fulfilled. 


(Ca~yI. 


the wild beasts of the 
earth. 

And when he opened the 
fifth seal, Isaw underneath 
the altar the souls of them 
that had been slain for the 
word of God, and for the 
testimony which they held: 


to each one a white robe; 
and it was said unto them, 
that they should rest yet 
for a little time, until their 


‘fellow- servants also and 


their brethren, which 
should be killed even as 


) 


they were, should be ful- 
filled. 











a@ Rey. 8:8, 6 Rev. 20:4. c2Tim.1:8. dGen.4:10; Zech.1:12. e Heb. 11: 40. 





Empire would perish; Gibbon furnishes data for suggesting that one-half perished. John assigns four 
eauses for this awful mortality: the sword, hunger, pestilence and wild beasts. Of these four Gibbon 
names in the last sentence of the above quotation three, and writers of the period itself speak of the 
fourth, the scourge of ravenous wild beasts which had multiplied owing to the depopulation of great 
provinces. : 

The first four seals, the Seals of the Horses, are associated. These have now been considered. The 
first, described in verses 1 and 2, I have pronounced the seal of Triumphant prosperity, the age of Trajan 
and the Antonines. The red horse of the fourth verse is the seal of civil war, fulfilled in the awful con- 
vulsions that began about A. D. 186, and agitated the whole civilized world. The third seal, the black 
horse and balance of the fifth verse, is the seal of want, while the next, the pale horse of the eighth verse, 
is the seal of death. 


THE FIFTH SEAL. 


It is evident, from the entire change of the imagery, that, after the fourth seal, the subject of prophetic 
vision is entirely changed. The horse now disappears, and is seen no more in connection with the opening 
of the seals. Along with the horse the armed warriors sweep out of sight. The next vision is that of 
suffering saints. 

9-11. ITsaw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of God. These 
are clearly Christians who had suffered martydom. They had died “for the word of God.” They were 
under the altar, Since the temple is typical of the church, the altar, the center of worship, points to the 
ehureh and its worship. The brazen altar stood at the door of the tabernacle, and at the bottom of it all 
the blood of the offerings was poured (Lev.4: 7). Their position probably points out that their own blood 
was poured out for Christ. 10. And they cried with a loud voice. Their cry denotes that the 
church had suffered long and severely, and they raise a ery for deliverance. 11. And white robes 
were given unto every one of them. The robes of justification and victory. They are assured that 
the day when ‘‘ they will be avenged” willsoon come, but that they must wait a little season. Others must 
be added to the number of the martyrs before the number is fulfilled. Itisatime of persecution. The 
fifth seal is the seal of persecution, and it evidently marks some notable era in the history of the Church, 
when more fiercely than ever before it felt the intolerant hand of ‘them who dwelt upon the earth.” The 
fulfillment is to be sought in a war of extermination waged against Christianity. Again we ask if, follow- 
ing the events already described, history records events that fulfill this prophecy? 

THE FULYILLMENT.—The ninety-two years of civil turmoil began A, D. 192 with the death of Com- 
modus. They ended in A. D: 284. In that year Diocletian ascended the Roman throne, and his reign was 
distinguished by the most terrible, most prolonged, and most general persecution known in the history of 
the ancient Church. The Church had often been persecuted before, but no persecution had ever before 
been so universal, so long continued, and so terrible. The Emperor was not by nature a persecutor, but 
the great men of the empire, especially Galerius, whom he had associated in the duty of government, were 
alarmed at the astonishing progress of the new religion, and demanded its extirpation. At last Diocletian 
yielded, and became the leader in the effort to root out the religion of Christ from the very face of the 
earth. 


Sheviol REVELATION. 439 


12 ne she P : Ty And I saw when he open- 12 
And I beheld, when he had opened the sixth | ,(ih6 sixth seal_and there 


seal, and, lo, there was a great earthquake; and Was A great earthquake ; 
the” sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the | as Pe 


moon beeame as blood; the whole moon became as 
2 blood; and the stars of the 18 

13 And the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, heaveh fell unto the earth, 

even as a fig-tree casteth her untimely figs, when | thripe Pan chen he te 

she is shaken of a mighty wind: shaken of a great wind. 
4 ., | And the heaven was re- 14 

14 And¢ the heaven departed as a scroll when it | moved as a scroll when it 


is 7 a ; : is roll 3 r 
is rolled together; and every mountain“ and island 2B fo ae nee 


were moved out of their places: OHO MOW OE Useus yaeess 


a Rey. 16:18. 6Joel2:10; Matt. 24:29; Acts 2:20. c Heb. 1:12. d Jer. 3: 233 4: 24. 














ae a ae a ee ae oe 

Early in A. D. 303 secret councils were held in Nicomedia, concerning the destruction of Christianity. 
-« Perhaps,” says Gibbon, “it was represented to Diocletian, that the glorious work of the deliverance of 
the empire was left imperfect so long as an independent people (the Christians) were permitted to subsist 
-and multiply in it.” On the twenty-third of February, the first blow was struck. An armed force was 
sent to destroy the great church of Nicomedia, and to burn the sacred books, so carefully preserved in 
that day when the printing press was unknown. This was the signal for beginning a persecution which 
was, by the consent of all historians, the longest, the most general, and the fiercest ever waged against the 
Chureh. It is aremarkable fact that a chronological era, dating from the time when Diocletian began to 
reign instituted not for religious, but astronomical purposes, and used until the Christian era was intro- 
duced in the sixth century, has received its name from the persecution, and has been called the era of 
martyrs. 

With regard to this period I make a quotation from Gibbon, Vol. II., page 69: “The resentment, or the 
fears of Diocletian, at length transported him beyond the bounds of moderation, which he had hitherto 
preserved, and he declared, in a series of cruel edicts, his intention of abolishing the Christian name. By the 
first of these edicts, the governors of the provinces were directed to apprehend all persons of the ecclesi- 
astical order; and the prisons, destined for the vilest criminals, were soon filled with a multitude of 
bishops, presbyters, deacons, readers and exorcists. By a second edict, the magistrates were commanded 
to employ every method of severity, which might reclaim them from their odious superstition, and oblige 
them to return to the established worship of gods. This rigorous order was extended, by a subsequent 
edict, to the whole body of Christians, who were exposed to a violent and general persecution.” This bets 
rible persecution, conducted with such vindictive fury that sometimes church buildings were surrounded 
py soldiers, the doors locked and the congregations burned in them, continued for over ten years. 

In the answer to the martyrs (verse 11) there are three things that arenoteworthy. First, it is said that 
they must await the great judgment, which would not be until another distinct set of martyrs was slain. 
These are evidently the martyrs slain, not by pagan Rome, but by anti-Christ. Second, they must wait 
“a little season.” This season is to be measured by God’s standard, and not by ours. Third, there were 
given unto them white robes. White robes are a symbol of justification and of triumph. “The white robes 
are given to him that overcometh.” These souls are not in the inner sanctuary, the type of heaven; but 
under the altar of the outer court, the type of the world. The white robes, therefore, imply their triumph 
and justification upon the earth. This came within twenty-five years of their suffering, through the formal 
acceptance of Christianity by the Roman Empire. 


THE SIXTH SEAL. 


12-17. There was a great earthquake. The symbol of a political or moralagitation and upheaval. 
The sun became black as sackcloth. The swn, moon, and stars are symbols of earthly dignitaries, great 
lights in the political or religious heavens. In the dream of Joseph, which so maddened his brethren, 
these terms are used in this meaning, as well as by the ancient prophets. In the East it was common to 
jiken the king or emperor to the sun, and stars are the symbols of princes and rulers. For the use of the 
term we refer the reader to Dan, 8: 10. The blackness of the sun and the bloody hue of the moon point 
out scenes of mourning and bloodshed among rulers and princes. The falling of the stars would indicate 
the downfall of those who had high places on the earth, or rather within the Roman Empire. 14. The 
heaven was removed as a scroll. The old religions, supposed to be of heavenly origin, pass away. 
‘Every mountain and island were moved. Mowntain and island are’ used to denote earthly rulers 

and kingdoms, the latter referring more especially to European provinces which are often called ‘the isles 
-of the sea” in the Bible. From the period of Diocletian, the great persecutor, the title, “« Your Eminence,” 
or, in other words, “mountain,” was bestowed upon princes. As a mountain stood above the plain, so the 


440 REVELATION. Bon Vie 


1 And the kings of the earth, 15- 
15 And the kings of the earth, and the great men, tie ee 


and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the chief captains, and the 
mighty men, and every bond man, and every free | byery bondman and tree, 


a hj 1 5 aii man, hid themselves in the 
man,* hid themselves in the dens, and in the rocks tan, Ted hee es ee 


of the mountains; the a ees and ss 16° 
16 And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on] {3 :n2 Sooke Fall on us, 


us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on | and hide us from the face 
of him that sitteth on the 
the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: throne, and from the wrath _ 
17 For? the great day of his wrath is come; and®| Gi, of thelr wrath is comes 


who shall be able to stand? and who is able to stand? 


alsa.2:19. bIsa. 13:6; Zeph.1:14. ¢ Psa. 76:7. 














rulers of the earth were. exalted. 15. And the kings of the earth,and the princes ... hid 
themselves. This implies great terror among “them that dwell on the earth;” their belief that terrible: 
judgments were impending from God, that the wrath of the Lamb was manifested, and their efforts. 
to escape. 

THE MEANING.—Many have explained this startling symbolism to describe the closing scenes of the 
world and the personal coming of Christ to judgment. This cannot be the meaning, for the series of 
visions continues on until the seventh seal is opened, and all it contains is exhausted. Others have: 
supposed that the rush of the northern races which overthrew the Roman Empire is meant. I believe 
that it refers to great events which have long since taken place. The various phenomena in earth and 
sky, the earthquake, the falling stars, the heavens rolled away, the mountains and islands moved out of” 
their places, all foreshadow a violent, bloody, remarkable upheaval of systems, rulers, governments,. 
kingdoms, and the establishment of a new order upon the earth. It is on earth, it is in history that we 
are to look for the fulfillment of the prophecy. And since the “earth” that is present to the mind of John 
is the civilized world known to the ancients, the Roman Empire, it is within its boundaries that we must 
look for the fulfillment. There can be no doubt that this is the seal of revolution. 

THE FULFILLMENT.—Several circumstances help us to fix the meaning. 1. The time. It follows. 
immediately after the great persecution indicated by the fifth seal, which closed in A. D. 311. These 
events occur, then, near that time. 2. It is a time of blood and mourning. Who are the mourners? 
Kings, great men, rich men, bondmen and freemen. Are these Christians? They are enemies of the Lamb,. 
who fear his wrath and mourn over his power. The mourners are the opposers of the Church —(Verse 16.) 
8. The seal is followed by a period of great joy and prosperity on the part of the Church.—(See chapter 7.). 
An innumerable multitude are sealed with the seal of the Lamb, of which the next chapter gives record. 
Have we, near A D. 311, the time when the great persecution closed, a period of mighty revolution, that 
filled the unbelieving world with mourning, and which was followed by a time of triumph, prosperity and. 
glory to the Chureh of Christ? In the year 312, leaving Britain, marching through Gaul, Constantine 
launched his armies upon Italy The Church watched his progress with singular interest; for although 
he had, as yet, made no profession of Christianity, his mother, Helena, was a Christian, and it was felt 
that he was favorabie to his mother’s faith. The Italian emperor opposed to him, Maxentius, was a firm. 
Pagan, and around him centered the interests of the Pagan faith. Indeed, he gave pubhe assurance that 
he would extirpate the Christian religion, and vowed to Jupiter that, in the event he was successful, he 
would make his worship universal on the ruins of Christianity. In three great battles Maxentius was 
defeated and in the last was slain, and Constantine became the ruler of Rome. In the East another 
emperor, Licinius, a Pagan and a persecutor, still held the reigns of power. Wars, truces and battles 
followed, until in A. D. 324 he was crushed and put to death. In this period of conflict, lasting about 
sixteen years, six emperors in all strove for the pre-eminence, of whom Constantine remained the sole 
survivor. 

But these are not the most remarkable changes of this period. Let us note these: i, The votaries of 
the old Paganism had rallied around the enemies of Constantine, because he was felt to be its unrelenting © 
foe, who would compass its destruction. When he was seated in triumph upon the ruins of six imperial 
thrones, there was great mourning from the enemies of the Cross. They felt that theirs was a doomed 
religion. They wereright. 2. In the year 319, before his final triumph, he nad decreed that his mother’s: 
religion should be tolerated as an acknowledged faith of the empire, 8. In 321 he decreed that Sunday,. 
the sacred day of Christianity, should be observed in all the cities by the cessation of trade and labor. 
4. In 325 he abolished by decree the bloody combats of the gladiators, where men killed each other to- 
amuse the populace, a Roman institution that had existed for a thousand years. 5 He convoked, by~ 
imperial authority, a great council of Christian bishops, the one known in history as the Council of Nice. 


Ch. VII.] REVELATION. 441. 





CHAPTER VII. 


The Sealing of the Servants of God. 


SuMMARyY.—The Four Winds Held. The Sealing of the One Hundred 
and Forty Four Thousand. The Great Multitude with the Palms of CHAPTER VII. 


Victory. They with White Robes About the Throne. res is I saw four an- 1 

; A gels standing at the four 
1 And after these things I saw four angels* stand- corners of the earth, hold- 

ing on the four corners of the earth,” holding the! agin that uo wind should 


a = e Cl ‘ blow on the earth, or on 
four winds of the earth, that the® wind should not) fe %ea or upon any tree: 


blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree, | And oe ao angel 2° 
2 And I saw another angel ascending from the| having the seal of the liv. 


cy aW1 TU] ‘ 3 ] ing God: and he cried with 
east, having the seal of the living God; and he cried | * ee voice toa ae 


with a loud voice to the four angels, to whom it}. ngels, to whom if was 
was given to hurt the earth and the sea, to cacao (bite one 


eral d > ; ‘the earth, neither the sea, 
3 Saying,? Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, | the ear Pees Hite saat 


nor the trees, till we have sealed® the servants of have sealed the servants 
our God int their foreheads. Pe eee a dared 


a Psa. 84:7; Dan. 6:22; Heb.1:14. 6 Dan.7:2. oe ae d@ Rev. 6:6. e Ezek. 9:4; Eph. 4:30; 2 Tim, 2:19.. 
Ff Rev. 22:4. 

















6. In 331 he decreed that the Pagan religion should exist no longer, and that all the heathen temples. 
should be leveled, or converted into churches. 7. At the same time the old Roman laws were remodeled 
according to the precepts of the Christian religion, and a Pagan empire was transformed into an empire 
of the Christian faith, under new institutions. Surely the old heavens were moved away as a scroll is 
gathered together. But thisis not all. I name another wonderful change of this age of revolution. In 
3924 he determined to shake the Roman world to its very center, and to deprive the imperial city of the 
crown worn for eleven centuries, by removing the capital from Italy to anew city upon the banks of the 
Hellespont, that should henceforth be called Constantinople, from his ownname. The mighty mountain. 
of the West is moved from its place. Not only do these revolutions, the greatest in the history of the 
world, fulfil the imagery, but the mournings of the heathen in that age almost adopted the language of 
Revelation in describing this period. The ruin of the Pagan religion is described by the Sophists, says. 
Gibbon, ‘“‘as a dreadful and amazing prodigy, which covered the earth with darkness, and restored the ancient 
dominion of chaos and night.” z 

Those who insist that the opening of the sixth seal portrays the end of the world should bear in mind, 
not only that the chain of events continues on through the 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th chapters, and that 
itis only when the Seventh Angel sounds his trumpet (11: 15) that the proclamation is made that ‘“‘the 
kingdom of the world is become the kingdom of our Lord and his Christ,’’ but they should keep in mind 
also that the scenes beheld by John are not literal pictures of the events, but symbolie visions. The 
interpreter should ask himself not, What would be the literal fulfillment of the visions? but, What do the 
symbols signify? The earthquake, the blackened sun, the falling stars, the moving mountains and islands. 
of the sixth seal are not to be regarded as literal any more than the pale horse in the fourth seal. 


CHAPTER VII. 


The symbolism which represents the opening events of the sixth seal has been given in chapter 6, verses 
12-17. These, however, only show forth the great revolution in the world’s history with which the seal 
opened. The sixth seal is not exhausted until the seventh seal is opened in chapter 8, verse 1. Hence, all 
the symbolism of chapter 7 represents events which belong to the sixth seal, or at least are not completed 

. before it closes. 

1-8. After this. After the opening of the sixth seal. Isawfour angels. The vision that appears 
before his eyes is that of four angels at the four points of the compass, holding four winds to prevent them 
from rushing in destruction upon the earth. These certainly represent four destructive powers which are- 
held back for a time from the land, the sea, and the vegetation of the earth. 2. Isaw another angel. 
The picture is that of an angel having the seal of the living God. The object of this seal is indicated in 
verse 3. The seal was a mark of ownership. The seal of God on the forehead would mark those sealed 
as God’s. The seal mark on the forehead would be visible to everyone; hence the seal in the forehead has 
been understood to be the public confession and profession of Christ. This angel would thus symbolize a 
great and successful movement to evangelize the race. 8. Hurt not, etc. The four winds are forbid- 





442 REVELATION. ‘ (CRA~VIT. 
4 And? I heard the number of them which were | heads. And I heard the 4 
number of them which 


sealed: and there were sealed an” hundred and forty 
and four thousand of all the tribes of the children 
of Israel. 





were sealed, a hundred and 
forty and four thousand, 
sealed out of every tribe of 
the children of Israel. 





5 Of the tribe of Juda were sealed twelve thous-| “tocre "sealed twelve > 
and, Of the tribe of Reuben were sealed twelve) ,(?0mnee capa 
thousand. Of the tribe of Gad were sealed twelve} _ twelve thousand: 

Of the tribe of Gad twelve 
thousand. thousand: 

6° Of the tribe of Aser were sealed twelve thous-| Of, the tribe of, Asher 6 
and. Of the tribe of Nephthalim were sealed twelve | Of the tribe of Naphtali 
thousand. Of the tribe of Manasses were sealed] of tne tribe of Manasseh 
twelve thousand. ot a 

7 Of the tribe of Simeon were sealed twelve} twelve thousand: | 
thousand. Of the tribe of Levi were sealed twelve]  ‘twen’ thoneana: 2°” 
thousand. |-Of the tribe of -Isachar were sealed | ©) Me aie cf tsar 
twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Zebulun 8 

8 Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelve| ofthe tribe of Joseph 
thousand. Of the tribe of Joseph were sealed| ,fWelvethousand: in 
twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Benjamin weve mene sealed twele 
sealed twelve thousand. After these aes Ee 

9 After this I beheld, and, lo,* a great multitude, no ae great multi: 
which no man could number,® of all nations, and | number, out of every na- 
kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the ed a Kaa 
throne, and before the Lamb,® clothed with white pelece (ie ee 
robes, and palms in their hands; in white robes, and palms 

10 And cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation! | ty With et 7 
to our God? which sitteth upon the throne, and unto | QS, Salvation unto our 
the Lamb. thr an ane anes ue Ne 

11 And® all the angels stood round about the een ac ake 
throne, and aboué the elders and the four beasts, | throne, “and about the el- 

ers and the four livin 
and fell before the throne on their faces, and wor- | creatures; and they fel 
shipped God, pefore the throne on, the 


@Rev.9:16. 61sa.4:2,3; Rev.14:1. ¢ Gen. 12:33 22:17; 49:10; Isa. 2:2,33 43:63 


e Rey. 3:5. 7 Psa. 3:83 Isa. 43: 113 Jer. 3: 23; Hos. 13:4. g Rev. 5:13. 


Rom. 11: 25. 
A Rev. 4:6. 


d Rey. 5:9. 








den to do their work of destruction until the sealing has been accomplished; or in other words, until the 
preaching of the gospel has wrought a certain result. 

4-8.. And I heard the number of them which were sealed. The number first named is one 
hundred and forty-four thousand, twelve thousand from each of the twelve tribes of Israel. These num- 
bers are not to be taken literally, but only signify that a great number, not a countless number, but a part 
of each tribe of Israel, accepted the gospel, Of the tribes Ephraim appears under the name of Joseph, 
and Dan is entirely omitted, a fact possibly due to the early falling away of Dan into idolatry. The num- 
ber twelve is preserved by counting Levi. For another appearance of the one hundred and forty-four 
thousand see 14: 1. 

9-10. After this I beheld. First he saw the vast company of those of the blood of Abraham who 
had been sayed, and then he sees another company, not numbered, because they were so great that no man 
could number them. Of all nations and kindreds. The first multitude represented the Jews saved 
through Christ; the second, the countless multitude, represented the saved of all nations, the Gentile 
saints. Before the throne. In the vision they seem to stand before the throne and before the Lamb, to 
whom they ascribe the praises of their salvation, White robes. Victorious, triumphant. Palms in 
their hands. The symbol of joy. The palm branch was used at the feast of Tabernacles, the feast of 
thanksgiving. 10. Salvation to our God. The praise of our salvation be given to God and to the 
Lamb. 


Ch. VIL.) REVELATION. 





443 








12 Saying,? Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wis- 
dom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, 
and might, de unto our God for ever and ever. 
Amen. . 

13 And one of the elders answered, saying untc 
me, What are these which are arrayed in white 
robes? and whence came they? 

14 And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. And 
he said to me, These” are they which came out of 
great tribulation, and have washed* their robes, 
and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. 

15 Therefore are they before the throne of God, 
and serve him day and night in his temple: and he 
that sitteth on the throne shall dwell* among them. 

16 They® shall hunger no more, neither thirst 
any more: neither shall the sun light on them, nor 
any heat. 

17 For the Lamb, which is in the midst of the 
throne,’ shall feed them, and shall lead them unto 
living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe 
away all tears from their eyes. 





saying, Amen: Blessing, 12 
and glory, and wisdom,and 
thanksgiving, and honour, 
and power, and might, be 
unto our God for ever and 
ever. Amen. And one of 13 
the elders answered, say- 
ing unto me, These which 
are arrayed in the white 
robes, who are they, and 
whence came they? And I 14 
say unto him, My lord, 
thou knowest. And he said 
to me, These are they 
which come out of the 
great tribulation, and they 
washed their robes, and 
made them white in the 
blood of the Lamb. There- 
fore are they before the 
throne of God; and they 
serve him day and night in 
his temple: and he that sit- 
teth on the throne shall 
spread his tabernacle over 
them. They shall hunger 
no more, neither thirst any 
more; neither shall the sun 
strike upon them, nor any 
heat: for the Lamb which 17 
isin the midst of the throne 
shall be their shepherd, 
and shall guide them unto 
fountains of waters of life: 
and God shall wipe away 
every tear from their eyes. 


15 








5.42 


a Rev.5:18. 6 Acts 14:22. cIsa. 1:18; Heb. 9:14; 1John1:7; Rev. 


7 Psa. 121:6. g Psa. 23:1; 36:8; John 10:11. 


1:53 Zech. 3:3. 
Aisa. 25:8; 35: 10. 


dIsa.4:5,6. elIsa. 49: 10. 





11,12. All the angels. 
and every creature join in the praises. 
praising God for the blessed scene they have just beheld. 


13-17. What arethese? The question is asked by the elder that he may teach. 


In chapter 5 the elders, four living creatures, the angels about the throne, 
Here again all are named, and the angels worship and join in 


“« These’”’ refers to 


the vast multitude described in verse9. 14, Thou knowest. ‘Ido not know but thou dost.” These 
are they which come out of the great tribulation. Sce Revision. Some great period of trial of the 
church is meant. They have stood the trial, and been true. Washed their robes. Have made them - 


selves spotless by trust in the blood of Christ. 
They are exalted to heaven. 16. They shall hunger no more. 


For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them. 


bestow upon them every blessing and remove every sorrow. 


15. Therefore are they before the throne of God. 
Their sorrows are over forever. 


bere 
God and the Lamb shall 


THE MEANING.—What do the symbols of this vision signify? It is evident that they indicate that four 
destructive agencies were to be checked and restrained until some great work of the gospel was accom- 
plished. The work to be wrought is symbolized by two multitudes, one numbered, the other countless, 
poth of them saved and praising God for salvation. The first company is composed of Jews, while the sec- 


ond and larger company is composed of Gentiles. 


In the fourteenth chapter we find again a company of 


one hundred and forty-four thousand with the Lamb upon Mt. Zion, evidently, from the same number, to 
be associated with these.’ We are there told that they were “ virgins,” a term whose spiritual signification 
is that they had never been defiled by idolatry, and that they were “‘the first fruits” untothe Lamb. These 
marks, as well as the literal statement here that they were of the tribes of Israel, identify them as the 
Jewish members of the Church. These had never been guilty of idolatrous fornication, and had been the 
first fruits of Christianity. Jews were the original first fruits and they were represented by the Jewish 


Christian element. The thought, 
triumph there were the Jewish and the Gentile elements. 


that the one hundred and forty-four thousand refers to spiritual Israel. 


spiritual Israel, but itis evident that a different meaning is intended here. 


as it appears to me, is to bring pefore the mind that at this period of- 
Tam aware that many commentators have held 


All Christians belong to this 
1. Those sealed are taken out 


of the tribes of Israel. They are a remnant, while the great body of the membership of the tribes is left 


unsealed. 2. The Gentile Christians are named immediately after. 
multitude of the Gentiles saved: 1. They are clothed in white robes. 
umph. 2. They have palms in their hands. Palms belong to victors. 


Observe the marks of the countless 
White robes are the mark of tri- 
'3. They join in a song of praise to 


the Lamb as the author of their salvation. This is evidently a heavenly picture, representing a great 





AA REVELATION. : [Ch. VIL. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


The Seventh Seal Opened. 


SUMMARY.—The Silence in Heaven. The Seven Angels with the Seven 
Trumpets. The Incense Offered. The Fire Cast on the Earth. The 
First Angel Sounds; Hail, Fire and Blood Follow. The Second 
Trumpet and the Mountain Cast into the Sea. The Third Trumpet 
and the Great Burning Stars. The Fourth Trumpet and the Sun 


Darkened. CHarTER VIII. 


1 And when he had opened the seventh seal,| And when he opened the 1 
there was silence in heaven about the space of half | S¥°nth Seal, there follow- 
an hour, Ree 

2 And* I saw the seven angels which stood before | angeis which stand before 
God;? and to them were given seven trumpets. nits Choon ae 








a Matt. 18:10; Luke1:19. 62 Chron. 29; 25-28. 





triumph of the saints immediately after the events last described. The subsequent portion of the chapter: 
is in harmony. “ Who are these,” it is asked, ‘arrayed in white garments?” The reply shows these, 
who have come through the (there is an articlein the Greek) great tribulation of a suffering and persecuted 
church, are permitted to witness its justification and victory. The wholeisa picture of a great triumph. 
of the church, triumphant on earth, and its triumphant sufferers enjoying the final reward on high. The 
meaning is that those who have suffered and wrought during the long period of tribulation covering the: 
first three centuries of the church have won their triumph on earth, in the victory of the church, and 
the final reward in heaven. 

It only remains to ask, whether before the “four winds ” were loosed, and after the great persecution of 
the fifth seal, such a triumph was won. I have already shown that the opening of the sixth seal refers to 
the overthrow of the old Paganism. I will state briefly that at the end of the thira century Paganism was. 
dominant, persecuting, seeking to “abolish the Christian name.” _Aé the end of the fourth century the civi- 
lized world was Christian. 

THE FOUR WINDS.—1 have already indicated that I regard the Four Angels with the Four Winds which: 
are held back from hurting the earth until this great sealing is effected, four mighty agencies of destruc- 
tion which were soon to sweep in fury upon the Roman Empire, “the earth” of John’s vision. This will 
be explained more fully in the next chapter. Until this sealing, this mighty triumph, is effected, the four- 
winds are held. It is significant that we will find following close upon the triumph of Christianity the: 
Roman Empire utterly overthrown by four agencies, symbolized when four angels blow their trumpets: 
under the seventh seal. It was a part of the providence of God that these agencies should be restrained 
until the empire was converted to Christianity. Indeed, to this providence we may attribute the fact that 
Europe at this day and for a thousand years, as well as the descendants of Europeans in America, acknowl- 
edge the Christian faith. Had the overwhelming hordes of northern barbarians rushed down upon the 
civilized world before the new faith had been firmly planted, it could hardly have survived the wreck of 
empires and civilization; but, deeply rooted in the hearts of the vanquished, when all else was lost, Chris- 
tianity rose above the ruins of the past and pointed the ferocious invaders to the Cross of Christ. The 
conquerors, in their new lands, laid aside the Paganism of their fathers and accepted a new religion from 
those whom they had vanquished. The new nations that emerge from the darkness of the Middle Ages,, 
seated within the vast boundaries of the old Roman Empire, all acknowledge the Christian faith. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


In the opening of the seventh chapter we are told that four angels were holding back four hurtful’ 
winds or destroying agencies until a great work was done for the Church. That work accomplished, the 
eighth chapter describes how four angels let loose four terrible agencies to a work of destruction. The 
first four trumpet angels are entirely separated from the remaining three, and do a separate work. There: 
ought not to be a doubt that the four agencies let loose by the four trumpet angels of the eighth chapter, 
are the same as the fown hurtful winds held back by the angels in the seventh chapter. 4 

1,2. When he opened the seventh seal. It is the Lamb who opens all the seals. There was 
silence in heaven about the space of half an hour. There has been a great effort among com- 
mentators to interpret the meaning of this silence. I think that it is a hush of awe before the march of 
the awful judgments about to come, the calm before the storm breaks forth, the oppressive silence before: 


Ch. VITII.] REVELATION. 





445 





3 And another* angel came and stood at the altar, 
‘having a golden censer; and there was given unto 
him much? incense, that he should offer ¢¢ with® the 
prayers of all saints upon the® golden altar which 
was before the throne. 

4 And the smoke of the incense, which came 
with the prayers of the saints, ascended up before 
‘God out of the angel’s hand. 

5 And the angel took the censer, and filled it with 
fire of the altar, and cast ¢é into the earth:* and 
there were voices, and thunderings, and lightnings,® 
-and an earthquake. 

6 And the seven angels which had the seven 
trumpets, prepared themselves to sound. 

7 The first angel sounded,» and there followed 
hail and fire mingled with blood, and they were 
east! upon the earth: and the third part) of trees 
was burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up. 





And another angel came 3 
and stood over the altar, 
haying a golden censer; 
and there was given unto 
him much incense, that he 
should add it unto the 
prayers of all the saints 
upon the golden altar 
which was before the 
throne. And the smoke of 4 
the incense, with the pray- 
ers of the saints, went up 
before God out of the an- 
gel’s hand. And the an- 5 
gel taketh the censer; and 
he filled it with the fire of 
the altar, and cast it upon 
the earth: and there fol- 
lowed thunders,and voices, 
and lightnings, and an 
earthquake. 

And. the seven angels 6 
which had the seven trum- 
pets prepared themselves 
to sound. 

And the first sounded, 7 
and there followed hail and 
fire, mingled with blood, 
and they were cast upon 
the earth: and a third part 
of the earth was burnt up, 
and the third part of the 





@ Ex. 30:1. ¢ Psa. 141:2. 


a Acts7:30. bEph. 5:2. c Rey. 5:8. 
; 7 Rev. 16:2. 


j Isa. 2:18. 





7 Rev. 16: 18. 


g2Sam.22:8. h Ezek. 38:22. 





the burst of battle. It is designed to emphasize the events that follow. 
introduces the vision of each seal. 
point some commentators make a mistake here. 


2. AndIsaw. Thus John 


The vision is not the silence in heaven, but what John saw. On this 
What he saw was the seven angels which stand 


before God; that is, the angels who act as his immediate ministering servants, to whom were given 


seven trumpets. 
in the following verses belongs to this seal. 
seven trumpet angels have discharged their mission. 
3-5. And another angel came and stood over 
tabernacle, ‘“‘a pattern made after heavenly things.” 
-was always taken to light the incense (Lev. 16: 13). 
golden altar, the altar of incense. The incense is 


The seventh seal, therefore, embraces these angels and their trumpets, and all they do 
The seventh and last seal will not be exhausted until the 


the altar. The scene reveals the altar of the 
This is the altar of sacrifice from which the coal 
This angel receives the incense and offers it upon the 
“the prayers of the saints ;” these to reach the throne 


must be lighted from the altar of sacrifice; or by faith in the blood of the Lamb of God. 4. And the 


smoke. As the smoke arose before the throne, so 


the prayers of the saints in the name of the crucified 


Savior arise to God. The special significance of all this is that in the terrible judgments about to follow, 
the prayers of the true and faithful saints will still come before God, and his providence will be over 


them. 5. Andtheangel. . 
Fire is usually a symbol of suffering. 
judgments of God are about to fall upon it. 


Empire, which embraced the civilized world. There followed thunders, etc. 


. filled it with the fire of the altar, and cast it upon the earth. 
This fire cast from the altar upon the earth indicates that the 
The earth in the sense used by John is the great Roman 


These mutterings and 


the quaking are ominous of the terrible scenes to follow when the angels sound their trumpets. 


6. And the seven angels which had the seven trumpets. 
deliberation. All must be made ready. 


silence of half an hour (verse 1); 


See verse 2. There is the utmost 
The four angels hold back the winds (7: 1), then there was the 
now the seven angels prepared themselves to sound. This implies 


that all things were being made ready for the great events to follow. Trumpets. The trumpet is used to 
giveasignal. Usually it implies the march or charge of armies. See Joel 2:1,15; Jer. 4: 5; Ezek. 33: 1-6. 
Sometimes it calls the people to worship. See Num. 31: 5; 1 Chron. 15: 24, The reader will see that the 


first is likely to be the significance here. 


7, The first angel sounded. When the trumpets sounded there followed the wonderful scenes 
described. When the first trumpet is blown John peholds a mighty storm-cloud rush over the earth. 


From it pour hail and fire mingled with blood. 


They fall upon the earth and a third part is scorched 


and blasted. These terms indicate desolation by some kind of judgments. The scene of the desolation is 


“the earth,” or the Roman Empire in John’s use of the term. 
-and blasted land indicates the devastation of destroying armies. 
-destruction descending upon a third of the world known to John. 


The blood indicates carnage. The scorched 
The language implies a terrible 


446 REVELATION. 


[Ch. VIII. 





8 And the second angel sounded, and as it were a 
great mountain burning with fire was cast into the 
sea; and the third part of the sea became?* blood: 

9 And the third part of the creatures which were 
in the sea, and had life, died; and the third part, of 
the ships were destroyed. 

10 And the third angel sounded, and there fell a 
great star from heaven, burning as it were a lamp, 
and it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and 
upon the fountains of waters; 

11 And the name of the star is called Worm- 
wood: and the third part of the waters became 
wormwood; and many men died of the waters, 
because they were made bitter. 

12 And° the fourth angel sounded, and the third 
part of the sun was smitten, and the third part of 
the moon, and the third part of the stars; so as the 
third part of them was darkened, and the day 
shone not for a third part of it, and the night like- 
Wise. 

13 And I beheld, and* heard an angel flying 
through the midst of heaven, saying with a loud 
voice, Woe,° woe, woe, to the inhabiters of the 
earth, by reason of the other voices of the trumpet 
of the three angels which are yet to sound! 








trees was burnt up, and all 
green grass was burnt up. 

And the second angel 8 
sounded, and as it were a 
great mountain burning 
with fire was cast into the 
sea: and the third part of 
the sea became blood; and 9 
there died the third part of 
the creatures which were 
in the sea, even they that 
had life; and the third part 
of the ships was destroyed. 

And the third angel 10 
sounded, and there fell 
from heaven a great star, 
burning as a torch, and it 
fell upon a third part of 
the rivers, and upon the 
fountains of the waters; 
and the name of the star 11 
is called wormwood; and 
the third part of the waters 
became wormwood; and 
many men died of the wa- 
ters, because they were 
made bitter. 

And the fourth angel 12 
sounded,° and the third 
part of the sun was smit- 
ten, and the third part of 
the moon,and the third part 
of the stars; that the third 
part of them should be 
darkened, and the day 
should not shine for the 
third part of it, and the 
night in like manner, 

And I saw, and I heard 13 
an eagle, flying in mid 
heaven, saying witha great 
voice, Woe, woe, woe, for 
them that dwell on the 
earth, by reason of the 
other voices of the trumpet 
of the three angels, who 
are yet to sound. 





@ Ezek. 14:19. 0 Ex. 15:23; Jer. 9:15; 23:15. cIsa. 13: 10; Amos 8:9. 


@ Rev. 14:6; 19:17. 


é Rey. 9:12; 11:14. 





8,9. And the second angel sounded. Then the scene changes. 
is cast into the sea. The sea is the theatre of destruction. 


Now a great burning mountain 
Again there is fire and blood indicating 


carnage and destruction. In the first judgment the third part of the earth suffers; but now a third part 


of the sea. The symbols imply that some mighty volcanic 
it a scene of awful warfare and destruction. 


power shall be turned upon the sea, and make. 


10, 11, And the third angel sounded. With the third trumpet the vision again changes. Nowa 


great, burning, blazing meteor falls upon a third part of the rivers, and u 


waters. A “third part of the earth,” a “third part of the sea,” 
are subjected to judgments. 11. And the name of the star is 


baleful work, and then disappears. 
They shall become bitterness and shall be scenes of death. 
12. And the fourth angel sounded. Again the scene changes, 


pon the fountains of the 


and now a “third part of the rivers” 

called W 
bitterness, because it shall fill the world with bitter sorrow. A star is a symbo 
a star as this, a blazing meteor, is a symbol of a leader who suddenly appears, rapidly does 


ormwood. That is, itis 
1 of a great leader. Such 
an awfully 


In some way the rivers will be the scenes of his malign influence. 


Now itis the third part of the: 


sun, and of the moon, and of the stars that is smitten, and darkness follows. The sun is a symbol of the 


supreme ruler, and the moon and stars of inferior dignities. 


If the Roman emperor, ruler of the world, 


should be cast from power, his empire overthrown, the consuls, senators and great men who supported 
his power be cast to the dust, and a period of intellectual and moral darkness should follow, it would 


fully meet the symbolism. 


13. And I beheld, and heard an angel. An eagle in the Revision. The flight of this messenger 
through the midst of heaven shows that an epoch has been passed with the four trumpet visions, and that 


another epoch is about to begin. The voice proclaims, Woe, woe, woe. 


There are three woes; there 


are three woe angels. Upon the inhabitants of the earth. Upon the earth as known to J ohn. The 


Ch. VLE: | REVELATION. 447 


geographical scene of those events which are historical must be looked for somewhere within the bounds. 
of the great Roman world. ; 





THE FULFILLMENT. 


I have explained briefly the symbolical significance of the visions which follow each trumpet blast of 
the first four angels. The next question is whether history has anything corresponding which follows. 
the overthrow of Paganism and triumph of Christianity as predicted in the sixth seal. Thus far we have 
a complete correspondence between the series of symbols and the events of history, following each 
in regular order, events and symbols corresponding. Does this correspondence continue? Do we find 
that, as the four trumpet blasts are blown, four hurtful agencies long held back (the four winds) rush to: 
the destruction of the Roman Empire? Let us see: 

1. About A. D. 400, the ‘“‘four winds” could be held no longer. The Goths gathered out of the mysteri- 
ous lands of the unexplored North, and, like a mighty torrent, threw themselves, a mighty, dauntless, 
savage host, upon Rome. Barbarous as the Indians of the desert, they left behind their march, scarred, 
scorched, blackened, bloody and desolated lands. Countries blooming like gardens were turned into tree- 
less deserts. In A. D. 409, under Alaric, their king, they descended on Italy. It had not seen the face of 
a foreign enemy for eight hundred years. At last the hosts gathered around the Imperial City. After a 
long siege, in the dead hour of night, the gates were opened by the hands of traitors and the barbarians 
rushed in. For three days the sack went on before they were glutted with blood and spoil. Then, their 
leader having died, they retired, loaded with spoil. The iron hail of war, the fire of burning towns and 
cities, mingled with the blood of the slain defenders, the scorched and blackened lands denuded of their 
fruit trees, and the grass trodden under foot by the march of armies, all correspond surprisingly with the 
language of the Scripture. It is strange, also, how the infidel Gibbon has chosen the very language of 
inspiration to describe some of the events of this period. I will quote a few phrases found in his thirty- 
first chapter and descriptive of the great invasion of Alaric and the Goths. “The tremendous sound of 
the Gothic trumpet” stirred the hosts to invasion. “At the first sound of the trumpet the Goths left thei” 
farms” to rush on in invasion. ‘The Gothic conflagration” consumed the empire. “ Blood and confla- 
gration and the burning of trees and herbage marked their path.” Here issurely a remarkable fulfillment. 
of the symbolism that follows the First Trumpet. 

2. The second trumpet implies a warfare upon the sea. Let us turn to history. The Goths completed 
their work about A. D. 409. About ten years later another mighty horde of northern barbarians was 
sweeping south. The principal tribe was called the Vandals, from whence our word vandalism. They 
rushed over Gaul, swept through Spain, leaped over the narrow straits of Gibraltar, and wrested northern 
Africa from the Roman dominion. Then they threw themselves like a burning mountain upon the sea and. 
filled it with fire and blood. In order that they might assail Rome on the seas and carry their armies to 
the islands and to Italy, they built fleets and struggled for the mastery of the Mediterranean. For six 
hundred years no ship hostile to Rome had disputed the mastery of the sea, but now it becomes the theatre 
of war. Fleets meet in the shock of battle; the sea is reddened with the blood of the slain; the Roman. 
ensign goes down, dyed in blood; the islands of the sea fall into the hands of the fierce barbarian, and at 
last, near thirty years after the contest began, their fleets land their armies in Italy, and they rush upon 
Rome. The city is besieged, falls, and for fourteen days a pitiless barbarian soldiery spare neither age nor 
sex. The spoil gathered for eight hundred years, from a hundred conquered nations, is carriedaway and 
loaded upon the Vandal fleets, and the blasted, scourged, and pillaged Capital is abandoned as unworthy 
to be held as a permanent possession. Surely these facts correspond to the Second Trumpet vision. 

3. The blazing meteor that follows the sound of the third trumpet has been found to imply some mighty 
leader who suddenly appears and enters upon a paleful work. Is there such a leader? Before A. D. 440, 
the Romans knew nothing of the Hungarian nation. About that time there suddenly appeared, as a 
meteor would flash in the sky, a warrior upon the banks of the river Danube, with eight hundred thousand 
fighting men under his banners. They had come from the depths of Central Asia, marched north of the 
\Euxine Sea through Russia, and now knocked at the river boundary of the Roman Empire. Overcoming 
opposition to their passage of the Danube, they rushed westward, crossed the river Rhine, and on the 
river Marne were met in conflict by the hosts of Rome. The historians tell us that the blood of slaught- 
ered heroes made the river run with blood, and that from one hundred and fifty thousand to three hundred. 
thousand bodies of the dead attested the fury of the conflict. Then they desolated the river Rhine to its 
mouth. Turning southward, on the banks of the river Rhone, the hosts metagaininfury. Then, descend- 
ing from the Alps, the fierce warrior, on the banks of the river Po, contended for the mastery of Italy. 
Victorious, he marched southward to seize the imperial prize. Unable to contend longer, Rome sent a 
priestly deputation to ask him to depart. By rich bribes and by work on his superstition they succeeded, 
and he retired, made Buda, on the river Danube, his capital, and founded the Hungarian nation. When he 
died, his followers turned the waters of the Danube from its course, buried him in its bed, and then let 
them return to flow over the grave of the hero. Beneath the waters of the river Danube still lie the bones 


448 REVELATION. [Ch. IX. 





CHAPTER IX. 


The Woe Trumpets, 


‘SUMMARY.—The Fifth Trumpet. The Fallen Star. The Destroying Lo- 
eusts. The Five Months of Their Power. The Sixth Trumpet. The 
Four Angels at the Euphrates Loosed. The Myriads of the Horsemen. 
The Third Part of Men Killed. The Rest of Mankind Repent Not. CHAPTER IX. 


And the fifth angel sound- 1 
1 And the fifth angel sounded, and? I saw a star | ed, and 1 saw a star from 


I 
fall from heaven unto the earth: and to him was | 2s28°, id there was given 


a b 3s pit. to him the key of the pit 
given the key of” the bottomless pit. _ Be Reto a a 
2 And he opened the bottomless pit; and there | ed the pit of theabyss; and 
arose® a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a | (i Pho sinoke of 
great furnace; and the sun and the air were dark-|a great furnace; and the 
x : sun and the air were dark- 
ened by reason of the smoke of the pit. ened by reason of the 








a Luke 10:18; Rev. 8:10. 6 Luke 8:31; Rev. 17:8; 20:1. ¢ Joel 2:2,10. 





‘of the star called Wormwood, that fell upon therivers. The trumpets have blown, three awful blows have 
been struck, and the weakened empire is ready to fall when the fourth trumpet blows. ’ 

4. The fourth trumpet. Read again the 12th verse. We have found that the Goths struck their blow 
about A. D. 409; the Vandals from the sea about A. D. 422; and Attila upon the rivers about A. D. 440. 
What follows? Weare to seek the fulfillment in the next and finalinvasion of Rome. It occurred A. D. 476. 
Odoacer, king of the Heruli, a Northern race, encouraged by the apparent weakness of the falling empire, 
besieged and took the almost helpless city. Augustulus, the feeble emperor, was hurled down, the Roman 
Senate that had met for twelve hundred and twenty-eight years, was driven from the Senate chambers, 
the mighty fabric of empire fell to the dust, and the great men were humbled never to rise again. sun, 
moon, and stars, emperor, princes, and great men, are smitten, lose their power, and cease to give light. 
Nay,more. There now began the period called by all historians the ‘“‘Dark Ages.” The fall of Rome 
introduced the period when, intellectually and spiritually, the day and night were darkened; when the 
minds of men were blinded, and when the Church, falling gradually into apostasy, gave forth for ages only 
a feeble light to human souls. Again the correspondence is complete. 

THE THIRD PART.—The third part is named in each of these four judgments. The first falls on a third 
part of the earth, the second on a third part of the sea, the third on a third part of the rivers, and the 
fourth on a third part of the sun, moon and stars. If they were to fall upon a third part of the great 
Roman world, (1) upon its land provinces, (2) upon its seas, (3) upon its river systems, and (4)-upon 
emperors and rulers (sun, moon and stars), the whole would thus be fulfilled. This is just what took place. 
During a great part of the period when the events were taking place which are covered by the seven 
trnmpets, the great Roman world was divided into three parts. Gibbon, Chap. LIIL., says: ‘“ From the 
age of Charlemagne to that of the Crusades, the world (for I overlook the remote monarchy of China) 
was occupied and disputed by the three great empires, or nations of the Greeks, the Saracens, and the 
Franks.” “The three great nations of the world, the Greeks, the Saracens, and the Franks, encountered 
each other on the plains of Italy.’—Chap. LVI. “ Vhree classes of men during that interval are conspicu- 
ous, the Saracens or Arabians, the Latins or Franks, inhabitants of Western Europe, and the Byzantine 
Greeks.” —Phil. Inquiries, Part III. These quotations, which might be multiplied, show that during the 
long period of a thousand years, a period embraced in the fulfillment of the visions of J ohn, the civilized 
world was divided into three distinct parts, and that these were clearly marked in history. It is upon one 
of these parts, a third part, the Western third part, called the Latin or Frank part, that all the calamities 
of the four invasions of Goths, Vandals, Huns and Heruli fell. It was the Western third part, the Old 
Roman Empire, which fell forever under their blows. 


CHAPTER IX. 


It has already been seen that the trumpet angels are divided into two groups. There remain the three 
who have been called the woe angels, on account of the language applied to them in chapter 8:13. Itis 
manifest that the first four have completed their work, and that the others are devoted to another and a 
distinct work, which shall be the source of great woe to a part of the inhabitants of the earth. This work 
must be at a later period, and hence must be after the year 476. 

1-6. Isaw a star from heaven fallen. (Revision.) John saw when the trumpet sounded, not a 

Star fall, but a star fallen to the earth. A starisasymbol of a leader. A star fallen to the earth would 


Ch. EX} REVELATION. 





3 And there came out of the smoke* locusts upon 
‘the earth: and unto them was given power, as the 
scorpions of the earth have power. 

A And it was commanded them that” they should 
not hurt the grass of the earth, neither any green 
‘thing, neither any tree; but only those men which 
have not® the seal of God written in their foreheads. 

5 And to them it was given that they should not 
kill them,* but that they should be tormented five 
months: and their torment was as the torment of a 
scorpion, when he striketh a man. 

6 And in those days’ shall men seek death, and 

shall not find it; and shall desire to die, and death 
shall flee from them. 
_ 7 And‘ the shapes of the locusts were like unto 
horses prepared unto battle; and on their heads 
were as it were crowns like gold,® and their faces 
were as the faces of men. 

8 ‘And they had hair as the hair of women, and" 
their teeth were as the teeth of lions. 

9 And they had breastplates, as it were breast- 
plates of iron; and the sound of their wings was as 
the sound of chariots of many horses running to 
battle. 

10 And they had tails like unto scorpions, and 
thexe were stings in their tails: and their power was 
to hurt men five months. 

11 And‘ they had a king over them, which 1s the 
angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in .the 
Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek 
‘tongue hath is name Apollyon. 


d Rey. 11:7. 
h Joel 1:6. 





c Rev. 7:8. 
g Dan. 7:8. 


aEx.10:4. 6 Rev. 6:6. 
Rey. 6:16. f Nahum 3:17. 





indicate his degradation in some way. 
_given power to let out hellish influences on 


came forth some influence, symbolized by smoke, which darkened the earth. 
The destroying locusts symbolize destroying armies. 
To the smoke their origin is due. 


the smoke locusts. 
“Observe that they come out of the smoke. 
power. Power to hurt is implied, since they are eompared to scorpions. 
the grass, etc. The locusts usually devour every green 
trees and vegetation. Only the men. 
sealed as God’sown. 5. They should not kill them. 





Their special hurt shall be directed 
This either implies that the armies symbolized 


A449 


smoke of the pit. And out 3 
of the smoke came forth 
locusts upon the earth; 
and power was given them, 

as the scorpions of the 
earth have power. Andit 4 
was said unto them that 
they should not hurt the 
grass of the earth, neither 
any green thing, neither 
any tree, but only such 
men as have not the seal 
of God on their foreheads. 
And it was given them 5 
that they should not kill 
them, but that they should 
be tormented five months; 
and their torment was as 
the torment of a scorpion, 
when it striketh a man. 
And in those days men 6 
shall seek death, and shall 

in no wise find it; and they 
shall desire to die, and 
death fieeth from them. 
And the shapes of the lo- 7 
custs were like unto horses 
prepared for war ; and upon 
their heads as it were 
crowns like unto gold, and 
their faces were as men’s 
faces. Andthey had hair 8 
as the hair of women, and 
their teeth were as the teeth 

of lions. And they had 9 
breastplates, as it were 
breastplates of iron; and 
the sound of their wings 
was as the sound of chari- 
ots, of many horses rush- 
ing to war. And they have 10 
tails like unto scorpions, 
and stings; and in their 
tails is their power to hurt 
men five months. They 
have over them as king the 
angel of the abyss: his 
name in Hebrew is Abad- 
don, and in the Greek 
tongue he hath the name 
Apollyon. 





= 


1 





e Job 3:21; 7:15; Isa. 2:19; Hos. 10:85 Luke 23 :29,303 
4 John 12:31; 14:30; Eph. 2:2; 2 Thes. 2:3,10. 





To him was given the key of the bottomless pit. He was 
the earth. 2. There arose a smoke. From that source 


8. There came out of 
See Nahum 3: 15; Ex. 10: 12. 
Unto them was given 
4. They should not hurt 


thing. These, however, shall seek to preserve 


against men who are not 


by the locusts should seek not to destroy the races they attacked, or that they should not destroy the 
empire assailed. Five months. Their torment should continue five months, or one hundred and fifty 


prophetic days. Since a day is a symbol of 


a year, this implies one hundred and fifty years. Their tor- 


mentas the torment of a scorpion. Their warfare and torment.shall be almost intolerable. 6. Shall 
men seck death. So terrible will be the torment that death will be desired. 


7-11. 
ance of the locusts is described. 
an appearance like golden crowns. 

-appearance. Faces of men. Face 
beards 159)" be a striking feature. 
9 


“4 


~ 


And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared for war. The appear- 
They represent armies of horsemen. Crowns like gold. There was 
An array of men wearing yellow turbans would have such an 
s covered with beard. Roman soldiers wore no beard, hence the 
8. Hair as the hair of women. Wearing long, flowing hair. 


450 REVELATION. Ph. LX. 


st Woe is past: be- 12 
12 One* woe is past; and, behold, there come two |, 13° there comer yet two 


Q , ere: > Woes hereafter. 
woes more hereafter. 4 Ana tha alent, Gameohae 
13 And the sixth angel sounded, and I heard a} goundea, and 1 heard’ a 


voice from the four horns of the golder. altar which | foiee from 1h. Mich $3 


is before God, 


a Rey. 8:13. 














Teeth as the teeth of lions. This probably signifies fierceness. 9. Breastplates as breastplates 
of iron. There was something that seemed like an army clad in iron coats of mail. The sound of 
their wings. They gave a sound like the rush of chariots and horses rushing to battle. 10. And 
they had tails. They stung terribly, and left a sting in their path. 11. They had a king over them. 
The real king was not the star, but the power of the bottomless pit. Apollyon. The destroyer; either 
the devil or one of his angels. 


FULFILLMENT. 


The locust, the horse, the horsemen, the scorpions, and indeed all the symbols point to Arabia as 
the source from whence the locusts come. I believe that there ought to be no reasonable doubt that the 
uprising of the Mohammedan or Saracen power is meant. The Western Roman Empire had fallen in 
A.D. 476. There yet existed the Eastern Roman Empire, with Constantinople for a capitai, called the 
Greek Empire. Against it the Saracen effort was especially directed. Let us see howothat movement. 
corresponded to the symbols: It was at the right time, after A. D. 476, and in the right place, directed 
against the eastern part of the Old Roman world. Not only the facts just mentioned, but the description 
of the men symbolized by the locusts, point to Arabia. The locusts ‘were like unto horses prepared for 
battle.’ The Arabians, unlike the Goths, Vandals, and Huns, were an army of horsemen, and moved 
over a country almost with the swiftness of the locust. Let the reader note the following facts concern- 
ing the Arabs: 1. They came forth from the home of the locust. 2. They all fought on horseback. 
There was not a foot-soldier in the armies which in A. D. 632 assailed the Eastern Empire. 3. They wore 
upon their heads something like crowns of gold. The historians often speak of them as the “turbaned 
Arabs.” Ezekiel (23: 42), speaking of the Sabeans, which were an Arabian tribe, says, ‘‘The Sabeans of 
the wilderness who put upon their heads beautiful crowns.”’ The yellow turbans of the Arab horsemen, 
at a little distance, would strikingly resemble “‘crowns of gold.” 4, The locusts had “the faces of men.’ 
The Jews and Arabs wore long, patriarchal beards. The Roman and northern races shaved the face. 
John notes that these locusts have the distinguishing mark of manhood in the East,—the unshorn beard. 
5. But to the faces of men is added “the hair of women.” The female distinction is long hair, and 
evidently John beholds, as the riders rush by, long hair flowing from their shoulders and streaming in 
the air. Did the Arabs in the seventh century wear long hair? Pliny, who was the contemporary of 
John, speaks (Nat. His. 7: 28) of ‘‘the turbaned Arabs with their uncut hair.’?> Ammianus Marcellinus in 
the fourth, and Jerome in the fifth century, each speak of the long-haired Arabs. An Arabian poem, 
Antar, written in Mahomet’s time, often speaks of the hair of its heroes flowing down upon their 
shoulders. We quote: “He adjusted himself, twisted his beard, and folded his hair under his turban, 
drawing it up from his shoulders.” 6. But the locusts had ‘“‘breastplates, as it were breastplates of iron.”” 
The historians of the Arabian wars constantly speak of the iron coats of mail. Mohammed, in the Koran,, 
says: “God has given you coats of mail to defend you in your wars.” 

OTHER DErarys.—Many corroborations might be added. 1. Mohammed was literally a fallen star. He- 
was a prince by birth, the heir of the rule of Mecca, but his grandfather and father dying while he was 
young, he was pushed aside and became a servant. 2. The locusts came out of the smoke. The Arabs were 
unknown as a conquering power before Mohammed. The smoke of his imposture filled them with the: 
fierce, stern fanaticism of the Koran. 3. They had literal orders in their invasions not to destroy vegeta- 
tion. “Cut down no palin trees, nor burn fields of corn. Destroy no fruit trees.’’—Gibbon, Vol. V., page 189. 
4. Passing other marks, their destructive work was to continue five months, or one hundred and fifty years. 
Though Mohammed’s work began earlier, it was in A. D. 632 that the Arab hosts burst forth from their 
deserts to assail the world. Within a hundred years Palestine, Syria, Mesopotamia, Egypt, the north of 
Africa, and Spain had fallen beneath their sway. In 762, the capital of the Saracen Empire was placed at, 
Bagdad and their rulers began to cherish peaceful ideas. In 781, the Caliph Haroun Al Rashid was their 
ruler. This is the golden age of the Saracen power. This is the era of the Arabian Nights. Bagdad was. 
called the “City of Peace.” How long is this from the time when the torment that had stricken half the 
world began? In A. D. 632, the Arabs assailed the nations, to which date one hundred and fifty years may 
be added. This would bring us to 782, the second year of Haroun Al Rashid’s reign. Did the torment 
continue longer? Nay. He was engaged in friendly correspondence with the Christian rulers of Europe, 





Ch, UX | REVELATION. 451 

14 Saying to the sixth angel which had the before God, one saying, 14 
: . ae ixth ang ic 
trumpet, Loose the four angels which are bound? in | jaa fiotrumpel Looce the 
the great river Euphrates. four angels which are 
s ; bound at the great river 

15 And the four angels were loosed, which were | Euphrates. And the four 15 
prepared for an hour, and a day, and a month, and ie 
a year, for to slay the third part of men. hour and day and month 
16 And”. tl 5 1 fi and year, that they should 
n he number of the army of¢ the horse- kill the third part-of men. 

men were two hundred thousand thousand:¢ and I mies of he hoe Ga i 
heard the number of them. ee 

17 And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and number of them. And thus 17 
them that sat on them, having breastplates of fire, fier Menno a 
and of jacinth, and brimstone: and® the heads of | them, having breastplates 
: as of fire and of brimstone: 
the horses were as the heads of lions; and out of | and the heads of the hors- 
their mouths issued fire, and smoke, and brimstone. lb eroren aptcae er 
18 By these three was the third part of men kill- | Proceedeth fire and smoke 

A and brimstone. By these 18 
ed, by the fire, and by the smoke, and by the brim- | three plagues was the third 
stone, which issued out of their mouths. oe the suoke nel ee 
19 For their power is in their mouths, and in| brimstone, which po eens. 
a : f 5 : Z ed out of their mouths. 

their tails:* for their tails were like unto serpents, | For the power of the hors- 19 
% . a es 1S in elr mouth, and In 
and had heads, and with them they do hurt. foie taille. fon chele tale 
are like unto serpents, and 








have heads; and with them 





a Rev. 16:12. 6 Psa. 68:17; Dan. 7:10. ¢ Ezek. 88:4. d Rev. 7:4. 


e1 Chron. 12:8; Isa. 5:28. flsa. 9:15. 





and from this time the Saracens ceased their efforts to make the world Mohammedan. Their aggressive 


wars were forever ended. 


THE SIXTH TRUMPET. 


18-15. The sixth angel sounded. A voice is then heard coming from the golden altar of incense 


(see 8: 3). 


which are bound at the great river Euphrates. The four angels represent four ag! 


He does not say who spoke, but declares the command uttered. 14. Loose the four angels 
encies which had 


been restrained and kept from advancing. 15. And the four angels were loosed. Whatever these 
angels represent, they are no longer restrained. It is implied that there were four agencies, or a fourfold 
division. Prepared for an hour, and a day, and a month, and a year. The Greek word used is 
that for the regular solar year of 3651-4 days, Julius Czesar having reformed the calendar. This would 
make 365 1-4, plus 30, plus 1, plus 1-12, equal 396 1-3 days. Or,a day being a symbol of a year, three hundred 
and ninety-six years and four months. 

16-19. The number of the armies of the horsemen. Countless armies of horsemen are signified. 
17. Having breastplates as of fire and of hyacinth and of brimstone. Or, bright red, blue and 
yellow. These are the colors observed. The heads of the horses. Strength and fierceness are implied. 
Out of their mouths proceedeth fire and smoke and brimstone. This is a destroying power. It 
might well describe the use of gunpowder. One looking at a distance would see the flash of fire, and the 
smoke, apparently coming from the horses’ heads, would smell the brimstone odor, and would see the 
destructive effect. 18. By these three plagues. The fire, smoke and brimstone. These agencies 
slay the third part of men. We have before found that the Old Roman world was divided into three 
parts. One third part had been destroyed by the first four trumpet invasions. A second third part was 
taken by the Saracens. If now the third third part was taken and destroyed by these three plagues, the 


symbolism would be fulfilled. 
THE FULFILLMENT. 


We have found that the Arabian scourge had fulfilled its work by A. D.782. It had taken from the East- 
ern Empire its provinces in Africa, and most of its possessions in Asia. The world, according to Gibbon, 
was at this time divided into three parts. Two of these had fallen before five destructive agencies. One 


still remains to be destroyed by the angels bound at the river Euphrates. 
A few years before the thousandth year of the Christian era, a fierce Tartar race, formidable by num- 


452 REVELATION. ° RGips LX: 


es 4 ; Pal they do hurt. And the rest 20 
20 And the rest of the men which were not killed | of nauk ian ee 


by these plagues, yet* repented not of the works of not killed "with dese 
their hands, that they should not worship? devils,° | fne°works cr their hands, 
and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, Loa DAs ace h 
and of wood; which neither can see, nor hear, nor| of gold, and of silver, and 
: of brass, and of stone, and 
walk: F of wood; which can neither 
21 Neither repented they of their murders, nor | s°; ri ers ie Spon 8 
of their sorceries, nor of their fornications, nor of | their murders, nor of their 
: soreeries, nor of their for- 
their thefts. nication, nor of their 
thefts. 


@ Deut. 31:29; 2 Chron. 28:22; Jer. 5:3. b Ley. 17:7; Deut. 82:17; Psa. 106:37; 1 Cor. 10:20. ¢ Psa. 115:43; 135:15. 




















bers and bravery, left their seats east of the Caspian Sea and moved southwestward, until they rested upon 
the river Euphrates. A yast region of country east of that river fell before their arms. Persia became 
one of their provinces, and India, as far as the ocean, was subjected to their sway. But for two genera- 
tions they “were bound by the river Euphrates,” and, lying upon its eastern banks, their armies were 
restrained by the river from ravaging the countries that lie to the west. For more than half a century, in 
some mysterious way, they were restrained at that river. At last, in the year 1057, sixty years after their 
appearance upon the east bank of that stream, after being bound for two generations, they crossed the 
Euphrates and marched upon the eastern Roman Empire. This people were called the Turkomans or 
Turkmans; we eall them Turks. 

There were four angels. This would imply,in some way, four powers. It isremarkable that this people 
were divided into four bodies, which formed four kingdoms, under the four grandsons of the leader who 
established the empire of the Turks in western Asia. The prince who was commissioned by the Caliph to 
attack the Greek Empire was named Togrul, but dying, his son, Alp Arslan, led the Turks across the 
Euphrates, and when he was slain in battle, he was succeeded by Malek Shah. If the reader will open at 
the 532d page of Gibbon, Vol. V., he will find that the mighty empire of Malek Shah was divided into four 
principalities, under his four sons, which are described by tla historian under the names of Persia, Ker- 
man or India, Syria, Roum or Asia Minor, extending from the shores of the Indian Ocean to the Medi- 
terranean. There are then four angels or messengers of destruction. 

Observe the correspondence: (1) They were bound at the Euphrates. (2) There were four commands, 
(3) Their armies were of horsemen, apparently countless. (4) They numbered their horsemen by myriads 
instead of by thousands. Gibbon often speaks of the,myriads of horse. See Chap. LVII. (5) “The 
Ottomans until a very recent period wore warlike apparel of scarlet, blue and yellow.” (6) The first time 
that gunpowder and firearms were employed in war was in their campaigns. Constantinople was taken 
by cannon. See Gibbon, Chap. LXVIII. I quote one passage: “‘ The great cannon of Mahomet has been 
separately noticed; an important and visible object in the history of the.times; but that enormous engine 
was flanked by two fellows almost of equal magnitude; the long order of the Turkish artillery was pointed 
against the walls; fourteen batteries thundered at once on the most accessible places; and of one of these 
it is ambiguously expressed, that 1t was mounted with one hundred and thirty balls, or discharged one 
hundred and thirty bullets.” (7) There was power in the tails of the horses. Thisisa singular statement. 
No less singular is the fact that among the Turks the horse’s tail is an emblem of power. The number of 
horses’ tails determines rank. A Pacha of three tails is a great officer. The emblem of the rule of the 
Pachas, the most wasteful, oppressive, unjust rule the world has ever seen, is the horse’s tail. 

THE TIME.—One point more must suffice. It has been already shown that the prophetic period is three 
hundred and ninety-six years and four months, and it must evidently begin at the time when the angels 
were “ loosed”’ in order to commence their work. It was in the year 1057, that the Turkish armies crossed 
the river and assailed the Empire. By the beginning of the next century their conquests extended to the 
Hellespont, and embraced all that portion of the world now portrayed upon the maps as Turkey in Asia, 
Then came the mighty uprising of Europe in the Crusades, which for the time beat back the torrent of 
Moslem invasion and recovered a portion of Asia. Between Europe and Asia the contest continued for 
two centuries, when Europe, weary of the fruitless struggle, abandoned the attempt, and the Turkish 
Empire, re-organized with the Ottoman Turks in power, passed over into Europe. The Eastern Empire 
was soon shorn of all its terrritories and reduced to the city of Constantinople. In the year 1453, assailed 
by two hundred thousand” Turks, its walls battered down by the first cannon ever used in a siege, one 
hundred thousand of its citizens lying dead upon the ramparts, it was stormed by the Turks, and the last 
relic of the mighty empire which had existed for two thousand two hundred years was swept away for- 
ever. The work was done. The Empire fell in 1453. In 1057 the work began by the passage of the 
Euphrates. The interval between 1s three hundred and ninety-six years! 


Ch. X.] REVELATION. i 453 


ite 





CHAPTER X. 


The Open Book. F 


SUMMARY.—The Strong Angel. The Open Book. Standing on Sea and 
Land. The Seven Thunders. The Angel’s Oath. John Asked to 
~Devour the Book. Sweet, and Yet Bitter. Called on Again to Proph- 


esy. CHAPTER X. 


1 And I saw another mighty angel come down! . AndIsaw another strong 1 
. - o angel coming down out of 
from heaven, clothed with a cloud;* and a rainbow | heaven, arrayed with a 


was upon his head, and? his face was as it were the | (ouds and, the, rainbow 


sun, and his feet® as pillars of fire; face was as the sun, and 
his feet as pillars of fire; 








@ Ezek. 1:28. 6 Matt. 17:2. c Rev. 1:15. 





' This remarkable prophecy is still more exact. The reader cannot fail to note particularly the language 
of the prophecy. We have found it to mean exactly 396 years and four months. On January 28th, 1057, 
according to Arabian historians, the Turks marched from Bagdad. 396 years and four months, or 120 days, 
would bring us to May 29th, 1453, the very day of the fall of Constantinople, and of the final overthrow of the 
Greek third part of the world. 

20,21. The rest . . . repented not. It is implied that these woes were sent as judgments. 
The Christianity of the East overthrown by the Saracens and Turks had become utterly corrupt. The 
rest, that is, those in other countries not conquered by Turks, continued their sins. That they should 
not worship devils. The worship of dead saints is what is meant by demon worship in the Scriptures. 
And the idols. Images had now been introduced into the churches everywhere and were worshiped. 
21. They repented not of their murders. In the Crusade against the Albigenses, conducted by 
Rome in the thirteenth century, it is estimated that one million of martyrs perished. Sorceries. Tricks 
to deceive, so characteristic of the priests. Fornication. This term may mean spiritual fornication or 
apostasy, and it may mean literal fornication. In either sense it is true of the religious features of the 
fifteenth century. Thefts. Thefts in resorting to deceptions and impostures to extort money from the 
people. Tetzel’s mission to Germany early in the sixteenth century is an {llnstration. Instead of repent- 
ance after the great judgment on the Eastern Church, the Western Church grew worse and worse. 

We have now followed the opening of the seals and the blowing of the trumpets to the sixth trumpet 
under the seventh seal. These have been followed in their order, then history has been consulted and, 
following in chronological order, have been found great epochal events in history which corresponded 
surprisingly to the symbolism of the visions. The American Editor of Lange on Revelation says: “‘ The 
writer must acknowledge that, after a careful consideration of the principal views that had been pre- 
sented, he has been constrained to the conclusion that the scheme of interpretation advocated by Elliott 
and Barnes (Substantially that which I have followed—B. W. J.) isin most respects correct. The points 
of resemblance between the symbols and the events of history, especially as portrayed by the infidel Gib- 
bon, are too many, too striking and too exact, to allow the thought that they are merely fortuitous. It 
would seem as though God had raised up the great historian just mentioned to perform a work for the 
Bible and the Church, which could not have been so effectively performed by a friend. At times it seems 
as though he was writing history expressly to elucidate prophecy.”’—Lange on Revelation, page 213. 

I will add that I have consulted Lange, Diisterdieck, Meyer, Elliott, Barnes, Alford, Prof. Wm. Milli- 
gan, Swedenborg, Archdeacon Lee, and all the principal commentators on Revelation, and find no other 
interpretation clear, consistent and complete. They are all more or less meaningless. 


CHAPTER X. 


The tenth and eleventh chapters should be one chapter. They relate to one series of events. The 
reader should keep in mind the point reached in the unveiling of the symbols. The sixth trumpet has 
blown. The Euphratean horsemen have done their work in “a year, a month, a day and an hour.” The 
Greek Empire, the last remnant of the old Roman world known to John, has fallen. The state of “the 
rest” is described in the last verses of chapter 9. The events beheld in chapters 10 and 11 up to 11: 15 
pelong still to the sixth trumpet. As the Greek Empire fell in 1453, the symbols in these chapters point to 
events subsequent to that date. ‘ 

1-8. I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven. -This mighty angel was seen in 
vision and is to be regarded as a symbol. The description is very much like that of the Son of Man 
in chapter 1. While the whole may signify some momentous movement the similarity of the description 


454 REVELATION. LCI xe: 


7 7 : x -a/and he had in his hand a 2 
2 And he had in his hand a little book open:*| amd he hac opel Gna Be 


and he set his right foot upon the sea, and his left | set his right foot upon the 
sea, and his left upon the 
foot upon the earth, earth; and he eried with a 3 
a ; 7 1 reat voice, as a lion roar- 
3 And eried with a loud voice, as when a lion oie wet whenneeree 
roareth: and when he had cried, seven” thunders | seven thunders untered 
: : : their voices. And when the 4 
uttered their voices. seven thunders uttered 
a ip | their voices, I was about to 
4 And when the seven thunders had uttered their wiht aad edu 
voices, I was about to write: and I heard a voice from heaven saying. Seal 
. . 1 
from heaven saying unto me,° Seal up those things | sdven° thuniers atterad 


which the seven thunders uttered, and write them 
not. 














a Matt. 28:18. 6 Rev. 8:5. c¢ Dan. 8:26. 





implies that Christ comes in that movement. Let the facts stated be observed closely. 1. Heisa mighty 
angel, 2. He comes down from heaven, enveloped in a cloud. 3. The rainbow about his head is the sym- 
bol of hope and peace. 4. The shining of his face and feet indicate that he shall spread light and intelli- 
gence. 5. His standing on sea and land shows that his mission was to the whole world. 6. The angel 
holds in his hand an open book. The roll is not only unsealed, but it is unrolled so that it can be read. 
This open book occupies a very conspicuous place in his work. The book in the angel’s hand must be an 
emblem of some fact. 7. The seventh fact is that when he, standing on land and sea, with the open book 
in his hand, cried in a loud voice, a command, or proclamation, or a call for attention, the seven thunders 
uttered their voices. The whole evidently signifies some mighty movement on the earth inaugurated by 
Christ. 

THE FULFILLMENT.—Beginning in the early part of the sixteenth century, within a short time of the 
date already reached, was a movement which corresponds fully to the symbols. Indeed the REFORMA- 
TION might be said to have begun earlier with Wicklif and Huss, but was fully inaugurated in the six- 
teenth century. It was amovement (1) in which Christ came in spirit; (2) amovement full of peace and 
hope; (3) a movement to diffuse light; (4) a movement for the whole world; (5) a movement due to the 
influence of the open book. The Reformation was the work of a book. Whatever the Romish clergy may 
pretend now, there is no doubt that before the Reformation they had taken the Bible from the people. 
The whole influence of the Catholic Church was opposed to its circulation, and in many instances persons 
have been burned for no other crime than having the Bible in their houses. The book was left sealed up 
in dead languages, and it was impossible for it to be read in the native tongue of any European people. 
This radiant angel, however, has in his hand a book open, Significant of the fact that in God’s providence 
the Reformation should present the New Testament, open, to the world. 

4. When the seven thunders had uttered their voices, etc. The seven thunders (the definite 
article in the Revision) uttered their voices when the angel cried in a loud voice. John was forbidden to 
record what they uttered. Certain facts will help us to understand what is meant. 1. The apostate power 
which had taken away and closed the book of the New Testament was called the seven-hilled city, and is 
alluded to in Revelation as the woman that sat on seven mountains (chap. 17: 9). 2, The word thunder has 
been constantly used to describe the threatening, blasphemous, and authoritative fulminations issued by 
the seven-hilled power against its enemies. To illustrate this, Le Bas says in his life of Wiclif, page 198: 
“ The thunders which shook the world when they issued JSrom the seven hills, sent forth an uncertain sound, 
comparatively faint and powerless, when launched from a region of less devoted sanctity.” These eccle= 
siastical thunders derived their power from the fact that they were hurled from the seven-hilled city. Very 
appropriately the bulls and anathemas of Rome may then be called the seven thunders. 3. It is a historic 
fact that the opening of the book by the Reformation, called forth the loudest voices of the seven thunders, 
The anathemas that had been wont to shake the nations were hurled at Luther and his supporters. , 

John says that he was about to write what they uttered. His act is symbolic. He becomes himself a part 
of the symbclism. His act shows that the voices of the seven thunders claimed a record as of divine 
authority. There was something uttered, and what was uttered was so presented that John was about to 
record it in the word of God. Then he heard a voice Srom heaven which bade him seal up what was uttered 
and write if not. When we remember that the thunders that issued from the Vatican were regarded by the 
nations as the voice of God, and that the Pope claimed to be the vicar of Christ, we can understand the 
meaning cf John’s symbolical purpose to record them as a part of the word of God, and also that of 
the heavenly voice which forbade them to be written. It simply represents what did take place among 
the reformers. There was an open book offered to the world. This resulted in the voices of the thunders 
of the seven-billed city. At first there was a disposition on the part even of Martin Luther, to listen to 


ChoX.] REVELATION. 


455 





5 And the angel which I saw stand upon the sea 
and upon the earth, lifted up his hand to heaven, 

6 And sware by him that? 
ever, who created heaven, and_ the things that 
therein are, and the earth, and the things that 
therein are, and the sea, and the things which are 
therein,” that there should be time no longer: 

7 But? inthe days of the voice of the seventh 
angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of 
God should be finished, as he hath declared to his 
servants the prophets. , 

8 And the voice which I heard from heaven 
spake unto me again, and said, Go and take the 
little book which is open in the hand of the angel 
which standeth upon the sea and upon the earth. 

9 And I went unto the angel, and said unto him, 
Give me the little book. And he said unto me, 
Take‘ if, and eat it up; and it shall make thy belly 
bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as honey. 

10 And I took the little book out of the angel’s 
hand, and ate it up; and it was in my mouth sweet 
as honey: and as soon as I had eaten it, my belly 
was bitter. 

11 And he said unto me, Thou must prophesy 
again before many peoples, and nations, and 
tongues, and kings. 


liveth for ever and! 





and write them not. And 
the angel which I saw 
standing upon the sea and 
upon the earth lifted up 
his right hand to heaven, 
and sware by him that liv- 
eth for ever and ever, who 
created the heaven and the 
things that are therein,and 
the earth and the things 
that are therein, and the 
sea and the things that are 
therein, that there shall be 
time no longer: but in the 
days of the voice of the 
seventh angel, when he is 
about to sound, then is fin- 
ished the mystery of God, 
according to the good ti- 
dings which he declared to 
his servants the prophets. 
And the voice which 
heardfrom heaven, J heard 
it again speaking with me, 
and saying, Go, take the 
book which is open in the 
hand of the angel that 
standeth upon the sea and 
upon the earth. And I 
went unto the angel, say- 
ing unto him that he should 
give me the little book. 
And he saith unto me, 
Take it, and eat it up; and 
it shall make thy belly bit- 
ter, but in thy mouth it 
shall be sweet as honey. 
And I took the little book 
out of the angel’s hand, 
and ate it up; and it was 
inmy mouth sweet as hon- 
ey: and when I had eaten 
if, my belly was made bit- 
ter. And they say ‘unto 
me, Thou must prophesy 
again over many peoples 
and nations and tongues 
and kings. 








c Rey. 11:15. 


ader. 10:10. 6 Dan. 12:7; Rev. 16:17. 


d Jer. 15:16; Ezek. 2:8; 3:1. 





5 


6 


T 


I8 


9 


10 


-these thunders as divine, but finally he committed the Papal Bull issued against his teachings to the 


flames to be rejected and it was rejected by the Reformers. 
5-7. And the angel . . sware 


that there should be time no longer. The whole pas- 


sage means that the time remaining is short, and that in the time of the seventh trumpet angel the whole 
consummation shall be reached. In response to the anathemas, thunders, and persecutions, ealled forth 


by the Reformation, the great 


angel who stands on both sea and land lifted his hand and uttered his sol- 


emn oath that the period of probation, persecution and suffering on the part of the Church, soon shall 
end. In chapter 6, verse 11, the suffering martyrs of Pagan persecution ery, O Lord, how long? And 


here to the second great body 

mystery shall be finished when the seventh angel shall sound. 
8-11. Go and take the little book . 

chapter. 1. The angel holds in his hand an open 


of martyrs assurance is given that events are h 


astening to theend. The 


eat it up. I will give a synopsis of the events of the 
book. 2. He calls attention to itina loud voice. 3. The 


seven thunders launch their thunderbolts against the reception of the open book by the world. 4. John is 


about to record their words, but is forbidden. 
power 


5. The angel affirms with an oath, that the duration of the 
and terror of the seven thunders shall be short, and that soon the seventh angel shall sound uni- 


versal redemption and triumph. 6. John is bidden to take the book. 7. He receives it and is told to eat it, 
In the nineteenth Psalm the 


or to receive and devour its contents. 
word of the Lord is compared 
great object of this angel seems 


g. Its words are sweet like honey. 
to the sweetness of honey. 9. There are bitter e 
to be to present the open book to the world. 
times in the chapter , twice it is stated that the book was open. John, in behalf of h 


ffects that follow. The 
The book is mentioned four 
umanity, receives the 


book; a symbol of the reception of the New Testament in their own tongues, received by the nations as a 


result of the Reformation. 


The word of the Lord was received by the people with great eagerness and 


456 REVELATION. [Ch. XI. 


CHAPTER XI. 


The Two Witnesses. 


SuMMARY.—The Temple Measured. The Holy City Trodden Down by the 
Gentiles. The Two Witnesses. Prophesying in Sackcloth. The Forty- 
Two Months. The Witnesses Slain. The Witnesses Exalted. The 
Fall of the Wicked City. The Seventh Trumpet Blown. The Final 
Triumph. CHAPTER XI. 

1 And there was given me* a reed like unto a), 20d there was een? 


rod: and the angel stood, saying, Rise,” and meas-| one said, Rise, and meas- 
ure the temple of God, and the altar, and them| the ciate aud ue Chae 
that worship therein. ieee aes ae en 
2 But* the court which is without the temple| temple leave without, and 
leave out, and measure it not; for‘ it is given unto | eon iven unto the mae 
the Gentiles; and the holy city shall they® tread | tions: and the holy city 


shall they tread under foot 
under foot! forty and two months. 








@ Ezek. 40:3; Zech. 2:1. 6 Num. 23:18. ¢ Ezek. 40:17. d Psa. 79:1; Luke 21:24. eDan. 8:10. fRey. 13:5. 





joy. They found it “sweeter than honey in the honey comb.” But while they devoured the word with: 
great enjoyment, there were bitter effects that followed. Millions, perhaps, in all, were persecuted and put. 
to death because they had accepted the book and suffered it to'determine their lives and worship. 

There is portrayed last another consequence of eating the book. “Thou must prophesy again before: 
many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings.” To prophecy is not only to foretell future events, 
but to declare the message of God. This message had been declared once by the apostles, both in person, 
and by those who preached their words. Apostolic preaching had almost ceased for many ages before the: 
Reformation. John, the representative of the apostolic body, commanded to prophesy, implies a revival 
of apostolic preaching among all peoples and nations. 

1,2. There was given me a reed like unto arod. There are several points that must be noticed: 
1. Who measures? 2. The measure used. 3. What is measured? (1) A reed is given to John to be used 
asameasure. It isnotan angel who measures, but an apostle, the sole representative of the apostles then 
living. The apostle is a representative of the apostolic body. It is the apostles who are to measure. 
(2) The measure is not a human one. John did not make it, nor did any other apostle, nor any man, or- 
body of men. The reed was given to him. It is a divine measure. Whatever is measured is to be compared. 
with a divine standard. There is a divine standard for measurement which was given by our Lord to the 
apostles. This is the New Testament of Jesus Christ. (3) Measure the temple. This cannot mean 
the literal temple. It was not in the part of the world where John was, if it had been standing; nor was’ 
it then standing. What is meant is that of which the temple was a Symbol; viz., the Church. See notes: 
on 1Cor.3:16. And the altar. In the Jewish temple the altar was the place where the worship 
centered. Without the altar worship was impossible, and the altar is taken as a symbol of the worship- 
The sacrifices of the altar were all typical of Christ’s atonement. Hence, the measurement has a relation 
to the death of Christ. And them that worship therein. The measure shall be applied to those who- 
profess to be Christians. It will be seen whether they come up to the standard. And the court which 
is without the temple. This was the outer court, the court of the Gentiles, the type of the World. 
This measurement does not relate to the world so much as to the Church. It is given unto the 
Gentiles. Not only it, but the Holy City. By the Holy City Jerusalem is meant when the term is. 
named literally, but Jerusalem is used often by both Paul and John as a symbol of the Church. See Gal. 
4: 26; Heb. 12: 22; Isa, 2: 2; Isa. 52:1; Rev. 21:2. Hence, the prediction is to be fulfilled by a prostration 
or desecration of the Church by worldly influences. Forty and two months. This period is given. 
several times in prophecy in varied forms. These will all be considered at once below. Here it will 


suffice to say that this is a period of 1260 days, and a day being a symbol of a year, the period meant is. 
1260 years. 


THE MEANING AND FULFILLMENT. 


After this explanation of the meaning of terms, the significance becomes plain. This prediction will 
be fulfilled if, under the sixth trumpet, before the seventh is blown, a corrupted Church, corrupted during 
long ages of apostasy, shall be compared with some divine standard. Or, in other words, after 1453 there- 
ought to be an effort to reform the Church, and to conform it to the New Testament. Let us ask, who shall. 


Ch. XI.] REVELATION. 457 


: . : | forty and t ths. 
3 And I will give power unto my two* witnesses,” iwi give amo. eer 

and they shall prophesy* a thousand two hundred Notes ao ens 

and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth. hundred and  threescore 
4 These are the? two olive-trees, and the two can-| These are the two olive 4 


ick i trees and the two candle- 
dlesticks standing before the God of the earth. Sele crarddine ebbrs (LG 











@ Rev. 20:4. bRev. 19:10. c Rev. 12:6. d@ Psa. 52:8; Jer. 11:16; Zech. 4:3. 





measure the Church? It had been measured for hundreds of years, not by the Bible, but by the decrees 
of councils, and by the decisions of Popes. There was during all this time a voice, almost suppressed, 
asking that it be measured by the divine standard, but it was stifled. This prophecy, however, implies a 
movement of commanding power which shall seek to apply the divine reed to the measurement of the 
Chureh. Who now, according to John, shall make the measurement; what shall be the standard? Not 
Popes, not councils, not apostolic fathers, but the reed is given to an apostle, the living representative of the 
apostolic body. The twelve to whom were given twelve thrones, to judge the twelve tribes of Israel, shall 
also measure the Church of Jesus Christ in the day signified by the symbolism employed. How? The 
reed was not their own creation but was given to them. There is but one’divine measure that has ever 
been given. The New Testament, written by apostles, given to them by inspiration, is the divine 
standard with which the Church, the worship and the worshippers, must be tested. Not the traditions of 
men, not the decisions of councils, not the decrees of synods, or conferences, not the creeds of any 
uninspired body that ever met on the face of the earth, but the standard measure is the New Testament. 


THE TRUE CHURCH. 


This is not the only place where the reed is named as the appointed instrument for the measurement of 
the Church. If the reader will turn to the twenty-first chapter, he will find that the New Jerusalem, the 
Holy City, is measured by an angel with a golden reed. In Ezekiel, chapter 40, the prophet sees an angel 
measure with a reed a temple such as has never been seen by mortal vision. The temple itself is just 
equal to the measure, and it is composed of many chambers, all equal in size to the reed, to each other, 
and to the temple itself, of which they are parts! This strange symbolism, this representation of what is 
apparently impossible, most beautifully represents the character of the true Church, when it has reached 
the fullness of the divine measure, and appears as the New Jerusalem. The whole temple is just the size, 
neither larger nor smaller than the reed. The true Church corresponds exactly with the divine measure: 
of the Word. It neither adds to itself things unknown to the apostles, nor omits the things therein 
enjoined. As the temple of Ezekiel was composed of chambers, each of which was the same size of the 
temple, so the Church is composed of many congregations, each of which should correspond exactly to 
the measure of the whole body. These individual congregations, which make up the spiritual temple, 
should not differ from each other in name, in creeds, in rites, in observances, as do the sects of modern 
times. In the true Church, when fully restored, there will be one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one 
spirit, one hope, one name, one practice. ; 

The symbolism recorded by the apostle evidently describes the measurement of the Church, its worship,, 
and of its worshipers by the divine standard of the New Testament. Our next inquiry is whether history 
records the fulfillment. Do we find aught in history, subsequent to 1453, which can be regarded a fulfill- 
ment of the prophecy? Earlier reformers, such as Waldo, Wiclif, and Huss, made an attempt to reform 
the Church, but the whole world dates the beginning of the Protestant Reformation with Luther. It was 
in 1517 that he nailed to the doors of the church in Wittemberg his Theses, by which he broke with Rome. 
It was held by the Papacy, which then lorded over Christendom, that the writings of the Fathers, 
tradition, and the decrees of councils were not only an additional measure, but might even set aside the 
Word of God. The great Reformation planted itself upon the principles maintained by Martin Luther, 
and the corner-stone of Protestantism is that the Bible is the only rule of faith and practice of the 
Christian Church. Protestantism has not always been true to its principles, but it has always conceded 
that the final standard of measurement is the Word of God. 


THE TWO WITNESSES. 


‘ 8,4. Iwill give unto my two witnesses. These two witnesses are witnesses for the Lord. They 
shall bear witness for 1260 days, the forty-two months the Holy City is trodden down. During this time 
they shall prophesy in sackcloth, a symbol of sorrow and mourning. It implies that these witnesses. 
shall be in tribulation during the period named. 4. These are the two olive trees, and the two 
candlesticks. The olive tree was the source of the oil used to provide for the candlesticks. The 
eandlesticks, burning the oil, gave forth light. The symbols imply that during this period of 1260 days. 


458 REVELATION. 


Feh, XI. 





5 And if any man will hurt them, fire? proceedeth 
out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies; 
and if any man will hurt them, he must in this 
manner be killed. oo Re 

6 These” have power to shut heaven, that it rain 
not in the days of their prophecy: and’ have power 
over waters to turn them to blood, and to smite the 
earth with all plagues, as often as they will. 

7 And when they? shall have finished their testi- 
mony,’ the beast that ascendeth out of the bottom- 
less* pit shall make war against them, and shail 
overcome them, and kill them. 

8 And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of® 
the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom 
and Egypt, where® also our Lord was crucified. 

9 And! they of the people, and kindreds, and 
tongues, and nations, shall see their dead -bodies 
three days and an half,/ and shall not suffer their 
dead bodies to be put in graves. 

10 And*® they that dwell upon the earth shall 
rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send 
gifts one to another; because these two prophets 
tormented them that dwelt on the earth. 





Lord of the earth. And if 


any man desireth to hurt 
them, fire proceedeth out 
of their mouth, and de- 
voureth their enemies: and 
if any man shall desire to 
hurt them, in this manner 
must he be killed. These 
have the power to shut the 
heaven, that it rain not 
during the days of their 
prophecy: and they have 
power over the waters to 
turn them into blood, and 
to smite the earth with ey- 
ery plague, as often as 
they shall desire. 
when they shall have fin- 
ished their testimony, the 
beast that cometh up out 
of the abyss shall make 
war with them, and over- 
come them, and kill them. 
And their dead bodies lie 
in the street of the great 
city, which spiritually is 
called Sodom and Egypt, 
where also their Lord was 
crucified. Andfrom among 
the peoples and tribes and 
tongues and nations do 
men look upon their dead 
bodies three days and a 
half, and suffer not their 
dead bodies to be laid ina 
tomb. And they that dwell 
on the earth rejoice over 
them, and make merry; 
and they shall send gifts 


And 7 





@2 Kings 1:10; Jer. 1:10; 5:14; Ezek. 48:3; Hos. 625. 
é Rey. 18:1. f Dan. 7:21; Zech. 14:2. g Rey. 14:8; 17:1,5. 


gj Psa. 79:2,38. & Rev. 12:12; 13:8. 


61 Kings 17:1; James 5:16. 
h Heb. 18:12; Rey. 18:24. 


e Ex. 7:19. 
4 Rev. 17:15. 





‘God shall have two agencies, bearing divine witness, which shall give forth light to men. 


shall be filled and sustained by the Spirit. 


d Luke 13:32. 


5 


6 


10 


These agencies 


5,6. Fire proceedeth out of their mouth. Whatever is signified by these two witnesses, they 
have power to destroy. In seeking for them we must find agencies which can save life and can destroy it, 
can shut the heavens and open them, can prevent blessings from descending upon the earth, can inflict 
curses and plagues on the inhabitants of the earth. The witnesses have supernatural powers. 

7-10. When they shall have finished their testimony. The thought is, “When they shall have 
made their testimony complete.” The beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit. The coming 
up of the beast out of the abyss is named here, in 13: 1, and in 17:3. The powers that come from the abyss 
are satanic. Compare 9: 2 with 9: it. This beast, therefore, represents some devilish power or influence. 
The word rendered beast here, in 13: 1, and in 17: 3, denotes a savage wild beast of prey. The beast from 
the abyss should be distinguished from “‘the beast coming up out of the sea” (43: 1), and from ‘“‘the beast 
coming up out of the earth” (13:11). They are all malign powers, but the power of evil manifested in 
different forms. Shall . . . killthem. Whatever the beast represents, that power shall assail the 
witnesses, and shall slay them for a time. 8. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street. 
shall not be buried, but remain in plain sight. I believe that this is what is signified. 
nesses were slain, their enemies could not get them out of sight. They could not bury them. Of the great 
city. This term is used eight times in Revelation. It is never used of Jerusalem. It is in contrast with 
the Holy City. As the Holy City is a symbol of the Church, a wicked City would Symbolize a false 
religion, or apostate church. Spiritually is called Sodom, and Egypt. Symboliecally so called 
Sodom, with its sins, was a type of this city; Egypt, the house of bondage, is also a type. Itisa sinful 
organization which has enslaved the true Israel. Where also our Lord was crucified. Many 
commentators haye insisted that this refers to literal Ji erusalem, but we must remember that the place is 
one where our Lord was spiritwally crucified. This is done by apostasy. See Heb. 6:6. That the reference 
is to spiritual declension is plain. 9. Look upon their dead bodies three days and a half During 
a period of three and a half days their bodies shall be seen in the street of the city slain, and all shall see 
them. They shall be conspicuous. This would seem to point to a period of three and one-half years 
10. They that dwell on the earth. This expression, often used in Revelation, always refers to 


They 
Though the wit- 


Ch. XL] REVELATION. 459 


; 2 =m *.-4 | one to another; because 
11 And after three days and an half the Spirit | these two prophets tor- 


of life from God entered into them, and they stood mented them that dwell on 
5 the earth. And after the 11 
upon their feet; and great fear fell upon them that | three days and a halt the 
saw them breath of life from God en- 
5 : : tered into them, and they 
12 And they heard a great voice from heaven stood upon their feet; and 
: : a a great fear fell upon them 
saying unto them, Come up hither. And* they | which beheld them. And 12 
ascended up to heaven in? a cloud; and their ene- Po ee ee a 
mies beheld them. them, Come up hither. And 


they went up into heaven 
13 And the same hour was there a great earth-| in the cloud: and their en- 

3 2 d 
quake,° and the tenth part of the city fell, and in Sule pee ae 
the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand: great Late eee 
and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to and there were killed in 

: ne earthquake seven ou- 
the God of heaven. sand persons: and the rest 
were aifrighted, and gave 
-glory to the God of heaven. 

















alsa. 14:3. 6Isa. 60:8; Acts1:9. c Rev. 16:9. 





-enemies of Christ. These rejoice because the witnesses are slain. They make merry over their death, 
because these two prophets tormented them. These witnesses, then, prophesied; that is, they 
spoke the will of God. Their warnings, exhortations, and denunciations of sin tormented the dwellers of 
the earth. 

11-18. After three daysandahalf. After lying in a state called dead three and a half years, they 
come to life again. God gave them life. The effect of their appearance was to fill the people of the 
wicked city with fear. 12. They heard a great voice from heaven. That voice called on the 
witnesses to come up thither. To be exalted to heaven, symbolically, always means, to give power, © 
prosperity and glory. This means that the witnesses now receive power and influence over men. Their 
exaltation implies that their prophesying is to be accepted as authority over men. 18, In that hour 
there was a great earthquake. Thesymbol of commotion, and of political or religious changes. The 
earthquake is caused by the exaltation of the witnesses. The result is that the wicked city is shaken, and 
apart of it falls. A tenth part. A large part. Seven thousand persons. Various explanations 
have been given of these numbers. In my judgment seven is used because it is the perfect number. Seven 
thousands would imply totality. The meaning is, therefore, a total overthrow. And the remnant. So 
eomplete was the overthrow from the earthquake, that the rest were filled with fear and glorified God. 
The whole implies that when the witnesses were lifted up, a commotion shook the false religion or 
apostate church, and that it was destroyed by the commotion. A part of its inhabitants were slain 
(perhaps spiritually), and the rest repented. 


THE MEANING AND FULFILLMENT. 


It has been remarked by several commentators that the passage concerning the two witnesses is the 
most difficult to explain of any in Revelation. Certainly there is a wide disagreement concerning its 
meaning, but I believe that it can be clearly explained. Let all the facts stated of the witnesses be taken 
in at one glance. 1. There are ¢wo witnesses, and only two. 2. These two are witnesses. Their business 
is to testify to certain facts or truths. 3. The Lord says they are ‘‘my’’ witnesses. They testify for the 
Lord: 4. The Lord gives these witnesses power. “T will give power,” etc. 5. They shall testify in sack- 
cloth. This implies that they shall testify in sorrow, robed in mourning. 6. They shall do this 1260 days, 
or, since a day in prophecy is the symbol of a year, for a period of 1260 years. 7. These witnesses are 
likened to two olive trees and to two candlesticks. 8. Itis stated that they shall have power to destroy 
their enemies. 9. Also to intercept blessings. 10. At the end of three and a half years, or 1260 days, shall 
be slain. 11. Shall lie unburied, but after three and a half days shall rise again. 12. The witnesses are 
“prophets” and they “prophesy ;” that is, they speak by inspiration. 13. Shall have great power and 
glory and be exalted to heaven. 14. The city of sin shall then be overthrown. 

There are a number of facts recorded here which must be true of the witnesses, and the business of the 
interpreter is simply to ascertain whether there is anything of which they are true and which would 
correspond with these facts. (1) The first one of the fourteen facts I have noted is that there were only 
two witnesses. Ihave lying before me an open Bible. I find that the book of Revelation is in what is 
called the New Testament. The whole Bible is divided into two great divisions, which are called the Old 
and New Testaments. There are, then, two Testaments. Note further ‘that the term testament is a word 
that signifies to bear witness. It is derived from a Latin word, testor, which means, I testify. The two 


460 REVELATION. (Ch. XT. 





testaments, then, imply éwo witnesses. We have, therefore, in the Old and New Testaments, two witness- 
es, whether they are those described by John or not. (2) These two witnesses of the Bible each testify of 
the Lord. He said to the Jews concerning the Old Testament Scriptures, ‘‘They testify of me.” The- 
Apostle John says concerning his life of the Savior, “‘These things were written that you might believe- 
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God.” One of these witnesses testifies of the Lord in type and 
prophecy; the other testifies by its history of facts. (3) The two witnesses are the Lord’s. He gives them 
their power and they testify of him. Thus far the two witnesses of the Bible correspond exactly with the 

two witnesses of the prophecy. (4) The two witnesses of the Word are fed with the oil of inspiration 

and give forth light. (5) These two witnesses speak by inspiration, or “prophesy.” Passing over some 

marks of minor importance, we come to (6) the statement that the two witnesses have power to destroy. 

The Word of God can save and it can destroy. It can justify and it cancondemn. In the Judgment the 

fate of men will be decided by the Word. If the reader will turn to Rev. 19: 11-15, and read what is. 
written of the conquests, triumphs, and destruction by the word of God, he will require nothing more- 
upon this point. In fact everything stated of the power of the two witnesses has been affirmed of the 
Word of God. (7) It is said that for 1260 days the witnesses shall prophesy in sackcloth. Every reader 

knows that for ages the Bible was forbidden to the people and locked up in the dead languages. It was. 
even a crime, for which many suffered death, to have the Bible in the tongue of the people. It is proper 
that we should consider here this period of mourning in which, if I am correct, the witness of the Old. 
and New Testaments shall be given in sorrow. 


TWELVE HUNDRED AND SIXTY DAYS. 


This period of mourning, during which the witnesses shall prophesy in sackcloth, is 1260 days. The- 
same period is named in several places in this prophecy. In Daniel 7: 25 it is stated that the youngest 
horn of the sea monster shall have dominion for a time, times, and half atime. This is understood to be- 
a period of three and a half years, forty-two months, or 1260 days. The outer court of the Holy City shall 
be trodden down by the Gentiles for forty-two months, or 1260 days (verse 2). The woman was fed of’ 
God in the wilderness for 1260 days (Rey. 13: 6). She was nourished a time, times,and a half time, or three: 
and one-half years, or 1260 days (chap. 13: 14). In five different passages the same period of time is 
named, and evidently covers in each case the same period of the history of the Church. The day being: 
used as a symbol for a year, we know that for 1260 years, the horn spoken of by Daniel, which speaks great 
words against the Most High, shall have dominion; that for the same period the Gentiles, the enemies of 
the saints, shall be in power; the two witnesses prophesy in sackcloth, and the woman, the type of the: 
true Church, flee into the wilderness. This remarkable period is that of the power and glory of Papal 
Rome. It becomes us, once for all, to settle when this period began and when it ends. ; 

It is somewhat difficult to mark the exact point in this development of the Romish power, which may be- 
regarded as the beginning of the 1260 years. But I believe that the consummation of the usurpation can 
be pointed out to the year. 

In A. D. 527 Justinian ascended the throne of the Eastern Empire. Before his reign the schism had. 
begun between the Greek and the Roman churches. He healed that schism by force in favor of Rome. 
If the reader will open ‘Gibbon, Vol. IV., p. 528, he will find an account of a terrible persecution, inaugu- 
rated by this monarch, in order to make all conform to the Papalrule. ‘His reign,” says Gibbon, ‘was a. 
uniform, yet various scene of persecution. . . Churches with their congregations were surrounded by~ 
Catholic soldiers, and the houses were burned with the congregations in them.” At this period, then, the- 
Church is drenched im blood in order to make the Romish power universal. The witnesses certainly 
prophesy in mourning. What more? In A. D. 531, Justinian, the ruler of the Eastern half of the old. 
Roman world, the ruler of the countries where the ehurehes still protested against the arrogant claims of 
Rome, decreed and enforced by arms the subjugation of the whole Chureh to the Roman Pope, and in A.D. 
533, he bestowed upon him the title of Rector Ecclesiw, or Lord of the Church. (D’ Aubigne’s Reforma- 
tion, Vol. I., p. 42.) In A. D. 533 the “Man of Sin” was certainly fully revealed. The Papacy was com- 
pletely established. The universal claims of the Pope were sanctioned by imperial power. Here, then, is. 
the beginning point. 

During the long period extending from A. D. 533 to 1793, a prophetic period of 1260 years, the two wit- 
nesses, the Old and New Testaments, remained in sackcloth. Even where the light had begun to spring: 
up and the Protestant Reformation had taken the place of the Romish faith, there was still intoleration. 

. Puritans were persecuted in England, Baptists in Lutheran Germany, Calvin burnt Servetus in Geneva 
Quakers and Baptists were punished for their religion in the American colonies. 2 

“War was made upon them.” Near the close of the last century the most determined attack ever known: 
was made upon the Bible. Voltaire and Rousseau led in France; Frederick the Great in Germany; Tom 
Paine, Hume, Gibbon and Bolingbroke in England; Thomas Jefferson and Paine in America. At last the- 
culmination was reached in France, The nation rose in a crusade against all religion. The Convention,, 


Ch: XI.) REVELATION. 461 


S i 1) The second Woe is past: 14 
14 The second woe is past; and, behold, the pened GOL Westone 


third woe cometh quickly. eth quickly. ; : 
15 And the seventh angel sounded; and there* sounded; and there follow: 7 

p Q 7 . , e€ reat voices in heaven, 

were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms | 0 Pi YO The king? 

of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, dom of the world is become 

and of his Christ; and” he shall reign for ever and | ert and he 

ever. shall reign for ever and 











alsa. 27:13. 6 Psa. 145:13; Dan. 2:44; 4:3,34; 6:26; 7:14,18,27; Micah 4:7; Luke 1:33; John 12:34; Heb. 1:85 12:28. 








‘composed of the representatives of the mightiest nation then upon the earth, by national law abolished 
not only the Bible but God. They decreed that France would worship no gods but Reason and Liberty. 
Atheism became the law of the State. 

This is the only instance known to all history of a deliberate legislative enactment abolishing all religion. 
Most fitly might such an event be styled the slaying of the witnesses who testify of the Lord. For 1260 
years the testimony of the witnesses had been in part suppressed; in 1793 it was enacted that they should 
testify no more, or henceforth should be silent as death. It was decreed that time should date no more 
from the Christian era, and that the week itself should be abolished because it was a Bible division of 
time. Let it be borne in mind: 1. That the war was waged by the power from the bottomless pit; an 
infidel power. 2. The witnesses were slain by the state which had done more than all others to build up 
and uphold the temporal power of the Pope. They lie in the street of the great city. 3. It is just 1260 years, 
the prophetic period, from the time when the Pope was styled Lord of the Church by imperial authority, 
-until the date of the abolition of the Bible and of God by ‘‘ the eldest son of the Church,” or from A. D. 
533 to A, D. 1793. 


THE TRIUMPH OF THE WITNESSES, 


After three days and a half the witnesses came to life. This implies that they regain their power and 
‘influence. The French ‘Convention,’ which inaugurated the Reign of Terror, guillotined all the royal 
family and many thousand citizens, decreed the dethronement of God, and made itself a terror to man- 
kind, continued in existence for a little more than three years, and in about three and a half years the 
French nation began to recover from its madness. Its atheistic laws were repealed, and Christianity was 
acknowledged as the religion of the State. This was not all. The resurrected witnesses were in sack- 
cloth no longer. The age of religious toleration had come. With the beginning of the present century a 
movement began to sweep over every civilized land in favor of religious liberty. 

The exaltation of the witnesses has followed. With the nineteenth century began a mighty movement to 
extend the circulation of the Bible. It is now translated into every written tongue of earth, and the Bible 
societies have made it the cheapest book in the world. To all who are not able to buy it is freely given. 
All are free to study it for themselves. Ours is also the age of missions. At the same time began a move- 
ment to preach the truths of the Bible to all nations. The result of this exaltation is that in our age we 
feel the heaving of a great moral earthquake. It is stated that a tenth part of the city shall be shaken 
down. Already Rome has lost its hold upon the governments of Italy and France. The trend of events 
is now towards the falling of the wicked city, the overthrow of its confirmed supporters, and the repent- 
ance of the others. These results are in the future; their fulfillment may yet require generations. We 
cannot name times and seasons, but the result will come. 


THE SEVENTH TRUMPET. 


14,15. And the seventh angel sounded. This is the seventh trumpet of the seventh seal. It 
should bring the end, the final victory, the grand consummation. That is what the apostle now beholds in 
the vision. The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his 
Christ. Here is the final triumph. It is the brightness of Zion’s glad morning, the long-deferred day of 
victory, the ushering in of the conquering reign of Christ. The agency by which this conquest is effected 
is the exaltation of the witnesses, or the diffusion of the Word of God. This exaltation causes the earth- 
quake, the fall of a part of the Great City, the destruction of a part of its inhabitants, and the repent- 
ance of the remnant. These events are followed by the seventh trumpet and the proclamation of the 
universal reign of Christ. Then the heavenly inhabitants join in peeans of victory and songs of praise 
and thanksgiving. ; 

16-18. The four and twenty elders, which sat before God.. These heavenly princes, in some 
-way identified with the work of redemption, join in worship and praises. “The mystery of God has been 


462 REVELATION. 


(Ch. XT. 








16 And the four and twenty elders, which sat 
before God on their seats, fell upon their faces, 
and worshipped God, 

17 Saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord God 
Almighty, which art, and wast, and art: to come; 
because thou hast taken to thee thy great power, 
and hast reigned. 

18 And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is 
come, and the time of the dead, that they should 
be judged, and that thou shouldest give reward 
unto thy servants the prophets, and to the saints, 
and them that fear thy name, small and great; and 
shouldest destroy them which destroy the earth. 

19 And the temple of God was opened in heaven, 
and there was seen” in his temple the ark of his 
testament: and there were lightnings, and voices, 
and thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail. 





ever. And the four and 
twenty elders,which sit be- 
fore God on their thrones 
fell upon their faces, and 
worshipped God, saying, 
We give thee thanks, 
Lord God, the Almighty, 
which art and which wast; 
because thou hast taken 
thy great power, and didst 
reign. And the nations 
were wroth, and thy wrath 
came, and the time of the 
dead to be judged, and the 
time to give their reward to 
thy servants the prophets, 
and to the saints, and to 
them that fear thy name, 
the small and the great; 
and to destroy them that 
destroy the earth. 


16 


17 


18 


And there was opened 19: 


the temple of God that is 
in heaven; and there was 
seen in his temple the ark 
of his covenant; and there 
followed lightnings, and 
voices, and thunders, and 
an Bat ig and great 
hail. 





@ Dan. 7:9; Eccl. 3:17; Acts. 10:42; 2 Tim. 4:1; 1 Pet. 4:5. 


6 Num. 4:5. 





finished in the days of the voice of the seventh angel” (10:7). The eighteenth verse will sufficiently 


explain why this also should be called a woe trumpet. 


It is the trumpet of judgment. 


19. I believe this verse ought to belong to chapter 12, and will there consider it. If it is connected in 
meaning with verse 18 it signifies that heaven is opened at the close of the seventh trumpet, and that from. 


thence come judgments as well as blessings. 


AN ANALYSIS OF PART I. 


With Rev. 11: 18 closes the first great division of the Book. It brings one series of visions which reaches: 
from the time of John to the end of the world to a close. It will aid those who have studied the preceding 


chapters to study the results in a condensed analysis. 


The first four chapters are not prophecy, except as the history of the Seven Churches is outlined. The 
future history of the world and the Church is symbolized by asealed book. It has seven seals. These 


are seven epochs that reach into the future until the end of time. 


THE FIRST SEAL.—The White Horse. The Era of Triumph. The Glorious Period of Roman History; 


6: 3,4, A. D. 96 to A. D. 180. 


THE SECOND SEAL.—The Red Horse. The Eraof Blood and of Civil Discord; 6:3,4. Beginning A. D. 193. 
THE THIRD SEAL.—The Black Horse. The Seal of Calamity, and of National Distress; 6: 5, 6. Begin- 


ning about A. D. 200. 


THE FOURTH SEAL.—The Pale Horse. The Era of Famine, Pestilence and Death; 6: 7,8. About A. D.. 


240 to A. D. 270. 


THE FirrH SEAL.—The Era of Persecution. The last effort of Paganism to blot out the Christian 


name; 6: 9,10. A. D. 303. 


THE SIXTH SEAL.—The Seal of Revolution. The Era of the Overthrow of Pa 


Beginning about A. D. 310 and extending to A. D. 350. 


gan Civilization; 6: 12-17. 


THE FouR WINDS,—A vision of destructive forces that shall destroy the Roman Empire, but held back 


until it shall be Christianized. The Four Winds represent Four Northern In 


Four Trumpets; 9: 1-17. Fulfilled from A. D. 340 to A. D. 395. 


THE FALL OF THE OLD ROMAN EMPIRE. 


THE FIRST TRUMPET under the Seventh Seal.—The Gothic Invasion fulfilled by the Invasion of Alaric; 


8:7. A.D. 409. 


r 


THE SECOND TRUMPET.—The Vandal Invasion. The Conquest of the Seas; 8: 8,9. A.D. 422. 
THE THIRD TRUMPET.—The Invasion of Attila, the Hun. The Scourge of the Rivers; 8: 10,11. A.D. 440. 
The End of Ancient History;. 


THE FOURTH TRUMPET.—The Final Overthrow of Rome by Odoacer. 


8:12, A.D. 476. These Four Trumpet Invasions are the Four Winds whic 


h were withheld. 


vasions, also indicated by 


cea 


Ch. XII.] REVELATION. 463: 





CHAPTER XII. 


The Vision of the Church. 


SuMMARyY.—The Vision in Heaven. The Woman Clothed with the Sun. 
Her Offspring. The Great Red Dragon. The Conflict in Heaven. The 
War on the Woman’s Seed. Her Seed Caught Up. Her Flight into 
the Wilderness. The Flood Cast by the Dragon. The Earth Helping 


the Woman. CHAPTER XII. 


1 And there appeared a great wonder in heaven; |_ And a great sign was 1 
seen in heaven; a woman 


a* woman clothed with the sun, and the moon | arrayed with the sun, and 


= 2 5 the moon under her feet, 
under her feet, and upon her head a crown of | 204 tponher head a crown 


Q of twelve stars; and she 2 
twelve stars: was with child: and she 


-2 And she, being with child, cried, travailing” in | crieth out, travailing in 


St 5 7 birth, and in pain to be de- 
birth, and pained to be delivered. Tetcde Ar eee ees 








a Isa. 60:19; Rom. 13:14; 2 Cor. 11:23 Gal. 4:26; Eph. 5:25. O6/Isa. 66:7. 





THE FALL OF THE EASTERN OR NEW ROMAN EMPIRE. 


THE FIrtH TRUMPET SOUNDED.—The Mohammedan Uprising. The Saracen Empire; 9: 1-12. A.D. 
632 to A. D. 782. 
THE SIXTH TRUMPET.—The Euphratean Angels Loosed. The Rise of Turkish Power; 9: 13-21. A.D. 
1057 to A. D. 1453. 
REVIVAL OF CHRISTIANITY. 


THE LITTLE Book and the Seven Thunders.—Symbols of the Reformation of Luther; 10: 1-11. 
A. D. 1518. 

THE OLD PATHS SouGHT.—The Church Measured; 11: 1,2. From A. D. 1516 to the present time. 

THE TWO WITNESSES.—The Two Books of the Word of God. In Sackcloth for twelve hundred and 
sixty years. Slain in 1793. Resurrected near the beginning of this century; 11: 3-12. 


EVENTS YET FUTURE. 


BABYLON FALLS.—11: 13. Yet Future. 
THE SEVENTH ANGEL SouNDS.—Christ comes. The Judgment; 12: 14-18. This ends the first part of 
Revelation and ends the world. 
CHAPTER XII. 


I believe that the first series of visions ends with chapter 11, verse 18. The book would be complete if % 
ended there. This series shows the judgments inflicted upon the great opposing powers which persecuted 
the Church, or in any way affected its history. There is portrayed first the overthrow of the great secu- 
lar power which occupied the world as known to the apostles, and then follows a symbolism which fore- 
tells the opposition from a great spiritual power, a wicked city, which is finally overthrown by the 
exaltation of the Witnesses, and this inaugurates the seventh trumpet and the final triumph of Christ. 

The second series of visions, in part, goes over the same ground. Its purpose, however, is to portray 
more fully the fortunes of the true church, its struggle with anti-Christ, the final overthrow of this wicked 
spiritual power, and the inauguration of the era of universal righteousness and peace. 

Chap. 11:19. In my comment on this verse under the preceding chapter I have said that it ought to 
belong to the 12th chapter. The reader will observe that the language with which the first series opens in 
Rev. 4: 1, is quite similar to the opening words of the verse that begins the second series. ‘I saw a door 
opened in heaven” is the opening sentence of the prophecy (chap. 4: 1), language which implies that the 
secrets of heaven are to be revealed. In chap. 11: 19, it is said that ‘‘ The temple of God was opened in 
heaven.” Even the Ark of the Testament in its most secret place is brought to view. Thereis to bea 
revelation of facts connected with the temple of God. We have already shown that the reference is, not 
to the Jewish temple, which no longer existed, but to the spiritual temple, the Church of Jesus Christ. Its 
door is opened; its history is foretold; the visions now beheld will relate to its fortunes, sorrows, trials, 
triumphs. Its history will be traced until it reaches its heavenly destiny. This is symbolized by the fact 
that the holy of holies, the type of heaven itself, is seen. The thunders, earthquake, etc., foreshadow the 
commotions, revolutions and judgments whlch will take place in the fulfillment of the symbols. 

1,2. A-woman clothed with the sun. A woman is used asa symbol many times in the Scriptures. 
“Say you to the daughter of Zion, behold thy salvation cometh.” (Isa. 62:11.) Here the reference 1s to 


464 REVELATION. fCh. XII. 


. -, | seen another sign in heay- 
3 And there appeared another wonder in heaven: | en; and behold, a great red 


: é "As ¢ 36 QVv1 be dragon, having seven heads 
and behold a* great red dragon, having” seven bends) eee hou ane ben 


and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads. his head seven diadems. | 
4 And® his tail drew the third part of the® stars third part ofthe stars at 
= f + a ° eaven, an 1a cas em 
of heaven‘ and did cast them to the earth: ad the eee ee ed nae 
dragon stood before the woman which was ready on stood before the woman 
to be delivered, for’ to devour her child as soon as livered, that when she was 
1 9 elivered, he mi evour 
it was born. : 1 her child. And she was 5 
5 And she brought forth a man-child, who® was | delivered of a son, a man 
to rule all nations with a rod of iron: and her child) the nations with a rod of 


= i aI is p iron: and her child was 
was caught up unto God, and ¢o his throne. ee up aaie eae 











a Bev. 17:3. b&b Rev. 17:9. cRev.13:1. dRev.9:10. ¢ Rev. 17:18. fDan. 8:10. g Ex.1:16; 1 Pet. 5:8. 
h Psa 2:9; Rev. 2:27; 19: 15. 





‘the Church. Again Paul (Gal. 4: 31) says, “ Ye are not the children of the bond woman, but of the free 
woman.” All are agreed that here the free woman represents the Church. Again (Rev. 21: 2), John sees 
the New Jerusalem descending adorned as a bride to meet her husband. The bride, the Lamb’s wife, here. 
and in the ninth verse, indeed in every place spoken of, is the Church. Once more: Paul speaks of Jeru- 
salem, the mother of us all, alluding again to the Church. This symbol, then, is a common one to repre- 
sent the Church, and we are justified in declaring that to be its meaning in this passage. The fact that 
she is clothed with the sun symbolizes the fact that the true Church shines with the light of the sun of 
righteousness. The moon under her feet represents the Old Testament, or dispensation, which shone 
by a reflected light and is subordinate to the New Covenant of the Church. The crown of twelve stars 
is explained by the twelve apostles, lights of the Church and a crown of glory toit. 2. She being with 
child cried. Again we must let the Scripture explain its own meaning. ‘‘As soon as Zion travailed she 
brought forth children.” (Isa. 66:8.) The travail of Zion causeth an increase. See also Isa. 54: 1 and 
49; 20, where the same figure is used. The state of the woman therefore implies a Church in sorrow, a 
suffering Church, but out of whose suffering there cometh an increase of the saints. It is a period when 
the saints are multiplied in the midst of persecution. 

8,4. Behold a great red dragon. Another wonder is seen, also in the sky, a great serpent-like 
figure, red, with seven heads and ten horns. This figure, we learn from verse 9, is a devilish manifesta- 
tion. The devil uses it for his purposes. ‘The red color implies.a persecuting power. The seven heads are 
-explained in 17: 9, where the seven-headed beast appears again, to be seven mountains, and also seven 
kingdoms; the ten horns are there said to be ten kingdoms which did not yet exist. We have also this 
monster appearing substantially in Dan., chapter 7. I will discuss it more particularly in chapter 17, but 
will here say that there is little doubt that it represents the persecuting powers of the earth which 
have opposed God and his Israel; the great world powers arrayed against God. This world power appears 
as Pagan Rome in the persecution of the Woman; the Church. The dragon was the standard of Pagan 
Rome in the third century, as testified by many ancient writers. 4. And his tail drew a third part 
_of the stars. This may indicate the great power of the dragon. Perhaps it has a‘more particular mean- 
ing. We have found under the 8th and 9th chapters that the old Roman world was divided into three 
parts, that the term third part was used of these divisions. In the early part of the fourth century, when 
the great triumph of Christianity over Paganism was about to be realized, the Roman world shows this 
division; in two parts toleration is shown; in the remaining ¢hird paré there is the most bitter persecu- 
tion, and finally the ruler of this part, Maximus, enters upon war with Constantine with the vow that if 
successful he will restore everywhere the old Pagan religion. Thismay besymbolized. And the dragon 
stood before the woman. This symbolizes an effort to destroy the sainis, the seed of the woman, the 
children of the Church. 

5. And she brought forth a man child. If the reader will turn to verse 17 he will learn that the 
remnant of the woman’s seed is ‘‘ those who keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of 
Jesus Christ.” The offspring of the woman, the ‘“‘woman’s seed,” then refers to the saints. ‘The man 
child is a symbol of the faithful members of the Church. But how shall they rule all nations witha 
rod of iron. The Greek says ‘‘rule as shepherds with a rod of iron.” This implies a firm and perma- 
nent, but tender and loving rule, not a stern rule. In 2: 27 it is promised that whosoever overcometh 
shall rule the nations with a rod of iron. In 19; 15 the same thing is stated of the Word of God. Thisis 
accomplished through the saints. They shall yet possess the earth. Every knee shall bow, and every 
-tongue confess. The kingdoms of the earth shall become the kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ. The 
man child, the woman’s seed, the saints, shall have a complete, an undisputed, a resistless dominion, 


Chy 2] REVELATION. 





465 





6 And the woman fled into the wilderness, where 


‘she hath a place prepared of God, that they should’ 


feed her there? a thousand two hundred and three- 
‘score days. ¥ 
7 And there was war in heaven: Michael” and his 


angels fought against the® dragon; and the dragon | 


fought and his angels, 

8 And prevailed not; neither was their place 
found any more in heaven. 

9 And‘ the great dragon was cast out, that® old 
serpent called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiv- 
eth the whole world: he* was cast out into the 
earth, and his angels were cast out with him. 

10 And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven,® 
“Now is come salvation, and strength, and the king- 
-dom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for 
the accuser of our brethren is cast down,? which 
accused them before our God day and night. 

11 Andi they overcame him by the blood of the 
Lamb, and by the word of their testimony;/ and 
they loved not their lives unto the death. 

12 Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that 
dwell in them. Woe to the inhabiters of the earth 
and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto 
you, having great wrath, because! he knoweth that 
he hath but a short time. 





c Rey. 20:2. d Luke 10:18. 
i Rom. 8:37. j Luke 14: 26. 


e Gen. 3:1. 
k Rey. 8: 13. 


6 Dan. 10: 13; 12:1. 
Zech. 3:1. 


«@ Rey. 11:3. 





unto his throne. And the 
woman fled into the wil- 
derness, where she hath a 
place prepared of God,that 
there they may nourish her 
a thousand two hundred 
and threescore days. 

And there was war in 
heaven: Michael and his 
angels going forth to war 
with the dragon; and the 
dragon warred and his an- 
gels; and they prevailed 
not, neither was their place 
found any more in heaven. 
And the great dragon was 
cast down, the old serpent, 
he that 1s called the Devil 
and Satan, the deceiver of 
the whole world; he was 
cast down to the earth, and 
his angels were cast down 
with him. And I hearda 
great voice in heayen, say- 
ing, Now is come the sal- 
vation, and the power, and 
the kingdom of our God, 
and the authority of his 
Christ: for the accuser of 
our brethren is cast down, 
which accuseth them be- 
fore our God day and 
night. And they overcame 
him because of the blood 
of the Lamb, and because 
of the word of their testi- 
mony; and they loved not 
their life even unto death. 
Therefore rejoice, O heay- 
ens, and ye that dwell in 
them. Woe for the earth 
and for the sea: because 
the devil is gone down un- 
to you, having great wrath, 





f Weve dtl. 








6 


8 


9 


10. 


11 


g Rey. 11:15. hJob1:9; 
Rev. 10:6. 


And her child was caughtup. This figure always means a glorious exaltation. It signifies that God 
will protect the saints and give them victory. This was probably fulfilled when Christianity triumphed 


over Paganism in the fourth century. 
6-9, And the woman fied into the wilderness. 
in verse 14. There it belongs in order. 


The flight into the wilderness is alluded to again 
Under that verse the meaning will be more fully considered. ‘7. 


And there was war in heaven. The woman had been seen in heaven, and there she is seen to be 
assailed. She has, however, a champion who fights her battles. It must be remembered that Michael, the 
woman, the man child, the dragon, the conflict, and the casting down of the dragon are all symbols. This 
symbolism indicates the defeat of the dragon in his attempt. He is not only vanquished, but humiliated, 
“cast down.” The first mighty attempt of Satan to “abolish the Christian name from the earth,” signally 
fails. We have already written enough to show the reader that this represents the facts of history. 
Pagan Rome, the dragon, struck at the heart of the Church. Blood flowed in rivers, the blood of the 
saints, but the grandeur of their lives and the heroism of their deaths struck fear and conviction to the 
hearts of their enemies. Each martyr called forth an army who were ready to die for Christ. God exalted 
the man child, caught it to his bosom, protected it, and Pagan Rome went down. The dragon prevailed 
not. Baffled, he is cast to the earth. 

10-12. Now is come salvation. We have next the songs of triumph sungin heaven. ‘‘ Nowis come 
salvation and strength and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ. For the accuser of our 
brethren is cast down,” ete. These songs of triumph are always heard when the symbolism portrays any 
great triumph of righteousness. See 7: 12; 11: 15. The triumphant songs here seem to exult over the 
overthrow of Paganism in the fourth century. 11. And they overcame him by the blood of the 
Lamb. This shows how the victory indicated in verse 8 was won. It was won by the blood of Christ 
and the faithfulness of the saints. ‘They loved not their life even unto death.” They were willing to 
give their lives for Christ. 12. Woe for the earth and for the sea, Not an imprecation but a pre- 

. diction. Satan, cast down, will take another form to do his wicked work. 


466 REVELATION. 


(Ch. XU. 








13 And when the dragon saw that he was cast 
unto the earth, he persecuted the woman which 
brought forth the man-child. 

14 And? to the woman were given two wings of a 
ereat eagle, that she might fly into? the wilderness, 
into her place; where she is nourished for® a time, 
and times, and half a time, from the face of the 
serpent. 

15 And the serpent? cast out of his mouth water 
as a flood after the woman, that he might cause her 
to be carried away of the flood. 

16 And the earth helped the woman; and the 
earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the 
flood which the dragon cast out of his mouth. 

17 And the dragon was wroth with the woman,° 
and went to make war with the remnant of her 
seed, which keep the commandments of God, and 
have? the testimony of Jesus Christ. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


The Seven-Headed Beast. 


SumMMARY.—The Beast that Rises Out of the Sea. 
Beast by the Dragon. 
Power Given to Continue Forty-two Months. The Lamb-like Beast 
that Had the Voice of a Dragon. His Service to the Seven-Headed 
Beast. The Number of the Beast. 


Power Given to the 


1 And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw* 
a beast rise up out of the sea, having seven heads 
and ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and 
upon his heads the name of blasphemy. 





aEx.19:4. 0 Rey.17:3. ¢Dan.7:25. dIsa. 59:19. 





18,14. The dragon .. persecuted the woman. 


were given two wings, etc. 





The Head Wounded to Death and Healed. 





eGen. 3:15. f Rev. 1:2, 6. 


knowing that he hath but 
a short time. 

And when the dragon 
saw that he was cast down 
to the earth, he persecuted 
the woman which brought 
forth the man child, And 
there were given to the 
woman the two wings of 
the great eagle, that she 
might fly into the wilder- 
ness unto her place, where 
she is nourished for a time, 
and times, and half a time, 
from the face of the ser- 
pent. And the serpent cast 
out of his mouth after the 
woman water as a river, 
that he might cause her to 
be carried away by the 
stream. And the earth 
helped the woman, and the 
earth opened her mouth, 
and swallowed up the river 
which the dragon cast out 
of his mouth. And the 
dragon waxed wroth with 
the woman, and went away 
to make war with the rest 
of her seed, which keep 
the commandments of God 
and hold the testimony of 
Jesus: and he stood upon 
the sand of the sea. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


And I saw a beast com- 
ing up out of the sea, hay- 
ing ten horns and seven 
heads, and on his horns 
ten diadems, and upon his 
heads names of blasphemy. 


g Dani T:2, 7. 


13: 


14- 


In some other form, not as a Pagan power 
defying Christ, but perhaps garbed as an angel of light, he still persecuted the woman. 14. There 
The meaning is that means were given to the persecuted church to flee 


into the wilderness, into « place where she would be hidden from view. 


The Church would disappear 


from sight. There she would bea time, and times, and half a time, or a year, two years and a half 
year, three and a half years, forty-two months, 1260 days. See verse 6 above, and 11: 2,3. This period we- 
found under chapter 11 to begin in A. D. 733, and to extend to about the close of the last century. 

15-17. And the serpent castout . . aflood. He resorted to persecutions in order to drive the: 
true Church off of the face of the earth. 16. The earth helped the woman. In some way the flood 
of persecution was so hindered that it failed to accomplish the object. I believe this refers to the hin- 
drances often interposed by secular powers to stay persecution. The Hussites protected themselves under 
Zisca by force of arms; the German princes protected Luther; the edict of Nantes gave French Protes- 
tants a rest. These were times when “the earth” drank up the flood. 17. And the dragon waxed. 
wroth. Was angry at his defeat. He continued the warfare by asking to destroy the woman’s seed. I 
believe that this vision reveals the persecution of the true Church, first by Pagan, and then by Papal 
Rome, a persecution that results in the apparent disappearance of the true Church from the earth. Thougl: 
not visible to the eye of the historian during this period, yet the true Church, fed of God, survives in the- 
hearts of hidden and persecuted saints. The period of her exile began about 533, in the reign of Justinian 
and ends about the beginning of the nineteenth century. Before the end of the period, the Divine meas- 
ure, the reed of the apostles, was used to measure the temple, altar and worshipers, and, as the result, over 
three-fourths of a century ago, the true Church began to appear as a visible body, once more in the world... 


Ch. XIII.] REVELATION. 467 


2 And* the beast which I saw was like unto a/ daw was like unto a wope 


leopard. and hi re as . ard, and his feet were as 
pard, s feet were as the feet of a bear, and | 2" Borers Me 


- his mouth as the mouth of a lion: and the” dragon | motth as the mouth of a 


gave him his power, and his seat, and great author- Ona eens 
ity. throne, and great authori- 
3 And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded Reeds ae thoden ip. erie 
to death; and his deadly wound was healed: and| gna nis death stroke was 
all‘ the world wondered after the beast. READ ee ager ila 


4 And they worshipped the dragon which gave] beast; and they worship- 4 
ped the dragon, because he 


Ree unto Se gas they pore’ the kave his autiority unto 
‘ aav d , 7 3 7 e beast; an hey wor- 
east, saying,’ Who zs like unto the beast? who is Bcd et aave eae 


able to make war with him? Who is like unto the beast? 

_ 5 And there was given unto him a° mouth speak itn, mec? BEA hore wee B 

ing great things, and blasphemies: and power was oe eee 

given unto him to continue forty’ and two months. | blasphemies; and __ there 
6 And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against A AIR Ponte ae 


7 g iQ , months. And he opened 6 
God, to blaspheme his name,£ and his tabernacle, | Mons. 4x piaphenies 


and them that dwell in heaven. against God, to blaspheme 
his name, and his taberna- 














aDan.7:6. 6 Rey.12:9. ¢2Thes.2:3. @Rev.18:18. e Dan. 7: 8-25; 11:36. fRey. 11:25; 12:6. 
g John 1: 14; Col. 2:9. 





1,2. Isawa beast coming up out of the sea. The 12th chapter has shown the relentless hostility 
of the dragon, ‘the old serpent, the devil,” to the woman, a hostility that has manifested itself in chang- 
ing forms. The last verse declares his purpose to make war on the seed of the woman. This chapter 
is intended to show the organized forms in which he has carried on this warfare. The apostle sees a beast, 
a wild savage beast, arising out of thesea. The restless oceanisa symbolof commotion. Having seven 
heads and ten horns. This beast bears the old dragon mark (12: 3) of seven heads and ten horns, It 
must therefore be some manifestation of the same power. Indeed, it is the dragon who has called the beast 
forth from the sea. On his horns ten crowns. These crowns are diadems (Revision). They are 
the sign of royal authority. They represent ten kings or kingdoms (17: 12). In the 12th chapter the 
seven heads had the diadems; now the horns wear them. There is a reason for this that we shall see iz 
the sequel. And upon his heads the name of blasphemy. If these heads should arrogantly claim 
divine honors, not belonging to them, these would be names of blasphemy. These heads are said to be 
seven kings. Sometimes kings have claimed to be gods, as Alexander, who asserted that he was the son 
of Jupiter Ammon, and the Roman Emperors, who all claimed divine honors and required men to worship 
their statues and to offer them sacrifices. 2. And the beast . . was like unto a leopard. It 
was a composite beast which united the characteristics of the beasts seen by Daniel in his vision (Dan, 
7: 1-6). The animals combined are all cruel, terrible beasts of prey; a terror toman. And the dragon 
gave him his power. That is, this beast was called forth to do the dragon’s work, and acted by the 
dragon’s authority. 

8,4. I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death. The Greek says ‘‘slain.” This 
deadly wound of the head was a deadly wound of the beast itself. See verse 12. This wound was given by 
the sword; that is, by war. See verse 14. It is in verse 14 suggested that the beast was restored after the 
wound by the efforts of the second beast first named in verse 11. The symbolism implies that a mortal 
wound was inflicted on the power represented by the beast; that when it was dead, or about to perish, its 
power was restored by the arts of the second beast. All the world wondered after the beast. Gave 
it their wonder and admiration. 4. They worshiped the dragon. In following after and obeying the 
beast they really gave worship to the dragon which had given the beast his power. Their worship was, 
however, directed to the beast itself. Who is like unto the beast? This language implies giving the 
beast superhuman honors. Similar language is often used of God. See Exod.15: 11; Ps.113:5; Isa. 40: 1& 
The dragon, cast down, receives worship through the beast. 

5,'7. There was given .. a mouth speaking great things. He would make blasphemous 
claims. Daniel affirms the same of the beast seen in his vision (Dan. 7: 18). Forty and two months. 
The same period named in 12: 6, in 11: 2, in 11: 3, and in Dan..7: 25. The period referred to here, when the 
beast shall prevail against the Church, is one of 1260 years. This is evidently the period of the world’s 
dominion over the Church. 6. He opened his mouth in blasphemy. Three kinds of blasphemy 


468 6 REVELATION. [Ch, XIII. 








2 ene : = WT ele, even them that dwell 
¢ And it was. given unto him to make war with| @% (2 (a 


the saints, and to overcome them: and power was | given unto him to make 
war with the saints, and 


given him® over all .kindreds, and tongues, and|to overcome them:’ and 
nations there was given to him au- 
; : 4 thority over every tribe 
8 And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship ape Se eee ee 
him,” whose names are not written in the book of | onthe earth shall worship 
the Lamb* slain from the foundation of the world. | pum, every one whose name 
9 if any man have an ear, let him hear. the book of life of the 
° oats . a F 1 aln 
10 He® that leadeth into captivity, shall go into | from the foundation of the 
eaptivity,° he that killeth with the sword, must be| World. If any man hath 9) 
killed with the sword. Here‘ is the patience and any ‘man is for captivity, 
. . a into Captivity he goeth;: i 
the faith of the saints. any man shall kill with the 
: sword, with the sword 
must he be killed. Here is 
the patience and the faith 
of the saints. 











aDan.7:21. 6 EX. 32:32; Dan. 12:1; Phil. 4:3; Rey. 21:27. cJohn 1: 29,36; Hph.1:4; 1Pet.1:19,20; Rey. 
6263 7917. dIsa. 33:1. e Gen. 9:6; Matt. 26:52. 7 Rev. 14: 12. 








are named; (1) against God; (2) against his tabernacle; (3) against those to whom God has opened his 
tabernacle. The first would be accomplished by usurping God’s prerogatives; the second by maledictions 
upon the true Church, and the third by curses on the true worshipers. 7. It was given unto him. He 
had power to make war on the saints and to overcome them for a long period. Compare 12: 14-17. His 
dominion was also one that seemed universal and he claimed rule over all kindreds .. and nations. 

8-10. And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him. All except the true and faithful 
saints, hidden in obscurity but known above and recorded in the book of life, shall give him homage. 9. 
If any man have an ear, let him hear. Let him give heed. The words to be heeded are in verse 10. 
10. If any man is for captivity, into captivity he goeth. The meaning is ‘* Whatsoever a man 
soweth, that shall he also reap.” “‘ With what measure a man metes, it shall be measured to him again.” 
If the beast and his adherents lead the saints captive, they shall finally be made captive; if they slay with 
the sword, so shall they be slain. Here is the patience and the faith of the saints. The assurance 
that God will, in the end, right all their wrongs gives them faith and patience. 


THE MEANING. 


As the monster with seven heads and ten horns is introduced three times in Revelation, in 12: 3, in 13:1, 
and in 17: 8, one explanation of the meaning of these symbols will suffice for all. Though the form varies 
somewhat the ten horned monster of Dan., chapter 7, is without doubt the same. Comparing the accounts 
we learn that ‘‘the seven heads are seven mountains on which the woman sitteth”’ (the harlot of chap- 
ter 17), and they are also seven kings or kingdoms. In 12: 3, these heads have upon them diadems, the 
crown that always signifies royalty, but in 13: 1 there are no diadems upon the heads. This may imply 
that the heads that had once worn the crowns were uncrowned in the period which is now pointed out. The 
ten horns, however, have diadems. In 17: 12 they are said to be ten kings or kingdoms which had not yet, 
when John wrote, received power, but shall receive it in the period pointed forward to in the symbols. 
Still another fact is pointed out in 17: 10. Of the seven kings five were fallen when John wrote; that is, 
had passed away; one of them then existed; one was yet to come; the beast himself was composed of all 
the seven and yet assumed such a form that he became an eighth. 

These facts will enable us to point out what is signified. It is some power that fights against God, that 
is a deadly enemy of the Church, that oppresses the Israel of God, that is used as Satan’s instrument, 
that overcomes the Church for 1260 years, that is blasphemous; that has existed as seven kings, or king- 
doms, for such may be the meaning of the word, and that shall reappear again as ten kingdoms. It will 
be seen that the form of this beast varies at different times, and we must expect the power meant to 
assume variousforms. Let us note the great world powers which haye arrayed themselves against God in 
oppressing his people during their history. 1. Hgypt enslaved the Israel of God, those whom he ealls 
“My People,” with a grievous bondage. At that period Egypt was the greatest of the world powers. IT. 
Next Assyria, many hundred years later, carries the Ten Tribes into captivity, from whence they never 
returned. Assyria was the destroyer of the kingdom of Israel and the oppressor of the kingdom of 
Judah. III. Babylon, the great Empire of Nebuchadnezzar, erected on the ruins of Assyria, conquered 
Judah, destroyed Jerusalem and the temple, and carried the people into captivity. IV. Persia overthrew 
Babylon, and succeeded to the sway over the remnant of Israel and Palestine. V Greece, or rather the 


Ch. XIII.] REVELATION, 469 








Macedonian Empire of Alexander, overthrew Persia, and the fifth of the great world powers became the 
ruler and the oppressor of God’s people. Under the successors of Alexander their sufferings were terri- 
ble. Here, then, we have Five Kingdoms, or great world monarchies, which had been used by the dragon 
for oppression, and which had passed away before John wrote. VI. One now is. Rome had overthrown 
all before her and occupied their dominion. The Roman monarchy existed when John was on Patmos, and 
he was sent there by the edict of a Roman Emperor. VII. One was yet to come. There was to be still 
another of these world powers, which should appear after John’s time. It is to be an anti-Christian world 
power. My opinion is that it refers to the Eastern or Greek Empire, the Roman Empire in the East, con- 
tinuing to exist as an Oriental despotism after the fall of Rome. This Empire was a persecutor also. No 
Emperor persecuted more cruelly than Justinian. In 17: 11 we are also told that there is an “ eighth head 
who is of the seven.” This is the beast. This means that the spirit and power of the whole beast, embrac- 
ing all the seven heads, passes to an eighth kingdom or rule. Wherever we find this rule we find the beast 
fully manifested. This signifies the temporal dominion of the Papal power, a sway that derived 1ts power 
from the kingdoms of the earth. 

The beast with seven heads and ten horns is, then, the great world power in its opposition to God’s peo- 
ple, manifesting itself in the various great worldly states which have fought against the saints. Of the 
heads of the beast Rome was the greatest and the most terrible of persecutoy's. Hence, while all the 
opposing world powers are generally signified, Rome, Pagan and Papal, is specially pointed out. There 
can be no doubt about the allusion of John to the heads signifying also seven mountains on which the 
harlot sitteth (7: 9). No phrase was oftener applied to Rome by Pagan poets and writers, as well as 
Christian Fathers than ‘the seven hiiled city.’ The eighth head (17: 11) 1s stated also to be an embodi- 
ment of the whole beast. Hence, I believe we are justified in declaring that Rome is the seat of the beast. 


THE MORTAL WOUND THAT WAS HEALED. 


It is shown, however, that the beast received a wound on one of its heads that was mortal. One of the 
kingdoms was overcome by the sword. This blow would, in the ordinary nature of things, destroy it and 
the beast. In some remarkable way this wound was healed. This was wonderfully fulfilled. In A.D. 476, 
the last of the Roman Emperors of the West was hurled from his throne, and Italy became the prey of 
contending barbarian hordes. It would seem as though the fate of Rome was forever sealed. Nineveh 
fell, but it was to rise no more. Babylon fell before the armies of Cyrus, and after afew generations it 
became the abode of ‘“doleful creatures.” Tyre fell, and on the bare rock, which was once the seat of a 
mighty city, ‘‘the fisherman spreads his nets.” Other cities have fallen and lost their glory, their domin- 
ion, their existence, and have been converted into heaps of ruins, where wild beasts have lurked, serpents 
hidden, and desert winds howled; but in the case of Rome, the deadly wound was healed. Mysteriously, 
wonderfully, the captive city, by the development of a new power, binds her conquerors in the chains of 
superstition, and by establishing a spiritual dominion over the souls of men, she yet succeeds in holding 
the secular authority oyer a vast portion of the world. The sway of Rome under the Popes became, in 
spite of her conquest, mightier than her sway under the Ceesars. 


FORTY-TWO MONTHS. 


It yet remains to consider the period during which it shall be given this dominion to have power over 
the saints. We have found that this period of 1260 days, or 1260 years, since a day is the symbol of a year, 
has been several times mentioned. The “Holy City,” the true Church, is trodden down by the Gentiles 
for forty-two months; the two witnesses prophesy in sackcloth for one thousand two hundred and three- 
score days; the woman, or the true Church, is driven by the dragon into the wilderness for twelve hundred 
and sixty days, and the beast exercises power for forty-two months, which is the same period once more, 
There can be no doubt that the treading down of the Holy City, the two witnesses in sackcloth, the flight 
and sojourn of the Church in the wilderness, and the power of the beast, all take place during the same 
period, begin at the same time, are different parts of the same history, and end at the same epoch. It has 
been already found (chapter 11) that this period began in 533. The period, then, of the greatest power 
and glory of this “eighth head,’’ which is the beast himself, would end about 1793, or about the beginning 
of this century. At that time there is certainly an exaltation of the two witnesses, a return of the 
Church from the wilderness. There is also a fatal shock to the temporal power of Rome. In 1798 
Napoleon Bonaparte effected the conquest of Italy, and the Pope, a prisoner, was a supplicant at his feet. 
In 1804, he ordered the Pope, who was now his puppet, to come to France to crown him emperor of the 
French. In 1805, he assumed the title of King of Italy. During the years of his power he ruled the Pope 
with an iron hand, broke up the old European system, emancipated the nations from the terror of Rome, 
and when he fell, the temporal authority of Rome had received a fatal wound. The influence of the Pope 
in the politics of the world was broken. Since then Rome has been occupied as the capital of free Italy, 
and the Pope has become “The Prisoner of the Vatican.” 





470 REVELATION. [Ch, XIIT. 
11 And I beheld another beast coming up sy . cout mento ee he 
PLDs a ike a lamb, an @ | and he had _ two horns like 
ae see a oe had two horns lik : ee lamb, ype spake re 
5 g . asa dragon. And he exer- 
12 And he exerciseth all the power of the iirst the (Ase bens in toy oe 
beast before him, and causeth the earth, and them And he maketh the earth 
which dwell therein, to worship the first beast, | to‘worsnip the first beast, 
whose deadly wound was healed. eee se ta fs 
13 And? he doeth great wonders, so” that he signs, that he should even 
ma. if y 
maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth| out of heaven upon ‘the 
in the sight of men ee ee 
= ae, An e deceiveth: them 
14 And deceiveth them that dwell on _ the) that dwell on the earth by 
S s Treason Oo ne Signs W. 
earth by the means of those miracles which he had | i¢‘was given him to do in 
power to do in the sight of the beast, saying to be PT re ae 
them that dwell on the earth, that they should on the earth, that they 
7 5 im 
make an image to the beast which had the wound | the beast, whe hatte the 
by a sword, and? did live. stroke of the sword, and 








a Deut. 18:1; Matt. 24:24; 2 Thes. 2:9; Rev. 16:14. 02 Kings1:10. ¢2 Kings 20: 7. 








THE LAMB-LIKE DRAGON, 


11, 12. I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth. John sees this second monster 
soming up out of the earth, a beast that has two-horns like a lamb, and a voice like the voice of a 
dragon. There is a close connection existing between the ten-horned and the two-horned beast. ‘The 
latter (1) exercises the power of the first beast before him, (2) causeth the earth to worship the first beast, 
(8) says to the earth that it should make an image of the first beast (verse 14), (4) gives life unto the 
image of the first beast, and (5) causes those who will not worship the image to be slain (verse 15). These 
statements show that there exists a close connection between the two, and that the last is the supporter 
and restorer of the first. We have found the first to be a symbolical representation of the temporal power 
of Rome. Most Protestant commentators see in the second beast the spiritual power of Rome, the power 
which gave life to, and built up, the temporal dominion of the Papacy. The Papal claims are two-fold, 
both of spiritual and temporal dominion. St. Peter with the sword and the keys is always represented as 
the symbol of Papal power; the sword of temporal sway, and the keys of the kingdom. The Pope not 
only claims to be the vicar of Christ, but the rightful ruler of the kings of the earth; and in this capacity, 
in the days of his greatness, has made and deposed kings, and granted kingdoms. Two horns likea 
lamb . . spakelikeadragon. There is a similitude like the Lamb of God; a counterfeit repre- 
sentation; but a voice like the old dragon of pagan Rome. Both features show themselves. It professes 
to bea Christian power. Sometimes its servants do a really lamb-like work, but then again we hear the 
dragon’s voice. It can hardly be necessary to state that symbolism could choose no language more 
appropriate to represent the harsh, arrogant utterances of Rome when she puts forth her power, or 
asserts her authority. Whoever has heard the harsh orders of the priest to his flock, has heard the 
dragon’s voice. How appropriately this language describes the bulls of Popes, or the fulminations of 
anathemas and excommunications against their enemies! 12. He maketh the earth . co 
worship the first beast. The spiritual power of Rome is exercised before, or in the presence of, the 
temporal power. They have dwelt together, and it 1s the Spiritual power that has made those that dwell 
upon the earth regard and pay homage to the temporal. If an earthly ruler refused to heed the mandates 
ef the Pope, his subjects were absolved from allegiance and bidden to depose him. If they refused, the 
whole kingdom was laid under interdict, the churches were closed, religious rites were suspended, the 
dead were not buried in the consecrated grounds, and a superstitious population soon demands deliver- 
ance by submission. It was by the terrors of the spiritual power that the earth was brought into 
subjection to the imperial temporal sway of the Popes. The second beast has made men worship the first. 

13,14. The second beast did great wonders, pretended to perform miracles, and thus ‘‘deceived them 
that dwell upon the earth.** Rome has claimed the possession of miraculous power in all ages, and no 
fact in history is better established than that she has continually resorted to lying miracles. 14. And 
deceiveth . . . by reason of those miracles. The object of these false miracles was to rivet the 
chains of the spiritual dominion, so as to build up the temporal sway of the papacy. The dragon-lamb 
commanded men to make an image of the beast, and to offer it homage. j 


Ch. XIII.) REVELATION. 








ATL 





15 And he had power to give life unto the image 
of the beast, that the image of the beast should 
both speak, and* cause that as many as would not 
worship the image of the beast should be killed. 

16 And he caused all, both small and great, rich 
and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their 
right hand, or in their foreheads: 

17 And that no man might buy or sell, save he 
that had the mark, or® the name of the beast,° or 
the number of his name. 

18 Here’ is wisdom. Let him that hath under- 
standing count the number of the beast: for it is 
the number of a man; and his number és Six hun- 
dred threescore and six. 


a Rev. 20:4. 6 Rev. 14:11. cRey. 15:2. 





lived. And it was given 15 
unto him to give breath to 
it, even to the image of the 
beast, that the image of the 
beast should both speak, 
and cause that as many as 
should not worship the im- 
age of the beast should be 
killed. And he causeth all, 
the small and the great, 
and the rich and the poor, 
and the free and the bond, 
that there be given them a 
mark on their right hand, 
or upon their forehead; 
and that no man should be 
able to buy or to sell, save 
he that hath the mark, even 
the name of the beast or 
the numbe. of his name. 
Here is wisdom. He that 
hath understanding, let 
him count the number of 
the beast; for it’ is the 
number of a man: and his 
number is Six hundred and 
sixty and six. 





d Psa. 107:43; Hos. 14:9; Rey. 2:17; 17:9. 





15-17. And he had power to give life unto the image of the beast. 


This image of the beast, 


of the old Pagan power, this eighth head, which is the beast and of the seven, is not a lifeless image. The 
arts of the dragon lamb gave it life. The spiritual power built up the temporal and gave it imperial and 


despotic dominion. It had power to slay all who would not worship its 
persecution in Holland, the scenes 
16. Hecausethall .. . 
The mark of the beast is some stamp or sign, by which all its worshipers should be 
were sometimes branded, as cattle are in our own age. The brand or 
would designate with certainty those who were 


Southern France, the frightful work of the Inquisition, the merciless 
of blood and death caused by Rome in many lands, are the fulfillment. 
receive a mark. 
known. In ancient days slaves 
mark of the beast would be some indelible sign which 


The awful dragonnades in 


to 


subject to his authority. A mark in the hand is supposed by some to represent the practice, while a mark 
in the forehead indicates the profession of life. It is remarkable, however, that a mark on the forehead, 
the sign of the cross made with water, converts a person into a Roman Catholic, and without this mark 


none are regarded as heirs of salvation. 17. No man might buy or sell, etc. 
for Catholics to be forbidden to patronize those who were not loyal to the Pope. 


It has been common 
At least three councils 


are named, those of Tours, of Constance and the Lateran, which have expressly forbidden business 


intercourse With heretics. 


THE NUMBER OF THE BEAST. 


18. Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast. 
It also speaks of the number of its name. ‘Its 
We wish to discover its name, and if we can count the number, we will find 


speaks of the name of the beast. It has, then, a name. 
name, then, is some number. 


The seventeenth verse 


itsname. ‘The number of the beast,” that is, the “number of its name,” is the number of a man, and 


that number is six hundred and sixty-six. 


It is, then, plain that the number six hundred and sixty-six is 


the number of the name of the beast, and this is a man’s name, Six hundred and sixty-six is English. 


John did not write in English, hence those words in English will not give the word we seek. 


666 are the ° 


Arab characters for the numbers, but they were unknown until many hundred years after John wrote, 


and hence afford no help. John wrote in 
The number is evidently, then, to be expressed in Greek characters. 


the Greek language for readers who understood that tongue. 
The Greeks did not express numbers 


‘by figures, but by letters; just as among the Romans, X stood for ten and C for one hundred. Six hundred 


and sixty-six could be expressed by spelling out the words in the Greek lan 


which were symbols for various quantities. Let us try the latter method: 
50=n, T0=0, 200=s. 666=Lateinos. 
spelling the name of Latinus, the reputed founder of the Latin race. 
spoke the Latin language. 


guage, or by using the letters 


30=L, 1=a, 300=t, 5=e, 10=i, 





And what is this name? The number of a man; the Greek method of 
The Romans were a Latin race and 
The Romish Church is continually officially called the Latin Church, to 


distinguish it from the Greek Church, the other branch of the great ancient schism , the Catholic sacred 
books are written in the Latin tongue; the worship is conducted in every country in the Latin alone, and 
when a Catholic council convenes, all its conferences are conducted in the tongue of the ancient Latins. 


“There is, then, a Latin Church, whose official and sacred speech is the Latin 


language, which has for its 


472 REVELATION. 








CHAPTER XIV. 


The Triumph of Christ. 


SUMMARY.—The Lamb and His Saints on Mt. Zion. The New Song. The 
Angel of the Everlasting Gospel. Blessed Are Those that Die in the 
Lord. The Son of Man in the Clouds. The Harvest of the Earth. 
The Elect Gathered. The Clusters of the Vine of the Earth Cut Off. 
Trodden in the Wine-Press. 


1 And I looked, and, lo, a? Lamb stood on the 
mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and 
four thousand,” having his Father’s name written 
in their foreheads. 


[Ch. XIV.. 





CHAPTER XIV 


And I saw, and behold, 1 
the Lamb standing on the 
mount Zion, and with him 
a hundred and forty and 
four thousand, having his 
name, and the name of his 


Father, written on their 
foreheads. And I heard a 2 
voice from heaven, as the 
voice of many waters, and 
as the voice of a great 
thunder: and the voice 
which I heard was as the 
voice of harpers harping 
with their harps: and they 3: 
sing as it were a new song 
before the throne, and be- 
fore the four living creat- 
ures and theelders: andno 
man could learn the song 
save the hundred and forty 
and four thousand, even 


2 And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of 
many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder; 
and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their 
harps: 

ateknd they sung as it were a new song before the 
throne, and before the four beasts and the elders: 
and no man could learn that song, but the hundred 
and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed 
from the earth. 








a John 1:29, 36. 6 Rev. 7:3. 





seat the ancient Latin capital. That Church is the great Apostate Church, upon whose head the names. 
of blasphemy have been written, which has claimed universal dominion upon the earth, and has slain the 
saints of the Most High. Its name is the number of the beast, and that name, Lateinos, the name or 
number of a man, is 666. It does not destroy the force of this that these numerals and letters can be so: 
combined as to spell out other names. This name is one that at once points to a power which has. 
_ displayed every mark which is assigned to the beast. Pe 
CHAPTER XIV. 


The gloomy picture of the terrible foes of the Chureh, given in chapter 18, is calculated to fill the saints 
with fearful foreboding. A persecuted, suffering Church, beholding these mighty enemies, their terrible 
work, these fearful struggles of the future, these triumphs of the wicked, might almost be led to despair 
of the final victory of the Redeemer’s cause. Hence, for the encouragement of the saints, their eyes are 
turned, in the fourteenth chapter, upon a brighter vision. The dark clouds are lifted off the future, and 
they are enabled to look beyond and to see the glorious fruition of all the tears and sorrow, the struggles. 
and trials of the Church. The vision of this chapter cheers the saints and encourages them to press on in 
the hour of darkness, by leading them forward to the final triumph of righteousness at the end of time. 

1-5. And I looked, and behold. This is the usual formula in Revelation which introduces a new 
vision. The Lamb stood on the mount Zion. In chapter 13 a false lamb has been seen, one that had 
a voice likea dragon. Here, in contrast, is seen the Lamb of God, the same as in chapter 5, taking the book 
with seven seals. On Mount Zion. Here and in Heb. 12: 22 are the only places in the New Testament. 
where this expression occurs. It is equivalent to the “Jerusalem above” of Gal. 4: 26 and Heb. 12: 22. 
Mount Zion, the city of the great King, the seat of the worship of God in Jerusalem, was a type, and is. 
used as a Symbol of the true Church. In Hebrews 12: 22, the saints who have entered into the covenant of 
Christ are said to have come, not to the mount that could not be touched, but to Mount Zion, the city of 
the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem. It is there used for the church of saints, and such is its meaning 
in this passage. With him a hundred and forty and four thousand, having his name, ete. In 
chapter 7: 4, the same number are spoken of as sealed from the twelve tribes of Israel. It means there, a 
great, indefinite number. Here, I take it that the meaning is the same. It is a great multitude, a round 
number, who are associated with the Lamb. 2. And I heard a voice from heaven. Whose voice is. 
not stated, but it was a mighty voice, the voice of harpers harping with their harps. Always when. 
great triumphs are achieved or about to be achieved, heaven rings with the praises of the singers. Com- 


pare 5: 8,9; 7:10-12; 11:17. 8. And they sung as it werea new song before the throne, A song: 


Ch ATV] REVELATION. 





473: 





4 These are they which were not defiled with | Hey that had been pur- 
women;* for they are virgins. These are they | These are they which were 4 
which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth. | forthey are virgins, These 
These were redeemed from among men,” deing the | ¢72 they which follow, the 
frst frui 2 Lamb whithersoever he go- 

rst-fruits unto God, and to the Lamb. ci These were purchased 
es : 1 . eye rom among men, to be the 

5 And‘ in their mouth was found no guile: for® | firstiruits unto God and 
they are without fault before the throne of God. pate, the Oe ee 

6 And I saw another angel fly in the midst of lie: they are without blem- 

: ene : ish. 
heaven,® having the everlasting gospel to preach) “ana1 saw another angel 6 
unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every | fying in mid heaven, hay- 
: : ; 2 ing an eternal gospel to 
nation, and kindred, and tongue, and yea proclaim unto them that 
os : Q S well on the earth, and un- 

7 Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give | to every nation and tribe 
glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: | 204 tongue and peoples 

f : and he saith with a great 7 
and‘ worship him that made heaven, and earth, and voice, Fear God, and give 
; See 2 im glory; for the hour of 
the sea, and the fountains of waters. ; his judgment is come: and 

8 And there followed another angel, saying,®| worship him that made the 
B = . : > heaven and the earth and 

abylon is fallen, is fallen, that great city, because | sea and fountains of wa- 
she made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath | Sha another, a second 8 
of her fornication. angel, followed, | saying, 

Fallen, fallen, is Babylon 





the great, which hath made 





d Eph. 5:27; Jude 24. e Matt. 28:19; Eph. 3:9; it.12. 


c Psa. 32:2; Zeph. 3: 13. 
g Isa. 21: 9; Jer. 51:8. 


6 James 1:18. 
f Psa. 124:83 146:5; Acts 14:15. 


a2 Cor, 11:2. 





that has some new features. It was sung in the presence of the Father and the attending princes of 
heaven. And no man could learn the song save the hundred and forty and four thousand. 
None could understand the song but them, those who had been redeemed. 4. These are they which. 
were not defiled with women. This thought is always a symbol of purity of life; of refusing sinful 
intercourse with the world. Spiritual adultery or fornication is being wedded to the world and partaking 
of itssins. They are virgins. This term is a symbol, and means that their lives are not defiled by the 
world. See2Cor.11:2. First fruits. First fruits were always dedicated to God. See Num.18:12. These- 
holy ones are set apart and dedicated to God and the Lamb. 5. Andintheir mouth, etc. This verse 
states that their lives were holy and pleasing to God and the Lamb. 

The Lamb on Mount Zion in the midst of these saints is a prophetic picture, and the thought should be, 
What do these symbols signify? These saints stand forth as the representatives of aclass. “They are 
first fruits unto God and the Lamb.” As the first fruits, devoted to God, were representative of the whole- 
harvest, so these stand forth as the representatives of the harvest of souls. We are to behold in them as 
they stand on Mount Zion with the Lamb in their midst, a picture of the Church in some age of the world. 
Let us observe the facts stated of them: 1. The Lambis in their midst; a characteristic of the holy saints. 
2. They are pure, unspotted, undefiled, not fornicators, nor sullied with unholy desires. 3. They follow the 
Lamb whithersoever he goes. They are sheep that hear the Shepherd’s voice. They are obedient to all 
his commandments. They follow his example as well as his words. They live a Christ-like life. 4. In 
their mouths was found no guile, and they were without fault before the throne of God. Whenever the 
Church of God becomes purified, ceases unholy fornication with the world, these are the marks which it 
will exhibit. I believe this to be a picture of the Church, yet to come, which shall have put on the white 
robes and have only Christ for its King. 

6,'7. I saw another angel flying in mid heaven. An angel is a messenger. Any agency that 
does God’s work or carries his message may be an angel. This angel isasymbol. (1) His flying indicates 
some movement or change that shall take place with great rapidity. (2) The fact that he has the ever- 
lasting gospel shows that the movement symbolized is the evangelization of the world. (3) That the 
movement will be world wide is shown in that he speaks to allraces. (4) His proclamation shows that 
he not only offers the glad, tidings but declares the consequences of their rejection. This all implies that 
the purification of the Church will be followed by a mighty gospel impulse which will sweep over the 
world. There is a sublime missionary spirit on the part of the revived Church. Full of zeal, breathing 
the spirit of the Master, permeated with the apostolic spirit, as in the days of old it will go everywhere 
preaching the word. The old, old, story, told by a holy people, told with a burning zeal and overflowing . 
love, shall exhibit its divine power in the salvation of the nations. 


8-12. There followed another angel, saying, Babylon is fallen. Asaresult of the great gos- 














AT4 REVELATION. (Ch. XIV. 
9 And the third angel followed them, saying with | ll the nations to drink of 
% ‘ - | the wine of the wrath of 
a loud voice, If any man worship the beast and his her fornication, 
ae ay receive Ais mark in his forehead, or in third, followed tent Say 9 
is hand, ing with a great voice, 
r * any man worshippeth the 
10 The same? shall drink of the wine of the wrath | beast and his image, and 
7 2 7 a =, receive a mar. on 1S 
of God, which is poured out without mixture into forehead, or upon his hand, 
the cup of his indignation; and he shall be tor- he also phall, deni et ibe 10 
mented with fire and brimstone in the presence of which 1s prepared unmixed 
: y , . |in the cup of his anger; 
the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: | Mie shiu‘be tormented 
11 And? the smoke of their torment ascendeth up with fire and brimstone in 
for ever and ever: and they have no rest day nor'| angels, and in the presence 
ce EAS apes ja 4 of the Lamb: and the 11 
night, who worship the beast and his, nage, andi Hes 
whosoever receiveth the mark of his name. eth, Bp, Oks Boece 
Le . . . s n Vi ¥ 7 
12 Here® is the patience of the saints: here are) ana night, they that wor 
they that keep the commandments of God, and the | oP ne ee a eneivath 
faith of Jesus. the mark of his name: Here 12 
: : ; es 
13 And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto | saints, oe that keep the 
ie, Write, Blessed* are the dead* which die in they ote sees Scat 
Lord from henceforth: Yea saith, the Spirit, that®| And I hearda voice from 13 
heaven saying, Write, 
Blessed are the dead which 
die in the Lord from hence- 
-@ Psa. 75:8. 6b Isa. 34:10. ¢ Rev. 18:10. @ Rey. 12:17." g Isa. 57:1,2; 


-2 Thes. 1:73 Heb. 4:9. 


é Keel. 4:1, :2.° f1 Cor. 153 1 Thes, 4: 16. 





~pel revival shown in verses 6, 7, the city of sin, here called Babylon, but called ‘‘spiritually Sodom, and 
Egypt, and where our Lord was crucified” (11: 8) shall fall. The wine of the wrath of her fornica- 
tion. This Babylon was a city of fornication, of unholy alliance with the world, wedded to the prince of 
this world instead of to Christ, and made the nations sin with her, or drink her wine. JWine of wrath. So 
called either because her wrath was manifested in persecution against those who refused to drink, or 
because the wine of God’s wrath shall be poured on her (see yerse 10). 9. And the third angel fol- 

lowed. This angel proclaims God’s judgment on all that worship the beast and hisimage. (See 
Ch.13.) 10. The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God. Those who received the 
mark of the beast, worshiped the beast, drank the wine of Babylon, shall drink the wine of God’s wrath. 
His judgments shall be poured out onthem. Shall be tormented with fire and brimstone. These 
are symbols, just as wine and cup are symbols. The meaning is that they shall suffer bitter anguish. 11. 
‘And the smoke of their torment. This is also a symbol suggested by fire,and brimstone. The 
thought of this verse is the eternal unrest and pain of those who have followed the beast. 12. Hereis 
the patience of the saints. The thought that the enemies who oppress them and torture them will be 
finally utterly overcome gives the saints patience to endure. 

BABYLON. What is meant by this city Babylon? The term only occurs in the New Testament in 1 Pet. 
5; 13, and in the Book of Revelation. It is shown in this passage that Babylon virtually signifies the same 
as the ‘‘ beast and his image,”’ while in 17: 5 Babylon is shown to be the mystical harlot who sat on the 
seven headed and ten horned beast. In chapter 18 the fall of Babylon is again declared and it is said that 
all the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her. Of this spiritual Babylon the old Babylon 
on the Euphrates was atype. It was (1) A wicked world power. (2) It oppressed God’s people and led 
them captive. (3) It was only when it was overthrown that Jerusalem was restored. (4) In addition it 
might be added that it was at or near Babylon that the confusion of tongues took place. This old Babylon 
in some way is a type of the Babylon meant by John. The facts stated of the spiritual Babylon are that it 
was (1) identified with the beast; (2) a mighty oppressor of God’s people; (3) that it led them captive; 
(4) ruled the earth; (5) is a harlot, or idolatrous church. Jt has been found in the preceding chapter that 
the beast and its image point to Rome; it will be found in chapter 17, that the woman who is called 
“Mystery, Babylon the Great,” who sitteth on the beast, is the great apostate church which has ruled the 
nations. This passage shows the means by which this dominion shall be overthrown. It will be done by 

.a pure and holy Church, filled with missionary zeal. It is the preaching of the ancient gospel which shall 
bring Rome to destruction. When this shall be done is not revealed, but I am led to cherish the idea that 
it is not so far distant as some suppose. 


Ch. XIV.] REVELATION. 


A75 











they may rest from their labours; and their works Een palit 1B Soe 
A eC ‘ rest trom 
do follow them. their labors; Vor their 
14 And I looked, and behold a white cloud, and a aden task 
upon the cloud one sat like unto* the Son of man, | white clond: and on the 
ane hi Head Id 2 ; 4 cloud 7 saw one sitting like 
aving on his head a golden crown, and in his hand unto a son of man, having 
: mee eae on his head a golden crown, 
“a sharp sickle. : and in his hand a sharp 
15 And another angel came out of the temple, | sickle. And another ange 
. . . . rom e temple, 
crying with a loud voice to him that sat on the crying with a great voice 
ees G ‘ 2 5 / to him that sat on the 
cloud, Thrust? in thy sickle, and reap: for the time | cloua, send forth thy sick- 
is come for thee to reap: for the harvest*® of the | 1¢ and reap: for the hont 
earth is ripe larvest of the Gane ts 
Ss ° P py 1 
5 3 2 -,|overripe. And he that sat 16 
16 And he that sat on the cloud thrust in his) onthe cioud cast his sickle 
sickle on the earth; and the earth was reaped. ton She ey and the 
17 And another angel came out of the temple And another angel came 17 
o see) is Q o out from the temple which 
which is in heaven, he also having asharp sickle. _| isin heaven, healso having 
18 And another angel came out from the altar,*}*sberp sickle, Andanoi 48 
5 : a : ° er angel came out from the 
which had power over fire; and cried with a loud /aitar, he that hath power. 
ota i ‘ : eae e 2 over fire; and he called 
ery to him that had the sharp sickle, saying,® Thrust | (ith a great voice to him 
in thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the | that had the sharp Sic 
f th fae for i a, Poltalicn saying, Send forth thy 
vine of the earth; for her grapes are fully ripe. sharp sickle, and gather 





a¥Ezek. 1:26; Dan. 7:13. 6 Joel3:13; Matt. 13:39. 


c Jer. 51:33; Rev. 18:12. 


d Rey. 16:8. eJoeld: 18. 





18. Iheard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write. Weare not told whose voice, but it is 
a yoice of authority. The words to be written are next stated. Blessed are the dead which die in 
the Lord. Not all the dead, but those dead who die in the Lord. Only those die im the Lord who are in 
the Lord when they die. The Christian life, begun by faith and baptism into Christ (Rom. 6: 3), is a life 
in Christ. To be assured Of this blessed death one must livea Christian life. From henceforth. Proba- 
bly from the time of this utterance to John, though some have supposed that the time meant is that of the 
Lord’s coming, which is declared in verse 14. Yea, saith the Spirit. The Spirit confirms the blessing 
pronounced and states the reason. They may rest from their labors. Yet though they rest their 
jabors are not lost; they follow them to eternity to speak for them. 

14-16. I looked, and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sat like unto the Son 
of man. Jesus has himself said that the Son of man shall be seen coming upon the clouds of heaven 
(Matt. 24: 30). John here sees the Son of Man sitting upon a white cloud. The Savior says that his com- 
ing shall be with great power and glory. John now sees upon the head of the Son of man a golden crown. 
The Savior says (Matt. 24: 30) that he will send his angels to gather the elect. John hears an angel bid 
him who sat upon the cloud, to reap the earth, for its harvest was ripe. 15. Send forth thy sickle 
and reap. There is gathered first the ripened harvest of the elect of God. It is an angel that came out 
of the temple of God as a messenger of God, carrying to the Son the Father’s command to gather the elect 
from the four corners of the earth. Then a longing, waiting Church, “loving the appearing of the Son of 
man,” shall first be gathered into the heavenly garner. The ripe sheaves are gathered. 16. The earth 
was reaped. The harvest of souls is ended forever. But those who are upon the earth “‘shall not pre- 
vent them that are asleep.” At the voice of the archangel the dead shall wake from their long sleep in 
the embrace of earth. Death shall be swallowed up in victory. ‘ Blessed henceforth forever are the dead 
who died in the Lord. Yea, saith the Spirit, they do rest from their labors and their works do follow 
them.” . 

17-20. Another angel came out of the temple which is in heaven, he also having a sharp 
sickle. The ripened harvest of the saints has been gathered first. That was symbolized in verses 14-16. 
The gathering ot the wicked to judgment is now shown in the symbols. Another angel comes forth with 
asicklein his hand. Christ, by his angels, was the great reaper of the righteous harvest. They that are 
Christ’s are gathered by him at his coming, but the wicked are gathered by another, here presented as an 
angelreaper. 18. Another angel came out from the altar. The altar of burnt offerings. Which 
had power over fire. This angel, one that has power over fire, comes forth from the altar where fire 
was kept burning. Fire is an emblem of punishment, of destruction. He bids the angel who holds the 
sickle to begin his work, ‘to put forth his sickle and cut off the clusters of the vine of the earth, for they 


476 REVELATION. 





19 And the angel thrust in his sickle into the | te core ee 
earth, and gathered the vine of the earth, and cast ae fully ripe. And the an- 19: 
zt into* the great wine-press of the wrath of God. earth, and gathered the 

20 And? the wine-press was trodden without® the | vintage of the ipa de 

ity; a of the wine-press, even | the great winepress of the 
city; and blood came out of the press, yee with a Gan aut ate ap 
unto the horse-bridles, by the space of a thousan winepress was trodden 
| o , without the city, and there 
and six hundred furlongs. came out blood from the 
Ne he pat ope the 
ridles o he horses, as 
CHAPTER XY. far ae # gnsane and six 
hundred furlongs. 
Another Great and Marvellous Sign in Heaven. 
SUMMARY.—Seven Angels with the Seven Last Plagues. The Sea of 

Glass. The Song of Moses, and the Song of the Lamb. The Temple CHAPTER Xv. 

Opened. The Temple Filled with the Glory of God. . 

‘ 3 _ And I saw another sign 1 

1 And I saw another sign in heaven, great and | in heaven, great and mar- 

da : vellous, seven angels hay- 
marvellous, seven? angels having the seven last ing seven plagues, which 
plagues; for® in them is filled up the wrath of God. fei eee ee 

2 And I saw as it were’ a sea of glass mingled And I saw as it were a 2 

5) ass min V 
with fire; and them that had gotten the victory | HS 34na" that come 

h rer aq ig | Victorious from the beast, 
over the beast,? and over his image, and over his and tom tiedoage, ad 
mark, and over the number of his name, stand on | from the number of his 

name, standing by the 


the sea of glass, having the harps of-God. 


(Ch. XV. 





' glassy sea, having harps of 





a Rey. 19:15. bIsa. 63:3; Lam. 1:15. ¢ Rey. 11:18; Heb. 13:12. d Rev. 16: 1; 21:9. eRev. 14:10. fRev. 4:6. 
g Matt. 3:11. hRev. 13:15. - 





are ripe.” Grapes are chosen as a symbol of the wicked because of their harmony with the figure that 
describes the fate of the wicked. “The vine of the earth” means the world that lieth in sin, ‘‘earth’’ 
being used in an unfavorable sense thus far in Revelation. 19. Cast it into the great winepress of the 
wrath of God. They were cast into the wine-press, then trodden under foot, and from the bruised and 
bleeding mass ran red juice like blood. The symbol implies delivery over to punishment and destruction. 
As the grapes were trodden and crushed in the wine-press, so the clusters ‘‘of the vine of the earth” are 
crushed under the wrath of God. 20. And the winepress was trodden without the city. The 
city, whenever it is not shown to be a wicked city, is Jerusalem, the Apocalyptic symbol of the Church. 
These judgments are without the church, judgments upon the world. And blood came out of the 
winepress. Thisis what John saw. The pressed juice of the grapes ran out red like blood, and ran in 
a mighty stream, deep as the bridle bits of the horses, 1600 furlongs; about 200 miles. There has been much 
discussion concerning what this distance signifies. Some have cited the fact that Palestine is about 200 
miles long, and held that a fearful carnage in that country is predicted. Others have noted the fact that 
Italy is about 200 miles wide, and held that this country is to be the scene of a terrible conflict, In my 
opinion, the whole is symbolic of the terrible judgments of the wicked in that day. The figures, 40x40, or 
4x4, multiplied by 10x10, imply the universality of the judgment. The four quarters, the Jour winds, the 
four corners of the earth are often mentioned, and four is held to be an Apocalyptical symbol of the 
earth, while ten, like seven, is a perfect, or sacred, number, 


CHAPTER XV. 


With this chapter begins a detailed account of the closing judgments upon “the beast and its image and 
those who have the mark of the beast.” Their overthrow, as the great city Babylon, has been seen in 
14: 8-10, but in chapters 15, 16, the Seven Last Plagues which come as judgments and tend towards the 
overthrow are given. The fourteenth chapter gives a summary of future events; the fifteenth, sixteenth, 
seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth chapters present the same events in detail. These chapters are all 
connected with the fall of spiritual Babylon, and open with these words: “I saw another great sign in 
heaven, great and marvelous, seven angels having the seven last plagues.” The opening of the seventh 
seal carries the reader to the triumph of Christianity over Roman Paganism, The seven trumpets lead us 
onward to the overthrow of the western Roman Empire by the Goths, Vandals and Huns, and the ruin of 
the Eastern Empire by the Saracens and Turks, The last trumpet of the seven reaches to the close of 
secular history with the trump of the Archangel. The seven vials also give the history of an epoch, and, 


‘Ch. XV.] REVELATION. AT7 





3 And they sing* the song of Moses the servant | God. And they sing the 3 
P t song of Moses the servant 
of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying,” Great | of God, and the song of 


and marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty ; | gna ‘Marea se at 


just® and true are thy ways, thou King of saints. ri war wane Oe 
r a f mighty; righteous and 
4 Who! shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify | true are thy “ways, thou 


thy name? for thou only art holy: for? all nations|Sinf nottear, O Lord. ana 


shall come and worship before thee; for thy judg- Be big tan cnet 
ments are made manifest. nations shall’ come and 


5 And after that I looked, and, behold, * the tem- He cieeiecoe aus Waa 


; i 1 been made manifest. 
ple of the tabernacle of the testimony in_ heaven | been made manite nati 
was opened: saw, and the temple of the 


© rng ] ‘ + e 
6 And the seven aagels came out of the temple, | ein isaven was opened: 


ine S ing res and there came out from 6 
having the seven plagues, clothed in® pure and | 20) wie, (iiseven aneels 


white linen, and having their breast girded with | that had the seven plagues, 


See arrayed with precious stone, 
golden girdles. pure and bright, and girt 


a@ Ex. 15:1; Deut. 31:30. 6 Deut. 32:4. cHos.14:9. d Ex. 15:14; Jer. 10:7. eIsa. 66:22. f Rev. 11: 19; 
Num.1:50. g Ex. 28:6; Ezek. 44:17. 














like each of the series of seven, bring us to the end of that epoch. They present the series of calamities 
that first weaken and then destroy the power of Papal Rome. Each one of three series of seven leads to 
the completion of a well-defined purpose. The seven seals have a definite object, and lead us to the accom- 
plishment of that object in the overthrow of Roman Paganism, The seven trumpets have a definite object, 
and lead us to the fulfillment of their design in the overthrow of the Roman Empire. Equally definite is 
the object of the seven vials, and equally certain that the last vial will accomplish the utter overthrow of 
that blasphemous power, which is variously described as a “‘city of fornication,” ‘‘the great city Babylon,” 
the scarlet adulteress, and the seven-headed and ten-horned beast. 

1, 2. Isaw another sign in heaven. Another scene displayed, different from those just past, 
and startling nits character. Seven angels having theseven last plagues. Called the last plagues 
because they are the final plagues which are sent upon the beast and its image; they bring the series to a 
close. They “fill up the wrath of God.” The great feature of this vision is the seven angels with the 
seven last plagues, but they are not seen at first when the vision opens; not until verse 7is reached. The 
vision opens with the scene of verse2. 2. Isaw as it were asea of glass mingled with fire. In 
4: 1 “the sea of glass, clear as crystal,’ was seen about the throne of God. It is the emblem of the calm- 
ness and purity of God’srule. Here the the sea is mingled with jire,a symbol always denoting judgments. 
This shows that the time for judgments, coming from the throneof God, hascome. And them that had 
gotten the victory over the beast. These are the redeemed of 14: 1, who are there seen standing with 
the Lamb on Mount Zion. They now engage in triumphant songs over the approaching overthrow of their 

-greatenemy. Having the harps of God. Musical instruments wholly dedicated to his praise. 

3,4. They sing the song of Moses .. andthesongof the Lamb. When Israel was deliy- 
ered from Egypt they sang the song of Moses as they had done on the shores of the Red Sea. Here, the 
spiritual Israel, redeemed, standing on the crystal sea, sings a song of deliverance, but it is the old song 
to a new strain; the song of the Lamb now; of the Redeemer. Just and true arethy ways. The sal- 
vation of the true worshipers and the judgment sent upon the wicked beast, demonstrated the truth and 
justice of God. 4. Who shall not fear thee P The judgments now given to the seven angels showed 
that God is a consuming fire, as well as a sun andashield, Weareleft mno doubt concerning the identity 
of these singers. They are “them that had gotten the victory over the beast and his image, and over his 
mark and the number of his name.” The ground of their rejoicing is also recorded, ‘All nations shall 
come and worship before thee; for thy judgments are made manifest.” The mighty arm of God is to be 
revealed in bringing to naught the powers of evil, and especially all the great enemies over whom they 
had been victorious. The saints who have undergone the persecution of the beast are represented as 
rejoicing because the day of its judgment has come. 

5-7. Behold the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened. The 
apostle looks again and “ behold, the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven is opened.” The tabernacle 
of the testimony was the Holy of Holies. Into it none but the High Priest entered, and he only to make 
intercession for the forgiveness of sins. It is the type of the Holy of Holies above, the mercy seat in the 
heavens where our High Priest intercedes for us, and where the smoke of the incense of prayer arises to 
God. 6. And the seven angels. The angels mentioned in verse i. Arrayed with a precious 


478 REVELATION. [Ch XVI. 





; : their breasts with 
7 And* one of the four beasts gave unto the pr eene Meee dal ae 


seven angels seven golden vials full of the wrath of | the four living creatures 
a ‘ gave unto the seven angels 
God, who liveth for ever and ever. golden bowls full of the 


1 ¢ |} wrath of God, who liveth 
8 And” the temple was filled with smoke frome | rth of God, who liveth 


the glory of God, and his power; and no man was | temple was filled with 
5 : 5 . | Smoke from the glory of 
able to enter into the temple till the seven plagues | Goa, and from his power; 


_ is G and none was able to enter 
of the seven angels were fulfilled. ioe 
seven plagues of the seven 
angels should be finished. 








a Rey. 4:6. b Ex. 40:34; 1 Kings 8:10; 2 Chron. 5:14; Isa. 6:4. c2Thes. 1:9. 





stone, pure and bright (Revision). Probably precious stones covered their garments like those of the 
robe of the high priest.. They come out of the temple as priests ot destruction. 7. And one of the four 
living creatures. For notes on the Four Living Creatures see chapter 4. As the servant and agent of 
the Almighty he hands the seven vials of God’s wrath to the angels. The Revision has “bowls” instead of 
“vials.”” The thought is that in succession seven plagues are to be poured upon the earth. 

8. And the temple was filled with smoke . . and none was able to enter into the temple 
until, ete. Does this mean that the heavens are shut against man during this period? Does it mean 
that no one can enter the true Church until the plagues are poured out? So some have mistak enly main- 
tained. The doors of the kingdom were opened on Pentecost, and will never be closed until the marriage 
supper of the Lamb. The true meaning is plain. The place of intercession has just peenseen. The seven 
wrath angels came forth. The smoke then fills the temple so that no one ean approach the place of inter- 
cession. The Greek original says no one, instead of no man. It means that the Divine purpose is fixed ; 
the wrath angels shall pour out their vials; there is no place longer given for intercession to prevent the just 
Judgments of God. The time of intercession has passed by, and the time for judgment has come. * No» 
one can enter the temple” to the tabernacle of testimony, the place of intercession, to avert these judg- 
ments “ until the seven plagues of the seven angels were fulfilled.” 


CHAPTER XVI. 


Interpreters are not agreed whether the pouring out of the vials relates to past or to future events. 
Almost all, except Roman Catholics and Rationalists, are agreed in the view that they refer to a series of 
calamitous events which were to befall the Papal power. The reader will observe that the first vial is 
poured upon the earth, ant it became a noisome and grievous sore upon “the men which had the mark of 
the beast, and which worshipped his image;’’ phraseology that we have found to refer to the supporters 
of the worldly power and spiritual claims of Rome. See notes on 13: 14-18, The fifth vial is poured. 
“upon the throne of the beast,” and his kingdom is darkened. After the sixth vial, evil spirits come out of 
the dragon, the beast, and the false prophet. After the seventh, the great city, Babylon, falls. These 
vials, therefore, indieate a series of judgments upon the anti-Christian powers, variously styled the 
dragon, the beast, the image of the beast, the false prophet, and Babylon. As these have been found to: 
symbolize the world-power which found its embodiment in Rome, and the last two to point especially to 
the spiritual despotism of which the Papacy is the chief expression, we must expect that great fabric to be 
the chief sufferer from these judgments. As, under the seven seals, Old Pagan Rome was judged and 
brought to an end; as, under the seven trumpets, the Roman Empire under its new form is judged and its 
destruction symbolized; so, under the seven vials, we have symbolized a series of judgments which 
weaken and destroy Papal Rome; and, with the seventh vial, the Great City, the type of the Apostate: 
Church, falls. 

There are historical events occurring within the last century which correspond so surprisingly with the- 
symbolism that the interpreters regard them as the fulfillment. While not insisting that these are the 
events foreshadowed by John, and while admitting that the pouring out of the vials may be future, I 
incline to the opinion that prophecy is being fulfilled in “these last days,” and I will point out certain 
events corresponding to each vial, which may be the things signified. : 

1,2. I heard a great voice. Asin several more instances John hears the voice, but does not see: 
the speaker. This voice comes from the temple, from “the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven,” 
from the abode of God. This signifies that God’s hand will shape the events symbolized. They 
represent his judgments. Pour out the vials of the wrath of God. Punishment sent for sins. As 
the plagues were sent on Egypt in order to secure the redemption of Israel, so these plagues are sent in 
order to redeem God’s Israel from the slavery of spiritual Babylon. See 18.4. Upon the earth. The: 
term “earth” is still used by John in his usual meaning of the Roman world. 2. And the first went,. 


‘Ch. XVI.] REVELATION. 479 





CHAPTER XVI. 


The Seven Last Plagues. © 


SUMMARY.—The Seven Angels Directed to Pour Out God’s Wrath. The 
First Vial and the Grievous Ulcers. The Second Poured Out upon the 
Sea. The Third Vial on the Rivers. The Fourth upon the Sun; Its 
Scorching Heat. The Fifth Poured on the Seat of the Beast. The 
Sixth on the Great River, Euphrates. The Three Unclean Spirits. 2 
Armageddon. The Seventh Vial Poured on the Air. The Great CHAPTER XVI. 

City Falls. ? ane I pear a as teak Vite £ 

6 out of the temple, saying 
1 And I heard a great voice out of the temple | to the seven angels, Go ye, 

saying to the seven angels, Go your ways, and pour] powis of the wrath of God 

ials VIE into the earth. 

out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth. te a 
2 And the first went, and poured out his vial? poured out his bow! into 

upon the earth:? and there fell a noisome and | poisome Avene one Goes 


: = iehe ‘ upon the men which had 
grievous sore upon the men which® had the mark of | "pon the nen veast, aad 


the beast, and wpon them which worshipped his] which worshipped his im- 


5 age. 
image. And the second poured 3 


* 7 7 out his bowl into the sea; 

3 And the second angel poured out his vial Oe ee ee ee ke 
the sea: and® it became as the blood of a® dead dead man; andevery living 
aes : ° : soul died, even the things 

man: and every living soul died in the sea. Paracel he ea 








a Rev. 8:7. 0Ex. 9:9. cRev.13:16. @Ex. 7:17. e Rev. 8:9. 











and poured out his vial upon the earth. John sees the vial poured out, and marks its effect; very 
grievous ulcers fall upon men ; that is, upon the men which had the mark of the beast, and upon 
them which worshipped his image. Those who suffer are those who listen to the lamb-like dragon, 
the anti-Christ, the false spiritual power; or, as has been found in chapter 14, the votaries of Rome. As. 
the vials of the wrath of God are a series of events leading to the destruction of this false power, we: 
must look for the first of the vials, not while it is at the zenith of its power. “We have found thata 
number of distinct prophecies seem to point to the year 1793 as a period when its power will give signs of 
decay, and its hold upon the nations weaken ; hence, we need not look for the first vial before this, Let 
the reader note the nature of the plague to be sent. It is described as a grievous ulcer, that afflicts those: 
who have the mark of the beast. An ulcer is not only a painful and dangerous sore, but is often malig- 
nant and foul with corruption. The term is often used to describe moral corruption, and the ulcers. 
described may be moral or spiritual. Can we find aught in history about the end of the 1260 years of 
Papal dominion that corresponds with the symbolism? For many centuries France was the stoutest and. 
staunchest of the supporters of the Romish Church. It was Charlemagne, the emperor of France, who 
bestowed the temporal power upon the Popes. It was to Avignon in France that, at one time, the Papacy 
was transferred for seventy years. The ruler of France was long styled ‘“‘the eldest son of the Church.” 
it was France that had perpetrated the massacre of St. Bartholomew, the dragonnades of the Cevennes, 
and the banishment of the Huguenots. The French nation had the mark of the beast to at least as great 
an extent as any other nation. In 1793, exactly at the close of the period of 1260 years, there breaks out 
in France a fearful, moral ulcer that had long been festering. The French Revolution, the uprising of 
enslaved masses who were maddened into fury, sent Catholic king, royal families, nobles, and priests to: 
the guillotine by tens of thousands, impelled the nation in its madness to publicly declare itself atheistic, 
leavened it with skepticism, and broke the hold of Rome to such a degree that she can never more control 
France. The ulcer was awfully corrupt and deadly. At one time 200,000 citizens of all conditions and. 
both sexes were in prison, and often in Paris alone, fourscore were sent to the scaffold in a day. As the 
result of the breaking forth of this ulcer, the mightiest Catholic nation was convulsed with civil war, 
every Catholic country in Europe was deluged in blood, and the Papal power received a shock from which 
it never can recover. The first vial, the breaking forth of grievous, painful, malignant ulcers, most fitly 
represents the breaking out of the French Reyolution, its awful excesses, and the irreparable injury done: 
to the great spiritual despotism by the events of which it was the beginning and the cause. 

3. And the second angel poured out his vial upon the sea. The first calamity has been upon 
the earth; the second is upon the ocean. The second angel pours his vial upon the sea, Then the waters. 
pecome red as blood and in the great mortality that follows it seems to John asif every soul in the sea. 


‘480 REVELATION. 


(Gh. XVI. 








4 And the third angel poured out his vial upon 
‘the rivers and fountains of waters; and they became 
blood. 

5 And I heard the angel of the waters say, Thou? 
art righteous, O Lord, which” art and wast, and 
shalt be, because thou hast judged thus: 

6 For’ they have shed the blood of saints and 
prophets,? and thou hast given them blood to 
drink; for they are worthy. 

7 And I heard another out of the altar say, Even 
so, Lord God Almighty,® true and righteous are thy 


And the third poured out 4 
his bowl into the rivers 
and the fountains of the 
waters; and it became 
blood. And I heard the 5 
angel of the waters saying, 
Righteous art thou, which 
art and which wast, thou 
Holy One, because thou 
didst thus judge: for they 6 
poured out the blood of 
saints and prophets, and 
blood hast thou given them 
to drink: they are worthy. 
And I heard the altar say- 7 
ing, Yea, O Lord God, the 
Almighty, true and right- 
eous are thy judgements. 





judgments. 


@ Psaioit2. 





6 Rey. 1:4,8; 4:8; 11:17. c Matt. 23:34. d Isa. 49:26. e Rev. 13:10; 14:10; 19:2. 





was dead. Again we ask if, in this series of calamities, there is one that smites the Catholic powers from 
the sea? Under the second trumpet a great and burning mountain fell into the sea. The Vandal power 
‘swept the Mediterranean, destroyed the Roman navy and then laid siege to the old imperial Rome. From 
the sea spiritual Rome, under the second vial, is weakened. The symbolism is fulfilled in the mightiest 
naval strife ever known. In1780 France and England, upon the ocean, were nearly equally matched. 
Along the shores of the struggling colonies of the United States sometimes the English, sometimes the 
French fleets, rode in triumph. At Yorktown, the superiority of the French at sea cooped Cornwallis in 
until Washington compelled his surrender. With 1793 begins another contest for the mastery of the 
seas. It continues after Napoleon sits on the imperial throne, and did not end for twenty years. France, 
again a Catholic power by Napoleon’s concordat with the Pope, rallies under the imperial flag with 
herself, Catholic Spain, Portugal and Italy, in the struggle. Protestant England and Catholic Europe 
Strive together upon the ocean. The old Catholic powers, those which in the past have been the vile 
instruments of Papal wrong, the nations whose kings have committed fornication with the great spiritual 
harlot, suffer the loss in this long and deadly struggle of six hundred ships of the Line, the largest war 
vessels that then went to sea, besides thousands of ships of war of smaller size. At the close of the 
contest, the naval power of Catholic Europe had been swept from the ocean. Once the Pope had 
claimed the dominion of the seas, and had given away newly discovered islands and continents, but now 
that proud claim has gone forever. 

4-7. And the third poured out his vial upon the rivers and the fountains of the waters. 
John sees the third ‘“‘vial poured upon the rivers and fountain of waters; and they become blood.” This 
vial will symbolize another event calamitous to Rome. The seat of the disasters is described as the 
rivers and we may expect some historical events, connected in some way with rivers, that result in the 
injury of the Papacy. There are two marks given which help us to locate the seat where the plague of 
the third vialis poured. 1. Itmust bea region of rivers and fountains of water. 2. It has evidently 
been the scene of terrible persecutions of the people of God. When the judgment is inflicted the angel of 
the waters exclaimed, “Thou art righteous, O Lord, who art and wast and shalt be, because thou hast 
judged thus. For they have shed the blood of saints and prophets and thou hast given them blood to 
drink, for they are worthy.” A land of persecution is to become the scene of calamities which are justly 
visited upon it for its sins. (1) The river system of northern Italy, we have seen, was indicated under the 
third trumpet. If the reader will look upon the map he will find it crowded with rivers. The streams 
rush down from the Alps and haste away to the sea. This river region of Italy has always been a battle 
ground where the fate of Italy has been decided. Here Attila the Hun, the “blazing Star,” the worm- 
wood of the rivers, laid Rome prostrate at his feet. Sees: 10,11. This vial seems to point to the same 
locality by the use of the same language. (2) But the locality marked must have been the scene of 
persecutions (verse 6); none more terrible, more bloody or more continued, have been known in the dark 
history of Rome. This very region was the home of the Albigenses. Against them the Papacy had 
hurled its fanatical legions from generation to generation. The blood of the Protestants of the Alps had 
for centuries dyed the rocks and streams with crimson. (3) In the year 1796, a general, aged 27, led a 
French army across the Alps. On the river system of Italy, on the Rhone, the Po and its tributaries, he 
‘battled with the Austrians and their allies. It is remarkable that every one of his great conflicts were 
‘fought upon the rivers. The battle of Lodi was fought on the Adda, Arcola on the Adige, Marengo on the 
Bromida. I will briefly give the results of the struggle. In 1796 Bonaparte entered Italy. The next 
year his armies take the city of Rome and proclaim an Italian Republic. Previously an armistice had 
been granted, for which the Pope paid 21,000,000 frances and gave up a hundred masterpieces of art to be 


Or XVIiE] REVELATION. 481 


8 And the f : o P i 16 And the fourth poured 8 
ourth angel poured out his vial upon | ,.4nd the | sues eee 


‘the sun; and power was given unto him to scorch| and it was given unto it to 
men with fire scorch men with ae a 9 

* men were scorene with 

9 And men were scorched with great heat, and ee ae 

blasphemed the name of God, which hath power] Goa which hath the power 

; x a % 35 ; - : : over these plagues; and 

moe ee plagues: and* they repented not to give they repented not to give 

1m ory. : Him glory. 

1 8 A J ¢ ‘ b And the fifth poured out 10 

Q And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon? | his bow! upon the throne 


the seat of the beast; and his kingdom was full of | (oe aeoeds ae 


darkness: and they gnawed their tongues for pain, | they gnawed their tongues 


a2 Chron. 28:22; Jer. 5:3; Isa. 8:21; Dan. 5:22. b Rev. 13:2. 

















-earried to Paris. In 1798 Pope Pius VI. was earried as a prisoner into France to die. His successor was 
not elected in Rome, which was still in the hands of the spoiler, but in Venice. Other results that follow 
from this invasion will be given under the fourth vial. Ah! how triumphantly the long persecuted 
Waldenses, as they saw the Pope carried a prisoner into exile, must have joined in the voice from behind 
the altar: ‘Yes, O Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments!” 

8,9. The fourth poured out his vial on the sun. Since these vials of the wrath of God are 
“poured into the earth” (verse 1), the sun must be used asasymbol. It is a symbol of a supreme ruler 
—a ruler or king. Any one who becomes a great light and occupies a pre-eminent position, may be 
indicated by this symbol. The Saviour is described as the Sun of Righteousness. In the dream of 
Joseph, his father Jacob, the patriarchal ruler, is represented by the sun. Among the orientals it is the 
well known symbol of a king orruler. The fourth vial is poured upon this sun, and power is given it to 
scorch men with fire. Fire, the instrument of bitter pain, is a symbol of suffering. It is therefore 

-evident that the ruler, symbolized by the sun, shall be the means of inflicting great suffering upon men. 
As we have found that these calamities are directed against the Papacy, it would follow that the sufferers 
are those who have received the mark of the beast. Though these adherents of Rome are in great 

-anguish from the calamities that befall them, still they do not repent of their crimes. Like ancient 
Egypt under the plagues, Rome will still persist in her wicked deeds, still refuse to liberate the people 
from her spiritual slavery. 

In 1801 Napoleon Bonaparte became the ruler of France, and soon became the virtual ruler of all Papal 
Europe. Spain, Belgium, Holland, Italy, and Austria were at his feet and either ruled by his satraps or 
at his dictation. No such scorching sun had arisen in the political horizon for more than a thousand 
years, and I do not know that the world has ever seen so great a scourge of man. From 1796 to 1815 he 
was engaged in war without amoment’s cessation. He converted Europe into a great camp and every 
nation was blackened and torn with wars. In his wars it is estimated that 2,000,000 men perished by the 
sword, and none can tell of the want and misery and despair that brooded over the bleeding and 
desolated lands that were tracked by his armies. This scorching sun, which parched, burnt and 
blackened the earth, exerted a most baleful influence on the power of the Papacy. In 1796 Bonaparte 
entered Italy; in 1797 his armies entered the Papal dominions, and a peace was made by which the Pope 
was not only shorn of half his provinces, but was compelled to buy off the invader by the payment of 
large sums of money. The next year the French armies entered Rome, tore the Pope from the Vatican, 
sent him a prisoner to France to die, and robbed Rome of its hoarded wealth. The imprisoned Pope died 
in captivity. The next Pope was elected in 1799, not in Rome, which was held by French soldiers, but in 
Venice. In 1800 he was permitted to return to his desolated capital as the dependent of France. In 1804, 
Napoleon Bonaparte determined to have placed upon his head the old imperial crown as emperor of the 
Romans, and the Pope was compelled to journey by land to Paris in order to gratify his master by serving 
in the ceremonial. Four years later Pius VII. was dragged from his palace, as his predecessor had been, 
and sent a prisoner into France. His states of the Church were confiscated. The grant made by Charle- 
magne nearly 1200 years before was resumed, and, until the fall of Napoleon, the Pope was without 
temporal possessions. 

Napoleon had broken the spell of Rome. He taught the world that the power of the Popes might be 
successfully dared; a noteworthy service to the humanrace. The Pope, from that time, ceased to be a 
powerful factor in the control of nations. But, notwithstanding these scourgings, the Papacy has not 
abated its exorbitant and blasphemous pretensions. They repented not to give God glory. 

10,11. The fifth angel poured out his vial upon the throne ofthe beast. By the throne of the 
-beast must be meant the seat of his power. There are few students of the Bible, whether Catholic or Protes- 

3 


482 REVELATION. (Ch. XVI. 


11 And blasphemed the God of heaven because of | rea and. they pias te 


3 epee the God of heaven 
their pains and their sores, and repented not of | because of their pains and 


. their sores; and they re- 
their deeds. ponher a sea 4 bb ete ye 
; Ac i i And the sixth poured out 12 

12 And the sixth angel poured out his vial* upon) ,ihowi upon’ the areat 

the great river Euphrates; and” the water thereof river, the river Euphrates; 


. ; ie and the water thereof was 
was dried up, that‘ the ways of the kings of the} dried up, that the way 


. 3 might be made ready for 
east might be prepat ed. ae : the kings that come from 
13 And I saw three’ unclean spirits like frogs | the sunrising. And I saw 13 


. coming out of the mouth of 
come out of the mouth of thee dragon, and out of | the dragon, and out of the 


/ t, and out of the mouth 
the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of | beast, tase proneer aout 
the false prophet. unclean spirits, as it were 











a Rey. 9:14. Bder. 50:38; 51:36. cIsa. 41:2. d1lJohn4:1l. e Rey. 12:3. 





tant, who deny that Italy and Rome are the throne of the great world power of which the seven-headed 
beast is the symbol. Then, the scene of the calamities of the fifth vial will be Italy and Rome. That has 
peen the seat of the beast for 1300 years. In the very seat of his power the beast shall receive a blow that 
will fill his kingdom with darkness, and those who worship him with anguish. Something shall occur 
that will cause great dismay and anguish to the Roman priesthood and devotees. Have any changes. 
occurred in Italy and Rome which have caused them to gnaw their tongues in pain? _ 

In the year 1848 the people of Rome arose in rebeilion to the Papal authority and drove Pius IX. into 
exile. A few months later he was restored by a French army. Nor did he dare remain when restored, 
save under the protection of French bayonets. With a French garrison he continued to rule his circum- 
scribed territory until 1870. In that year France was compelled to withdraw her soldiers to defend her 
soil from German invasion. That was the opportunity of Italy. The Papal army was scattered by the 
soldiers of Victor Emmanuel; the Pope shut himself in the Vatican, and Rome became the capital of new 
Italy. The temporal power of the Pope is gone forever. The Italian government has seized upon the- 
overgrown possessions of the church. The lands it claimed have been confiscated, monasteries and con- 
vents have been closed, and universal religious toleration declared. Protestant churches and schools are: 
founded in Rome itself, and statues have been erected under the shadow of the Vatican to martyrs whom 
the Papacy had slain. It is said they blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and 
their sores, and repented not. What better illustration of this than that the Pope has been declared. 
infallible ! 

-That the reader may see that there is beyond doubt something in the symbolism which points to such a. 
fulfillment as has been suggested above I will quote an old work cited by Albert Barnes, written by Robert 
Flemming and published in 1701, nearly two hundred years ago. It is called the Apocalyptic Key, and con- 
tains the following on the fifth vial: ‘‘ The fifth vial which is to be poured out on the seat of the beast, or 
the dominions which belong more immediately to, and depend upon, the Roman See; that J say this judg- 
ment will begin about A. D. 1794, and expire about A. D. 1848.” As a matter of fact Bonaparte invaded 
Italy in 1796, and in 1848 the Pope was driven from Rome. Since that date, though returned and protected 
by the French until 1870, his temporal power has been at an end. 

12. Andthe sixth angel poured out his vialupon the great river Euphrates ; and the water’ 
thereof was dried up. The angel of the sixth trumpet is connected with the river Euphrates (9: 14). 
There a movement is symbolized which ends in the overthrow of the Eastern Roman Empire, the old 
Roman world power. Here a movement is probably signified which will work to the same end in the case 
of the Roman dominion revived in the Papal world power. The river Euphrates was the seat of the great 
city which once oppressed Israel and carried God’s people into captivity. If was taken by Cyrus, God’s. 
chosen agent, and the means employed was the drying up of the Euphrates. ctr turned the river, which 
ran through the city, unto new channels, dried up the old bed, then marched in this bed under the walls 
where they crossed the river on arches, and took the city. In some way the drying up of the Euphrates 
shall overthrow, or tend to overthrow, spiritual Babylon. Possibly this may be-accomplished by the 
exhaustion of the resources of that power. The nations which once supplied them have been falling away. 
That the way might be made ready for the kings that come fromthe sunrising. Intheinfancy 
of the Christ, the wise men of the East, also called kings in the Psalms, came to offer homage to the kingly 
child. The prophecy implies that when this obstacle is removed, the way of the inhabitants shall be 
opened. The drying up of the Euphrates will, im“#ome manner, open the way for those that are signified. 
to come to Christ, as those of old did to the manger. 

18-16. I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon. Let the: 
reader observe there is an alliance of three powers described as the dragon, the beast, and the false: 


Ch. XVI.] REVELATION. 


14 For* they are the spirits of devils, working? 
miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the 
earth,° to gather them to the® battle of that great 
day of God Almighty. 

15 Behold,* I come as a thief. Blessed 7s he that 
watcheth, and keepeth his garments,‘ lest he walk 
naked, and they see his shame. 

16 And he gathered them together into a place 
called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon. 

17 And the seventh angel poured out his vial into 
the air; and there came a great voice out of the 
temple of heaven, from the throne, saying,® It is 
done. 

18 And there were voices, and thunders, and 
lightnings; and there was a great.earthquake, such” 
as was not since men were upon the earth, so 
mighty an earthquake, and so great. 

19 And!‘ the great city was divided into three 
parts, and the cities of the nations fell: and great 





483 


frogs: for they are spirits 14 
of devils, working signs; 
which pe forth unto the 
kings of the whole world, 
to gather them together 
unto the war of the great 
day of God, the Almighty. 
(Behold, I come as a thief. 15 
Blessed is he that watch- 
eth, and keepeth his gar- 
ments, lest he walk naked, 
and they see his shame.) 
And they gathered them 16 
together into the place 
which is called in Hebrew 
Har-Magedon. 

And the seventh poured 17 
out his bowl upon the air; 
and there came forth a 
great voice out of the tem- 
ple, from the throne, say- 
Ing, It is done: and there 18 
were lightnings, and voic- 
es, and thunders; and there 
was a great earthquake, 
such as was not since there 
were men upon the earth, 
so great an earthquake, so 
mighty. And the great city 19 
was divided into three 
parts, and the cities of the 
nations fell: and Babylon 


the great was remembered 





Babylon! came in remembrance before’ God, to 





62 Thes. 2:9. c Luke 2:1. 


@1 Tim. 4:1; James 3:15. 
A Dan. 12:1. 


d Rev. 20:8. e Matt. 24:43; 1 Thes. 5: 2; 2 Pet. 3:10. 
f2 Cor. 5:3. g Rev. 21:6. 6 


@ Rev. 14:8, 7 Rev. 18:5. Isa. 51:17; Jer. 25:16. 





prophet. From their mouths came three unclean spirits, like frogs, who go forth to the kings of the earth, 
rally their forces under the banners of the three allied powers, and march them to the battle of the great 
day of the Almighty. We have met these three powers before, and know that these three are really one, 
animated by one spirit, but appearing in different forms. The dragon, the Satan (chapter 12), wars against 
the woman, in the form of old Pagan Rome; he then (chapter 13) transfers this warfare to the seven- 
headed beast, the political world power shown both in the form of Imperial and Papal Rome; this power 
was supported, reanimated when about to perish, by the lamb-like dragon who is the false prophet (13: 11). 
As it were frogs (Revision). Unclean, loathsome, suggesting the plagues of Egypt. 14. For they 
are the spirits of devils. The Greek is “demons.” They are demoniacal influences, and will show 
forth false miracles by which to deceive men. Unto the kings of the whole world. They will mar- 
shal their forces for the last conflict. The conflict that shall then take place will decide the fate of 
Babylon. The drying up of the Euphrates will prepare the way for its destruction. For an account of the 
battle of that great day see 19: 11,19. 15. Behold, I come as athief. Thisis interposed in order to 
give a place for exhortation to be always ready. The Lord comes when men do not see him. 16. They 
gathered them (Revision). The three unclean spirits. To a place called in the Hebrew tongue 
Armageddon. If thisis a literal conflict of arms the place where it will take place is probably indi- 
cated. Probably the conflict will be moral and spiritual. The place named is not only Hebrew, but is a 
famous spot in Hebrew history. Armageddon means simply the hill Megiddo. Upon the Hill Megiddo 
was fought the battle in which King Josiah was slain. It was inthe midst of the battle- ground of Israel. 
The plain of Esdraelon, the depression between Judea and Galilee, was tracked with armies, Tf Ezekiel 
87: 8-17 is understood literally it signifies that Palestine will be the theatre of this struggle, but of all 
these passages I am inclined to believe that they have a spiritual signification. The Israel of Ezekiel rep- 
resents the church, the true Israel. Armageddon, the battle-ground of Israel, is used metaphorically to 
describe the great conflict of the Israel of God. 

17-21. And the seventh angel poured out his vial into the air. From Eph. 2: 2 we learn that 
the air is the region of the power of evil. The fifth vial was poured upon the seat of the beast; the sev- 
enth on the seat of the dragon. Camea great voice. The voice so often heard but not seen. Whether 
the divine voice or not it speaks the divine will. Itis done, It is finished. The work is complete. The 
seventh vial brings the work toanend. 18. There were voices, and thunders, etc. See 8:5; 11:19. 
These features accompany the tremendous movements of the divine will. A great earthquake. A 
mighty agitation, and rupturing such as was never seen before. Society will be upheaved to its very 
foundations. 19. And the great city. The great spiritual Babylon, the woman that sitteth on the 
beast (17:5). Was divided into three parts. It was broken asunder, and shaken into pieces by the 


¥ 


484 REVELATION. 


(Ch. XVII. 











give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness 
of his wrath. 


in the sight of God, to give 
unto her the cup of the 
wine of the fierceness of 


9 * j i > j 3]. 
20 And* every island fled away, and the moun-|fta‘away. and the younte — 
tains were not found. ains were not found. And 21 


21 And* there fell upon men a great hail out of 
heaven, every stone about the weight of a talent: 
and men blasphemed God because of the plague of 
the hail; for the plague thereof was exceeding 


great hail, every stone about 
the weight of a talent,com- 
eth down out of heaven 
upon men: and men blas- 
phemed God because of the 
hail; for the plague thereof 
is exceeding great. 


great. 
CHAPTER XVII. 


The Judgment of the Great Harlot. 


SuMMARY.—The Woman Clothed in Purple and Scarlet. Her Name, 
Mystery, Babylon the Great. The Beast on Which She Sat. The 
Meaning of the Seven Heads and Ten Horns. The Victory of the 

¥ 


Lamb. CHAPTER XVII. 


And there came one of 1 
the seven angels that had 
the seven bowls, and spake 
with me, saying, Come 
hither, I will shew thee the 
judgment of the great har- 
lot that sitteth upon many 
waters; with whom the 2 
kings of the earth commit- 
ted fornication, and they 
that dwell in the earth 
were made drunken with 
the wine of her fornication. 


1 And there came’ one of the seven angels which 
had the seven vials, and talked with me, saying 
unto me, Come hither; I will shew unto thee the 
judgment of? the great whore that® sitteth upon 
many waters; : 

2 With whom the kings of the earth have com- 
mitted fornication, and‘ the inhabitants of the 
earth have been made drunk with the wine of her 
fornication. 








aRey. 6:14. 6 Rey. 11:19. c¢ Rey. 21:9. d Nahum 38:4; 2 Tim. 3:1-6; 4:3; Rev. 19:2, eJer.51:18. fJer. 51:7. 








great upheaval. It is difficult to settle what is meant by three parts. Perhaps the three “ evil spirits” 
(verse 13), which represent the dragon, the beast and the false prophet, are henceforth parted from each 
other. If this should be signified, it would mean that worldly government would henceforth be rescued 
from Satan’s influence, and that spiritual powers would never henceforth give homage to the world. 
Great Babylon came in remembrance. The wrath of God is poured out because of her sins. 20. 
And every island fied away. Islands and mountains denote earthly powers. Perhaps the meaning 
is that the old lines between states and nations shall pass away, and that henceforth there shail be one 
nation, one kingdom, one people, that of Jesus Christ. 21. There fell upon mena great hail out of 
heaven. Upon the men who were judged and punished. Hail is asymbol of God’s judgments. Hail- 
stones of such weight signify awful judgments. The men blasphemed God. Not all men, but the 
men punished. In verse 9 and 11 it is declared that they repented not, and here it is again implied that 
they were incorrigible. The thought is that they perish in impenitence. 

It might be added that Robert Flemming, who in 1701 so accurately forecast the fate of the Papacy (see 
statement in notes on the fifth vial), places the seventh in A. D. 1900. 


CHAPTER XVII. 


The sixteenth chapter presents the series of historical events that lead to the overthrow of spiritual 
Babylon. The interpretation of these has been for the most part determined by the facts of history 
which have already transpired. The sixth vial brings to the present date. Concerning what follows the 
seventh vial I speak with diffidence, as it is yet future, but of this we can be certain, that it foreshadows 
the final overthrow of the anti-Christian powers. In chapters xvii., xviii, and xix., the downfall of 
these powers, the overthrow of the Apostate Church, the triumph of the Word of God, and the victory of 
Armageddon, are described with greater detail. Chap. 17: 1-6 describes spiritual Anti-christ under the 
figure of a great harlot. The true Church is described throughout Revelation as a pure woman, the 
Bride of Christ; the false church as a harlot. That this harlot refers to the same wicked power already 
described as Babylon is evident from the words on her forehead. 








Ch. XVII.] REVELATION. 485 
3 So he carried me away in the spirit into the gu Spine ano a acer 
wilderness :* and I saw a woman sit upon” a scarlet- | ee ae Te eet col, 
coloured beast, full® of names of blasphemy, having | ored beast, full of names of 
seven heads and ten horns. Dad enous nad 
4 And the woman was arrayed in purple® and Pee eae a 
scarlet-colour, and decked with gold, and precious | decked with gold and pre- 
stones, and pearls,* having a golden cup in her eee ent a pone 
hand, full of abominations and filthiness of her ie oe 
fornication. things of her fornication, 
5 And upon her forehead was a name written,‘ a 
Mystery, BABYLON? THE GREAT," THE MOTHER OF | BABYLON TEE foun 
HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. HARLOTS, AND OF THE 
6 And I saw the woman drunken with the blood | S2nrn and lsaw the wo. 6 
of the saints, and with the blood of! the martyrs of) man, drunken with the 
Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered with great | with the blood of the mar- 
admiration. a helt aomiopel ye 
7 And the angel said unto me, Wherefore didst |2 great wonder. And the 7 


angel said untome, Where- 





a Rev. 12:6. 6 Rev. 12:3. c Rev. 13:1. d Rev. 18:12. eJer. 51:7. f2Thes.2:7. gRev. 11:1. h Rev. 19:2. 
4 Rev. 619s 1201, 





eee ee Se Bes 
There came one of the seven angels. These angels had symbolized the overthrow of 
Babylon by their vials. This one will now show John the events of her overthrow in greater detail. The 
next three chapters relate to her fate. Sitteth upon many waters. Is supported by many nations. 
See verse 15, which explains the meaning of “waters” when used asa symbol. 2. With whom the 
kings of the earth have committed fornication. There has been an unholy relationship between 
this false church and the rulers and kingdoms of the earth. Were drunken with the wine of her 
fornication. The nations have received her spirit and partaken of her sins. 3. He carried me 
away inthe spirit into a wilderness. It is not explained why she is seen in a wilderness. Perhaps 
the thought is that her development was in obscurity and almost unnoticed until she had reached 
supreme power. Sitting upon a scarlet colored beast. Supported by this beast. In chap. 13 I have 
discussed at length the meaning of this beast and of its seven heads. See that chapter. And ten 
horns. The significance of these will be considered under verse 12. 

4-5. And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet. The color of royalty. Decked 
with gold, ete. Her jewels and gold indicate enormous wealth. Having a golden cup in her hand. 
A golden censer in the hands of an angel represents by its incense the prayers of those who belong to the 
true church. This symbol of the false church has a cup full of abominations instead. Jeremiah 51: 7. 
5. Upon her forehead was a name written. A title which told who she was and explained her 
character. Mystery. Making pretensions that the world cannot understand. (See 2 Thess. 2: 7.) 
Babylon the Great. Another name is given. She is the wicked city that carried the true Israel into 
bondage and persecuted them. See notes on 14:8. The Mother of Harlots. Not only a harlot but 
the mother of harlots. In connection with Babylon, the two horned beast, and the scarlet woman, 
Revelation points out fornication, or harlotry, as one of their most prominent characteristics. In order 
that there may be no mistake about what is meant it is well to determine the use of these terms in the 
Bible. ‘ Harlotry symbolizes wniformly the apostasy of God’s church.”—Auberlen. “The word harlot is 
used at least fifty times to describe spiritual fornication, that is, the corrupt doctrine and practices of the 
churches of Israel and Judah.”—Bishop Wordsworth. ‘ In eighteen out of twenty places where the figure 
oceurs its import is that God’s church and people had forsaken him.”—A/ford. “There are only three 
places in the whole Bible where the figure is applied to heathen cities or nations; twice to Tyre, and once 
to Nineveh.”— Williams. The fact that uniform use (with the rarest exceptions) is to describe a falling 
away from God shows that the Scarlet Harlot is the symbol of a faithless, apostate church. One is 
signified, too, that is the mother of other false churches which have followed in her ways. 

6. Isaw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints. This implies that she had been a 
great persecutor and had slain multitudes of the people of God. There is only one body claiming to be 
the Christian Church to whom this will apply. There have been some. harlot daughters of the harlot 
mother who have also engaged in persecution, but there is only one self-styled Christian body on the 
earth of whom it can be said she “ was drunken with the blood of the saints.” 


1-3. 


486 REVELATION. 


[CR-XVII. 





thou marvel? I will tell thee the mystery of the 
woman, and of the beast that carrieth her, which 
hath the seven heads and ten horns. : 

8 The beast that thou sawest was, and is not; 
and? shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go 
into perdition: and they that dwell on the earth 
shall wonder, (whose names were not written in 
‘the book of life from the foundation of the world,) 
when they behold the beast that was, and is not, 
and yet is. 

9 And» here zs the mind which hath wisdom.* 
The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the 
woman sitteth. 

10 And there are seven kings: five are fallen, and 
one is, and the other is not yet come; and when he 
cometh, he must continue a short space. 


fore didst thou wonder? I 
will tell thee the mystery 
of the woman, and of the 
beast that carrieth her, 
which hath the seven heads 
and the ten horns. The 
beast that thou sawest 
was, and is not; and is 
about to come up out of 
the abyss, and to go into 
perdition. And they that 
dwell on the earth shall 
wonder, they whose name 
hath not been written in 
the book of life from the 
foundation of the world, 
when they behold the 
beast, how that he was, 
and is not, and shall come. 
Here is the mind which 
hath wisdom. The seven 
heads are seven mountains, 
on which the woman sit- 
teth: and they are seven 
kings; the five are fallen, 
the one is, the other is not 
yet come; and when he 





cometh, he must continue 
a little while. And the 11 
beast that was, and is not, 
is himself also an eighth, 
and is of the seven; and he 
goeth into perdition. And 12 
the ten horns that thou 
sawest are ten kings,which 
have received no kingdom 
as yet; but they receive « 
authority as kings, with 
the beast, for one hour. 
These have one mind, and 13 
they give their power and 
authority unto the beast. 


11 And the beast that was, and is not, even he is 
the eighth, and is of the seven, and goeth into per- 
dition. 

12 And‘ the ten horns which thou sawest are ten 
kings, which have received no kingdom as yet; but 
receive power as kings one hour with the beast. 

13 These have® one mind, and shall give their 
power and strength unto the beast. 











@ Rey. 11:7; 18:1. 6 Rev. 18:18. ¢ Rey. 13:1. d Dan. 7:20; Zech. 1:18. e Rom. 8:7. 





7-11. I will tell thee the mystery of the woman. This is told in the latter portion of this chap- 
ter and in the next. And of the beast that carried her. For a full discussion of this seven-headed 
beast see notes on chap. 13:1-10. 8, The beast that thou sawest was, and is not. See notes just 
referred to. The beast that existed then, when John wrote, was to receive a deadly wound, and to appear 
again in a new form. They whose name hath not been written. Are not of God’s spiritual chil- 
dren. From the foundation of the world. The meaning of this expression is to be sought in 13: 8. 
Their names were written in the book of life which had existed from the time referred to in 13: 8, when 
the plan of redemption was prepared in the counsels of God. 9. Here is the mind which hath 
wisdom. The mind that hath wisdom can interpret what follows. The seven heads are seven 
mountains. Since just one city in the world was called the city of seven mountains (septem montes) in 
John’s time there must be a reference to that city. 10. And there are seven kings. We have found 
that a mountain is a symbol of an exalted man, or power. In 13: 1-8 I have explained the kingdoms or 
powers, symbolized by these heads. 11. The beast that was, and is not, isthe eighth. I have 
explained in chapter 13 this eighth power, which was a revivification of the beast, and which had the char- 
acteristics and strength of all the seven. 3 

12-15. And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings. In 12: 3 there are seven diadems 
on the heads, but none on the horns; in 13: 1 there are no diadems on the heads but there are on the horns. 
The diadem signifies royal power. The first reference points to a period when the powers existed of which 
the heads were a symbol; the second reference points forward to a time when these had mostly passed 
away, and when the ten royal powers signified by the horns had existed. The horn isa symbol of power, 
and often is used for a kingdom in prophetic language. See Dan. 7: 24. This, then, implies ten powers 
which sprang out of Rome and supported the false church. These are given by Sir Isaac Newton as fol- 
lows: 1. Kingdom of the Vandals in Spain and Africa, 2. Kingdom of the Visigoths. 3. Kingdom of the 
Suevi in Spain, 4. Kingdom of the Alans in France. 5. Kingdoms of the Burgundians. 6. Kingdom of 
the Franks. 7. Kingdom of the Britons. 8. Kingdom of the Huns. 9. Kingdom of the Lombards. 10. 
Kingdom of Ravenna. The Roman empire was broken up into these kingdoms, and they were all sup- 
porters of the Papacy. These ten kings or kingdoms did not exist in the time of J ohn, but should after- 


ano S VAT | REVELATION. , 487 








o hes ar agai 
14 These? shall make war with the Lamb, and ee eeane = 


+he Lamb shall overcome them:” for he is Lord of | 8h! qvergome them, ta 
lords, and King of kings; and they® that are with | King of, kings; and’ they 


4 . hh y a 
him are called, and chosen, and faithful. go tana chee 


15 And hesaith unto me,? The waters which thou | ndfaunny Ee aaa 
sawest, where the whore sitteth,° are peoples, and | thou sawest, where the 


: : “lot sitt , 
multitudes, and nations, and tongues. Se ae 


7 tions. and tongues. And 16 
16 And the ten horns which thou sawest upon the | ors. rns which thou 
beast,! these shall hate the whore, and shall make | sawest, and the beast, 


hese shall he arl 
her desolate,é and naked," and shall eat her flesh, tees ee ae 


> r wi p late and naked, and shall 

and burn her with fire. 5 Q . |eat her flesh, and shall 
17 For! God hath put in their hearts to fulfil his burn her utterly with fre. | 

will, and to agree, and give their kingdom unto the aah ee RRS 


at J i p Q to come to one mind, and 
beast,) until the words of God shall be fulfilled. 1 eee conn 


18 And ‘the woman which thou sawest* is that the beast, until ithe words 
great city,! which reigneth over the kings of the|Dished. And the aris 
earth whom thou sawest is the 

7 great city, which reigneth 
over the kings of the earth. 











a Rev. 16:14. 6 Deut. 10:17; 1 Tim. 6:15. c Jer. 50:44; 1 Pet. 2:9; Rev. 14:4. dIsa. 8:7. @ Rev. 18:7. 
Fder 50:41. g Ezek. 16:37. ARey. 18:8. i Rom. 1:26. j Rev. 10:7. k Rev. 16:19. 1 Rev. 12:4. 





“wards receive authority and do the will of the beast. For one hour. Forashort time. A part of these 
‘kingdoms soon passed away. 14. These shall war against the Lamb. They aid the false church in 
its war on the saints. The Lamb shall overcome them. They shall finally turn away from the false 
church. 15. The waters which thou sawest. These are symbolical of the many nations and races 
which support the scarlet woman. 

16-18. Thetenhorns .. shall hate the harlot. Ata later period still, the ten horns shall hate 
‘and desolate the harlot. We have seen this fulfilled in the fact that the kingdoms that have been devel- 
-oped from these have in the last three centuries either become Protestant, or have broken with Roman 
rule. The historical facts given under the seven vials show how they have waged war on Rome. 17. For 
God did put in their hearts to do his mind. He used these as agents to carry out his own will. 
First they gave their support to the false woman, until his words were accomplished, and then turned from 
her and assailed her. 18. Thewoman . . is the great city. The city named in 16: 19. See notes 
there. 

Notve.—In chap. 16: 19 it is declared that when the seventh vial is poured out the great city Babylon 
shall be divided into three parts. It is there suggested in the notes that this may refer to the separation 
of the dragon, the beast, and the false prophet from each other. In the present chapter (17: 16) it is stated 
that the ten horns, which become the strength of the beast, shall be turned upon the woman who is Mys- 
tery, Babylon, the Great. This implies a separation between the beast and the woman, between the secular 
power that had supported the Papacy and the Papacy itself. This seems to have been already fulfilled. 
‘The temporal dominion of the popes, “the states of the church,” has been taken from them, the powers 
of Europe have ceased to obey the popes, even the Catholic powers, such as France and Italy, have shut 
up monasteries and appropriated the overgrown possessions of the church to the uses of the state. The 
passages referred to imply that the Papacy will continue to exist after it has ceased to receive the sup- 
port of the secular power, since the woman still lives after the support of the beast is withdrawn. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


The fall of the great city, Babylon, otherwise represented as the woman who sat upon the beast, has 
een symbolized in the pouring out of the seven vials. The seventeenth chapter describes her, shows her 
general character, points out the sources of her support, and how these shall finally become her 
destroyers. The eighteenth chapter borrows language and imagery from the destruction of the ancient 
Babylon, the oppressor of Israel, especially from the prophets Isaiah and Jeremiah, in order to deseribe 
-the overthrow of the spiritual Babylon. Since in 17: 16-18 it is shown that the horns of the beast upon 
-which the woman sat haye been turned upon her, the present chapter refers to a period of desolation 
~which shall precede her final overthrow. The Papacy is to exist for a period after the support of the 


PI 


488 REVELATION. 








CHAPTER XVIII. 


The Doomed City. 


SUMMARY.—The Fall of Babylon Decreed. The People of God Com- 
manded to Come out of Her. The Kings of the Earth Lament Over 
Her Fall. The Merchants and Traffickers Also Lament. The Mill- 
stone Cast into the Sea. 

1 And after these things I saw another angel 
come down from heaven, having great power ;*,and 
the earth was lightened with his glory. 

2 And he cried mightily with a strong voice, 
saying,” Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and° 
is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of 
every foul spirit, and a’ cage of every unclean and 
hateful bird. 

3 For all nations have drunk of the wine of the 
wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth 
have committed fornication with her, and the mer- 
chants of the earth are waxed rich through the 
abundance of her delicacies. 

4 And I heard another voice from heaven, Say- 
ing,° Come out of her, my people, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her 
plagues: 

5 Fort her sins have reached unto heaven, and 
God hath remembered her iniquities. 

6 Reward’ her even as she rewarded you, and 
double unto her double, according to her works: in 
the cup which she hath filled, fill to her double. 

7 How" much hath she glorified herself, and lived 
deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her: 





[Ch. XVIII. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


After these things I saw 
another angel coming 
down out of heaven, hav- 
ing great authority; and 
the earth was lightened 
with his glory. And he 
cried with a mighty voice, 
saying, Fallen, fallen is 
Babylon the great, and is 
become a habitation of dev- 
ils, and a hold of every 
unclean spirit, and a hold 
of every unclean and hate- 
ful bird. For by the wine 
of the wrath of her forni- 
cation all the nations are 
fallen; and the kings of 
the earth committed forni- 
cation with her, and the 
merchants of the earth 
waxed rich by the power 
of her wantonness. 

And I heard another 
voice from heayen, saying, 
Come forth, my people, out 
of her, that ye have no fel- 
lowship with her sins, and 
that ye receive not of her 
plagues: for her sins have 5. 
reached even unto heaven, 
and God hath remembered 
her iniquities. Render unto 
her even as she rendered, 
and double wnto her the 
double according to her 
works: in the cup which 
she mingled, mingle unto 
her double. How much so- 
ever she glorified herself, 
and waxed wanton, so 


1 


6. 





a Ezek. 43.2; Rev. 13:1. 


b Isa. 13:19; 21:9; Jer. 51:8. 
Jer. 50:8; 51:6; 2 Cor. 6:1 


c Isa. 84:14. @ Mark 5:2,3. 
7. f Gen. 18:20; Jonah 1:2. 


g Psa. 137:8; 2 Tim. 4:14; Re 


e Gen. 19:12: Isa. 48:20; 52:11; 
V. 13:10; 14310. A Rzek. 28:2. 





secular power is withdrawn. How strikingly the state portr 
tations over evil times that are found in all the encyclical let 
1-8. Afterthese things. Those described in chapter 17. 
this is Christ. There is no proof of their correctness. 
him great authority. And the earth was lightene 
proceeding from God. 2. And he cried 
description with Isaiah 21: 9; 14: 23 and 13: 21. 
17: 16) but now it is developed. This picture is intended to portr 
the nations have drunk. Partaken with her in her sins. 
chants of the earth have waxed rich. Her luxurious livin 
4-8. Come out of her, my people. This iny 
lest by remaining they should be involved in her d 
old Mesopotamian Babylon, so he has a people in the spiritual Babylon. 
began his voice has called on them to come out of her. Nor can it be doub 
earnest worshipers still who have found enough of Christ in the mazes of 
their hearts. The condemnation of the great spiritual despotism is not a 
has enslaved are the children of the devil. 5. Her sins have reache 
therefore for God’s remembrance of her iniquities in judgments. 
rewarded you. This is addressed to those who h 


d with his glory 


The fall of Babylon h 


g had made 


estruction. 


itation is given to the people of God yet ine 


ayed in chapter 18 is fulfilled in the lamen- 
ters of Pope Pius IX. and Leo XIII! 

Another angel. Some have urged that: 
Having great power. There was assigned to 
- This was a proof of power 
Babylon the great is fallen. 


Compare this 


as been already declared (16: 19; 
ay her utter desolation. 8. For all, 
Fornication. See note on 17:5. Mer-. 


great markets. 
aptivity, , 


As God once had a captive people in the: 


Ever since the Reformation 
ted that he has many true and 
the Papacy to have given him 
declaration that all whom she 
d unto heaven. They call 


6. Reward her even as she has. 
ave meted out her judgments. The divine principle of * 


Ch. XVIII.] REVELATION. 


489° 





for she saith in her heart, I sit a* queen, and am no 
widow, and shall see no sorrow. 

8 Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, 
death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be 
utterly burned with fire:> for strong is the Lord 
God who judgeth her. 

9 And the kings of the earth who have commit- 
ted fornication, and lived deliciously with her, 
shall? bewail her, and lament for her, when they 
shall see the smoke of her burning, 

10 Standing afar off for the fear of her torment, 
saying,® Alas, alas! that great city Babylon, that 
mighty city! for in one hour is thy judgment come. 

Ii And? the merchants of the earth shall weep 
and mourn over her; for no man buyeth their mer- 
chandise any more: 

12 The merchandise of gold, and silver, and 
precious stones, and of pearls, and fine linen, and 
purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all thyine wood, 
and all manner vessels of ivory, and all manner 
vessels of most precious wood, and of brass, and 
iron, and marble, 

13 And cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, 
and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, 
and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and 
chariots, and slaves, and® souls of men. 

14 And the fruits that thy soul lusted after are 
departed from thee, and all things which were 
dainty and goodly are departed from thee, and thou 
shalt find them no more at all. 


15 The merchants of these things, which were 








much give her of torment 
and mourning: for she 
saith in her heart, I sit a 
queen, and am no widow, 
and shall in no wise see 
mourning. Therefore in 
one day shall her plagues 
come,death, and mourning, 
and famine; and she shall 
be utterly burned with fire ; 
for strong is the Lord God 
which judged her. And 
the kings of the earth, who 
committed fornication and 
lived wantonly with her, 
shall weep and wail over 
her, when they look upon 
the smoke of her burning, 
standing afar off for the 
fear of her torment, say- 
ing, Woe, woe, the great 
city, Babylon, the strong 
city! for in one hour is thy 
judgement come. And the 
merchants of the earth 
weep and mourn oyer her, 
for no man buyeth their 
merchandise any more, 
merchandise of gold, and 
silver, and precious stone, 
and pearls, and fine linen, 
and purple, and silk, and 
searlet; and all thyine 
wood, and _ every vessel of 
ivory, and every vessel 
made of most precious 
wood, and of brass, and 
iron, and marble; and cin- 
namon, and spice, and in- 
cense, and ointment, and 
frankincense, and wine, 
and oil, and fine flour, and 
wheat, and cattle, and 
sheep; and merchandise of 
horses and chariots and 
slaves; and souls of men. 
‘And the fruits which thy 
soul lusted after are gone 
from thee, and all things 
that were dainty and 
sumptuous are perished 
from thee, and men shall 
find them no more at all. 
The merchants of these 
things,who were made rich 


g 


1 


12: 


14 


15 





b Jer. 50:34. 


asa. 47:7,8; Zeph. 2:15. 
f Ezek. 27:27. 


g Ezek. 27:13; 2 Pet. 2:3. 


judgments is that every one shall be rewarded according to his works. 


reap. This power shall have returned upon it in double portion what it h 


sit as a queen. This verse describes her former pride. 
her plagues come. Notwithstanding her pride and exultation. 
an ancient city was taken and destroyed it was burned with fire. 
9-14. Thekings . shall bewail her- 
her, or profited by her will pewail her fall. 10. 
mourners looking from a great distance, afraid to approach nearer. 
mentcome. It has come suddenly. 
had made gain in any way from the sins or the luxury of 
enumeration of the articles in which there was traffic. 
reads, “‘ the bodies and souls of men.” The first seems to refer to the tr 


until modern times and sanctioned by the Papacy. The latter expression seem 
for the dead, paid for out of the money drawn 


14. The fruits. These things for which 


spiritual traffic. What is the whole system of masses 
from mourning relatives, put a traffic in the souls of men? 
Babylon so lusted are all gone from her forever. 


Burned with fire. 


There will be mourners. 
Standing afar off. The picture represents these 
For in one hour is thy judg- 
arth shall weep. All who 
ws, then, an 


11. And the merchants of thee 
Babylon shall mourn. There follo 
18. Slaves and souls of men. The Greek 
affic in slaves, a common traffic 
gs to me to refer to a 


¢ Ezek. 26:16; Rev.17:2. dJer. 50:46. @ Isa. 21:95 Rey. 14:8. 


Ws 


See 17:16. 


What they sow, that shall they 
as meted out to others. 
Compare Isaiah 47: 8-9. 8. Therefore shall 
When 


I 


Those who have sinned with 


490 REVELATION. 


[Ch. XVIII. 








made rich by her, shall stand afar off, for the fear 
of her torment, weeping and wailing, 

16 And saying, Alas, alas! that great city, that 
was clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, 
and decked with gold, and precious stones, and 
pearls! 

17 For in one hour so great riches is come to 
nought. And* every shipmaster, and all the com- 
pany in ships, and sailors, and as many as trade by 
sea, stood afar off, 

18 And” cried, when they saw the smoke of her 
burning, saying,, What city is like unto this great 
city! 

19 And° they cast dust on their heads, and cried, 
‘Weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas! that great 
city, wherein were made rich all that had ships in 
the sea by reason of their costliness! for in one 
hour is she made desolate. 

20 Rejoice* over her, thow heaven, and ye holy 
apostles and prophets; for® God hath avenged you 
on her. 

21 And a mighty angel took up a stone like a 
‘great millstone, and ‘cast 7¢ into the sea, saying,‘ 
Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be 
‘thrown down, and shall be found no more at all. 

22 And? the voice of harpers, and musicians, and 
of Ripers, and trumpeters, shall be heard no more 
at all in thee; and no craftsman, of whatsoever 
craft he be, shall be found any more in thee; and 
the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at 
all in thee; : 

23 And the light of a candle shall shine no more 
at all in thee ;" and the voice of the bridegroom and 





by her, shall stand afar off 
for the fear of her torment, 
weeping and mourning; 


saying, Woe, woe, the great 


city, she that was arrayed 
in fine linen, and purple 
and scarlet, and decked 
with gold and _ precious 
stone and pearl! for in one 
hour so great riches is 
made desolate. And every 
shipmaster, and every one 
that saileth any whither, 
and mariners, and as many 
as gain their living by sea, 
stood afar off, and cried 
out as they looked upon 
the smoke of her burning, 
saying, What city is like 
the great city? And they 
cast dust on their heads, 
and cried, weeping and 
mourning, saying, Woe, 
woe, the great city, where- 
in were made rich all that 
had their ships in the sea 
by reason of her costliness! 
for in one hour is she 
made . desolate. Rejoice 
over her, thou heaven, and 
ye saints, and ye apostles, 
and ye prophets; for God 
hath judged your judge- 
ment on her. 

And a strong angel took 
up a stone, as it were a 
great mill-store, and east 
it into the sea, saying, 
Thus with a mighty fall 
Shall Babylon, the great 
city, be cast down, and 
shall be found no more at 
all. And the voice of harp- 
ers and minstrels and flute- 
players and_ trumpeters 
shall be heard no more at 
allin thee; and no erafts- 
man, of whatsoever craft, 
shall be found any more at 
all in thee; and the voice 
of a millstone shall be 
heard no more at all in 
thee; and the light of a 
lamp shall shine no more 
at all in thee; and the 


i 


9 


21 


22 


23 





@ Isa. 23:14. 6 Ezek. 27:30. ¢ Josh. 7:6; 1 Sam. 4:12; Job. 2:12. 


A Jer. 33:11, 





15-19. The merchants of these things . 
kings over the fall of the city has been given in verses 


d Psa. 96:11-13; Isa. 44:23; 49:13; Jer. 51:48. » 
ée Luke 11:49. fJer.51:64. g Isa. 24:8; Jer. 7:34; 16:93; 25:10; Ezek. 26:13, en DNS 


shall stand afar off. The lamentation of the 
9-14. The lamentation of the merchants is now 


given. They are also represented as standing afar off. With them join the shipmasters and mariners 


who haye been engaged in her trade. 
end. 

20. Rejoice over her, thou heaven. While there are mourners, 
to rejoice. She had exalted herself against God. All who have been 
from her, are called to rejoice. 


These all mourn because their profits from her are brought to an 


another company is ealled upon 
for God, and who have suffered 


21-24. And a strong angel took up a millstone. See Jeremiah 51: 61-64. This symbolical act 


implies an utter destruction. In Jeremiah the stone is east into 
the sea, because another Babylon is designed. 22. And 


the Euphrates. Now it is cast into 


the voice of harpers. It is this third 


angel who declares the silence and desolation of the city now. And the sound of the millstone. In 


the mills grinding food for the people. 


The mills were hand-mills, usually worked by the women as a 


domestic duty. 28. For with thy sorcery were all the nations deceived. This accounts for the 
fact that all nations poured their treasures into her lap. 24. And in her was found the blood of 


the prophets. 


, 


It is because she has slain the saints of the Most High that these judgments come upon 


Ch. XIX. ] REVELATION. 





491 





of the bride shall be heard no more at all in thee:?| 
for thy merchants were the great men of the earth; 
for” by thy sorceries were all nations deceived. 

94 And in her was found the blood of prophets, 
and ee saints, and of all that were slain upon the 
earth. 


CHAPTER XIX. 


The Marriage Supper of the Lamb. 


SuMMARY.—Rejoicing in Heaven. The Bride Preparing for the Bride- 
groom. The White Horse and the Word of God. Conquering the 
World for Christ. The Great Battle. The Beast and the False 
Prophet Taken. Cast into the Lake of Fire. 


1 And after these things I heard a great voice of 
much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia;* Salva- 
tion, and glory, and honour, and power, unto the 
Lord our God: 

9 For true and righteous are his judgments; for 
he hath judged the great whore, which did corrupt 
the earth with her fornication, and hath avenged* 
the blood of his servants at her hand. 

3 And again they said, Alleluia. And her smoke® 
rose up for ever and ever. 

4 And‘ the four and twenty elders and the four 
beasts fell down and worshipped God that sat on 
the throne, saying,? Amen; Alleluia. 

5 And a voice came out of the throne, saying," 
Praise our God, all ye servants, and ye that fear 





him, both small and great. 





9:22; Nahum 3:4; Rev. 17:2. c Rev. 4:11; 


7:10; 12:10. 
Isa. 34:10; Rev. I4:ll. 7 Rev. 4:4. g Neh 


alsa. 23:8: 62 Kings 
é . 5:18. 


voice of the bridegroom 
and of the bride shall be 
heard no more at all in 
thee: for thy merchants 
were the princes of the 
earth; for with thy sorcery 
were all the nations de- 


ceived. And in her was 24 


found the blood of prophets 
and of saints, and of all 
that have been slain upon 
the earth. 


CHAPTER XIX. 


After these things [heard 1 
as it were a great voice of 
a great multitude in heav- 
en, saying, Hallelujah; 
Salvation, and glory, an 
power, belong to our God: 
for true and righteous are 2 
his judgements; for he 
hath judged the great har- 
lot, which did corrupt the 
earth with her fornication, 
and he hath avenged the 
blood of his servants at 
her hand. And a second 3 
time they say, Hallelujah. 
And her smoke goeth up 
for ever and ever. And 4 
the four and twenty elders 
and the four living crea- 
tures fell down and wor- 
shipped God that sitteth 
on the throne, saying, 
Amen; Hallelujah. Anda 5 
voice came forth from the 
throne, saying, Give praise 
to our God, all ye his ser- 
vants, ye that fear him, the 





d Deut. 32:43; Rev. 6:10; 18:20. 
h Psa. 


134:1. 








Ag Jerusalem in the time of Christ filled up the measure of the sins 
Babylon, the great persecutor, fills 


her. 
36; Luke 11: 51; 13: 33), So the spiritual 


of Israel, (see Matt. 23: 29, 35, 
up the measure of the sins of 


the beast and false prophet, and is required to account for the blood of slaughtered prophets and saints 


of all ages. 


CHAPTER XIX. 


The nineteenth chapter of Revelation describes 
ment of the reign of Christ among the children of men. 


chapters. 
ing verses he announces the fall of Babylon, a 
chapters. In chap, 16: 13 the gathering of the united hosts of the dragon, the b 


to the battle of Armageddon is 
throw of the allied powersjwhich 
of a Harlot, then changes the symbol to a city, alludes to its fate, and in 
ing over its destruction. In chapter 19, the opening part 
victory about to be won, and then the events that lead up to the 
1-5. After these things. Following the preceding scenes. 


some of the events that precede the full acknowledg- 
These have been partly described in preceding 
In chapter 14: 6 the apostle points out the mighty strides of the gospel of Christ. In succeed- 
mighty event which is more fully described in succeeding 
east, and the false prophet, 
pointed out. This is the battle in which shall take place the final over- 
have exerted so malign an influence on the earth. But before this catas- 
trophe is fully explained the apostle brings in a delineation of the great spiritual apostasy under the form 
an episode, pictures the mourn- 
is a picture of heavenly rejoicings over the great 
great battle are introduced. 
I heard a great voice of much people. 


“These songs of rejoicing and thanksgiving are seen in Revelation whenever any great triumph or blessing 


is about to come. See 5: 13; (fem O43 


11:15; 12:10. 2. For true and righteous ar 
This is shown by the judgments on the spiritual Babylon. 4, And the four and twenty elders. 


e his judgments. 
See 


492 REVELATION. 





6 And* I heard as it were the voice of a great 
multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as 
the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia; 
for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth. 

7 Let us be? glad and rejoice, and give honour to 
him: for® the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his 
wife hath made herself ready. 

8 And* to her it was granted that she should be 
arrayed in fine linen, clean and white: for® the fine 
linen is the righteousness of the saints. 

9 And he saith unto me, Write, Blessed! are they 
which are called unto the marriage-supper of the 
Lamb. And he saith unto me, These are the true 
sayings of God. 

10 And® I fell at his feet to worship him. And 
he said unto me, See" thou do tt not; Lam thy fel- 
low-servant, and of thy brethren,! that have the 
testimony of Jesus: worship God: for the testimony 
of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. 

11 And I’saw heaven opened, and behold a white 
horse; and he that sat upon him wasi called Faith- 
ful and True; and* in righteousness he doth judge 
and make war. 





[ChSXIx,, 


small and the great. And 6 
I heard as it were the 
voice of a great multitude, 
and as the voice of many 
waters, and as the voice of 
mighty thunders, saying, 
Hallelujah: for the Lord 
our God, the Almighty, 
reigneth. Let us rejoice 7 
and be exceeding glad, and 
let us give the glory unto 
him: for the marriage of 
the Lamb is come, and his 
wife hath made herself 
ready. And it was given 8- 
unto her that she should 
array herself in fine linen, 
bright and pure: for the 
fine linen is. the righteous 
acts of the saints. And he 9 
saith unto me, Write, 
Blessed are they which are 
bidden to the marriage 
supper of the Lamb. And 
he saith unto me, These 
are true words of God. And 10° 
I fell down before his feet 
to worship him. And he 
saith unto me, See thou do 
it not: I am a fellow-ser- 
vant with thee and with 
thy brethren that hold the 
testimony of Jesus: wor- 
ship God: for the testimo- 
ny of Jesus is the spirit of 
prophecy. 

And I saw the heaven 11. 
opened; and behold, a 
white horse, and he that 
sat thereon, calied Faithful 








a Ezek. 1:24. 6Isa. 44:23. 


a ¢ Matt. 22:2; 25:10; 2 Cor. 11:2; Eph. 5:32. 
J Luke 14:15. 


g Rey. 22:8. h Acts 10:26; 14:14. 


d Psa. 45:13; Ezek. 16:10. 
t1John. 5:10. j John 14:6; Rey. 3:14. & Isa. 11:4, 





é Psa. 132:9.. 





chap. 4: 4, 6, and notes at close of that chapter. 
“out of the throne,” 
Lord. 


5. .And a voice came forth from the throne. Not: 
as in the Common Version. The speaker is not indicated. Itisa call to praise the 


6,'7. ITheard . . agreat multitude. This isin response to the call from thethrone. The Lord 

God omnipotent reigneth. This is demonstrated in the overthrow of the wicked. '7%7. For the mar-- 
riage of the Lamb is come. The blessed union of the Lord with his chosen Bride, the Church. The 
consummation of this marriage is described in 21:2. His wife hath made herselfready. TheChureh 
has to prepare herself for this event before it can take place. The Lord will not accept a bride who is not 
purified and fit for the Heavenly Bridegroom. 
. 8,9. Toher was granted. By divine grace. That she should be arrayed. She must be arrayed 
in spotless white. What this white raiment is is not left in doubt. It is woven by the pure and holy lives 
of the saints. 9. And he saith unto me, Write. This always implies a very important message. 
Blessed are they which are called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb. The blessing is upon 
those who have a part in the blessedness of this holy union. Those will be called who have wedding gar- 
ments pure and white of fine linen. See verse 8. 

10. And I fell at his feet. In this passage and in 22: 7, 8, the apostle offers worship to a fellow’ 
creature, an angel. In each place the prohibition is prompt, This episode is introduced in order to teach 
the sinfulness of all creature worship. It is likely that the fact that the fate of a great apostate church, 
in which worship is offered to its human head, is being declared, is the reason why here this symbolical 
act occurs. Man created in God’s image is to worship only that which is divine. The testimony of 
Jesus. Theangel declares himself of thy brethren. In 22: 9, he adds, “‘of thy brethren, the prophets.” 
Here the explanation is added that the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. In testifying of Jesus 
the angel became one of the prophets. 

11-16. And I saw the heaven opened. This implies the opening of a new vision. 
Where a former vision is continued the formula is “After these things.” We now have a series of pict- 
ures symbolizing the closing events that inaugurate the Millennium. ‘The first of these is the one before 
symbolized by the angel that flies through heaven with the everlasting gospel, but now presented in a 
grand vision of the triumphant march of the Worp or Gop. Behold a white horse, Always the- 


See 4:1; 11: 19. 


Ch. XIX.] REVELATION. 


493 





12 His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his 
head were many crowns; and he had a name writ- 
‘ten that no man knew but he himself: 

13 And? he was clothed with a vesture dipped in 
blood, and his name is called The? Word of God. 

14 And the armies which were in heaven followed 
him upon white horses,° clothed in fine linen, white 
and clean. 

15 And® out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, 
that with it he should smite the nations: and* he 
shall rule them with a rod of iron: and? he treadeth 
the wine-press of the fierceness and wrath of Al- 
mighty God. 

16 And he had on Ais vesture and on his thigh a 
name written,® KinG of KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS. 

17 And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and 
he cried with a loud voice, saying to all the fowls 
that fly in the midst of heaven," Come and gather 
yourselves together unto the supper of the great 


God; 
18 That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the 
flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and 


the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, 





and True; and in right- 
eousness he doth judge and 
make war. And his eyes 12 
are a flame of fire, and 
upon his head are many 
diadems; and he hath a 
name written, which no 
one knoweth but he him- 
self. And he is arrayed in 13 
a garment sprinkled with 
blood: and his name is 
called The Word of God. 
And the armies which are 14 
in heaven followed him 
upon white horses, clothed 
in fine linen, white and 
pure. And out of hismouth 15 
roceedeth a sharp sword 
hat with it he should 
smite the nations: and he 
shall rule them with a rod 
of iron: and he treadeth 
the winepress of the fierce- 
ness of the wrath of Al- 
mighty God. And he hath 16 
on his garment and on his 
thigh a name _ written, 
KING OF KINGS,AND LORD 
OF LORDS. 

And I saw anangel stand- 
ing in the sun; and he cri- 
ed with a loud voice, say- 
ing to all the birds that fly 
in mid heaven, Come and 
be gathered together unto 
the great supper of God; 
that ye may eat the flesh 18 
of kings, and the flesh of 
captains, and the flesh of 
rey pes men, and the flesh 
of horses and of them that 





b John 1:1; 1John 6:7. ¢ Matt. 28:3; Rev. 4:4; 7:9. 


-a Isa. 63:2,3. 
fisa. 63:3; Rev. 14:19,20. 


Rey. 2:27; 12:5. 


d Isa. 11:4; 2 Thes. 2:8; Rev. 1:16. ¢ Psa. 2:93 
g Psa. 72; Dan. 2:47; 1 Tim. 6:15; Rev. 17:14. h Ezek. 39:17. 








symbol of conquest and triumph. Seenoteson6:2. He that sat upon him called Faithfuland True. 
It is the Lord, who now comes as the Word of God. His conquests are effected by the word, but the march 


is really the march of Christ. 12. His eyes were as a flame of fire. 


head were many crowns. 
of kings. A name written that no man knew. 


Diadems. All kingly authority is concentrated in his hands. 
Probably the new name of chap. 2: 17, a name which 


See note on 1: 14. Upon his 
He is King 


will be disclosed to those invited to the marriage supper of the Lamb (3: 12). 138. He is arrayed ina 
garment sprinkled with. See Revision. The word in the best Greek MSS. is not Bebammenon (dipped), 
put “sprinkled.” The usual idea is that the sprinkled plood is that of his conquered enemies. I believe that 
the thought is the sprinkling of his own blood, the blood through which he conquers. 14. And the 
armies which were in heaven followed him. These armies are the armies of the saints, purified, 
holy, a conquering host, led by Christ to victory. 15. Out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword. See 
note on 1:16. This symbolizes the word by which he achieved his conquests. He shall rule them with 


a rod of iron. 


treadeth the winepress. He shall inflict God’s judgments 


See notes on 2: 27 and 12: 5. This implies not a stern, but a firm and lasting rule. He 
on the sins of the earth. 


See notes on 


44: 17-19. 16. He hath on his vesture and on his thigh. This probably signifies that the name 
-was written on his vesture, even on his thigh. The Greek may be so translated. Kingof Kings. Of the 
various titles given to Christ in this passage this is the highest and marks him as supreme. There are 
four titles given in the passage: (1) in verse 11; (2) verse 12; (3) verse 13, and (4) in verse 16. 

The sublime imagery of this passage portrays the spiritual march and conquest of Christ. A purified 


church, following Christ, holy and true, shall carry the word in triumph 
armies of the saints, all united 
marching to the great final conflict with the hosts of evil. 


17,18. 


ant power to the nations. 
under Christ, led by him, strengthened by him, hence invincible, are 


The 


And I saw an angel standing in the sun. And riding with the sun in his course. From 


this position in the heavens and riding through the heavens he can call all the fowls of heaven together. 


Unto the great supper 
judgments on his enemies. 
-of amighty defeat, which 
that named in the next verse. 


of God. Unto the feast for pirds of prey caused by the carnage of God’s 
18. That ye may eat. The picture drawn is that of the terrible slaughter 
leaves the earth covered with the slain of every degree. 


The conflict meant is 


494 REVELATION. 


Gh. XIX. 





and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both 
small and great. 

19 And* I saw the beast, and the kings of the 
earth, and their armies, gathered together, to make 
war against him that sat on the horse, and against 
his army. 

20 And the beast was taken, and with him the 
false prophet that wrought miracles before him, 
with which he deceived them that had received the 
mark of the beast, and them that worshipped _ his 
image. These” both were cast alive into a lake of 
fire burning with brimstone. 

21 And the remnant were slain with the sword of 
him that sat upon the horse, which sword proceed- 
ed out of his mouth: and all the fowls were filled 
with their flesh. 





sit thereon, and the flesh 
of all men, both free and 
bond, and small and great. 

And I saw the beast, and 
the kings of the earth, and 
their armies gathered to- 
gether tomake war against 
him that sat upon the 
horse, and against his 
army. And the beast was 
taken, and with him the 
false prophet that wrought 
the signs in his sight, 
wherewith he deceived 
them that had received the 
mark of the beast, and 
them that worshipped 
his image: they twain were 
cast alive into the lake of 
fire that burneth with 
brimstone: and the rest 
were killed with the sword 
of him that sat upon the 
horse, even the sword which 
came forth out of his 
mouth: and all the birds 
were filled with their flesh. 





a Rey. 16:16. 6 Dan. Tits Rey. 2:10. 


19 


20» 


21 





19-21. I saw the beast. Sce notes on 


13: 1-10. This beast represents the world power opposed to 


vhrist under its changing forms. The Roman Pagan Empire, and the Roman Papal secular power, are 
two forms. But it continues even after these forms pass away. The form in which it will manifest itself 


in this conflict will be better known when the fulfillment takes place. 
the earth as his supporters to oppose the Lamb and his armies. 


The beast marshals the kings of 
20. And the beast was taken. It 


is the beast’s last appearance. He is now finally overthrown. And with him the false prophet. The- 


false prophet, the beast, and the dragon have 


been named in chap. 16: 13 as calling the kings of the earth 


to the battle of Armageddon. See notes there. This is the same conflict. Here the result of the conflict 
prophet. He is the lamb-like 


is given. That wrought the signs. 
They twain were cast alive into the lake of fire. 


bol indicates utter 


killed with the sword of him, etc. This is probably symbolic. 


This description identifies the false 
dragon of 13: 11, the false Spiritual despotism, the apostate church. Thi 
In 18: 8it is said that B 
with fire. Here the false prophet, both symbols of the same power, is cast into the 
destruction. What is cast into this lake is seen no more. 


lake of fire. 


S false prophet is now taken. 
abylon shall be burned 
The sym- 
21. And the rest were 
If these who had been sinners and 


Supporters of the powers of evil were incapacitated for that support longer, it would be their death 


(separation) from that cause. 
birds were filled, etc. 


It may 


THE COMING OF CHRIST. 


The coming of Christ, pictured in this chapter, has been seized upon by the advoe 
described in the next chapter. 
embraced in verses 11-16 describes a personal coming which shall be visibl 


coming before the millennial period which 1s 


which is the coming so often referred to in the Scriptures. 
language of this description is all the language of symbolism. 


name “written on his vesture and on his thigh.” 

his coming to judgment of which he spoke in Matt. 
in 1 Thess. 4: 16, Revelation does not rightly 
heaven preceded and heralded by the trump of the archangel. 
not evidently the one meant by our Lord. 
ciated with the Last Judgment. See Matt. 25: 31-34: 1 Cor. 
recognize one visible Return or Coming of Christ. 
until we come to chap. 20: 11. Here it is placed after the Millennium. 


coming in power, the power of his 


be that this remnant were converted b 
If this is a symbol its signification is that the victory was complete. 


The language is undoubtedly symbolic. 
24: 30, Luke 21: 27, Matt. 25; 31, 
describe it. He declares that he Shall 


Hene 
Visible Return of the Lord does not take place before the Millennium, and t 


y.the word. And all the. 


ates of his visible 


They insist that the passage 


come on the clouds 


The coming described in Revelation 
(8) This personal, visible coming of the Lord is alwa 
15; 23; 2 Thess. 2: 8, ete. 
Now, the Last Judgment is not reached in Revelation 
€, we must conclude that the 
hat chap. 19: 11-16 describes a 
Word, but nota visible coming. (4) Is it objected that in 20: 11 noth- 


e to the eyes of all men, and 
To this it might be objected: (1) That the 

None expect that, when the 
he will be seen riding on a white horse with an army following him riding on white hor 


Lord comes, 
ses, and having a 
(2) If this be 
and described by Paul 


of 
is 


ys asso- 
The Seriptures only 


ing is said of the coming of Christ? It is said (Matt. 25: 81) that when the Lord comes he shall be seated 


on the throne of judgment, and in Rev. 20: 11 John 
He does not descriise here his coming, 


sees this throne and the Lord sitting on the throne, 
but shows him already come and engaged in judgment. 


Chi XxX.) REVELATION. 





CHAPTER XX. 


The Millennium. 


SUMMARY.—Satan Bound for a Thousand Years. Thrones and Saints 
Reigning with Christ. The First Resurrection. Satan Loosed at the 
End of the Thousand Years. The Gathering of Gog and Magog and 
of the Nations. Their Attack Upon the Saints. Their Destruction. 
The Devil Cast into the Lake of Fire. The Great Judgment. 


1 And I saw an angel come down from heaveu,? 
having the key of the bottomless pit and a great 
chain in his hand. 

2 And he laid hold on” the dragon, that old ser- 
pent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him 
a thousand years. 

3 And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut 
him up, and* set a seal upon him, that“ he should 
deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years 
should be fulfilled: and after that he must be loosed 
a little season. 

4 AndIsaw® thrones, and they that sat upon them, 
and‘ judgment was given unto them: and J saw the® 
souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of 
Jesus, and for the word of God,® and which had not 
worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither 
had received Azs mark upon their foreheads, or in 
their hands: and they lived and! reigned with Christ 


495: 


CHAPTER XX. 


And I saw an angel com- 1 
ing down out of heaven, 
having the key of theabyss 
and a great chain in his 


hand. And he laid hold on 2: 


the dragon,the old serpent, 
which is the Devil and Sa- 
tan, and bound him for a 


thousand years, and cast 3. 


him into the abyss, and 
shut i, and sealed i over 
him, that he should deceive 
the nations no more, until 
the thousand years should 
be finished: after this he 
must be loosed for a little 
time. 


And I saw thrones, and 4- 


they sat upon them, and 
judgement was given unto 
them: and J saw the souls 
of them that had been be- 
headed for the testimony 
of Jesus, and for the word 
of God,and such as wor- 
shipped not the beast, nei- 
ther his image, and receiv- 
ed not the mark upon their 
forehead and upon _ their 
hand; and they lived, and 





a thousand years. reigned with Christ a 


a Rey. 1:18; 9:1. 62 Pet. 2:4; Jude 6; Rev. 12:9. ¢ Dan. 6:17. d Rev. 16:4. eDan.7; Matt. 19:28; Luke 22:30. 
f1Cor. 6:2,3. g Rev. 6:9. h Rev. 18:12, ¢ Rom. 8:175 2 Tim. 2:12. 














After the mighty conflict, the crisis of the fate of the world, the apostle beholds the results of the: 
glorious victory. Spiritual Babylon and the beast, the Papacy and its secular allies, overwhelmed in the 
battle of Armageddon, have disappeared from earthly history. The old serpent, the dragon, the devil, 
who under so many forms, as pagan Rome, as the imperial power, as the kings of the earth, has perse- 
cuted the Church, yet exists, but his power is broken, and he is now to meet the results of his disastrous. 

ailure. 
: 1-8. And I saw an angel come down from heaven with a chain, and the key of the 
abyss. This abyss is named in Rey. 9: 1,11; in 11: 7, and 17: 8. It is the present abode of Satan and his 
evil spirits. The things seen by John are symbolical. They imply that in some way the power of Satan 
shall be virtually destroyed upon the earth. 2. He laid hold on the dragon . and bound 
-him a thousand years. The chain I suppose to be the Word of God. At this period of the triumph 
of righteousness the gospel takes such hold of the hearts of men that Satan loses his power over them. 
We can easily see how this is accomplished by what takes place under our own eyes. A man may be: 
drunken and lawless, but if he repents under the influence of the gospel he ceases to serve Satan. The 
devil loses his power over that man. When that period shall come for which the saints in all ages have 
wistfully looked, when the laws of God shall be written upon every heart, then Satan, bound with a 
chain, the chain of truth, shall be deprived of influence on the earth. 8. And cast him into the 
abyss. During this millennial period the chained enemy of man is cast into a prison house, but not the 
lake of fire. Had he gone there he should never more return. He shall go there as his ultimate fate, 
(see verse 10), but after the thousand years, he is to return to the earth for a little season, and until the 
final effort of his long struggle against God he shall be confined in the abyss, from whence there is the 
possibility of escape, instead of being cast into the lake of fire, which is an eternal doom, In the 
bottomless pit the great deceiver shall remain till the thousand years are ended, when for a little season. 


he shall regain his power. 


496 REVELATION. (Ch. XX. 


Te 28 ’ ;] | thousand years. The rest 5 
5 But the rest of the dead lived not again until Made 


‘the thousand years were finished. This zs the first the thousand years should 
x ae ° be finished. This is the 
resurrection. } first resurrection. Blessed 6 
6 Blessed and holy zs he that hath part in the aor ae phe, hak Hath 
first resurrection: on such the* second death hath | tion: over these the second 


. a death hath no power; but 
no power; but they shall be priests of? God and of | they snail be priests of God 


eae, : PAT | ; > and of Christ, and shall 
Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years. aes witch os on 


years. 




















@ Rey. 21:8. 6 1sa. 61:6; 1 Pet. 2:9; Rey. 5:10. 





4-6. And I saw thrones and they that sat on them. These thrones are symbols of rule. It 
implies that they who sit on them shall have sway. And judgment was given to them. They shall 
exercise a moral judgment over humanity. Lsawthe souls ofthem. Ofthe martyrs. Note that it is 
the sowls that he observes. And they lived and reigned with Christ. John saw that those who 
sat on thrones reigned with Christ a thousand years. “ In thelast days the mountain of the Lord’s house 
shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations 
shall flow intoit.” Isa. 2:3. Will Christ come visibly to reign in person as an earthly monarch? The 
personal coming of the Savior is placed by all the sacred writers as the last event before the great judg- 
ment day. This great epoch is placed after the millennial period, and also after the overthrow of Satan 
in his last conflict. If the Savior, then, during this millennial period, is not visibly present upon the 
earth, how can he reign? Just as he reigns over each saint now. Those who know the Lord accept him 
as king, but in this period ‘“‘the knowledge of the Lord shall cover the earth as the waters do the channels 
of the sea.” All men shall hear and obey the gospel, and all shall submit to the beneficent sceptre of 
Christ. Souls of them that had been beheaded. These are they “‘who lived and reigned with 
Christ for a thousand years.” Is this a literal resurrection from the grave? I answer decidedly in the 
negative. (1) The apostle does not say one word about the resurrection of the bodies of the martyrs, 
nor does he say that he saw their bodies, or that he saw the martyrs themselves. Heis particular to say 
that he saw the sowls or spirits of the martyrs living and reigning with Christ. (2) They had been put to 
death in the body, and their souls were unseen upon the earth, but there is no intimation in Scripture 
that their souls had ever-ceased to exist. They were alive with Christ, but now they live in some sense 
different from that existence which they had before. It cannot mean that their souls came to life, for 
they had never ceased to have existence. (3) What, then, does the affirmation mean? That as Christ 
reigns upon the earth during the millennial period by his truth, so the spirit of the martyrs is revived and 
lives in the Church. The souls of the martyrs live because the Church is composed of those who love 
Christ better than goods or liberty or life. This glorious reign of Christ pervades the earth because the 
souls of the martyrs are resurrected and live in all who name the name of Christ, and who are filled with 
the spirit of the ancient martyrs. (4) If any should think such an interpretation of symbolical language 
far fetched, let him compare Scripture. This explanation is not forced nor the interpretation of the 
language unusual. It was predicted by the prophets that Elias must come again before the Messiah. He 
did come in spirit and power, not in person, but as the stern, fearless, upright reformer of the wilder- 
ness of Jordan. In the same sense Ezekiel speaks (chap. 27: 12-14) of the return of the captive Jews to 
their own land: “ J will open your graves, oh my people! and cause you to come up out of your graves, and 
bring you into the land of Israel.”” When Martin Luther was engaged in deadly struggle with the 
Papacy, Pope Adrian sent a brief to the German Diet at Nuremburg, which contained these words: 
“The heretics Huss and Jerome are now alive again in the person of Martin Luther.” A. thousand 
years. I am not prepared to say that this blessed period shall be limited to a thousand years, but 
am rather disposed to believe that a thousand years, a round period of great duration, is chosen to 
show to the longing student of the prophets that there shall be a long, long period of righteousness 
upon the same earth that has been reddened with blood, filled with crime, and made foul by sin. 
The characteristics of this golden period of the human race are clearly pointed out by the prophets. 
5. But the rest of the dead lived not. If “the souls of the martyrs” live again spiritually and 
morally upon the earth in the millennial period, as I have explained, then this statement is to be 
explained in harmony. The rest of the dead lived not until the end of the thousand years. Thé sublime 
faith of the martyrs pervades the saints during this period, and other men, wicked or less noble, sleep in 
silence, unseen and unknown, without influence upon the earth, until the millennial period is ended. 
They have no part in the first resurrection, the resurrection of the spirits of the martyrs. 6. Blessed 
and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection. In this great moral and spiritual 
resurrection that brings in the Millennium. On such the second death hath no power. The 
second death is the sad doom of eternal death. See verse 14. 


Ch. XX.] REVELATION. 











497 


A Sys red And when the thousand 7 
. 7 And when the thousand years are expired, jou e Gee ae 
Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, Shall be loosed oué of his 
8 And shall* go out to deceive the nations which | Pus", 204 Shall, come 8 
-are in the four quarters of the earth,” Gog and Ma- a lps Spa oad 
gog, to® gather them together to battle; the number | and Magog, to gather ther 
of whom 7s as the sand of the sea. eGUe ee 
9 And* they went up on the breadth of the earth, pastor Seer aie ee 9 
and compassed the camp of the saints about, and of the earth, and compass- 
the belosee city ‘ and fire came down out of heaven, | Shout, “and Np BoM 
an > citv: and fire came down 
devoured t ek ‘ out of heaven, and devour- 
10 And the devil that deceived them was casted them. And the devil 10 
into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast | (Rat deceived, them. was 
ale a > and brimstone, where are 
and the false prophet are, and shall be tormented igi pred eh aed eae by 
-day and night for ever and ever. prophet; and they shall be 
11 And IT saw a great white throne, and him that | formented ay and night 
‘sat on it, from whose face® the earth and the fee ee 
heaven fled away;* and there was found no place | upon it, from whose face 
P the earth and the heaven 
for them 
. fled away; and there was 
12 And® I saw the dead, small and great, stand | found no ‘place for them. 
a i And I saw the dead, the 12 
before God:" and the books were opened; and great and the small, stand 
another book was opened, which is the book of life: uehooehanil ge ae. pa 





aJob. 1:7; 1 Pet. 5:8. 6 Ezek. 38. c Rey. 16:14. dIsa. 8:8. e2Pet. 3:7. fDan,2:35. g John 5:225 2 Cor. 5:10; 
i Thes. 4:15,17. h Dan. 7:10. 7 Psa. 69:28; Phil. 4:3. 





7-10. When the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed. The earth shall have 
its golden age but it shall not last forever. Satan shall, when many ages have rolled away, be loosed for 
a little season. From some cause, that is wrapped in the darkness of the future, righteousness shall 
‘wane; wickedness shall revive; the great adversary shall in part regain his influence over our race. But 
it is cheering to know that his triumph will be short. He shall be loosed only for a little season. 8. 
And shall go out to deceive the nations. Again he shall marshal the hosts of sin and reiew his 
old conflict. The four quarters of the earth. From the wholeearth. Gog and Magog. See Gen. 
10: 2and Ezekiel 38: 2. Josephus says that Magog represented the Scythians, a great race spread over 
the country now occupied by Southern Russia. 9. And they went up over the breadth of the 
-earth. They spread over it. Compassed the camp of the saints and the beloved city. 
Assailed the true Church and sought to destroy it. How the Church shall be assailed cannot now be 
told, but there will be a determined attempt to extirpate it. The beloved city, the spiritual Jerusalem, 
the Church, shall be surrounded, but in the day of her extremity the Lord will hear her ery for help. 
Fire from heaven will descend on her enemies. Christ shall come. “ As the lightning flashes from the 
-east unto the west, so shall the coming of the Son of man be.” Then shall the Lord consume the wicked 
“with the spirit of his mouth and the brightness of his coming.” ‘The day of the Lord skall come, 
when the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, and 
-all its works shall be burned up.” Fire came down from God and consumed them. For a 
comment on this read 2 Thess. 1: 7-10. They shall come in flaming fire to destroy his enemies. The time 
will have come for the arm of the Lord to be revealed in might. 10. And the devil that deceived 
them was cast into the lake of fire. This is Satan’s last battle. His time has come. The great 
deceiver is not cast into the bottomless pit now. The lake of fire is opened, and we discover there the 
beast and the false prophet, but they have gone whence none ever return. There the devil is cast in and 
locked up to abide with his allies in wickedness forever. 

11-15. AndIsawa great white throne, and himthat satonit. This is one more act in the 
great drama, The throne of judgment is set. The nations, living as well as dead, are called to stand 
before God. The white throne indicates purity, triumph and glory. It is the color of the light. From 
whose face the earth and the heaven fled away. See 21:1. There is to be a new heaven and 
-earth. The old ones are destroyed to be reconstructed. 12. And I saw the dead, small and great. 
As we learn from the next verse the dead of every land, of earth, and sea and hades deliver their dead and 
sall come to judgment. The books are opened. Therecords that contain all the deeds of men. 


a 


498 REVELATION. 





and the dead were judged out of those things which 
were written in the books,* according to their 
works. 

13 And the sea gave up the dead which were in 
it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which 
were in them: and they judged every man accord- 
ing to their works. 

14 And” death and hell were cast into the lake of 
fire. This is the second death. 

15 And whosoever was not found written in the 
book of life was cast into the lake of fire. 


CHAPTER XXI. 


The New Jerusalem. 


SUMMARY.—The New Heaven and New Earth. The Bride, the Lamb’s 
Wife. The City Coming Down out of Heaven. Its Walls, Gates, 
Foundation. The City of Gold and Gates of Pearl. The Light of the 
City. Its Holiness. 


1 And°* 1 saw a new heaven and a new earth: for 
the first heaven and the first earth were passed 
away; and there was no more’ sea. 

2 And I John saw’® the holy city, new Jerusalem, 
coming down from God out of heaven, prepared ‘as 
a bride adorned for her husband. 








26) mee ae 


another book was opened, 
which is the book of life: 
and the dead were judged 
out of the things which 
were written in the books, 
according to their works. 
And the sea gave up the 
dead which were in it; and 
death and Hades gave up 
the dead which were in 
them: and they were judg- 
ed every man according to 
their works. And death 
and Hades were cast into 
the lake of fire. And if any 15. 
was not found written in 
the book of life, he was 
cast into the lake of fire. 


14 


CHAPTER XXI, 


And I saw anew heaven 1 
and a new earth; for the 
first heaven and the first 
earth are passed away ; and 
the seaisno more. And I 2 
saw the holy city, new Je- 
rusalem, coming down out 
of heaven from God, made 
ready as a bride adorned 





d Isa. 57:20. 


a Jer. 17:10; Matt. 16:27; Rom. 2:6. 61 Cor. 15:26. cIsa. 65:17; 66:22; 2 Pet. 3:13. 


ée Isa. 52:15 
Gal. 4:26; Heb. 11:10; 12:22; 18:14. Isa. 54:55 61:10; 2 Cor. 11:2. 





Another book. The book of life in which the names of the saints are recorded. From these books all 
are judged according to their works. 18. The sea. A symbol of the lost dead of whom no man 
knoweth. Death and Hades. The unseen world which hides from our view those who have departed. 
from earth. The thought of the verse is that all the dead shall be judged. 14. And death and 
hades were cast into the lake of fire. After this judgment day ‘death and hades”’ also, death and. 
the unseen land of the dead, disappear forever. That is the significance of being cast into the lake of 
fire, the eternal prison house. Until the end of the Millennium and the final judgment men shall die, but 
after that grand epoch in the history of the Universe, there shall be no more death. The last enemy, 
death, shall be destroyed. Then shall come to pass the saying that is written, ‘‘O! death, where is thy 
sting? O! grave, where is thy victory?’? 15. And whosoever was not found written .. was 
cast into the lake of fire. Into that same lake of fire, that prison house to which have gone the 
false prophet and the beast, to which has been consigned the dragon, “‘ that old serpent the devil,” the 
“eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels.” There shall also be banished those whose “names are: 
not written in the book of life.” This is the second death. As far as Inspiration throws its light upon 
the sad lot of those consigned to that “lake of fire’? theirs is an eternal fate. When some one has shown 
that the doors of this final prison of the Universe have opened to permit the escape of those who have 
been consigned to its keeping, then we may perhaps indulge some hope that its prisoners will, in the lapse 
of endless years, escape from their sad environment. 


CHAPTER XXI. 


The last verses of the last chapter have portrayed the terrors of the eternal judgment and the fate of 
those who have not served God. There ends the history of the godless world. As far as inspiration has 
revealed the future state the godless disappear forever from the history of the Universe in the prison 
house ealled the Lake of Fire. If the prophet’s eyes had not been opened to see beyond these scenes, dark 
would seem the fate of our race. After a thousand years of purity and triumph history would seem to end 
in the terror of the judgment day and the darkness of the second death. But our Lord has mercifully 
lifted the curtain beyond and revealed to us the glorious final destiny of man. After a iong and weary- 


Ch. XXI.] 


3 And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, 
Behold,* the tabernacle of God 7s with men, and he 
will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, 
ae God himself shall be with them, and be their 

od. 

4 And” God shall wipe away all tears from their 
eyes; and°® there shall be no more death,‘ neither 
sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more 
pain: for the former things are passed away. 

5 And? he that sat upon the throne said, Behold, * 
I make all things new. And he said unto me, 
Write: for these words are true and faithful. 

6 And he said unto me, It is done. I am Alpha 
and Omega, the beginning and the end:* I will give 
unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the 
water of life freely. 

7 He that" overcometh shall inherit all things: 
andi I will be his God, and he shall be my son. 

8 Buti the fearful, and unbelieving, and the 


REVELATION. 


499 





|for her husband. And 13 
heard a great voice out of 
the throne saying, Behold, 
the tabernacle of God is 
with men, and he shall 
dwell with them, and they 
shall be his peoples, and 
God himself shall be with 
them, and be their God: 4 
and he shall wipe away ev- 
ery tear from their eyes; 
and death shall be no more; 
neither shall there be 
mourning, nor crying, nor 
pain, any more; the first 
things are passed away. 
And he that sitteth on the 
throne said, Behold,I make 
all things new. And he 
saith, Write: for these 
words are faithful and true. 
And he said unto me, They 6 
are come to pass. Lam the 
Alpha and the Omega, the 
beginning and the end. I 
will give unto him that is 
athirst of the fountain of 
the water of lifefreely. He 7 
that overcometh shall in- 
herit these things; and IL 
will be his God, and he 
shall be my son. But for 8 


Or 











a@ Lev. 26:11; Ezek. 43:7; 2 Cor. 6:16; Rev. 7:15. 6 Isa. 25:8. c1 Cor. 15:26,54. 


J Isa. 43:19; 2 Cor. 5:17. g Isa. 12:3; 55:1: John 4:10,143 7:37. 


h Rom. 8:17,82. 


d Isa. 35:10; 61:3. e Rev. 4:2. 
ti Zech. 8:8; Heb. 8:10. 


ji Cor. 6:9; Gal. 5:19-21; Eph. 5:5; 1 Tim. 1:9; Heb. 12:14. 





struggle, and a history full of dark and eventful episodes, mankind will reach a goal of happiness and 
splendor that it is vain to attempt to describe or even conceive. When the last battle is ended and the 
author of evil with all his works, the curses that he has wrought, and the servants that have promoted his 
ends, are cast into the eternal prison house, and their power to do eyil forever broken, then will dawn the 
bright morning of eternal bliss and glory. This chapter deseribes the eternal home of the saints. 

1-4, I saw a new heavenandanew earth. The scriptures both of the Old and New Testaments 
point to the destruction of the old earth when the Lord comes to judgment. See 2 Pet.3:10. Itisto 
undergo a purification and a renewal to fit it for the home of the saints in glory. The “old heavens and 
earth,” which I understand to comprehend the old world and its order, so sadly out of joint, pass away at 
the time of the great judgment, and the old state of things shall be succeeded by a new order, both 
physical and moral. And the seais nomore. Whether this is to be understood literally, or whether 
it means that there shall be no barriers between the peoples, such as the sea interposes, is not certain. 2. 
And I saw the holy city, the new Jerusalem. The glorified and heavenly Church, pure and beauti- 
ful as a bride prepared for the bridegroom. This chapter presents a vision of the final condition of the 
redeemed and triumphant church. This vision points out the contrast between the beginning and the final 
condition of our race. The career of man began in a garden, the fitting home of a race few in numbers. 
It ends, as revealed by the prophet, in a city, the home where multitudes gather. Of this city Jerusalem 
was a type. The redeemed and holy Church, washed by the Savior’s blood, and obedient to his will as a 
faithful bride to her husband, is the new Jerusalem. 8. Behold the tabernacle of God is with 
men. Of old the Shekinah, the emblem of God’s presence, dwelt in the tabernacle between the Cherubim. 
In this glorious city of the future, God shall make his tabernacle and dwell with men. They shall recog- 
nize his presence, his protection, his fatherly and omnipotent care over them. 4. And he shall wipe 
away every tear from their eyes. No sorrow or travail of any kind shall ever enter within the walls 
of the city. The cry of anguish shall never be uttered, hearts shall never be broken, no tear shall ever 
dim the eye, and, most glorious of all, death shall be unknown. Death began his sway when man was 
expelled from Paradise; he ends it when the final judgment condemns Satan, death and hades to enter the 
lake of fire. The new Jerusalem will be painless, tearless, deathless, because it will be a sinless city. 
“The former things have passed away.” 

5-8. Behold,I make all things new. See the noteonversel. Write. This is the third time in 
this book, in addition to the epistles to the churches in chapters 2 and 3, where John receives the special 
command to “write.” The other examples are in 14: 13 and 19: 9. See also1: 11. 6. Itisdone. All 
things are come to pass. I am the Alpha and the Omega. See notes oni: 8. This shows that the 
speaker is Christ. ‘7. He that overcometh. Here for the first time, after the close of the seven epis- 


500 REVELATION. 


£Ch. KXT. 





abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, 
and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall 
have their part in the lake which burneth with fire 
and brimstone; which is the second death. 

9 And there came unto me one of the seven 
angels which had the seven vials full of the seven 
last plagues, and talked with me, saying, Come 
hither, I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb’s wife. 

10 And he carried me away in the spirit to a 
great and high mountain, and shewed me* that 
great city, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of 
heaven from God, 

11 Having the glory of God: and her light was 
like unto a stone most precious, even like a jasper- 
stone, clear as crystal; 

12 And had a wall great and high, and had 
twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and 
names written thereon, which are the names of the 
twelve tribes of the children of Israel. 

13 On the east, three gates; on the north, three 
gates; on the south, three gates; and on the west, 
three gates. 

‘14 And the wall of the city had twelve founda- 
tions, and in them the names of the twelve apostles 
of the Lamb. 

15 And he that talked with me had” a golden 
reed to measure the city, and the gates thereof, and 
the wall thereof. 





a Ezek. 4:8. 





6 Ezek. 40:3; Zech. 2:1; Rey. 11:1. 


the fearful, and unbeliev- 
ing, and abominable, and 
murderers, and fornica- 
tors, and sorcerers, and 
idolaters, and all liars, 
their part shall be in the 
lake that burneth with fire 
and brimstone; which is 
the second death. 
And there came one of 9 
the seven angels who had 
the seven bowls, who were 
laden with the seven last 
plagues; and he spake with 
me, saying, Come hither, I 
will shew thee the bride, 
the wife of the Lamb. And 
he carried me away in the 
Spirit to a mountain great 
and high, and shewed me 
the holy city Jerusalem, 
coming down out of heaven 
from God, having the glory 11 
of God: her light was like 
unto a stone most precious, 
as it were a jasper stone, 
clear as crystal: having a 
wall great and high; hav- 12 
ing twelve gates, and at the 
gates twelve angels; and 
the names written thereon, 
which are the names of the 
twelve tribes of the chil- 
dren of Israel: on the east 
were three gates; and on 
the north three gates, and 
on the south three gates: 
and on the west three gates. 
And the wall of the city 
had twelve foundations, 
and on them twelve names 
of the twelve apostles of 
the Lamb. And he that 15 
spake with me had for a 
measure a golden reed to 
measure the city, and the 
gates thereof, and the wall 


14 








tles of chapters 2 and 3, do we have the promise to him who overcomes. 


8. But the fearful and 


unbelieving. Those wedded to sin have no place in the glorious home prepared for the saints. “The 
fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idola- 
ters, and all liars,” have undergone the second death, the death that has no resurrection, and can never 
enter or disturb the holy peace of the glorious city. 

9-14. There came unto me one, etc. This is one of the angels of the vials of the wrath of God. 
See chap.16. They did their work as wrath angels before the judgment, and are now seen engaged in 
other work. I will shew thee the Bride, the Lamb’s wife. The glorified church henceforth to be 
united with her Lord. 10. He carried me away in the spirit. He seemed to be stationed on a high 
» mountain and there to see a mighty city descending out of heaven. The angel said ‘‘ I will shew thee the 
Bride,” and he showed him a beautiful city. The harlot of chapter 17 was a great, wicked city, ‘‘ Mystery, 
Babylon the Great,” while the Bride is a great city also, the “ holy Jerusalem from heaven.” 11. Hav- 
ing the glory of God. Lighted by the divine presence and glory. We cannot follow all the details of 
its splendor, but they are designed to show that it exhibited a splendor such as mortal eye has never 
seen. The walls are of jasper, the gates of pearl, the foundations of precious stones and the streets 
paved with gold. The dimensions are immense, beyond even human conception, and its gates stand open 
night and day, The names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb are written upon its foundations, and of 
the tribes of Israel upon its gates. 12. Twelve gates, As many as there were tribes and apostles. 
Twelve angels. As gate-keepers to prevent the unclean from entrance. Names written thereon. 
The names of the twelve tribes of Israel. These were typical of the true Israel, the saints, and shows that 
all who belong to the true Israel will enter. 14. The wall of the city had twelve foundations. 
The twelve apostles of the Lamb are foundations of the Church, Jesus Christ being the chief corner-stone. 

15-21. Andhe . had a golden reed to measure the city. The reed is a divine measure and 


CHE XOKR TT REVELATION. 501 


b thereof. And the city lieth 16 
16 And the city lieth foursquare, and the length (onediase dat ena 


is as large as the breadth. And he measured the | thereof is as great as the 


h: 2 
city with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs: the) the “city ‘with’ the tecd, 


- twelve thousand furlongs 
length, and the breadth, and the height of it are tw Teeth andthe breath 
equal. and the height thereof are 


: equal. And he measured 17 
17 And he measured the wall thereof, an hundred | tie wait thereof, a hundred 


90, . ita yy re | and forty and four cubits, 
and forty and four cubits, according to the measure Pye ie cee 
of a man, that is, of the angel. aman, that is, of an angel. 


18 And the building of the wall of it was of jas-| $2 the building eae is 
per: and the city was pure gold, like unto clear | #4 the city was pure gold, 


like unto pure glass. “The 19 
glass. foundations of the wall of 
19 And?* the foundations of the walls of the city | HP nianer Oe Weclon 
were garnished with all manner of precious stones. | Hones. Tie frst founda. 
The first foundation was jasper; the second, sap-| ona, sapphire; the third, 
phire; the third, a chalcedony; the fourth, AM tcmaiae the alae see 
emerald; cn 


20 The fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, 
OpaZ ; , chryso- 
seventh, chrysolite ; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, aa praso: tke ebsventn. ia. 


cinth, the twelfth, ame- 
topaz: the tenth, a chrysoprasus; the eleventh, a) fire ee ee ae ot 


jacinth; the twelfth, an amethyst. gates were twelve pearls: 
5 é ne ne severa. 
21 And the twelve gates were twelve pearls; | gates was of one pearl: and 


; i) q the street of the city was 
every several gate was of one pearl,” and .the street dare ncld av ibworo ena: 


of the city was pure gold, as it were transparent parent glass. And I saw 22 
no temple therein; for the 
glass. Lora God the Almighty, 


22 And° I saw no temple therein: for the Lord | 274 the Lamb, are the tem- 
God Almighty and the ears are the temple of it. ee as the a8 ¢ 
23 And® the city had no need of the sun, neither 
of the moon, to shine in it; for the glory of God 
did lighten it, and the Lamb és the light thereof. 


24 And® the nations of them which are saved 


alsa. 54:11. 6 Rev 22:2. ¢ John 4:23; 1 Cor. 13:12; 15:28. d Isa. 24:23. eIsa. 60:33; 66:12. 




















the city is to correspond to the measure. In chapter 11 the church is measured with a reed. Both the 
earthly and the heavenly church must agree with the divine plan. 16. And the city lieth four 
square. It is regular and symmetrical. Twelve thousand furlongs. I suppose that these vast 
dimensions, a number twelve times one thousand, both favorite Hebrew numbers, are intended to indicate 
the vastness of the city, rather than its exact size. 17. The wall thereof, an hundred and forty 
and four cubits. Again we have twelve times twelve, the square of a favorite and sacred number. The 
city has twelve gates, twelve angels, twelve foundations, and a wall twelve times twelve cubits high. 
That is, of anangel. The measure of aman and of an angel will be the same in the New Jerusalem. 
18. The wall of it was jasper. A brightly radiant stone. See verse 11. The city was pure gold. 
The symbols indicate that the city is beautiful and rich beyond conception. The costliest materials 
known to mortals are named in order to give us some idea. 19. And the foundations of the wall of 
the city were garnished. They were adorned with precious stones. The twelve apostolic foundations 
present every spiritual grace and beauty. The various stones named are among the most precious known 
to the ancients. 21. And the twelve gates were twelve pearls. Each gate composed of a single 
pearl.. And the street of the city. The streets were paved with pure gold. As it were transparent. 
Transparency is the symbol of purity. 

22-27. AndIsaw no temple therein. John saw no temple in the city, such as at Jerusalem. It 
wasalltemple. God and the Lamb were present in it everywhere and every spot was holy. Wherever the 
knee was bowed the Lord was present to see and hear. The whole of the New Jerusalem will be an abode 
of praise. 23. And the city had no need of the sun. Night never settles down to shut out its 
splerdor, and eternal light, springing from the brightness of God and the Lamb, precludes the need of a 


502 REVELATION. 


shall walk in the light of it: and the kings of the 
earth do bring their glory and honour into it. 

25 And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by 
day; for* there shall be no night there. 

26 And they shall bring the glory and honour of 
the nations into it. 

27 And” there shall in no wise enter into it any 
thing that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh 
abomination, or maketh a lie; but they which are 
written in the Lamb’s book¢ of life. 





CHAPTER XXII. 


The New Jerusalem (Continued). 


SUMMARY.—The River of the Water of Life: The Tree of Life. The Di- 
vine Light of the City. Its Heavenly Purity. The Lord’s Promise to 
Come. The Church Says Come. The Curse Upon Those Who Add to 
or Take from this Book. 


Epilogue. 


1 And he shewed me‘ a pure river of water of 
life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne 
of God and of the Lamb. 

2 In the midst of the street of it, and on either 
side of the river, was there the* tree of life, which 
bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruit 
every month: and the leaves of the tree were! for 
the healing of the nations. 





[Ch. XXII. 


neither of the moon, to 
shine upon it: for the glory 
of God did lighten it, and 
the lamp thereof is the 
Lamb. And the nations 24 
shall walk amidst the light 
thereof: and the kings of 
the earth do bring their 
glory into it. And the 25 
gates thereof shall in no 
wise be shut by day (for 
there shall be no night 
there): and they shall bring 26 
the glory and the honour 
of the nations into it: and 27 
there shall in no wise enter 
into it any thing unclean, 
or he that’ maketh an 
abomination and a lie: but 
only they which are writ- 
ten in the Lamb’s book of 
life. And he shewed me a22 
river of water of life, bright 
as crystal, proceeding out 
of the throne of God and of 
the Lamb, in the midst of 
the street thereof. Andon 2 
this side of the river and 
on that was the tree of life, 
bearing twelve manner of 
fruits, yielding its fruit 
every month: and the 
leaves of the tree were for 
the healing of the nations. 





@ Isa. 60:20. 6 Isa. 35:8; 52:1; Joel 3:17, c Psa. 69:28; Dan. 12:1, Phil. 4:3; 


Ezek. 47:1; Zech. 14-8; John 7:38,39. e Gen. 2:9; Rey. 2:7. 


Rev. 3:53 13:8; 20:12. 
Ff Rev. 21:24. 


d@ Psa. 38:63 





sSunormoon. 24. And the nations 
the light of the city. The kings. 
them offerings to the New Jerusalem. 25. And the 
The gates were never shut. 


- walk in the light of it. The redeemed of all 
The idea is that all who have earthly dignities and honors shall make 


gates of it shall not be shut at all by day. 
This implies, first, that the city has no fear. of any foes. 


nations enjoy 


These have all been 


conquered and subdued. The struggles have been ended forever and no enemies remain to invade its 


happy precincts. It implies, in the second place, that ‘‘the nations of the saved” 
There is always admittance freely to those ‘who have the right to enter in thr 


ean always enter. 
ough the gate into the city.” 


26. They shall bring the glory and the honour. All nations are represented as contributing to 
increase its glory, as the nations pay tribute to an earthly capital. 2'7. There shallin no wise enter. 


Nothing sinful or unclean shall ever enter, “neither whatever worketh abom 


they that are written in the Lamb’s book of life.” 
1,2. And he shewed me a pure river of water of life. 


the Son. 2. In the midst of the street of it. 
It is the river of life that runs in the street. 


ination, or maketh a lie; but 


A symbol of the eternal life flowing from 
the Son of God as a fountain, which has been bestowed upon all who dwell in the heay 
as crystal. Radiant with glory. The shining light which comes from the ri 
heavenly life. Proceeding. The fountain of this life is the throne of God 


enly city. Bright 
ver shows the glory of the 
and it has been bestowed by 


In the Revision this is attached to the preceding verse. 
On each side of the river, watered by it, st 
life . . yielding its fruit every month. The thought is that it is always fruit 


ands the tree of 
ful, not limited to 


certain seasons of fruit bearing. The leaves of the tree were for the healing, ete. Weare not to 
conclude that there were diseases to be healed, but that in the city were the means which banished dis- 
ease and death. The student cannot fail to trace the correspondence with the home of the sinless race in 
Eden. There was there “ariver that went out of Eden to water the garden.” Here thereisa river, “ bright 
as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and the Lamb.” There was a tree of life in Paradise. In 
the New Jerusalem, on either side of the river stands the tree of life bearing twelye manner of fruits, or 
rather fruit twelve times a year, every month. The river and the tree are symbols of the life bestowed by 
the grace of God. The river flows from the throne of God and the Lamb; from the fountain whence life 


Ch. XXIIT.] REVELATION. 


3 And* there shall be no more curse: but the? 
throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it; and 
his servants shall serve him. 

4 And® they shall see his face; and his name 
shall be in their foreheads. 

5 And there shall be no night there; and they 
need no candle, neither light of the sun; for* the 
Lord God giveth them light: and they® shall reign 
for ever and ever. 

6 And he said unto me, These sayings are faith- 
ful and true. And thet Lord God of the holy 
prophets sent his angel to shew unto his servants 
the things which must shortly be done. 


7 Behold, I come quickly: blessed zs he that. 


keepeth the sayings of the prophecy of this book. 

8 And L John saw these things, and heard them. 
And when I had heard and seen, I fell down to 
worship before the feet of the angel which shewed 
me these things. 

9 Then saith he unto me, See thou do it not: for 
Tam thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren the 
prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of 
this book: worship God. 


f 





503 


And there shall be no curse 
any more: and the throne 
of God and of the Lamb 
shall be therein: and his 
servants shall do him serv- 
ice; and they shall see his 
face; and his name shall be 
on their foreheads. And 
there shall be night no 
more; and they need no 
beet of lamp, neither light 
of sun: for the Lord God 
shall give them light: and 
they shall reign for ever 
and ever. 

And he said unto me, 
These words are faithful 
and true: and the Lord, the 
God of the spirits of the 
prophets, sent his angel to 
shew unto his servants the 
things which must shortly 
come to pass. And behold, 
Leome quickly. Blessed is 
he that keepeth the words 
of the prophecy of this 
book. 

And I John am he that 
heard and saw these things. 
And when I heard and saw, 
I fell down to worship be- 
fore the feet of the angel 
which shewed me_ these 
things. And he saith unto 
me, See thou do it not: T 
am a fellow-servant with 
thee and with thy brethren 
the prophets, and with 
them which keep the words 
of this book: worship God. 


3 


4 
5 


4 


© 





aZech. 14:11. 6 Ezek. 48:35. ¢ Matt. 5:8; 1 Cor. 13:12; 1John 3:2. 


d Psa, 36:9; 


84:11. e Dan. 7:27. fHeb.1 


sl. 





and immortality come. 


and a tree of life. Christ is the life, 
attractive features in an oriental city, 
bliss that shall pervade the heavenly city. 

8-5. And there shall be no more curse. 
has ever blighted the life of man, must be ascribed to sin. 
spirit, which was not due, either directly or indirectly, to transgression. 
of the Celestial City, 
God’s finger. It shall always be seen and known that they 
there. The city isa city of light lighted 
soul shall have no nights of sorrow there. 
assistants in the rule of the glorified earth. 

6,7. These sayings are faithful and true. 
remains is intended to emphasize the ‘‘sayings”’ 
These words are repeated in verses 12 and 20. 
the reference is to his coming to work out “ the 
final coming, which was not far away according 
sayings. Such an one will be found faithful when the Lord comes. 

8,9. I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel. 
19:10. There John attempts to worship the angel and is prevented. 


of any being, earthly or heavenly, who is not divine. 
10-12. Sealnot the sayings of the prophecy of this book. 
-them and store them away. But they are not to be hidden. 


The tree yields its fruit at all times, so that the supply 
about the tree is healthful. Even the leaves are for the healing of the nations. 
and all refer in some way to Christ. Trees and rivers presented most 
and are beautiful emblems of the full supplies of life, gra 


there will be no more pain. 4. They shall see his face. 
shall enjoy the visible presence of the Lamb. His name shall be in their foreheads. 
are his. 5. And there shall be no night 
by the divine presence, but the meaning goes beyond this. The 
They shall reign forever and ever. 


The time h 


never fails. 


Everything 
There is a book, a river 


ce and 


The curse came upon those in Paradise on account of 
their sins. There shall be no more curse, for no sin shall ever enter the New Jerusalem. Every curse that 
Not a throe of pain has ever been felt by the 
human body, not a pang has ever pierced the human heart, or a shadow of sorrow passed over the human 
As sin ean never pass the gates 
See Matt.5: 8. They 
Written by 


They shall be Christ’s 


The Visions of Revelation have now ended. What 
of the preceding chapters. ”, Behold I come quickly. 
It is the coming of Christ that is meant. 
things that must shortly be done,” or he may refer to his 
to the divine measure. Blessed is he that keepeth the 


It may be that 


See on these two verses the notes on 
Among the idolatrous tendencies 


that early showed themselves in the church was angel worship. This not only rebukes it, but the worship 


- To seal them would mean to conceal 
ad come for the fulfillment to 


504 REVELATION. 


(Ch SXXIL.. 








10 And?* he saith unto me, Seal not the sayings | 


of the prophecy of this book; for the time is at 
hand. 

11 He? that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and 
he which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he 
that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and he 
that is holy, let him be holy still. 

12 And, behold, I come quickly; and my reward¢ 
és with me, to give every man according as his work 
shall be. 

13 I‘ am Alpha and Omega, 
the end, the first and the last. 

14 Blessed* are they that do his commandments, 
that they may have right to the tree of life, and 
may enter in through the gates into the city. 

15 For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and 
whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and 
whosoever loveth and maketh a lie. 

16 I* Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto 
you these things in the churches. I am£ the root 
and the offspring of David, and" the bright and 
morning star. 

17 And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And 
let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that 
is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take 
the water of life freely. 

18 For I testify unto every man that heareth the 
words of the prophecy of this book, If) any man 


the beginning and 





And he saith unto me, 
Seal not up the words of 
the prophecy of this book: 
for the time is at hand. He 
that is unrighteous, let him 
do unrighteousness still: 
and he that is filthy, let 
him be made filthy still: 
and he that is righteous, 
let him do righteousness 
still: and he that is holy, 
let him be made holy still. 
Behold, I come quickly; 
and my reward is with me, 
to render to each man ac- 
cording as his work is. I 
am the Alpha and the 
Omega, the first and the 
last, the beginning and the 
end, Blessed are they that 
wash their robes, that they 
may have the right to come 
to the tree of life, and may 
enter in by the gates into 
the city Without are the 
dogs, and the sorcerers, 
and the fornicators, and 
the murderers, and the 
idolaters, and every one 
fee loveth and maketh a 
ie. 

I Jesus have sent mine 
angel to testify unto you 
these things for ‘the 
churches. I am the root 
and the offspring of David, 
the bright, the morning 
star. 

And the Spirit and the 
Bride say, Come. And he 
that heareth, let him say, 
Come. And he that is 
athirst, let him come: he 
that will, let him take the 
water of life freely. 

I testify unto every man 
that heareth the words of 


10, 


11: 


18: 





@ Dan. 8:26; 12:4,9, 
g Isa. 11:13 Jer. 23:5,6. 


6 Ezek. 3:27; 2 Tim. 3:18. 
Ah Num, 24:17; Zech. 6:12. 


cIsa.40:10. dIsa. 44:6. 


e Dan. 12:12. 
iIsa. 65:1; John 7:37. j Deut. 4:2: 12:32; Proy. 30:6. 


f 1 Pet. 3:22), 





begin. 11, He that is unjust, let him be unjust still. 
that is fixed in injustice and unrighteousness, let him 
ceding visions show that he shall reap the seed that he has sown. 


This is nof a command, but a warning. He: 
goon. The future judgments revealed in the pre- 
But the holy and true, let them be- 


encouraged to press on; they have their reward. The reason that the saints may be sure of this is next 
Then the unjust and the holy” 


given. 12. Behold, I come quickly, 
shall each be rewarded according to his works. 
13-16. I am Alpha and Omega. 


signification. 14. Blessed are they that wash their robes. 


and my reward is with me. 


See notes on 1: 8. The three titles given here have a similar: 
See the Revision. Those who have 


their robes washed are those whose sins are forgiven, and who obey Christ. These have the right to 


enter the city, for no sinner can enter there. 15. Without are dogs. 


taken to represent one type of sinners. 


In an oriental city the dogs, an 
unclean animal, are seen in great numbers in the Streets, and are a disagreeable feature. These are: 


Others with different characteristics are also given. All are 


without. None of them ever pass through the portals of the New Jerusalem. 16. I Jesus. The Lord. 


is still Jesus, that is the Savior. 


Have sent mine angel to testify. See: 1. 


Here at the close where 


the Lord speaks in personal communication to J ohn, he speaks of himself by the name Jesus. Iam the 


root and the offspring of David. See Chap. 5: 5. 
17-20. And the Spirit and the bride say, Come, 
come quickly.” Inverse 20 John repeats that the Lord saith, 


Twice (verses 7 and 12) the Lord has said, ‘I 
“Surely I come quickly.” The subject of 


these verses is the coming of the Lord. The Bridegroom has promised to come, and in verse 17 the Bride: 


responds to the promise of the Bridegroom by inviting him to 
stands with hands extended, “loving his appearing,” 
Lord. Let him that heareth. Let all who have 


come. The church, filled with the Spirit, 
inviting the coming, and eager for the coming of the 
heard the gracious promise join in the invitation and. 


Ch. XXII.] REVELATION. 


505. 





shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him | 


the plagues that are written in this book: 

19 And if any man shall take away from the 
words of the book of this prophecy, God? shall take 
away his part out of the book of life, and out of the 
holy city, and from the things which are written in 
this book. 

20 He which testifieth these things saith, Surely” 





the prophecy of this book, 
If any man shall add unto 
them, God shall add unto 
him the plagues which are 
written in this book: and 
if any man shall take away 
from the words of the book 
of this prophecy, God shall 
take away his part from 
the tree of life, and out of 
the holy city, which are 
written in this book. 

He which testifieth these 





I come quickly. Amen. Even so, come, Lord CE OP ey eoaee 
Jesus. : ‘ as ee of the Lord 
21 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with | Jesus be with the saints. 
you all. Amen. eek 
a EX. 32:38. 6 Heb. 9:28. 





20° 


say “Come.” Lethimthatis athirst come. Let all thirsty for the water of life come and partake of. 
it freely. Whosoever will. To will to come is the essential thing in order to coming to Christ. 18. 
If any man add to these things. See Deut. 4: 2, and 12: 32, The whole spirit of the Scripture is. 
against adding to or taking from the Lord’s words. This is a warning against spurious revelations. 
19. If any man take from. This could be done by denying, or explaining away the words of 
prophecy. To do either is a deadly sin. Indeed, to tamper with the Divine word in any way is sinful. 
20. He which testifieth. It is John who now speaks and exults that the Lord has promised soon to 
come. He adds his prayer for the coming. 21. The grace of our Lord. The usual apostolical. 


benediction. 


KEY THOUGHTS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT BOOKS. 


The key thought, or primary object of each New Testament book, according to Dr. 
‘George F. Pentecost, is as follows: 

Marruew—Jesus the Son of God and Lord according to Old Testament promise. 

Marx—Jesus is the Savior who Meets Man’s Needs. 

Luxe—The Son of Man in his Service among Men. The World’s Savior. 

Joun—The Son of God in the Moral Glory of his Person and Life. 

Acrs—Christ in Heaven, and the Energy of the Holy Spirit on Earth. What Christ 
‘Continued to Do and to Teach by His Spirit in the Apostles. How the Church was 
Gathered and Built. The Progress of the Kingdom. 

Romans—Christianity Unfolded in its Doctrine. Righteousness; How Man can be 
Justified before God. ; 

I. Corrnru1ans—Church Order and Discipline. Our Relations to Each Other in the 
‘Church. 

II. Corinrutans—Christian Ministry and Superiority over Circumstances. Our 
Relation to the Word and to Them. 

Gatatians—Christian Blessing and Liberty contrasted in the Law. Stand Fast in 
the Liberty wherewith Christ has made you Free. The Spirit in the Beginning, Middle 
and End of Christian Life and Power. 

Epuestans—Christ the Measure of Christian Standing and Blessing. Together with 
Christ. 

Puiipprans—Christian Experience. In the Face of Christ. Perfection that is not 
Perfect. One Thing to Do. 

Cotosstans—The Church’s Glories and Fullness in Christ her Head. 

I Tuessatonrans—Christ, coming to and for the Church, and her Eternal Blessedness. 

II Tuessaton1ans—Christ coming with his Saints. The Eternal J udgment of Unbe- 
lievers. 

I Timoray—Church Order according to God. 

II Timornay—Church Disorder and the Individual Pathway. 

Trrus—Christian Qualification for the Ministry and Godly Conduct. 

Puitemon—Christian Love. Counting upon Love between Brother and Brother. 

Hesrews—Our Apostle’s Priest, Sacrifice and Witness. 

James—The Common Sense of Christianity, or Christian Morality in and out of the 
‘Church. 

I Prrer—God’s Righteous Government in Relation to Saints. 

II Perer—God’s Righteous Judgment upon the Public Christian Profession. 

I Joun—Christ the Eternal Life and Power of Communion with God. 

II Jonn—Christ and the Truth the Safeguard against Heresy. 

III Joun—Christian Hospitality to the Saints and especially to Laborers. 

JupE—Apostasy Traced down to the Last Days. 

ReyeLarion—Christ Assuming the A ae of the World. Things to Come. 

506 


QUOTATIONS FROM THE OLD TESTAMENT IN THE NEW 
TESTAMENT. 


The close connection between the Old and New Testaments is shown by the number 
of times the Old Testament is quoted in the New. Bagster’s Bible gives 889 quotations 
and allusions. George F. Pentecost gives the number at 855, a few of the allusions 
given by Bagster’s Bible being disputed. Every book of the Old Testament is quoted 
except Obadiah, Nahum, Zephaniah and Esther. There is only one quotation from the 
Song of Solomon. According to Dr. Pentecost the number of Old Testament quotations 
and allusions in each New Testament book is as follows: 





The Gospel of Matthew,....--..- 96 Times. | 1 Thessalonians,........ iste rsxate ete 2 Times. 
The Gospel of Mark, ......-..-- SA 2 CS eames teverercieteretsy aes ya ATER 
‘The Gospel of Luke,.........++- ifs UG Shen edanyhrros omens oon oC amabo’ on Grapes 
‘The Gospel of John,.....----- rs AO ANS 2 pee cere races man fr on tore ie ys Meta 
Acts of the Apostles, ........--- Dy) we PAG DTS WSS, aeperecsrevercor a Nelarelsteiere ses Somme 
Romans, ...--seereceeerseteeees Tee Alcnoots\:b aint co doOie o¢ Ogos ae Gr es 
1 Corinthians,......--seeeereees asin yt Thad SC Peewee btn pect goso MOE 20 
2 ee oc. x aV'et ereysvsieuod ode) she°8) = Ace ar Vipin Dapoodheecchboe luo psa oS TOES 
Galatians). ..+ 20. cieenesccnes cess t6. i Axel ticipate mavobpenos ct oboront ox (en 
Ephesians, ..-++++eeerte rere cess Hh Revelation,.....csseseeessesere 249 
Philippiang,.....-.eeeeeereeeres Sears ‘eke 
CColOSSIANS,..- sees eeeeseerreees pi MT OGA iis araccieiere elelole slelsfateisteiisiste 855 Times. 


CHRONOLOGY OF ACTS AND THE EPISTLES. 


(From the Bible Hand-Book.) 


Descent of the Holy Spirit...... 
Setting Up of the Church....... 
Hirst) Persecutions.............: 
se UMNO eeU SADAATI A oieye,oncleue)scsrale «ite 
Conversion of Saul 
First Gentile Converted......... 
Founding of Church at Antioch. 
Writing of Matthew's Gospel... 
James Killed by Herod......... 
JEP ARIESS) (CEUNES Sere Sales A eeoe eran 
His 1st Miss’y Journey Begun... 
Council at Jerusalem........... 
Paul’s 2nd Miss’y Journey Begun. 
Writing of I. Thessalonians..... 
Writing of II. Thessalonians..... 
Third Miss’y Journey Begun.... 
Writing of I. Corinthians....... 
Writing of Galatians............ 
Writing of II. Corinthians...... 
Writingof Romansss. 64.5.0... 
Writing of Luke’s Gospel....... 
. Paul’s Arrest at Jerusalem 
Paulvate Caesarea. cces| as uate sans 
Paul Starts for Rome. ....... ... 
atl hedches IvOMEC: vs ves alee: 


61 


(508) 





.| Paul’s Imprisonment at Rome... 
.| Paul Writes Ephesians.......... 
. | Paul Writes Philippians......... 
.| Paul Writes Colossians.......... 


Paul Writes Philemon.......... 


. | James Writes his Epistle... -... 
MUL Peters Wittens eee ase 
MA CLS Written: 2... ye eee ee 
45, 
47. 
48. 
50. 
51. 
52. 
53. 
54. 
57. 
57. 
58. 
58. 
59. 
58. 
59. 
60. 


Paul ise Ae qiibie diester 1a 
He Visits Various Places........ 
Paul Writes Hebrews........... 
Paul Writes I. Timothy......... 
Paul Warites Ditis-i. 2 aeeere tae 
Writing of Mark’s Gospel....... 
Dieters Written. ee merece 
Paul’s 2d Imprisonment at Rome. 
Th ieae tays WW itibem)cn ey cannes 
Martyrdom oi: Battll ss cseiecs ee ee 
Destruction of Jerusalem....... 
Jude’s Epistle Written.......... 
Writing of John’s Gospel....... 
Writing of John’s Three Epistles. 
John’s Visions at Patmos....... 
Revelations Written............ 
Death of John..... 


coer ner oeeoe 


ay ee 


62. 


100. 


CITIES AND TOWNS NAMED IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 
(From the Bible Hand-Book.) . 


I. In Jupma. 


1. Azotus: Near the Mediterranean; the ancient Ashdod, visited by Philip (Acts 
3:40). 

2. Bethlehem: Six miles south of Jerusalem; the birthplace of Jesus (Matt. 2: 1). 

3. Bethany: Near Jerusalem, on a slope of the Mount of Olives; the home of 
Mary, Martha and Lazarus (John 12: 1). 

4. Gaza: Near the Mediterranean, to which a road led from Jerusalem (Acts 
$3) 26). 

5, Emmaus: Four miles south of Jerusalem; the place to which the two disciples 
were walking when joined by Jesus (Luke 24: 18). : 

6. Joppa: On the Mediterranean; the port of Jerusalem where Peter saw a vision 
(Acts 11: 5). 

7, Jericho: In the valley of the J ordan, where Jesus restored sight to Bartimeeus 
(Mark 10: 46). 

8. Jerusalem: The Holy City, where all the great feasts were held (Luke 2: 41). 


Jie dbs: SAMARIA. 


1. Antipatris: East of Shechem; the place to which the guard conveyed Paul by 
night (Acts 23: 31). 

9. Cesarea; On the Mediterranean, where Paul made his defence before Agrippa 
(Acts 25). 

3. Sychar: In the valley between Ebal and Gerizim; the site of Jacob’s well 
(John 4: 5, 6). : 


III. In GALiver. 


1. Bethsaida; A village on the Sea of Galilee; the native place of Peter, Andrew 
and Philip (John 1: 44). 

2. Cana: A village four or five miles northeast of Nazareth, where Jesus performed 
his first miracle (John 2: 11). 

3, Capernaum: A city on the northwestern shore of the Sea of Galilee, where 
Jesus lived, and performed many miracles (Matt. 4: 18). 

4, Chorazin: A city on the northern shore of the Sea of Galilee, against which 
Jesus pronounced woes (Matt. 11: ZN) 

5. Magdala: A village on the western shore of the Sea of Galilee, visited by Jesus 
(Matt. 15: 39). 

6. Nazareth: A town among the hills, about midway between the Sea of Galilee 
and the Mediterranean; celebrated as the place where Jesus was brought up (Luke 
-4; 16). 

Vie Bite A village on a hill southeast of Nazareth, where Jesus raised to life the 


widow’s son (Luke 7: 12). ‘cae 


510 CITIES AND TOWNS. 





8. Ptolemais: On the Mediterranean, north of Mount Carmel, where Paul landed 
on his way to Jerusalem (Acts 21: 7). 

9. Tiberias: A city on the western shore of the Sea of Galilee, visited by Jesus 
(John 6: 1). 


IV. In Pere@a. 


1. Bethabara: A place east of the Jordan, nearly opposite Jericho, where John 
baptized (John 1: 28). 

2. Macherus: East of the Dead Sea; the place where John the Baptist was 
imprisoned and beheaded. Not named in the Bible. 


V. DeEcapo.uis. 


1, Bethsaida: On the northeastern shore of the Sea of Galilee; the place where 
Jesus fed the five thousand (Luke 9: 10-17). 

2. Gadara: A city south of the Sea of Galilee, which gave its name to the district 
—“the country of the Gadarenes’’ (Mark 5: 1). 

3. Gergesa: A little village east of the Sea of Galilee; the place near which the 
demoniacs were cured, and the swine drowned (Matt. 8: 28-34). 


AVES dhse PHG@NICIA. 


1. Tyre: The celebrated commercial city of antiquity, on the Mediterranean; on 
“the coasts’? of which Jesus cured the daughter of the Syro-Pheenician woman (Matt. 
15: 21-28). 

2. Sidon: A city on the Mediterranean, about twenty miles north of Tyre, in a 
region once visited by Jesus (Mark 7: 24), 


VII. In Synta. 


1. Damascus: On a fertile plain, watered by the Abana and Pharpar, east of the 
Anti-Libanus mountains; the place of the Apostle Paul’s conversion (Acts 9: 1-25). 

2. Antioch: On the river Orontes, seventeen miles from the Mediterranean, 
between the Taurus and Lebanon ranges of mountains; the seat of the first missionary 
church (Acts 11: 19-30), 


VIII. In Asta Minor. 


1. Antioch: A city in Pisidia, east of Ephesus, visited by Paul and Barnabas (Acts 
13: 14). 

2. Ephesus: A celebrated city one mile from the “igean Sea, where Paul preached 
for a long time (Acts 19), and one of the seven churches of Asia (Rey, 2:4). 

3. Derbe: A town in Lycaonia, visited by Paul and Barnabas (Acts 16: iD). 

4. Iconium: Sixty miles east of Antioch, where Paul and Barnabas preached (Acts 
14: 1-5). 

5. Lystra: Not far from Derbe, also visted by Paul and Barnabas; the home of 
Timothy (Acts 16: 1), and where the two missionaries were thought to be gods (Acts 
14: 8-12). ' 

6. Laodicea: The capital of Phrygia, and the seat of one of the churches to which 
a message was sent by John (Rey. 3: 14), 


CITIES AND TOWNS. 511 





7%. Miletus: The port of Ephesus, where Paul delivered a farewell address (Acts: 
20: 17-38). 

8. Myra; An important town of Lycia, where Paul changed ships on his journey 
to Rome (Acts 27: 5). 

9. Patara; A sea-port of Lycia, where Paul took ship for Phoenicia (Acts 21: 1, 2). 

10. Pergamos: A city of Mysia; the site of one of the seven churches of Asia 
(Rey. 2: 12). 

11. Perga: A city of Pamphylia, visited by Paul and Barnabas, and where Mark 
left them (Acts 18: 13). 

12. Philadelphia: A town on the borders of Lydia; the seat of one of the seven 
churches of Asia (Rev. 3:7). 

13. Smyrna: On the Agean Sea, forty miles north of Ephesus; the seat of one of 
the seven churches of Asia (Rey. 2: 8). 

14. Sardis: An important city in Lydia; the seat of one of the seven churches of 
Asia (Rev. 3:1). 

15. Troas: The ancient Troy, on the Mgean Séa, Ghost Paul in a vision received 
the call to Macedonia (Acts 16: 8-10). 

16. Tarsus: A city of Cilicia; the birthplace of the Apostle Paul (Acts 9: 11). 

17. Thyatira: A city of Lydia, and the seat of one of the seven churches of Asia 
(Rey. 2: 18). 


IX. In Maceponia. 


1. Amphipolis: Thirty-three miles from Philippi, and three miles from the Hgean 
Sea, visited by Paul (Acts 17: 1). 

2, Apollonia: A city thirty miles from Amphipolis, where Paul remained one day 
Acts jel): 

3. Berea: A small city on the eastern side of Mount Olympus, where Paul 
preached, and where the people examined the Scriptures to see if his preaching was. 
true (Acts 17: 10-13). 

4. Philippi: A flourishing city nine miles from the Mgean Sea, celebrated as the 
first foothold of the gospel in Europe (Acts 16: 12-40). 

5. Thessalonica; At the head of the Thermaic Gulf; an important commercial 
centre, and the scene of Paul’s labor (Acts 17: 1-9). 


X. In GREECE. 


1 Athens: One of the most celebrated cities of the world, situated five miles 
northeast of the Saronic Gulf, a part of the AZgean Sea. It was the seat of Grecian 
learning, and the place where Paul delivered one of his most famous discourses (Acts 
17: 15-34). 

2. Corinth; An important city forty miles west of Athens, where Paul preached, 
and the seat of one of the leading churches (Acts 18: 1-18). 


XI. In THe Isies oF THE SEA. 


1. Fair Haven: A harbor in the island of Crete; a place where the ship on which 


Paul was sailing anchored (Acts 27: 8). 
2. Mitylene: On the island of Lesbos, in the ee Sea, where Paul’s ship 


anchored for a night (Acts 20: 14). 


512 CITIES AND TOWNS. 


3. Paphos: On the western shore of Cyprus; visited by Paul and Barnabas (Acts 
TBAB). ; 

4, Salamis: On the eastern shore of Cyprus; visited by Paul and Barnabas (Acts 
Aa) 
5. Syracuse: A celebrated city on the eastern shore of Sicily, where Paul stopped 
‘on his journey to Rome (Acts 28: 12). 





4 
XII. Ivany. 5 


¥. Rhegium: A city on the southern extremity of Italy, where the ship in which 
Paul was journeying touched (Acts 28: 13). 

2. Puteoli: The leading port of Italy, where Paul disembarked (Acts 28: 13). 

3. Appii Forum: A village on the Appian Way, forty-three miles from Rome, 
where Christians met Paul (Acts 28: 15). 

4. Three Taverns: A place eleven miles from Rome, where another band of Chris- 
tians met Paul (Acts 28:15). 

5. Rome: The great city of Italy, the capital of the Roman Empire, where Paul 
was taken for trial before Cesar (Acts 28:16), and where he was afterwards put to 
death. 


THEOLOGY LIBRARY 

SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 

AT CLAREMONT — 
CALIFORNIA 


09 
28. 
no 
2 


4, 
PY 


THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
sama le 


ah ee 


rs] 





LF 
‘ 








a. ae ; ay , 
." aa " a . 2 : ‘\ 
—— on r oo i : - AV 
» ”_ \ 
* pee : P 7 2 ; \) ¥ 
Ten a ; - Hi) ' 


hon 
’ 2 « a : ba Fj a he 
| aan fees = 


~ 
a 
x 


y+ Laselapes . 
ye en 


"te BGT Cs 
~ ‘ 





“oT i d RAB 
= 


wey, 





- 


= ae ay gy cos 








BS2088.A3 1889 $3 / copy 1/ vol 2 
Bible. N.T. English. Authorized. 1889. 
The people s New Testament : the common 


f 


/ ae 


Nee 
\ 


ra 


A 


s 


J 
hi 





y 
— 


\ Sy 


\ 


| 


Sp 
Oo 


BY PRINTED IN U. S.A. 
Me ; VW 3, 


S399 


THEOLOGY LIBRARY 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY AT CLAREMONT 


CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 


23-262-002 


ai) 
Da 


eae ee 
mate “ Wiehe 


he 





