DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 


DIVINITY  SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/worksofrevjohnwe30wesl 


THE 


WORKS 


O F T H E 


Rev.  JOHN  WESLEY,  M.  A. 

Late  Fellow  of  Lincoln-College , Oxford. 


Volume  XXX. 


BRISTOL: 

Printed  by  WILLIAM  PINE,  in  Wine-Street. 

MDCCLXXIV. 


/ 


[ 3 ] 


^rCrp~/ 

W b / 3 W & 


A N 

E X T R A C 

T 

OF  THE 

Rev.  Mr.  John  Wesley’s 

J O U R N A 

L, 

From  February  16,  x 755,  to  June 
1758. 

16, 

Number  IX. 

February  16,  1755. 


HAVING  beard  a confufed  account  from  a 
place  near  Camelford,  in  Cornwall,  I 
wrote  to  a friend  near  it,  and  received  the  fol- 
lowing anfwer. 

A 2 “According 


[ 4 ] 

“ According  to  your  defire,  I have  inquired 
into  the  particulars  of  the  late  affair  at  Dineboul 
quarry.  The  rock  is  about  thirty  yards  thick ; 
but  the  moft  valuable  part  of  the  ftone  lies  un- 
dermoft. 

There  were  nine  partners  who  {hared  the  ad- 
vantage of  this  part  of  the  quarry.  Being  greedy 
of  gain,  they  brought  out  as  much  of  the  under 
part  as  poffible ; and  the  rather,  becaufe  the 
time  for  which  they  had  hired  it  was  within  a 
month  of  expiring. 

* On  Monday  Dec.  2.  William  Lane,  John 
Lane,  William  Kellow,  and  five  more  ol  the 
partners,  met  in  the  morning,  and  fent  one  of 
their  number,  for  Theophilus  Kellow,  to  come 
to  work.  He  came,  but  was  fo  uneafy  he  could 
not  flay,  but  quickly  returned  home.  William 
Kellow  was  fent  lor  in  hafle,  and  went  to  look 
alter  his  mare,  which  had  caft  her  foal.  The 
other  feven  continued  labouring  till  twelve.  All 
the  workmen  ufually  dme  together.  But  thefe 
wrought  on,  when  the  reft  withdrew,  till  in  a mo- 
ment, they  were  covered,  with  rocks  of  all  fizes, 
falling  about  ten  yards,  fome  of  which  were 
thought  to  be  three  tons  weight.  William  Lane 
had  fome  years  fince  known  the  love  of  God. 
He  was  fitting,  cleaving  ftones,  when  the  rock 
calved  in  upon  him,  with  a concave  futface, 
which  juft  made  room  for  his  body.  Only  one 
edge  of  it  light  upon  him,  and  broke  one  of  his 

thigh 


r 

l 


5 ] 

thigh  bones.  When  they  dug  away  the  Hones, 
he  was  earneftly  praying  to  God,  and  confeftmg 
his  unfaithfulnefs.  As  foon  as  he  looked  up,  he 
began  exhorting  all  around,  inftantly  to  make 
their  peace  with  God.  His  bone  being  fet,  he 
foon  recovered  both  his  bodily  ftrength,  and  the 
peace  and  love  which  he  had  loft.  Another  who 
fatclofe  by  his  fide,  was  covered  over  and  killed 
at  once.  Clofe  to  him  John  Lane  (fon  of  Wil- 
liam) was  Handing : he  was  thrown  upon  his 
face,  he  knew  not  how,  and  a fnarp-edged  Hone 
pitched  between  his  thighs,  on  which  a huge 
rock  fell,  and  was  fufpended  by  it,  fo  as  to  fha- 
dow  him  all  over.  The  other  five  were  entirely 
dallied  in  pieces.’’  Doth  not  God  fave  thofe  that 
truft  in  him  ? 

Tuef.  April  1.  I rode  from  Briftol  to  a vil- 
lage named  Kingfwood  near  Wotton-Underedge. 
The  church  was  exceeding  full,  and  the  congre- 
gation was  ferious  and  uHl-behaved.  And  I had 
fince  the  fatisfaHion  of  being  informed,  that 
many  of  them  are  much  changed,  at  leaft,  in 
their  outward  behaviour. 

Wednef.  2.  With  fome  difficulty  we  reached 
Stanley : there  has  been  lately  a great  awakening 
in  this  country.  I never  faw  fitch  a congrega- 
tion here  before,  notwithftanding  the  wind  and 
rain.  And  all  prefent  feemed  to  receive  the 
word  with  gladnefs  and  reaainefs  of  mind. 
There  is  a folid,  ferious  people  in  thefe  parts, 
A g who 


[ 6 ] 

who  {land  their  ground  againfl  all  oppofition. 
The  warmed  oppofers  are  the  jacobites,  who  do 
not  love  us,  becaufe  we  love  King  George.  But 
they  profit  nothing;  for  more  and  more  people 
fear  God  and  honour  the  king. 

w e rode  on  Thurfday  in  the  afternoon 
through  heavy  rain,  and  almod  impa {fable  roads 
to  Evefham  : and  on  Friday  4.  to  Birmingham, 
a barren,  dry,  uncomfortable  place.  Mod  of  the 
feed  which  has  been  fown  for  fo  many  years,  the 
wild  boars  have  rooted  tip  : the  fierce,  unclean, 
brutifh,  blafphemous  Antinomians  have  utterly 
dellroyed  it.  And  the  m)Jiic  foxes  have  taken 
true  pains  to  fpoilw hat  remained,  with  their  new 
gofpel.  Yet  it  feems  God  has  a bleffing  for  this 
place  dill:  fo  many  dill  attend  the  preaching: 
and  he  is  eminently  prefent  with  the  fmall  num- 
ber that  is  left  in  the  lociety. 

Satur.  5.  I preached  at  Wednefbury,  and  at 
eight  on  Sunday  morning.  But  the  great  congre- 
gation afTembled  in  the  afternoon,  as  foon  as  the 
fervice  of  the  church  was  over,  with  which  we 
take  care  never  to  interfere.  A folemn  awefeem- 
ed  to  run  all  through  the  company  in  the  even- 
ing, when  I met  the  fociety-  We  had  indeed 
preached  the  gofpel  here  with  much  contention. 
But  the  fuccefs  overpays  the  labour. 

Mond.  7.  I was  advifed  to  take  the  Derbvfhire 
road  to  Mancheder.  We  baited  at  an  heufe  fix 
miles  beyond  Litchfield.  Obferving  a woman  fit- 
ting in  the  kitchen,  I alked,  “ At  e you  not  well  ?” 

And 


C 7 ] 


And  found  Hie  had  juft  been  taken  ill  (being  on 
her  journey)  with  all  the  fymptoms  of  an  ap- 
proaching pleurify.  She  was  glad  to  hear  of  an 
eafy,  cheap,  and  (almoft)  infallible  remedy,  an 
handful  of  nettles,  boiled  a few  minutes,  and  ap- 
plied warm  to  the  fide.  While  I was  fpeaking 
to  her,  an  elderly  man,  pretty  well  dreft,  came 
in.  Upon  enquiry,  he  told  us,  he  was  travelling, 
as  he  could,  towards  his  home,  near  Hounflow, 
in  hopes  of  agreeing  with  his  creditors,  to  whom 
he  had  furrendered  his  all.  But  how  to  get  on 
he  knew  not,  as  he  had  no  money,  and  had  caught 
a tertian  ague.  I hope  a wife  Providence  direfted 
this  wanderer  alfo,  that  he  might  have  a remedy 
for  both  his  maladies. 

* Soon  after  w-e  took  horfe  we  overtook  a 
poor  man,  creeping  forward  on  two  crutches.  I 
afked  whither  he  was  going?  He  faid  to- 
ward Nottingham,  where  his  wife  lived.  But 
both  his  legs  had  been  broke  while  he  was 
on  fhipboard.  And  he  had  now  fpent  all  his  mo- 
ney. This  man  likewife  appeared  exceeding 
thankful,  and  ready  to  acknowledge  the  hand  of 
God. 

In  the  afternoon  we  came  to  Barton-forge, 
where  a gentleman  of  Birmingham  has  fet  up  a 
large  iron-work,  and  fixt  five  or  fix  families,  with 
a ferious  man  over  them,  who  loft  near  all  he 
had  in  the  great  riot  at  Wednefbury.  Moft  of 
them  are  feeking  to  fave  their  fouls.  I preached 
in  the  evening,  not  to  them  only,  but  to  many 
A 4 gathered 


[ 8 ] 


gathered  from  all  parts,  and  exhorted  them  to 
love  and  help  one  another. 

Tuef.  8.  I had  defigned  to  go  (trait  on  to  Hay- 
field.  But  one  from  Afhbourn  preft  me  much 
to  call  there  : which  accordingly  I did  at  feven 
in  the  morning,  and  preached  to  a deeply  ferious 
congregation.  Seventeen  or  eighteen  then  de- 
fired  to  join  in  a fociety,  to  whom  I fpoke  feve- 
rally,  and  was  well  pleafed  to  find,  that  near 
half  cf  them  knew  the  pardoning  love  of  God. 
One  of  the  firll  I fpoke  to  was  Mifs  Berisford : 
a fweet,  but  fhort-lived  flower  ! 

* Through  much  hail,  rain  and  wind,  we  got 
to  Mr.  B ’s  at  Hayfield,  about  five  in  the  af- 

ternoon, His  favourite  daughter  died  fome 
hours  before  we  came;  fuch  a child  as  is  fcarce 
heard  of  in  a century.  All  the  family  informed 
me  of  many  remarkable  circumfiances,  which 
elfe  would  have  feemed  incredible.  She  fpake 
exceeding  plain,  yet  very  feldom  ; and  then  only 
a few  words.  She  was  fcarce  ever  feen  to  laugh, 
or  heard  to  utter  a light  or  trifling  wTord.  She 
could  not  bear  any  that  did,  nor  any  one  who 
behaved  in  a light  or  unferious  manner.  If  any 
fuch  offered  to  kifs  or  touch  her,  fine  would  turn 
away,  and  fay,  “ I don’t  like  you.”  If  her  bro- 
ther or  fifters  fpoke  angrily  to  each  other,  or 
behaved  triflingly,  fire  either  flrarply  reproved 
(when  that  feemed  needful]  or  tenderly  intreated 
them  to  give  over.  If  fhe  had  fpoke  too  flrarply 
to  any,  fire  would  humble  herfelf  to  them,  and 

not 


[ 9 ] 

not  reft  till  they  had  forgiven  her.  After  her 
health  declined,  fhe  was  particularly  pleafed  with 
hearing  that  hymn  fung,  “Abba,  Father:”  and 
would  be  frequently  fmging  that  line  herfelf, 

“ Abba  Father,  hear  me  cry.” 

On  Mond.  April  7.  without  any  ftruggle,  fbe 
fell  afleep,  having  lived  two  years  and  fix 
months. 

Wednef.  9.  In  the  evening  I preached  at 
Manchefter.  The  mob  was  tolerably  quiet,  as 
long  as  I was  fpeaking,  but  immediately  after, 
raged  horribly.  This  I find,  has  been  their  man- 
ner  for  fome  time.  No  wonder  : fince  the  good 
juftices  encourage  them. 

Thurf.  10.  I rode  to  Hayfield  again,  to  bury 

Mr.  B ’s  child.  Abundance  of  people  were 

gathered  together,  and  I found  uncommon  li- 
berty in  preaching.  Who  would  have  looked 
for  fuch  a congregation  as  this,  in  the  Peak  of 
Derbyfhire. 

I returned  to  Manchefter,  the  next  day,  and 
had  a quiet  congregation  both  that  evening  and 
the  following. 

Sund.  13.I  met  the  fociety  at  five,  and  fhewed 
them  wherein  I feared  they  had  grieved  the  Spi- 
rit of  God,  and  provoked  him  to  deliver  them 
to  be  thus  outraged  by  the  beajis  of  the  people.  1 
then  rode  to  Hayfield  once  more,  where  Mr. 

B- read  prayers,  and  preached  a folemn 

and  aftefting  fermon,  relative  to  the  late  provi- 
dence. In  the  afternoon  I again  found  great  li= 
A 5 berty 


[ 10  J 


beity  of  fpirit,  in  applying  thofe  awful  words, 
What  is  a man  profited,  if  he Jhall gain  the  whole 
Ivor Ul,  and  lofe  his  own  Joul? 

Monel.  14.  I rode  by  Manchefter,  'where  I 
preached  about  twelve)  to  Warrington.  At  fix 
in  the  morning,  Tuef.  15.  I preached  to  a large 
and  ferious  congregation  ; and  then  went  on  to 
Liverpool,  one  of  the  neateft,  bell  built  towns 
I have  feen  in  England.  1 think  it  is  full  twice 
as  large  as  Chefter.  Moll  of  the  Erects  are 
quite  flrait.  Two-thirds  of  the  town  we  were 
informed,  have  been  added,  within  thefe  forty 
years.  If  it  continues  to  increafe  in  the  fame 
proportion,  in  forty  years  more  it  will  nearly 
equal  Brillol.  The  people  in  general  are  the 
moll  mild  and  courteous,  I ever  faw  in  a fea-port 
town  : as  indeed  appears  by  their  friendly  be- 
haviour not  only  to  thejews  and  Papifis  who  live 
among  them,  but  even  to  the  Me t hod f Is,  (fo 
called.)  The  preaching-houfe  is  a little  larger 
than  that  at  Newcaftle.  It  was  thoroughly  rilled 
at  feven  in  the  evening.  And  the  hearts  of  the 
whole  congregation  leeined  to  be  moved  be- 
fore the  Lord  and  before  the  prefence  of  his 
power. 

Every  morning,  as  well  as  evening,  abundance 
of  people  gladly  attended  the  preaching.  Many 
of  them,  I learned,  were  dear  lovers  of  contro- 
verfy.  But  I had  better  work.  I preffed  upon 
them  all,  Repentance  toward  God,  and  faith  in  our 
Lord  Jfus  Chriji . 


Sund. 


[ II  ] 

Sund.  20.  I explained,  after  the  evening 
preaching,  the  rules  of  the  fociety,  and  ftrongly 
exhorted  the  members  to  adorn  their  profeflion, 
by  all  holinefs  of  converfation. 

Mond.  21.  I rode  to  Bolton.  Being  now  among 
thofe  who  were  no  Jlrange.rs  to  the  covenant  of 
promife , T had  no  need  to  lay  the  foundation 
again,  but  exhorted  them  to  rejoice  evermore. 
Their  number  is  a little  reduced  fince  I was  here 
before.  And  no  wonder  ; while  the  fons  of  flrife 
are  on  every  fide,  fome  for  Mr.  Bennet,  fomefor 
Mr.  Wh— — . The  little  flock  notwithftanding 
hold  on  their  way,  looking  flrait  to  the  prize  of 
their  high  calling. 

* Thurf.  24.  We  rode  in  lefs  than  four  hours 
the  eight  miles  (fo  called)  to  Newell-hay.  Juft 
as  I began  to  preach,  the  fun  broke  out,  and  (hone 
exceeding  hot  on  the  fide  of  my  head.  I found 
if  it  continued,  I fhould  not  be  able  to  fpeak  long, 
and  lifted  up  my  heart  to  God.  In  a minute 
or  two'  it  was  covered  with  clouds,  which  con- 
tinued till  the  fervice  was  over.  Let  any  who 
pleafe,  call  this  chance : I call  it,  an  anfwer  to 
prayer. 

Frid.  25.  About  ten,  I preached  near  Todmor- 
den.  The  people  flood,  row  above  row,  on  the 
fide  of  the  mountain.  They  were  rough  enough 
in  outward  appearance.  But  their  hearts  were  as 
melting  wax. 

* One  can  hardly  conceive  any  thing  more 
delightful,  than  the  vale  through  which  we  rode 

A 6 from 


[ 12  j 


from  hence.  The  liver  ran  through  the  green 
meadows  on  the  right.  The  fruitful  hills 
and  woods  rofe  on  either  hand.  Yet  here 
and  there  a rock  hung  over : the  little  holes 
in  which,  put  me  in  mind  of  thofe  beautiful 
lines, 

Te,  domine,  intonji  monies,  te faxa  loquentur 
SummaDeum , dum  montis  amatjuga  pendulushircus, 
Saxorumque  colit  latebrofa  cuniculus  antra  ! 

At  three  in  the  afternoon  I preached  at  Hep- 
tonflall,  on  the  brow  of  the  mountain.  The  rain 
began  almolf  as  foon  as  I began  to  fpeak.  I 
prayed,  that  if  God  fa'.v  bell,  it  may  be  flayed, 
till  I had  delivered  his  word.  It  was  fo,  and  then 
began  again.  But  we  had  only  a fhort  ftage  to 
Ewood. 

Satur.  2 6.  I preached  at  feven  to  a large  and 
ferious  congregation,  and  again  at  four  in  the  af- 
ternoon. When  I began,  in  a meadow  near  the 
houfe,  the  wind  was  fo  high,  I could  hardly 
fpeak.  But  the  winds  too  are  in  God's  hand. 
In  a few  minutes  that  inconvenience  ceafed. 
And  we  found  the  Spirit  of  God  breathing  in 
the  midfl  of  us,  fo  that  great  was  our  rejoicing 
in  the  Lord. 

Sund.  27.  A little  before  I took  horfe,  I looked 
into  a room  as  I walked  by,  and  faw  a good,  old 
man,  bleeding  almofl  to  death.  I defired  him 


unme' 


[ i3  1 


immediately  to  fnuff  vinegar  up  his  nofe,  and 
apply  it  to  his  neck,  face  and  temples.  It  was 
done  : and  the  blood  entirely  flopped  in  lefs  than 
two  minutes. 

The  rain  began  about  five,  and  did  not  inter- 
mit, till  we  came  to  Haworth  : notwithftanding 
which  a multitude  of  people  were  gathered  toge- 
ther at  ten.  In  the  afternoon  I was  obliged  to 
go  out  of  the  church,  abundance  of  people  not 
being  able  to  get  in.  The  rain  ceafed,  from  the 
moment  I came  out,  till  I had  finifhed  my  dif- 
courfe.  How  many  proofs  mufl  we  have,  that 
there  is  no  petition  too  little,  any  more  than  too 
great  for  God  to  grant  ? 

Mond.  28.  I preached  at  Kighley : on  Tuef. 
at  Bradford,  which  is  now  as  quiet  as  Birftal. 
Such  a change  has  God  wrought  in  the  hearts 
of  the  people,  fince  John  Nelfon  was  in  the  dun- 
geon here.  My  brother  met  me  at  Birflal  in  the 
afternoon. 

Wednef.  30.  We  began  reading  together, 
“ A gentleman’s  reafons  for  his  diffent  from 
the  church  of  England.”  It  is  an  elaborate  and 
lively  traft,  and  contains  the  ffrength  of  the 
caufe.  But  it  did  not  yield  us  one  proof,  that  it 
is  lawful  for  us,  (much  lefs  our  duty)  to  fepa- 
rate  from  it. 

* Thurf.  May  1.  I finifhed  the  " Gentleman’s 
Reafons,”  (who  is  a diffenting  minifler  at  Exe- 
ter.) In  how  different  a fpirit  does  this  mail 

write, 


[ H ] 

write,  from  honeft  Richard  Baxter  ! The  one 
dipping,  as  it  were,  his  pen  in  tears,  the  other  in 
vinegar  and  gall.  Surely  one  page  of  that  loving, 
feiious  Chriftian  weighs  more,  than  volumes  of 
this  bitter,  farcaflic  jefter. 

Sund.  4.  I preached  at  one,  and  again 
at  five,  to  fome  thoufands  at  the  foot  of  the 
hill.  I believe  this  hollow  would  contain 
fixty  thoufand  people,  handing  one  above 
another.  And  a clear,  firong  voice  might 
command  them  all  : although  if  they  hood 
upon  a plain,  I doubt  whether  any  human 
voice  could  be  diftinftly  heard  bv  half  the 
number. 

Tuefday  6.  Our  conference  began  at  Leeds. 
The  point  on  which  we  defired  all  the 
preachers  to  fpeak  their  minds  at  large,  was, 
“ Whether  we  ought  to  feparate  from  the 
church  ?”  Whatever  was  advanced  on  one  fide 
or  the  other,  was  ferioufiy  and  calmly  confi- 
dered,  And  on  the  third  day  we  were  all  fully 
agreed,  in  that  general  conclufion,  That  (whe- 
ther it  was  lawful  or  not)  it  w7as  no  ways  expe- 
dient. 

Mond.  12.  We  rode  (my  wife  and  I)  to  North- 
allerton. 

Tuef.  13.  I rode  on  to  Newcafile.  I did  not 
find  things  here  in  the  order  I expedfed.  Many 
were  on  the  point  of  leaving’the  church,  which 
fome  had  done  already  : and,  as  they  fuppofed 


on 


[ *5  ] 

on  my  authority  ! O how  much  difcord  is 
caufed  by  one  jarring  firing  ! How  much  trouble 
by  one  man,  who  does  not  walk  by  the  fame  rule, 
and  agree  in  the  fame  judgment  with  his  bre- 
thren ! 

May  18.  Being  Whitfunday,  I preached 
about  eight  at  Gatelhead-fell,  and  returned  be- 
fore  the  fervice  at  St.  Andrew’s  began.  At  the 
facrament  many  found  an  uncommon  bleffing, 
and  felt  God  has  not  yet  left  the  church. 

In  the  following  week  I fpake  to  the  members 
of  the  fociety  feverally,  and  found  far  fewer 
than  I expended  prejudiced  againft  the  church  : 
I think,  not  above  forty  in  all.  And  I trufi:  the 
plague  is  now  fiayed. 

Wednef.  21.  I preached  at  Nafferton,  near 
Hcrfley,  about  thirteen  miles  from  Newcaftle. 
We  rode  chiefly  on  the  new  weftern-road,  which 
lies  on  the  old  Roman  wall.  Some  part  of  this 
is  fiill  to  be  feen,  as  are  the  remains  of  moft  of 
the  towers,  which  were  built  a mile  diftant  from 
each  other,  quite  from  fea  to  fea.  But  where  are 
the  men  of  renown  who  built  them,  and  who 
once  made  all  the  land  tremble?  Crumbled  into 
dull ! Gone  hence,  to  be  no  more  feen,  till  the 
earth  fhall  give  up  her  dead  ! 

Thurfday  22.  Mr.  Wardrobe,  minifier  of  Bath- 
gate inScotland,  preached  at  the  Orphan-houfe 
in  the  evening,  to  the  no  fmall  amazement  and 
difpleafure  of  fome  of  his  zealous  country- 


men. 


Saturday 


[ x6  ] 

Saturday  24.  I preached  at  Sheephill.  The 
cold  drove  us  into  the  houfe,  which  being  much 
crowded,  was  as  hot  as  an  oven.  Riding  after- 
wards in  the  keen  north  wind,  it  feized  upon  my 
bread  immediately.  However  I made  a fhift  to 
preach  at  Cheder,  and  then  went  on  to  Sunder- 
land. 

Sunday  25.  I preached  at  eight,  tho’  not  with- 
out pain,  not  having  recovered  my  voice.  We 
had  an  ufeful  fermon  at  church.  As  foon  as  the 
facranrent  was  over,  I preached  in  the  high-ftreet 
fit  being  Trinity-funday)  upon  There  are  three 
that  bear  record  in  heaven.  And  my  voice  was  fo 
redored,  that  I could  command  the  whole  con- 
gregation tho’  it  was  exceeding  large. 

Monday  26.  I rode  to  Morpeth  and  preached 
in  the  market-place,  to  a fmall,  but  quite  congre- 
gation. In  the  evening  I preached  in  the  new 
room  at  Alnwick.  But  I could  fcarce  be  heard, 
my  voice  being  very  weak.  In  the  morning  it 
was  dronger.  So  I preached  with  more  eafe  at 
five.  And  then  returned  to  Newcaftle. 

Thurfday  29.  I had  the  pleafure  of  feeing 
Mr.  Gillies  from  Glafgow.  He  preached  for  me 
in  the  evening,  to  the  Hill  greater  afionilhmem 
of  the  warm  men,  who  “ could  never  have 
thought  it  of  him”  ! Shall  we  not  have  more  and 
more  caufe  to  fay, 

“ Names  and  fe£Is  and  parties  fall  ; 

“ Thou,  O Chrift,  art  all  in  all.” 


Friday 


[ 17  3 

Friday  30.  I walked  to  the  infirmary.  It  is 
finely  fituated  on  the  top  of  the  hill  ; and  is  the 
belt  ordered  of  any  place  of  the  kind  I have  feen 
in  England.  Nor  did  I ever  fee  fo  much  fenouf- 
nefs  in  an  hofpital  before  ; none  were  laugh- 
ing or  talking  lightly  : many  were  reading  the 
bible.  And  when  I talked  to  and  prayed  with 
one,  the  whole  ward  liftened  with  deep  atten- 
tion. 

Mon,  June  1.  I left  Newcaftle  and  came  to 
Durham,  juft  as  Jacob  Rowell  had  done  preach- 
ing, or  rather,  attempting  to  preach,  for  the 
mob  was  fo  noify,  that  he  was  conftrained  to 
break  off.  I reached  Oftnotherly  in  the  evening, 
and  found  a large  congregation  waiting.  I preach- 
ed immediately,  God  renewing  my  ftrength, 
and  comforting  my  heart. 

*Here  I enquired  ofeye  and  ear-witneffes,  con- 
cerning what  lately  occurred  in  the  neighbour- 
hood. On  Thurfday,  March  25  laft,  being  the 
week  before  Eafter,  many  perfons  obferved  a 
great  no ife  near  a ridge  of  mountains  in  York- 
fhire,  called  Black-hamilton.  It  was  obferved 
chiefly  in  the  fouth-weft  fide  of  the  mountain, 
about  a mile  from  the  courfe  where  the  Hamilton 
races  are  run  ; near  a ridge  of  rocks,  common- 
ly called  Whitfon-ciiffs  or  Whitfon-White- 
Mare,  two  miles  from  Sutton,  about  five  from 
Thrifk. 

The  fame  noife  was  heard  on  Wednef- 
day  by  all  who  went  that  way.  On  Thurfday, 

about 


[ >8  ] 

about  feven  in  the  morning,  Edward  Abbot, 
weaver,  and  Adam  Bofomworth  bleacher,  both 
of  Sutton,  riding  under  Whifton-cliffs,  heard  a 
roaring  (fo  they  termed  it)  like  many  cannons,  or 
loud  and  rolling  thunder.  It  feemed  to  come 
from  the  cliffs,  looking  up  to  which,  they  faw 
a large  body  of  flone,  four  or  five  yards  broad, 
fpilt  and  fly  off  from  the  very  top  of  the  rocks. 
They  thought  it  ftrange,  but  rode  on.  Between 
ten  and  eleven,  a larger  piece  of  the  rock,  about 
fifteen  yards  thick,  thirty  high,  and  between  fixty 
and  feventy  broad,  was  torn  off  and  thrown  into 
the  valley. 

About  feven  in  the  evening,  one  who  was 
riding  bv,  obferved  the  ground  to  {hake  exceed- 
ingly, and  foon  after  feveral  large  Hones  or  rocks 
of  fome  tons  weight  each,  rofe  out  of  the  ground. 
Others  were  thrown  on  one  fide,  others  turned 
upfide-down,  and  many  rolled  over  and  over. 
Being  a little  furprized,  and  not  very  curious, 
he  hailed  on  his  way. 

On  Friday  and  Saturday  the  ground  continu- 
ed to  ffake,  and  the  rocks  to  roll  over  one  ano- 
ther. The  earth  alfo  clave  afunder  in  very  many 
places,  and  continued  lo  to  do  till  Sunday  morn- 
ing. 

Being  at  O {motherly,  feven  miles  from  the 
cliffs,  on  Mond  ay,  June  1,  and  finding  Edward 
Abbot  there,  I defiled  him  the  next  morning  to 
{hew  me  the  way  thither.  I walked,  crept  and 
climbed  round  and  over  great  art  of  the  ruins. 

I could 


[ x9  ] 

I could  not  perceive  by  any  fign,  that  there  was 
ever  any  cavity  in  the  rock  at  all  ; but  one  part 
of  the  folid  ftone  is  cleft  from  the  reft,  in  a per- 
pendicular line,  and  Imooth  as  if  cut  with  inftru- 
ments.  Nor  is  it  barely  thrown  down,  but  fplit 
into  many  hundred  pieces,  fome  of  which  lie 
four  or  five  hundred  yards  from  the  mam  rock. 

The  ground  neareft  the  cliff,  is  not  raifed, 
but  funk  confiderabiy  beneath  the  level.  But  at 
fome  diftance  it  is  raifed  in  a ridge  of  eight  or 
ten  yards  high,  twelve  or  fifteen  broad,  and  near 
an  hundred  long.  Adjoining  to  this  lies  an  oval 
piece  of  ground  thirty  or  forty  yards  in  diameter, 
which  has  been  removed  whole  as  it  is,  from  be- 
neath the  cliff,  without  the  leaft  filTure,  with  all  its 
load  of  rocks,  fome  of  which  were  as  large  as 
the  hull  of  a fmali  fhip.  At  a little  diftance  is  a 
fecond  piece  of  ground,  forty  or  fifty  vards  a- 
crofs,  which  has  been  alfo  tranfplanted  intire, 
with  rocks  of  various  fizes  upon  it,  and  a tree 
growing  out  of  one  of  them.  By  the  removal  of 
one  or  both  of  thefe,  I fuppofe  the  hollow  near 
the  cliff  was  made. 

All  round  them  lay  ftones  and  rocks,  great 
and  fmali,  fome  on  the  furface  of  the  earth,  fome 
half  funk  into  it,  fome  almoft  covered,  in  varie- 
ty of  pofitions.  Between  thefe  the  ground  was 
cleft  afunder,  in  a thoufand  places.  Some  of 
the  apertures  were  nearly  clofed  again,  fome  gap- 
ing as  at  firft.  Between  thirty  and  forty  acres 

of 


C 20  ] 


of  land,  as  is  commonly  fuppofed,  (though  fome 
reckon  above  fixty)  are  in  this  condition. 

On  the  fkirts  of  thefe,  I obferved  in  abund- 
ance of  places,  the  green  turf  (for  it  was  paflure 
land)  as  it  were  pared  off,  two  or  three  inches 
thick,  and  wrapt  round,  like  fheets  of  lead.  A 
little  farther  it  was  not  clefc  or  broken  at  all,  but 
railed  in  ridges,  five  or  fix  foot  long,  exaclly 
refembling  the  graves  in  a church-yard.  Of 
thefe  there  is  a vaft  number. 

That  part  of  the  cliff  from  which  the  reft,  is 
torn,  lies  fo  high  and  is  now  of  fo  bright  a co- 
lour, that  it  is  plainl)'  vifible  to  all  the  country 
round,  even  at  the  diftance  of  feveral  miles.  We 
faw  it  diflindily  not  only  from  the  ftreet  in 
Thirfk,  but  for  five  or  fix  miles,  as  we  rode  to- 
wards York.  So  we  did  likewife,  in  the  great 
North  road,  between  Sandhutton  and  North- 
Allerton. 

But  how  may  we  account  for  this  phenome- 
non ? Was  it  effedfed  by  a merely  natural  caufe  ? 
If  fo,  that  caufe  mufl  either  hace  been  fire,  wa- 
ter or  air.  It  could  not  be  fire  ; for  then  fome 
mark  of  it  muft  have  appeared,  either  at  the 
time,  or  after  it.  But  no  fuch  mark  does  ap- 
pear, nor  ever  did  : not  fo  much  as  the  leaft 
fmcke,  either  when  the  firft  or  fecondrock  was 
removed,  or  in  the  whole  fpace  between  Fuef- 
day  and  Sunday. 

It  could  not  be  water  ; for  no  water  iffued 
out,  when  the  one  or  the  other  rock  was  torn 

off. 


[ ] 

off.  Nor  bad  there  been  any  rains  fome  time 
before.  It  was  in  that  part  of  the  country  are- 
markable  dry  feafon.  Neither  was  there  any 
cavity  in  that  part  of  the  rock,  wherein  a fuffi- 
cient  quantity  of  water  might  have  lodged.  On 
the  contrary,  it  was  one,  ftngle,  folid  mafs, 
which  was  evenly  and  fmootny  clelt  in  funder. 

There  remains  no  other  natural  caufe  aflign- 
able,  but  imprifoned  air.  I fay,  imprifoned: 
for  as  to  the  fafhionable  opinion,  that  the  ex- 
terior air  is  the  grand  agent  in  earthquakes,  it  is 
fo  fenfelefs,  unmechanical,  unphilofophical  a 
dieam,  as  deferves  not  to  be  named,  but  to  be 
exploded.  But  it  is  hard  to  conceive,  how  even 
imprifoned  air  could  produce  fuch  an  effeft.  It 
might  indeed  Jlia/e,  tear,  raife  or  fink  the  earth  : 
but  how  could  it  cleave  a folid  rock  ? Here  was 
not  room  for  a quantity  of  it,  fufficient  to  do 
any  thing  of  this  nature  : at  leaft  unlefs  it  had 
been  fuddenly  and  violently  expanded  by  fire, 
which  was  not  the  cafe.  Could  a fmall  quanti- 
ty of  air,  without  that  violent  expanfion,  have 
torn  fo  large  a body  of  rock  from  the  reff,  to 
which  it  adhered  in  one  folid  mafs  ? Could  it 
have  fit ivered  this  into  pieces,  and  fcattered  fe- 
veral  of  thofe  pieces,  fome  hundred  yards  round  P 
Could  it  have  tranfported  thofe  promontories  of 
earth,  with  their  incumbent  load,  and  fet  them 
down,  unbroken,  unchanged  at  a dillance  ? 
Truly  I am  not  fo  great  a volunteer  in  faith,  as 
to  be  able  to  believe  this : he  that  fuppofes  this, 

muff 


[ 22  ] 

rr-uft  fuppofe  air  to  be  not  only  a very  ftrong, 
(which  we  allow)  but  a very  wife  agent  : while 
it  bore  its  charge  with  fo  great  cauiion,  as  not 
to  hurt  or  diilocate  any  part  of  it. 

What  then  could  be  the  caufe  ? What  in- 
deed, but  God,  who  arofe  to  fhake  terribly  the 
earth  : who  purpofely  chofe  fuch  a place,  where 
there  is  fo  great  a concourfe  of  nobility  and 
gentry  every  year  ; and  wrought  in  fuch  a man- 
ner, that  many  might  fee  it  and  fear,  that  all 
who  travel  one  of  the  moll  frequented  roads  in 
England,  might  fee  it,  almoft.  whether  they 
would  or  no,  for  many  miles  together.  It  mull 
likewife  for  many  years,  maugre  all  the  art  of  man, 
and  be  a vifible  monument  of  his  power.  All 
that  ground  being  now  fo  incumbered  with  rocks, 
and  hones,  that  it  cannot  be  either  ploughed  or 
grazed.  Nor  will  it  lerve  any  ufe,  but  to  tell  all 
that  fee  it,  who  can  hand  before  this  great  God  ? 

Hence  we  rode  to  Thirfk,  where  I met  the 
little  fociety,  and  then  went  on  to  York.  The 
people  had  been  waiting  for  fome  time.  So  I 
began  preaching  without  delay,  and  felt  no  want 
of  hrength,  though  the  room  was  like  an  oven 
through  the  multitude  of  people. 

* Frid.  6.  I read  Dr.  Sharp’s  elaborate  tra£ls 
on  the  rubrics  and  canons.  He  juftly  obferves, 
with  regard  to  all  thefe,  1.  That  our  governors 
have  power  to  difpenfe  with  our  obfervance  of 
them  ; 2.  That  a tacit  difpenfation  is  of  the  fame 
force  with  an  explicit  chfpenfation  : 3.  That  their 

continued 


[ 23  ] 

continued  connivance  at  what  they  cannot  but 
know,  is  a tacit  difpenfation.  I think,  this  is 
true.  But  if  it  be,  he  has  himfelf  anfwered  his 
own  charge  againft  the  Mrihodijis  (fo  called.) 
For  fuppofe  the  canons  did  forbid  field-preach- 
ing, as  exprefly  as  playing  at  cards  and  frequent- 
ing taverns,  yet  we  have  the  very  fame  plea  for 
the  former,  as  any  clergyman  has  for  the  latter. 
All  our  governors,  the  king,  the  archbifhop  and 
bilhops,  connive  at  the  one,  as  well  as  the 
other. 

Saturday  7.  One  of  the  refidentiaries  fent  for 
Mr.  Williamfon,  who  had  invited  me  to  preach 
in  his  church,  and  told  him,  “ Sir,  I abhor  per- 
fection.; but  if  you  let  Mr.  Welley  preach,  it 
will  be  the  worfe  for  you.”  He  defired  it  never- 
thelefs:  but  I declined.  Perhaps  there  is  a pro- 
vidence in  this  alfo.  God  will  not  fuffer  my 
little  remaining  ftrength  to  be  fpent  on  thofe 
who  will  not  hear  me,  but  in  an  honourable 
way. 

Sunday  8.  We  were  at  the  minfler  in  the 
morning,  and  at  our  parifh  church  in  the  after- 
noon. The  fame  gentleman  preached  at  both  : 
but  tho5  I faw  him  at  the  church,  I did  not 
know  I had  ever  feen  him  before.  In  the  morn- 
ing he  was  all  life  and  motion  : in  the  afternoon 
he  was  as  quiet  as  a poll.  At  five  in  the  even- 
ing the  rain  contained  me  to  preach  in  the  oven 
again.  The  patience  of  the  congregation  fur- 
prized  me.  They  feemed  not  to  feel  the  ex- 
treme 


[ 24  ] 

treme  heat : nor  to  be  offended  at  the  clofe 
application  of  thofe  words,  Thou  art  not  far  from 
the  kingdom  of  God. 

Monday  9.  I took  my  leave  of  the  richeft  fo- 
ciety,  number  for  number,  which  we  have  in 
England.  I hope  this  place  will  not  prove  (as 
Cork  has  for  fome  time  done)  the  capua  of  our 
preachers.  When  I came  to  Epworth,  the  con- 
gregation was  waiting.  So  I went  immediately 
to  the  Crofs  : and  great  was  our  giorying  in  the 
Lord. 

Tuefday  10. 1 met  the  ffewardsof  the  Lincoln- 
fhire  focieties,  who  gave  us  an  agreeable  ac- 
count of  the  work  of  God  in  every  place. 

Wednefday  11-  I preached  in  a meadow  at 
Mifterton,  to  a larger  congregation  than  ever 
met  there  before. 

Thurfday  12.  At  eight  I preached  at  Clay- 
worth,  and  at  Rotherham  in  the  evening.  Here 
like  wife  was  fuch  a number  of  people  affembled, 
as  was  never  before  feen  in  that  town.  Is  not 
this  one  clear  proof  of  the  hand  of  God,  that  al- 
though the  novelty  of  this  preaching  is  over,  yet 
the  people  flock  to  hear  it  in  every  place  far 
more  than  when  it  was  a new  thing  ? 

Friday  13.  In  the  evening  I preached  at  Shef- 
field. In  the  morning  I examined  the  members 
of  the  fociety,  and  was  agreeably  furprized  to 
find,  that  though  none  had  vifited  them,  fince  I 
did  it  myfelf,  two  years  ago,  yet  they  were  ra- 
ther 


[ 25  ] 

ther  increafed  than  diminifhed  in  number,  and 
many  of  them  growing  in  grace. 

Monday.  16.  I preached  in  the  evening  at 
Nottingham,  and  on  Thurfday  afternoon  reached 
London.  From  a deep  fenfe  of  the  amazing 
work  which  God  has  of  late  years  wrought  in 
England,  I preached  in  the  evening  on  thofe 
words  Pfalm  cxlvii.  20.  He  hath  not  dealt  Jo  with 
any  nation  : no,  not  even  with  Scotland  or  New 
England.  In  both  thefe  God  has  indeed  made 
bare  his  arm  ; yet  not  in  fo  aftonifhing  a man- 
ner as  among  us.  This  mull;  appear  to  all  who 
impartially  confider,  1.  The  numbers  of  perfons 
on  whom  God  has  wrought:  2.  The  fwiftnefs 
of  his  work  in  many  both  convinced  and  truly 
converted  in  a few  days:  3.  The  depth  of  it  in 
moll  of  thefe,  changing  the  heart,  as  well  as  the 
whole  converfation  : 4.  The  clearnefs  of  it  en- 
abling them  boldly  to  fay,  “ thou  haft  loved  me, 
thou  haft  given  thyfelf  forme.”  5.  The  conti- 
nuance of  it.  God  has  wrought  in  Scotland  and 
New-England,  at  feveral  times,  for  fome  weeks 
or  months  together.  But  among  us,  he  has 
wrought  for  near  eighteen  years  together,  with- 
out any  obfervable  intermiftion.  Above  all  let 
it  be  remarked,  that  a confiderable  number  of  the 
regular  clergy  were  engaged  in  that  great  work 
in  Scotland  ; and  in  New-England,  above  an 
hundred,  perhaps  as  eminent  as  any  in  the  whole 
province,  not  only  for  piety,  but  alfo  for  abili- 
ties both  natural  and  acquired  : Whereas  in 
Vol.  XXX.  B England 


c 26  3 


England  there  were  only  two  or  three  inconfi- 
derable  clergymen,  with  a few,  young,  raw  un- 
lettered men  : and  thefe  oppofed  by  will  nigh  all 
the  clergy,  as  well  as  laity  in  the  nation.  He 
that  remarks  this  muff  needs  own,  both  that  this 
is  a work  of  God  : and  that  he  hath  not  wrought 
fo  in  any  other  nation. 

Monday  23.  I was  confide  ring,  What  could 
be  the  reafons  why  the  hand  of  the  Lord  (who 
does  nothing  without  a caufej  is  almoft  entirely 
flayed  in  Scotland,  and  in  great  meafure  in  New 
England?  It  does  not  become  us  to  judge  pe- 
remptorily : but  perhaps  fome  of  them  may  be 
thefe.  1.  Many  of  them  became  wife  in  their 
own  eyes : they  feemed  to  think,  they  were 
the  men,  and  there  were  none  like  them. 
And  hence  they  refufed  God  the  liberty  of  fend- 
ing by  whom  he  would  fend,  and  required  him 
to  work  by  men  of  learning,  or  not  at  all.  2. 
Many  of  them  were  ingots,  immoderately  attach- 
ed either  to  their  own  opinions  or  mode  of  wor- 
fhip.  Mr.  Edwatds  himfelf  was  not  clear  of  this. 
But  the  Scotch  bigots  were  beyond  all  others ; 
placing  Arminianifm  (fo  called)  on  a level  with 
deifm,  and  the  church  of  England  with  that  of 
Rome.  Hence  they  not  only  fuffered  in 
themfelves  and  their  brethren  a bitter  zeal , 
but  applauded  themfelves  therein:  in  fhewing 
the  fame  fpirit  againlf  all  who  differed  from 
them,  as  the  papifts  did  againft  our  forefathers. 
3.  With  pride,  bitternefs  and  bigotry,  felt-in- 
dulgence 


[ 27  3 

diligence  was  joined:  felf-denial  was  little  taught 
and  praftifed.  ’Tis  well  if  fome  of  them  did 
not  defpife,  or  even  condemn  all  felf-denial  in 
things  indifferent,  as  in  apparel  or  food,  as  near- 
ly allied  to  popery.  No  marvel  then  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  was  grieved.  Let  us  profit  by  their 
example. 

Tuefday  2_y  Obferving  in  that  valuable  book, 
Mr.  Gillies’s  hiftorical  colle&ions,  the  euftom  ol 
Chriftian  congregations  in  all  ages,  to  fet  apart 
feafons  of  folemn  thankfgivings;  I was  amazed 
and  afhamed  that  we  had  never  done  this,  after 
all  the  bleflings  we  had  received.  And  many  to 
whom  I mentioned  it  gladly  agreed,  to  fet  apart 
a day  for  that  purpofe. 

Monday  30.  I fet  out  for  Norwich  and  came 
thither  the  next  evening.  As  a large  congrega- 
tion was  waiting,  I could  not  but  preach,  though 
weary  enough.  The  two  following  days,  I 
fpoke  to  each  member  of  the  fociety  : and  on 
Friday,  July  4,  took  horfe  again,  though  how  I 
fhould  ride  five  miles,  I knew  not.  But  God 
fo  {Lengthened  both  man  and  heart,  that  I reach- 
ed Buiy  the  fame  night,  and  London  the  next, 
far  lefs  tired,  than  when  I fet  out  from  Norwich. 

Monday  7.  Was  our  firrt  day  of  folemn  thankf- 
giving,  for  the  numberlefs  fpiritual  biefiings 
we  have  received.  And  I believe  it  was  a day 
which  will  not  foon  be  forgotten. 

Thurfday  17.  One  fpent  the  evening  with 
us,  who  is  accounted  both  a fenfible  and  a reli- 
B 2 gious 


[ »8  ] 


gious  man.  What  a proof  of  the  fall ! Even 
with  all  the  advantages  of  a liberal  education, 
this  perfon,  I will  be  bold  to  fay,  knows  juft  as 
much  of  heart-religion,  of  fcriptural  Chriftiani- 
ty,  the  religion  of  love,  as  a child  three  years 
old  of  Algebra.  How  much  then  may  we  fup- 
pofe  a Turk  or  Heathen  to  know  ? Hardly 
more  : perhaps  juft  as  much. 

Tuefday  22.  To  oblige  a friendly  gentlewo- 
man I was  a witnefs  to  her  will,  wherein  fhe  be- 
queathed part  of  her  .eftate  to  charitable  ufes  ; 
and  part,  during  her  natural  life,  to  her  dog  Toby. 
I fuppofe,  though  fire  fhould  die  within  the  year 
her  legacy  to  Toby  may  ftand  good.  But  that  to 
the  poor  is  null  and  void,  by  the  ftatute  of 
Mortmain  ! 

Sunday  27.  I buried  the  body  of  Ephraim 

B -,  once  a pattern  to  all  that  believed.  But 

from  the  time  he  left  off  fading  and  univerfal  felf- 
denial,  in  which  none  was  more  exemplary  for 
fome  years,  he  funk  lower  and  lower,  till  he  had 
neither  the  power,  nor  the  form  of  religion  left. 
In  the  beginning  of  his  illnefs  he  was  in  black  de- 
fpair.  But  much  prayer  was  made  for  him. 
Toward  the  clofe  of  it,  it  pleafed  God  to  reftore 
to  him  the  light  of  his  countenance.  So,  1 truft, 
his  backfliding  only  coft  him  his  life  : and 
he  may  j et  live  with  God  for  ever. 

I was  much  affefled  about  this  time  bjra  letter 
fe nt  from  a gentleman  in  Virginia.  Part  of  it 
runs  thus.  “ The  poor  negro  flaves  here,  never 

heard 


[ 29  ] 


heard  of  Jefus  or  his  religion,  ’till  they  arrived 
at  the  land  of  their  flavery  in  America,  whom 
their  mailers  generally  neglebl,  as  though  immor- 
tality was  not  the  privilege  of  their  fouls  in  com- 
mon with  their  own.  Thefe  poor  Africans  are 
the  principal  objefls  of  my  compaffion,  and  I 
think  the  mofl  proper  fubjefl  of  your  cha- 
rity. 

“ The  inhabitants  of  Virginia  are  computed 
tobe  about  300,000  ; and  the  one  half  of  them 
are  fuppofed  to  be  negroes.  The  number  of 
thefe  who  attend  on  my  minidry  at  particular 
times,  is  uncertain.  But  I think  there  are  about 
three,  bunderd,  who  give  a Hated  attendance. 
And  never  have  I been  fo  much  ftmek,  with  the 
appearance  of  an  aiTembly,  as  when  I have  glanc- 
ed my  eye  on  one  part  of  the  houfe,  adorned 
(fo  it  has  appeared  to  me)  with  fo  many  black 
countenances,  eagerly  attentive  to  every  word 
they  heard,  and  fome  of  them  covered  with  tears. 
A confiderable  number  of  them,  about  an  hund- 
red, have  been  baptized,  after  they  had  been  fully 
inftru£led  in  the  great  truths  of  religion,  and 
had  evidenced  their  fenfe  of  them  by  a life  of 
the  flriftell  virtue.  As  they  are  not  fufficiently 
polifhed,  to  diffemble  with  a good  grace,  they 
exprefs  the  fenfations  of  their  hearts,  fo  much  in 
the  language  of  fimple  nature,  and  with  fuch  ge- 
nuine indications  of  artlefs  fincerity,  that  it  is 
impoflible  to  fufpeft  their  profeflions,  efpecially 
when  attended  with  a fuitable  behaviour. 

B 3 


“Mr. 


J 


C 3° 

“ Mr.  Todd,  minifter  of  the  next  congrega- 
tion, has  near  the  fame  number  under  his  care. 
And  feveral  of  them  alfo,  he  informs  me,  dif- 
cover  the  fame  ferioulnefs.  Indeed  there  are 
multitudes  of  them  in  various  parts,  who  are 
eagerly  defirous  of  inllruclion.  They  have  ge- 
nerally very  little  help  to  read  : and  yet  to  my 
agreeable  furpiize,  fundry  of  them,  by  dint  ol 
application,  in  their  very  few  leifure  hours,  have 
made  fuch  a progrefs,  that  they  are  able  to  read 
their  bible,  or  a plain  author,  very  intelligibly. 
But  few  oftheir  mailers  will  beat  the  expence 
of  furnifhing  them  with  books.  I have  fuppli- 
ed  them  to  the  utmofl  of  my  ability.  They  are 
exceedingly  delighted  with  Watt’s  fongs.  And 
1 cannot  but  obferve  that  the  negroes,  above  all 
of  the  human  fpecies  I ever  knew,  have  the  ni- 
cell  ear  for  rnufick.  They  have  a kind  ofexta- 
tic  delight  in  pfalmody  : nor  are  there  any  books 
they  fo  foon  learn,  or  take  fo  much  pleafure  in, 
as  thofe  ufed  in  that  heavenly  part  of  divine  wor- 
fiiip.” 

Sunday,  Auguft  3.  I dined  with  one  who  liv- 
ed for  many  years  with  one  of  the  moll  celebrat- 
ed beauties  in  Europe.  She  was  alfo  proud, 
vain  and  nice  to  a very  uncommon  degree.  But 
fee  the  end  ! After  a painful  and  naufeous  dif- 
eafe,  fhe  rotted  away  above  ground  : and  was 
fo  offenfive  for  many  days  before  fhe  died,  that 
fcarce  any  could  bear  to  flay  in  the  room. 

Monday 


[ ] 

Mond.  4.  Hearing  my  old  friend,  Mr.  H s, 

was  now  a beggar  and  forfaken  of  all,  I called 
(after  a reparation  of  fixteen  years)  at  his  lodg- 
ings, to  offer  him  any  fervice  in  my  power.  I 
was  pleafingly  furprized,  to  find  him  reading  the 
bible  ! But  Hill  1 am  afraid  all  is  not  right.  For 
the  hand  of  God  feems  to  be  upon  him  Hill  : and 
his  mind  is  fo  hurried  he  can  fettle  to  nothing.  O 
what  a pattern  of  holinefs  and  liability  of  mind 
was  this  very  man,  till  he  was  fiolen  away  by  the 
men  who/e  words  are  fmoother  than  oil.  But  were 
they  not  to  him  very  /words  ? 

Wednef.  6.  I mentioned  to  the  congregation 
another  means  of  increafing  ferious  religion, 
which  had  been  frequently  pradifed  by  our  fore- 
fathers, and  attended  with  eminent  bleffing : 
namely,  the  joining  in  a covenant  to  ferve  God, 
with  all  our  heart  and  with  all  our  foul.  I ex- 
plained this  for  feveral  mornings  following: 
and  on  Friday,  many  of  us  kept  a faff  unto  the 
Lord,  befeeching  him  to  give  us  wifdom  and 
llrength,  to  pronnje  unto  the  Lord  our  God  and 
keep  it. 

Mond.  11.  I explained  once  more  the  nature 
of  fuch  an  engagement,  and  the  manner  of  doing 
it  acceptable  to  God.  At  fix  in  the  evening  we 
met  for  that  purpofe,  at  the  French  church  in 
Spittalfi elds.  After  I had  recited  the  tenor  of  the 
covenant  propofed,  in  the  words  of  that  bleffed 
man,  Richard  Allen,  all  the  people  flood  up, 
in  teflimony  of  affent,  to  the  number  of  about 
B 4 eighteen 


[ 32  ] 

eighteen  hundred  perfons.  Such  a night  I fcarce 
ever  faw  before.  Surely  the  fruit  of  it  fhall  remain 
for  ever. 

Saiur.  16.  I buried  the  remains  of  a rough, 
honeft,  friendly  man,  Capt.  Edward  Stotelburv. 
But  the  lion  was  become  a lamb,  before  God 
took  him  to  himfelf. 

Sund.  17.  I took  my  leave  of  the  congrega'ion 
in  Moorfields,  by  applying  thofe  awful  words, 
It  is  appointed  for  men  once  to  die  : and  early  in 
the  morning  fet  out  for  Cornwall.  In  the  even- 
ing I preached  to  a fleepy  congregation  at 
Reading,  on,  It  is  a fearful  thing,  to  fall  into  the 
hands  cf  the  living  God ; and  to  much  fuch  ano- 
ther on  Tuefday  evening  at  Salifburv,  on  Harden 
not  your  hearts. 

OnWednef.  20.  at  noon  I preached  at  Shaftf- 
bury,  to  a much  more  lively  people.  In  the  af- 
ternoon both  my  fellow-traveller  and  I were 
fairly  worn  out.  We  betook  ourfelves  to  prayer, 
and  received  ftrength.  Nor  did  we  faint  any 
more,  till  on  Frid.  22.  we  reached  Plymouth- 
dock.  And  I found  rnyfelf  far  lefs  weary 
then,  than  on  Monday  when  I came  to  Cole- 
brook. 

Having  fpent  two  days  comfortably,  and  I 
hope,  ufefully,  on  Mond.  25.  I rode  over  the 
mountains,  clofe  by  the  fea  to  Loo,  a town  near 
half  fo  large  as  Illington,  which  fends  four  mem- 
bers to  the  parliament ! And  each  county  in 
North-Wales  fends  one ! At  Fowey  a little 

company 


[ 33  ] 

company  met  us,  and  conduced  us  to  Luxillian. 
Between  fix  and  feven  I preached  in  what  was 
once  the  court-yard  of  a rich  and  honourable 
man.  But  he  and  all  his  family  are  in  the  duft, 
and  his  very  memory  is  alrnoft  perifhed.  The 
congregation  was  large  and  deeply  ferious.  But 
it  was  ftill  larger  on  Tuefday  evening,  and  feve- 
ral  feemed  to  be  cut  to  the  heart.  OnWednefday 
they  flocked  from  all  parts.  And  with  what  ea- 
gernefs  did  they  receive  the  word  ? Surely  many 
of  thefe  laft  will  be  firft  1 

Thurf.  28.  I preached  at  St.  Mewan’s.  I do 
not  remember  ever  to  have  feen  the  yard  in 
which  I flood  quite  full  before.  But  it  would  not 
now  contain  the  congregation.  Many  were  ob- 
liged to  ftand  without  the  gate.  At  five  in  the 
morning  I preached  at  St.  Awftle’s,  to  more  than 
our  room  could  contain.  In  the  evening  I was 
at  St.  Ewe.  One  or  two  felt  the  edge  of  God’s 
fword,  and  funk  to  the  ground.  And  indeed 
it  feemed  as  if  God  would  fuffer  none  to  efcape 
him  ; as  if  he  both  heard  and  anfwered  our 
prayer, 

“ Dart  into  all  the  melting  flame 
Of  love,  and  make  the  mountains  flow.” 

Satur.  30.  As  I was  riding  through  Truro,  one 
flopped  my  horfe,  and  infilled  on  my  alighting. 
Prefently  two  or  three  more  of  Mr.  Walker’s 
B 5 foci.ety 


C 34  ] 

fociety  came  in  : and  we  feemed  to  have  been 
acquainted  with  each  other  many  years.  But  I 
was  conftrained  to  break  from  them.  About  five, 
I found  the  congregation  waiting,  in  a broad, 
convenient  part  of  the  flreet  in  Redruth  : I was 
extream'ly  weary.  And  our  friends  were  fo  glad 
to  fee  me,  that  none  once  thought  of  ailing  me 
to  eat  or  drink.  But  my  wearinefs  vanifhed 
when  I began  to  fpeak.  Surely  God  is  in  this 
place  alfo. 

Sund.  3.1.  Underftanding  there  were  many 
prefent,  who  did  once  run  well,  I preached  at 
eight,  (the  rain  ceafing  juft  in  time)  on,  How 
Jhall  I give  thee  up,  Ephraim  ? Many  endea- 
voured, but  in  vain,  to  hide  their  tears.  I 
was  agreeably  furprized  at  church,  to  hear  the 
prayers  read,  not  only  with  delibeation,  but  with 
uncommon  propriety.  At  one,  the  congregation 
was  nearly  double  to  what  it  was  in  the  morning. 
And  all  were  fl ill  as  night.  Surely  thefe  are  pa- 
tient heavers'.  God  grant  they  maybe  fruitful 
ones ! 

At  five  I preached  in  Gwenap,  to  feveral 
thoufands  : but  not  one  of  them  light  or  inatten- 
tive. After  I had  done  the  ftorm  arofe,  and  the 
rain  poured  down,  til!  about  four  in  the  morning. 
Then  the  fky  cleared,  and  many  of  them  that 
feared  God,  gladly  aftembled  before  him. 

Mond.  September  1.  I preached  at  Penryn, 
to  abundantly  more  than  the  houfe  could  con- 
tain. 


Tuef. 


[ 35  ] 

Tuef.  2,Wewentto  Falmouth.  Thc-town  is  not 
now  what  it  was  ten  years  fince.  All  is  quiet  from 
one  end  to  the  other.  I had  thoughts  of  preach- 
ing on  the  hill  near  the  church.  But  the  violent 
wind  made  it  impracticable  : fo  I was  obliged  to 
flay  in  our  own  room.  The  people  could  hear  in 
the  yard  likewife,  and  the  adjoining  houfes : and 
all  were  deeply  attentive. 

Wednef.  3.  At  four,  Mrs.  M.  came  into  my 
room,  all  in  tears,  and  told  me,  “ She  had  feen, 
as  it  were,  our  Lord  handing  by  her,  calling  her 
by  her  name;  and  had  ever  fince  been  filled  with 
joy  unfpeakable.”  Soon  after  came  her  filter, 
in  almofi  the  fame  condition,  and  afterwards  her 
neice  : who  likewife  quickly  melted  info  tears, 
and  refufed  to  be  comforted.  Which  of  thefe 
will  endure  to  the  end  ? Now  at  leaft  God  is 
amonsr  them. 

O 

After  preaching  again  to  a congregation  who 
now  appeared  ready  to  devour  every  word,  I 
walked  up  to  Pendennis  caftle,  finely  fituatedon 
the  high  point  of  land  which  runs  out  between 
the  bay  and  the  harbour,  and  commanding  both. 
It  might  eafily  be  made  exceeding  ftrong.  But 
ourwoodden  cables  are  fufficient. 

In  the  afternoon  we  rode  to  Hellion,  once 
turbulent  enough,  but  now  quiet  as  Penryn. 
I preached  at  fix,  on  a rifing  ground,  about  a 
mulket-ihot  from  the  town.  Two  drunken  men 
II rove  to  interrupt:  but  one  foon  walked  away, 
B 6 The 


[ 36  ] 

The  other  leaned  on  his  horfes  neck  and  fell  faft 
afleep. 

What  has  done  much  good  here,  is  the  exam- 
ple of  W T . He  was  utterly 

without  God  in  the  world,  when  his  father  died, 
and  left  him  a little  eftate,  incumbered  with  huge 
debt.  Seven  or  eight  years  ago  he  found  peace 
with  God.  He  afterwards  fold  his  eflate,  paid 
all  his  debts,  and  with  what  he  had  left,  fur- 
nifhed  a little  fhop.  Herein  God  has  bleft  him 
in  an  uncommon  manner.  Meantime  all  his  be- 
haviour is  of  a-piece  : fo  that  more  and  more  of 
his  neighbours  fay,  “ Well,  this  is  a work  of 
God  !”  1 

Thurf.  4.  In  the  evening,  heavy  rain  began, 
jufl  as  I began  to  give  out  the  hymn.  But  it 
ceafed  before  I named  my  text.  I fpoke  very 
plain,  and  it  feemed  to  fink  into  many  hearts  : 
as  they  fhewed  by  attending  at  five  in  the  morn- 
ins  ,*  when  we  had  another  happy  and  folemn 
hour. 

About  noon,  Frid.  5,  I called  on  W.  Row,  in 
Breag,  in  my  wray  to  Newlin,  “ Twelve  years 
ago,”  he  faid,  “ I was  going  over  Gulval-downs, 
and  I faw  many  people  together.  And  I afked, 
what  was  the  matter  ? And  they  told  me,  “ A man 
was  going  to  preach.”  And  I faid,  to  be  fure  it 
is  fome  mazed  man.  But  when  I faw  you,  I faid, 
"Nay,  this  is  no  mazed  man.”  And  you 
preached  on  God’s  raifing  the  dry  bones.  And 
from  that  time  I could  never  reft,  till  God  was 

pleafed 


C 37  1 

pleafed  to  breathe  on  me,  and  raife  my  dead 
foul !” 

I had  given  no  notice  of  preaching  here.  But 
feeing  the  poor  people  flock  from  every  fide,  I 
could  not  fend  then  empty  away.  So  I preached 
at  a fmall  diflance  from  the  houfe,  and  befought 
them  to  confider  our  great  High-priejl , who  is 
paffed  through,  into  the  heavens.  And  none 
opened  his  mouth : for  the  lions  of  Breag  too, 
are  now  changed  into  lambs.  * That  they  were 
fo  fierce  ten  years  ago  is  no  wonder.  Since  their 
wretched  minifler  told  them  from  the  pulpit 
(feven  years  before  I refigned  my  fellowfhip) 
“ That  John  Wefley  was  expelled  the  college 
for  a bafe  child,  and  had  been  quite  mazed  ever 
fince  : that  all  the  Metkodijis  at  their  private  fo- 
cieties,  put  out  the  lights,  &c.”  with  abundance 
more  of  the  fame  kind.  But  a year  or  two  fince, 
it  was  obferved,  he  grew  thoughtful  and  melan- 
choly. And  about  nine  months  ago,  he  went 
into  his  own  neceffary  houfe,  and  hanged  hirn- 
felf ! 

When  we  came  to  Newlin  we  were  informed, 
that  a ftrong,  healthy  man,  was  the  morning 
before  found  dead  in  his  bed.  Many  were  flart- 
led:  fo  I endeavoured  to  deepen  the  impreflion, 
by  preaching  on  thofe  words,  There  is  no  work , 
nor  device,  nor  knowledge,  nor  wifdom,  in  the  grave 
whither  thou  goejl. 

Satur.  6.  In  the  evening  I preached  at  St.Juft. 
Except  atGwenap,  I have  feen  no  fuch  congre- 
gation 


[ 38  ] 

g&tion  in  Cornwall.  The  fun  (nor  could  we  con- 
trive it  otherwife)  Ihone  full  in  my  face,  when  I 
began  the  hymn.  But  juft  as  I ended  it,  a cloud 
arofe,  which  covered  ii  till  I had  done  preaching. 
Is  any  thing  too  fmall  for  the  providence  of  him, 
by  whom  our  very  hairs  are  number td. 

Sund.  7.  Laftyear,  a ftrange  letter,  written  at 
Penzance,  was  inferred  in  the  public  papers. 
* To-day  1 fpoke  to  the  two  perfons  who  occafi- 
oned  that  letter.  They  are  of  St.  Juft's  parifh, 
fenfible  men,  and  no  Methodijis.  The  name  of 
one  is  James  Tregeer,  of  the  other  Thomas 
Sackerlv,  I received  the  account  from  James 
two  or  three  hours  before  Thomas  came.  But 
there  was  no  material  difference.  “ In  Julv  was 
twelvemonth,  they  both  faid,  as  they  weie  walk- 
ing from  St.  Juft  church  town  toward  Sancretf, 
Thomas  happening  to  look  up,  cried  out, 
“ James,  look,  look  ! What  is  that  in  the  fky?” 
The  firft  appearance,  as  James  expreffed  it  was, 
three  large  columns  of  horfemen  fwiftly  prefling 
on,  as  in  a fight,  from  fouth-weft  to  north-eaft,  a 
broad  ftreak  of  fky  being  between  each  column. 
Sometimes  thev  feeined  to  run  thick  together; 
then  to  thin  their  ranks.  Afterward  they  faw  a 
large  fleet  of  three  maft  fhips,  in  full  fail  toward 
the  Lizard  Point.  This  continued  above  a quar- 
ter ot  an  hour.  Then  all  difappearing,  they 
went  on  their  way.”  The  meaning  of  this,  if  it 
was  real,  (which  I do  not  affirm)  time  only  can 
iffiew- 


I preached 


[ 39  ] 

I preached  at  eight  in  the  morning  and  five  in 
the  afternoon  and  then  hafiened  to  St.  Ives. 
But  we  did  not  reach  it,  till  between  nine  and 
ten.  So  I delayed  vifiting  Mr.  K.  till  the  morn- 
ing. He  is  a young  attorney,  who  for  fometime 
pall,  haft  frequently  attended  the  preaching.  On 
Saturday  morning  he  fell  raving  mad.  I never 
faw  him  till  this  morning.  He  fling,  and  fwore, 
and  fcreamed,  and  curfed,  and  blafphemed,  as 
if  poffeffed  by  legion . But  as  foon  as  I came 
in,  he  called  me  by  my  name,  and  began  to 
fpeak.  I fat  down  on  the  bed,  and  he  was  ftill. 
Soon  after  he  fell  into  tears  and  prayer.  We 
prayed  with  him,  and  left  him  calm  for  the  pre- 
fent. 

* Tuef.  9. 1 defired  as  many  of  our  brethren  as 
could,  to  obferve  Wednefday  the  tenth  as  a day 
of  faffing  and  prayer.  Juft  as  we  were  praying 
for  him,  (we  were  afterwards  informed)  he  left 
off  raving,  and  broke  out,  “ Lord  ! How  long? 
Wilt  thou  hide  thy  face  for  ever?  All  my  bones 
are  broken.  Thy  wrath  lieth  heavy  upon  me  : 
I am  in  the  loweft  darknefs  and  in  the  deep.  But 
the  Lord  will  hear : he  will  rebuke  thee,  thou 
unclean  fpirit.  He  will  deliver  me  out  of  thy 
hands.”  Many  fuch  expreflions  he  uttered 
for  about  halfan  hour,  and  then  raved  again. 

Thurf.  11.  He  was  more  outrageous  than  ever. 
But  while  we  were  praying  for  him  in  the  even- 
ing, he  funk  down  into  a found  fleep,  which  con- 
tinued 


[ 4o  ] 

tinued  for  ten  hours.  Nor  was  he  furious  any- 
more: although  the  time  of  deliverance  was  not 
come. 

Satur.  13.  I preached  once  more  at  St.  Juft, 
on  the  firft  ftone  of  their  new  fociety  houfe.  In 
the  evening,  as  we  rode  to  Cambourn,  John 
Pearce  of  Redruth,  was  mentioning  a remarkable 
incident.  * While  he  lived  at  Helfton,  as  their 
clafs  was  meeting  one  evening,  one  of  them  cried, 
with  an  uncommon  tone,  “ We  will  not  flay 
here : we  will  go  to  fuch  an  houfe,”  which  was 
in  a quite  different  part  of  the  town.  They  all 
rofe  immediately,  and  went;  though  neither 
they,  nor  fhe,  knew  why.  Prefently  after  they 
were  gone,  a fpark  fell  into  a barrel  of  gunpow- 
der, which  was  in  the  next  room,  and  blew  up 
the  houfe.  So  did  God  preferve  thofe  who  truft- 
ed  in  him,  and  prevent  the  blafphemy  of  the 
multitude. 

Sund.  14.  I preached  about  eight  at  Bray,  to  a 
very  numerous  congregation.  And  I believe  God 
fpoke  to  the  hearts  of  many;  of  backfliders  in 
particular.  Soon  after  ten  we  went  to  Redruth 
church.  A young  gentlewoman  in  the  next  peu% 
who  had  been  laughing  and  talking  juft  before, 
while  theconfelhon  was  reading  feemed  very  un- 
eafy;  then  fcreamed  out  feveral  times,  dropt 
down,  and  was  carried  out  of  church.  Mr. 
Collins  read  prayers  admirably  well,  and  preach- 
ed an  excellent  fermon,  on,  Ckrijl  alfo  fufftrcd, 


[ 4*  ] 

leaving  us  an  example,  that  we Jhould  tread  in  his 
Jleps. 

At  one  I preached  on  faith,  hope,  and  love, 
I was  furprized  at  the  behaviour  of  the  whole 
multitude.  At  length  God  feems  to  be  moving 
on  all  their  hearts.  About  five  I preached  at  St. 
Agnes,  where  all  received  the  truth  in  love, 
except  two  or  three,  who  foon  walked  away. 
Thence  I rode  on  to  St.  Cuthbert.  At  noon  I 
was  much  tired.  But  I was  now  as  frefh  as  in  the 
morning. 

* Mond.  15.  We  walked  an  hour  near  the  fea- 
fliore,  among  thofe  amazing  caverns,  which  are 
full  as  furprizing  as  Poole’s-Hole,  or  any  other  in 
the  Peak  of  Derbyfhire.  Some  part  of  the  rock 
in  thefe  natural  vaults,  glitters  as  bright  and  ruddy 
as  gold.  Partis  a fine  fky-blue : part  green,  part 
enamel’d,  exaflly  like  mother  of  pearl : and  a 
great  part,  efpecially  near  the  Holy  Well, 
(which  bubbles  upon  the  top  of  a rock,  and  is 
famous  for  curing  either  fcorbutic  or  fcrophu- 
lous  diforders)  is  crufted  over,  wherever  the 
water  runs,  with  an  hard  white  coat,  like  ala- 
bafter. 

At  fix  in  the  evening  I preached  at  Port  Ifaac. 
The  next  day  I rode  to  C-amelford,  and  preached 
in  the  market-place  about  fix,  on,  Ye  muji  be  born 
again.  Some  were  much  afraid  there  would  be 
difturbance.  But  the  whole  congregation  was 
quiet  and  attentive. 


Thurf, 


C 42  ] 

Thurf.  18.  Juft  as  we  came  in  at  Lancefton, 
the  heavy  rain  began.  Between  five  and  fix  I 
preached  in  a gentleman’s  dining-room,  capable 
of  containing  fome  hundreds  of  people.  At 
five  in  the  morning  I preached  in  the  Town- 
hall,  and  foon  after  took  my  leave  of  Corn- 
wall. 

Frid.  19.  In  the  evening  I reached  North 
Moulton.  But  being  wet  and  tired,  and  the  peo- 
ple not  having  notice,  I did  not  preach  till  the 
next  morning.  A few,  I found,  Hand  ftedfaft 
here  alfo,  though  a neighbouring  gentleman,  has 
threatened  them  much,  unlefs  they  will  leave 
this  way,  has  turned  many  out  of  their  work 
or  farms,  and  headed  the  mob  in  perfon. 

On  Saturday  evening  I preached  at  Tiverton, 
to  a well  eflablifhed  people. 

Sund.  21.  I rode  to  Collumpton,  where  the 
minifter  preached  an  excellent,  prafilical  fermon. 
At  one  I preached  on  the  parable  of  the  fower  ; 
and  about  five  in  the  market-houfe  at  Tiverton. 
The  congregation  were  larger  than  for  fome 
years.  Yet  all  behaved  as  though  they  really  de- 
fined to  fave  their  fouls. 

Mond.  22.  It  rained  the  greater  part  of  the 
day,  which  lelfened  the  congregation  at  Charl- 
ton. 

Tuef.  23.  We  walked  up  to  Glaflonbury- 
Tower,  which  a gentleman  is  now  repairing.  It 
is  the  fteeple  of  a church,  the  foundation  of 
which  is  Hill  difcernible.  On  the  weft  fide  of 

the 


C 43  ] 

the  tower  there  are  niches  for  images,  one  of 
which,  as  big  as  the  life,  is  ftill  entire.  The  hill 
on  which  it  hands  is  extremely  fteep,  and  of  an 
uncommon  height,  fo  that  it  commands  the 
country  on  all  ftdes,  as  well  as  the  Briftol  chan- 
nel. I was  weary  enough  when  we  came  to 
Briftol.  But  I preached  till  all  my  complaints 
were  gone.  And  I had  now  a little  leifure  to  fit 
ftill,  and  finifii  the  Notes  ov  the  Teflament. 

Friday,  Qflober  3.  I rode  over  to  Pill,  a 
place  famous  from  generation  to  generation,  even 
as  Kingfwood  itfelf,  for  hupid,  brutal,  abandon- 
ed wickednefs.  But  what  is  all  the  power  of 
the  world  and  the  devil,  when  the  day  of  God’s 
power  is  come  ? Many  of  the  inhabitants  now 
feem  defirous  of  turning  from  the  power  of  Sa- 
tan to  God. 

Sunday  5.  I preached  on  the  fouth-weft  fide 
of  Briftol.  I fuppofe  a confiderable  part  of  the 
congregation  had  hardly  ever  heard  a fermon  in 
the  open  air  before.  But  they  were  all,  rich  and 
poor,  ferious  and  attentive.  No  rudenefs  is 
now  at  Briftol. 

Thurfday  9.  I preached  on  the  Green,  near 
Pill,  to  a large  and  ferious  congregation.  It  rain- 
ed moft  of  the  time ; but  none  went  away,  al- 
tho’  there  were  many  genteel  hearers. 

Wednefday  15.  I preached  at  Bath.  Even 
here  a few  are  joined  together,  and  hope  they 
(hall  be  fcattered  no  more. 

I dined  with  fome  ferious  perfons,  in  a large, 

ftately 


[ 44  ] 

Hately  houfe,  Handing  on  the  brow  of  a delight- 
ful hill.  In  this  paradife  they  live  in  eafe,  in  ho- 
nour, and  in  elegant  abundance.  And  this  they 
call  retiring  from  the.  world. ! What  would  Gre- 
gory Lopez  have  called  it  ? 

lr  the  evening  the  fociety  met  at  Briftol.  I 
had  c bred  again  and  again,  that  no  perfon 
would  c me  who  had  not  calmly  and  deliber- 
ately refolved,  to  give  himfelf  up  to  God.  But 
I believe  not  ten  of  them  were  wanting.  And 
we  now  folemnly  and  of  fet  purpofe,  by  our 
own  free  a£l  and  deed,  jointly  agreed,  to  take 
the  Lord  for  our  God.  I think,  it  will  not  foon 
be  forgotten  ; I hope,  not  to  all  eternity. 

Monday  20. 1 left  Briflol ; and  taking  feveral 
focieties  in  the  way,  on  Thurfday  23,  preached 
at  Reading.  Several  foldiers  were  there,  and 
many  more  the  next  night,  when  I fet  before 
them  the  ten  or  5 of  the  Lord.  And  I fcarce  ever 
faw  fo  much  impreffion  made,  on  this  dull,  fen- 
felefs  people. 

Saturday  25.  I reached  London,  notwithftand- 
ing  all  the  forebodings  of  my  friends,  in  at  lead  as 
good  health  as  I left  it. 

Sunday  26.  I entered  upon  my  London-duty, 
reading  prayers,  preaching  and  giving  the  facra- 
ment,  at  Snow’-fields  in  the  morning;  preaching 
and  giving  the  facrament  at  noon,  in  Weft-ftreet 
chappel ; meeting  the  leaders  at  three,  burying 
a corpfe  at  four,  and  preaching  at  five  in  the  after- 
noon. 


[ 45  ] 

■noon.  Afterwards  I met  the  fociety,  and  con- 
cluded the  day  with  a general  love-feaft. 

Monday  27.  We  fet  out  for  Leigh  in  EfTex. 
But  being  hindered  a little  in  the  morning,  the 
night  came  on  without  either  moon  or  Ears, 
when  we  were  about  two  miles  fhort  of  Raleigh. 
The  ruts  were  fo  deep  and  uneven,  that  the 
horfes  could  fcarce  Hand,  and  the  chaife  was  con- 
tinually in  danger  of  overturning : fo  that  my 
companions  thought  it  bell,  to  walk  to  town  tho’ 
the  road  was  both  wet  and  dirty.  Leaving  them 
at  Raleigh.  I took  horfe  again.  It  was  fo  throughly' 
dark,  that  we  could  not  fee  our  horfes  heads. 
However  by  the  help  of  him  to  whom  the  night 
fhineth  as  the  day,  we  hit  every  turning,  and 
without  going  a quarter  of  a mile  out  ofour  way, 
before  nine  came  to  Leigh. 

Wednefday  29.  I returned  to  London.  In  my 
fcraps  of  time  on  this  and  two  or  three  other  davs 
I read  over  (what  I had  often  heard  much  com- 
mended) Lord  Anfon’s  Voyage.  What  pity  he 
had  not  a better  hiftorian  ? One  who  had  eyes 
to  fee,  and  courage  to  own,  the  hand  of  God. 

Thurfday,  November  y,  Mr.  Whitefield  called 
upon  me;  difputings are  now  no  more.  We  love 
one  another  and  join  hand  in  hand,  to  promote 
the  caufe  of  our  common  matter. 

In  the  afternoon  I buried  the  remains  of 
Samuel  Larwood  who  died  of  a fever  on  Sunday 
morning;  deeply  convinced  of  his  unfaithful- 
nefs,  and  yet  hoping  to  find  mercy.  He  had 

lately 


t 46  ] 

lately  taken  and  repaired  a building  in  South- 
wark, called  by  the  venerable  men  who  built  it, 
Zoar.  His  executor  offering  it  to  me,  on  the 
evening  of  Friday  6.  that  folemn  day,  which  we 
obferved  with  faffing  and  prayer  for  our  king 
and  country,  I preached  there  to  a large  and 
quiet  congregation.  But  moil  of  them  appeared 
wild  enough.  And  fuch  were  we,  till  grace  made 
the  difference. 

* Monday  10.  I preached  at  the  Wells.  And 
I did  not  wonder,  that  God  gave  an  uncommon 
bleffing,  to  thofe  who  then  affembled  in  his 
name,  confidering  the  difficulties  they  had  broke 
through.  The  froft  was  very  fevere,  accompa- 
nied w ith  fuch  a fog,  as  perhaps  the  oldeft 
unan  there  never  faw  before.  The  lamps  could 
not  be  feen  acrofs  the  ftrcet,  and  hardly  the 
ground  by  thoTe  who  had  lights  in  their  hands. 
Many  loft  their  way,  when  they  were  juft  at 
their  own  doors.  And  it  was  almoft  as  hard  to 
breathe  as  to  fee.  How  eafy  is  it  for  God  to  pu- 
niflr  a finful  nation,  even  without  employing  an 
arm  of  flefh  ? 

* Mondav  17.  As  we  were  walking  towards 
Wapping,  the  rain  poured  down  with  fuch  vio- 
lence, that  we  were  obliged  to  take  ffielter  till  it 
abated.  We  then  held  on  to  Gravel-lane:  in 
many  parts  of  which  the  waters  were  like  a river. 
However  we  got  on  pretty  well,  till  the  rain  put 
out  the  candle  in  our  lanthern.  We  then  were 
obliged  to  wade  through  all,  till  rve  came  to  the 

chap  pel- 


[ 47  ] 

chappel-yard.  Juft  as  we  entered  it,  a little 
ftreak  of  lightning  appeared  in  the  fouth-weft. 
There  was  likewife  a fmall  clap  of  thunder,  and 
a vehement  burft  of  rain,  which  rufhed  fo  plen- 
tifully through  our  fhattered  tiles,  that  the  veft- 
ry  was  all  in  a float.  Soon  after  I began  read- 
ing prayers,  the  lightning  flamed  all  round  it, 
and  the  thunder  rolled  juft  over  our  heads. 
When  it  grew  louder  and  louder,  perceiving 
many  of  the  ftrangers  to  be  much  affrighted,  I 
broke  off  the  prayers,  after  the  colleQ:,  “ Light- 
ten  our  darhnefs  we  befeech  thee,  O Lord,” 
and  began  applying.  The  Lord Jitteth  above  the 
water-food  ; the  Lord  remaineth  a king  for  ever. 
Prefently  the  lightning,  thunder  and  rain  ceafed, 
and  we  had  a remarkable  calm  evening. 

* It  was  obferved,  that  exaffly  at  this  hour, 
they  were  adting  Macbeth,  in  Drurv-Lane  : and 
juft  as  the  mock-thunder  began,  the  Lord  be- 
gan to  thunder  out  of  heaven,  For  a while  it 
put  them  to  a ftand.  But  they  foon  took  cour- 
age and  went  on.  Otherwife  it  might  have  been 
fufpefted,  that  the  fear  of  God  had  crept  into 
the  very  theatre  ! 

Tuefday  18.  We  bad  a folemn  watch-night 
at  Zoar. 

Wednef.  2 6.  Being  much  importuned  there- 
to, I wrote  “ Serious  thoughts  on  the  earth- 
quake at  Lifbon  directed,  not  as  1 defigned  at 
firft,  to  the  fmall  vulgar,  but  the  great : to  the 

learned, 


[ 48  ] 


learned,  rich  and  honourable  Heathens,  com- 
monly called  Chriftians. 

Tuefday,  Dec.  2.  I received  a remarkable  let- 
ter, part  of  which  I have  here  fubjoined. 

“It  might  be  llrange,  Sir,  that  I whom  you 
have  no  perfonal  knowledge  of,  fhould  write 
with  the  freedom  I am  now  going  to  take.  But 
I trull,  you  defire  as  much  to  inllrufl,  as  I to 
be  infirufted.  I have  long  laboured  under  a 
difeafe,  which  comes  the  nearelt  to  that  which 
is  named  fcepticifm.  1 rejoice  at  one  time,  in 
the  belief,  that  the  religion  of  rov  country  is 
true.  But  how  tranfient  my  joy  ! While  my  bu- 
fy  imagination  ranges  through  nature,  books  and 
men,  I often  drop  into  that  horrible  pit  of  deifm, 
and  in  vain  bemoan  my  fall.  The  two  main 
fprings  which  alternately  move  my  foul  to  thefe 
oppofite  opinions  are,  firlf,  Can  it  be,  that  the 
great  God  of  the  boundlefs  univerfe,  containing 
many  thoufand  better  worlds  than  this,  Ihould 
become  incarnate  here,  and  die  on  a piece  of 
wood  ?”  There  I loofe  my  belief  of  Chriltianity. 

* But  on  the  other  hand  I think,  well,  let 
me  examine  the  fitnefs  of  things  which  deifm 
boails  of.  And  certain  it  is,  I difcern  nothing 
but  beauty  and  wifdom  in  the  inanimate  parts  of 
the  creation.  But  how’  is  the  animate  fide  of  na- 
ture ! It  (hocks  me  with  powerful  cruelty,  and 
bleeding  innocence.  I cannot  call  the  earth 
(as  Fontenelle  does)  “ A great  rolling  globe,  co- 
vered over  with  fools : but  ra'her.  a great  rolling 

globe, 


C 49  1 

globe,  covered  over  with  flaughter-houfes : 
where  few  beings  can  efcape  but  thofe  of  the 
butcher-kind,  the  lion,  wolf,  or  tyger.  And  as 
to  man  himfelf,  he  is  undoubtedly  the  fupreme 
lord,  nay,  the  uncontrolable  tyrant  of  this 
globe.  Yet  furvey  him  in  a flate  of  deifm,  and 
I mult  pronounce  him  a very  poor  creature. 
He  is  then  a kind  of  jack-catch,  an  executioner- 
general.  He  may,  nay  he  mull  deftroy,  for  his 
own  fubfiftence,  multitudes  of  beings  that  have 
done  him  no  wrong.  He  has  none  of  that  hea- 
venly power  toreifore  life.  And  can  he  be  fond 
of  the  permillion  to  take  it  away  ? One  who 
like  me,  is  fubjeft  to  the  tender  paffions,  will 
never  be  proud  of  this. 

No  dying  brute  I view  in  anguifh  here, 

But  from  my  melting  eye  defcends  a tear. 

The  very  beafls  are  entitled  to  my  compaffion  ; 
but  who  can  exprefs  the  anxieties  I feel,  for  the 
afflictions  fullained  by  virtuous  men,  and  my 
abhorrence  of  the  cruel  ? yet  in  deifm  I can  dif- 
cern  no  reward  for  the  one,  or  punifhment  for 
the  other.  On  this  view  of  things,  the  Caliilian 
king  might  well  fay,  “ He  could  have  directed 
God  to  amend  his  creation.” 

* I think  upon  the  whole,  the  God  of  wifdom 
would  not  have  made  a world,  fo  much  in  want 
of  a redeemer  as  this,  and  not  give  it  one  : there- 
Vol.  XXX.  C fore 


[ 50  ] 

fore  at  prefent,  I am  again  a Chriflian.  O that 
the  fon  of  God  would  confirm  me  his  ! As  yet  my 
foul  is  like  a weather-beaten  bird,  that  hovers 
over  the  great  ocean,  tired  and  afraid  of  drop- 
ping : death  and  eternity  are  ready  to  receive  it, 
the  pleafant  land  is  out  of  fight,  hid  by  fogs  and 
milts,  and  the  way  unknown,  to  gain  the  happy 
groves. 

I was  formerly  apt  to  mention  my  fcepticifm, 
both  to  clergymen  and  laymen,  with  a view  of 
lefTening  the  evil.  But  they  rather  increafed  it. 
Few  clergymen  cared  todifcourfe  on  the  fubjeft  : 
and  if  they  did,  they  generally  expected,  that  a 
few  weak  reafons  Ihould  eradicate  at  once  llrong 
and  deep  rooted  prejudices.  And  molt,  layman 
difcovered  an  utter  ignorance  of  the  religion 
they  pretended  to  believe  ; and  looked  upon  me 
as  if  I had  the  plague,  for  owning  I did  not  be- 
lieve it.  What  method  could  I take?  I long 
avoided  fpeaking  of  religion  to  any  but  its  great 
author  : who  I hope,  has  at  lalt  led  rne  to  one 
that  is  capable  of  removing  my  fpiritual  dark- 
nefs.  May  the  giver  of  all  goodnefs  reward  you 
in  that  day  when  (according  to  the  prophet 
Daniel)  The  wife JlicM flint  as  the  bnghtnefs  of  the 
frmement,  and  they  that  turn  many  to  rigktoow  nefs 
as  the  ftars for  ever !" 

Friday  12.  As  I was  returning  from  Zoar,  I 
came,  as  well  as  ufual  to  Moorfields.but  there  mv 
ftrength  entirely  failed,  and  fuch  a faintnefs,  and 

wearinefs 


[ 5*  ] 

wearinefs  feized  me,  that  it  was  with  difficulty  I 
got  home.  I could  not  but  think,  how  happy  it 
would  beffuppofe  we  were  ready  for  the  bride- 
groom) to  fink  down  and  deal  away  at  once,  with- 
out any  of  the  hurry  and  pomp  of  dying  ! Yet  it 
is  happier  dill,  to  glorify  God,  in  our  death,  as 
'veil  as  our  life. 

About  this  time  I received  a ferious,  fcnfible 
letter,  the  fubdance  of  which  was  as  follows. 

“ Scarce  any  nation  paffes  a century,  without 
feme  remarkable  fluctuation.  How  fhould  it  be 
otherwife  ? For  how  can  that  be  perpetually 
/table,  wherein  man,  full  of  in  liability,  is  princi- 
pally concerned  ? It  is  certain  therefore,  that 
all  the  quiet  in  a nation  is  ordered  by  divine 
wifdom  ; as  all  the  confufions  and  convulfions 
are  permitted  by  divine  juflice.  Let  us  view  the 
prefent  date  of  Great-Britain  in  this  light  : red- 
ing allured,  that  all  which  befalls  us,  is  intended 
to  promote  our  good,  in  this  world,  and  that 
which  is  to  come. 

“ This  land  is  ripe  for  judgments.  Flow  few 
are  there  herein,  who  even  intend  to  pleafe  God 
in  all  they  do  P and  all  befides  are  fubjeCls  of 
divine  wrath.  For  all  who  live  without  any  re- 
gard to  God,  are  wilful  Tinners  againd  God,  and 
every  hour  liable  to  the  droke  of  his  offended 
judice. 

“ And  what  flrall  thefe  do,  when  viflted  by 
the  fword,  the  plague,  the  famine,  or  the  furious 
C 2 elements  ? 


[ 52  ] 


Elements  ? O that  they  would  turn  to  God,  thro’- 
the  Saviour  of  finners  ! Surely  then  they  would 
find  mercy  ! Yea,  and  probably  fee  the  falva- 
tion  of  God,  even  in  the  land  of  the  living. 

“ But  what  fhall  the  Chriftians  do  in  the  time 
of  public  calamitites  ? Be  ftill,  look  up,  and 
follow  providence.  Be  ftill,  O my  foul  in  the 
midft  of  tumults  and  the  difirefs  of  nations.  Take 
no  comfort  in  any  thing  but  in  the  confcioufnefs 
of  divine  love.  Liften  to  his  voice  and  quietly 
wait  to  fee  the  hand  of  God  over  all.  If  you  are 
uncertain  what  to  do,  look  up,  and  expeftwifdom 
from  above.  If  you  fear,  look  up  for  courage  and 
faith  to  aft  well  on  all  occafions.  If  the  fword 
is  at  your  throat,  look  up  for  fubmiffion  to  the 
wife  and  gracious  will  of  God.  Look  up  for 
power  to  pray  without  ceafing,  and  in  every 
thing  to  give  thanks.  Follow  providence.  Do 
not  run  bejore  but  after  the  hand  that  leads  the 
fimple-hearted,  with  a fteddy  attention,  and  a 
determinate  purpofe  to  do  what  is  pleafing  to 
him. 

* “ But  what  (hall  the  Chriftians  do,  if  the 
ftorm  come,  if  our  country  be  aftually  invaded? 
The  general  anfwer  mull  be  the  fame,  be  ftill  ; 
look  up : follow  providence.  A particular  an- 
fwer is  hard  to  give  yet.  Only  fo  far  one  may 
fay,  x.  We  rouft  take  great  care  of  our  fpirits. 
If  we  fink  into  the  world’s  fears  or  joys,  we  fhall 
lofe  our  hold  on  God.  The  fpirit  of  the  Chrif- 
tians 


[ 53  ] 


tians  and  the  fpirit  of  the  world  are  entirely  dif- 
ferent. They  can  never  agree  in  what  apper- 
tains to  the  work  of  God,  either  in  his  difpen- 
fations  of  grace  or  juflice.  2.  Every  one  fhould 
deeply  confider,  what  he  is  called  to.  Some 
tnay  think  it  would  be  a fin  to  defend  themfelves. 
Happy  are  they,  if  they  can  refrain  from  judging 
or  condemning  thofe  that  are  of  a different  per- 
fuafion.  Certain  it  is,  fome  have  fought  and  di- 
ed in  a juft  caufe,  with  a confcience  void  of  of- 
fence. To  fome  therefore  it  may  be  matter  of 
duty,  to  repel  the  common  enemy.  3.  They 
who  believe  they  are  called  to  this,  fhould  pro- 
ceed in  all  things  in  a Chriftian  fpirit.  They 
fhould  if  poffible  join  in  one  body.  They  fhould 
endeavour  to  avoid  triffling  company  and  con- 
verfation.  They  fhould  learn  the  exercife  with 
prayers  and  hymns.  But  who  of  us  is  fufhcient 
for  thefe  things  ?” 

Sundav  14.  The  minds  of  many  people  being 
deeply  affefted  with  a profpeft  of  public  calami- 
ties, I explained  thofe  comfortable  words  in  the 
firft  leffon,  Ifa.  xxvi.  co.  Come,  my  people , enter 
thou  into  thy  chambers , and  Jhut  thy  doors  about 
thee  : hide  thyfelf  as  it  were  for  a little  moment, 
until  the  indignation  be  overpcfl. 

Tuefday  16.  I fet  out  for  Lewifham,  appoint- 
ing one  to  meet  me  with  my  horfe  at  the  Stones- 
end.  But  he  miftook  his  way,  and  fo  left  me 
to  walk  on,  in  my  boots  and  great  coat.  When 
C 3 I came 


[ 54  ] 

I came  within  a quarter  of  a mile  of  Lewifham- 
bridge,  a coach  drove  fwiftly  by  me.  I won- 
dered why  the  coachman  flopped,  till  he  called, 
and  defired  me  to  come  up  to  him.  The  rea- 
fon  then  appeared  : the  low  grounds  were  quite 
covered  with  water,  fo  that  I could  not  have  at- 
tempted to  reach  the  biidge,  without  hazarding 
my  life. 

* Tuefday  23.  I was  in  the  robe-chamber,  ad- 
joining to  the  houfe  of  lords,  when  the  king  put 
on  his  robes.  His  brow  was  much  furrowed 
with  age,  and  quite  clouded  with  care.  And  is 
this  all  the  world  can  give  even  to  a king  ? All 
the  grandeur  it  can  afford  ? A blanket  ofErmin 
jound  his  fhoulders,  fo  heavy  and  cumberfome 
he  can  fcarce  move  under  it!  An  huge  heap  of 
borrowed  hair,  with  a few  plates  of  gold  and  glit- 
tering flones  upon  his  head  ! Alas,  what  a bau- 
ble is  human  greatnefs  ? And  even  this  will  not 
endure  ! Cover  the  head  with  ever  fo  much  hair 
and  gold  : yet 

Seif  te  ProJ'erpina  canum ; 

Perfonam  capiti  detrahet  ilia  tuo. 

January  1,  1756.  We  had  a large  congrega- 
tion at  four  in  the  morning.  How  much  are 
men  divided  in  their  expectations,  concerning 
the  enfuing  year  ? Will  it  bring  a large  harveft 
of  temporal  calamities?  Or  of  fpiritual  bleffings? 

Perhaps 


C 55  ] 

Perhaps  of  both  ; of  temporal  affli&ions  prepa- 
ratory to  fpiritual  bleffmgs. 

Monday  5.  This  week  I wrote  “ An  addrefs 
to  the  clergy  which,  confidering  the  fituation 
of  public  affairs,  I judged  would  be  more  fea- 
fonable  and  more  eafily  borne,  at  this  time  than 
at  any  other. 

* Wednefday  14.  Mr,  Wallh  wrote  me  as 
follows : 

Rev.  and  very  dear  Sir, 

“ In  Mr.  Booker’s  letter  are  many  palpable 
fahlioods.  But  what  exafperated  him  fo,  he 
does  not  tell.  It  was  my  oppofing  his  Arian 
principles:  my  telling  him,  I had  the  fame  ar- 
guments to  prove  the  divinity  of  Chrift,  as  to 
prove  the  Godhead  of  the  Father.  1.  The  Fa- 
ther is  called  God  ; fo  is  the  Son,  If.  ix.  6. 
2.  The  Father  is  called  So  is  the  Son, 

Hof.  i.  7.  The  Father  is  called  npH'  : fo  is  the 
Son,  Hof.  i.  7.  The  Father  is  faid  to  be Jrom 
everlajling.  So  the  Son  is  called  “jy>  2N,  If. 
ix.  6.  Not,  the  everlajhng  Father',  but  the  Fa- 
ther or  author  of  eternity.  4.  The  Father  is  faid 
to  create  all  things.  So  is  the  Son,  Jo.  i.  and 
Col.  i.  5.  The  Father  is  faid  to  be  Almighty  : 
fo  is  the  Son.  6.  The  Father  is  omniprefent  : fo 
is  the  fon,  Mat.  xx.  18.  7.  The  Father  is  om- 
nifcient ; fo  is  the  Son.  Rev.  ii.  7.  The  Father  for- 
gives fins:  fo  does  the  Son,  Mark  ii.  8.  The 
Father  is  judge  of  all  : fo  is  the  Son. 

“ But  flill  he  difputed,  whether  any  man 
C 4 fhould 


[ ^ ] 

fhould  pray  to  Chrift  ? I gave  thefe  reafons  for 
it.  1.  All  men  are  bound  to  honour  the  Son,  as 
they  honour  the  Father.  But  we  are  to  honour 
the  bather,  by  praying  to  him.  Therefore  we 
fhould  fo  honour  the  Son.  2.  God  commands. 
Let  all  the  angels  of  God.  vjorfiip  him.  This 
is  done,  Rev.  v.  And  it  is  certain  praife 
and  thankfgiving,  are  fuperior  rather  than 
inferior  to  prayer.  3.  St.  Paul  prayed  to 
him,  2 Cor.  xii.  8,  9.  4.  St.  Stephen 
prayed  to  him,  A£ts  vii.  59.  (The  word,  God, 
is  not  in  the  original.)  3.  All  believers  in  the 
apoftolic  age  prayed  to  him,  1 Cor.  i.  2.  For 
what  is,  to  call  upon  his  name,  but  to  pray  to 
him  ? 

“ When  he  could  not  anfwer  thefe  reafons, 
he  called  them  cant,  and  faid  “ Much  learning 
has  made  thee  mad.”  What  he  calls  “ Con- 
tempt,” was  confronting  him  with  fcripture  and 
reafon,  in  defence  of  the  Godhead  of  Chrift.  I 
acknowledge,  I have  been  an  oppofer  of  Arian- 
ifm,  ever  fince  I knew  what  it  was:  but  efpe- 
cially  fince  my  late  illnefs,  during  which  I had 
fuch  glorious  evidences  of  the  eternal  power  and 
Godhead  of  my  great  Redeemer.  I blefs  God, 

I love  Mr.  B as  well  as  all  mankind.  But 

it  grieves  me  to  fee  the  people  led  in  the  high 
road  to  hell,  inflead  of  heaven  : efpecially  at  a 
time  which  calls  upon  all,  to  awake  and  prepare 
to  meet  their  God.” 


Saturday 


[ 57  ] 

Saturday  17.  And  in  the  fpare  hours  of  the 
following  days  I read  over  Mr.  Pike’s  Philofo- 
phia  Sacra,  a (reatife  admirably  well  wrote,  by 
an  ingenious  man,  who  fays  all  that  can  be  faid, 
for  Mr.  Hutchinfon’s  hypothefis.  But  it  is  only 
an  hypothefis  Hill  ; much  fuppofition,  and  little 
proof. 

Monday  26.  I rode  to  Canterbury  and  preach- 
ed in  the  evening  to  fuch  a congregation  as  I 
never  faw  there  before.  In  which  were  abund- 
ance of  the  foldiers,  and  not  a few  of  their  of- 
ficers. 

Wednefday  28.  I preached  about  noon  at 
Dover,  to  a very  ferious,  but  fmall  congregation. 
We  afterwards  walked  up  to  the  Caflle,  on  the 
top  of  a mountain.  It  is  an  amazingly  fine  fitua- 
tion.  And  from  hence  we  had  a clear  view  of 
that  vaft  piece  of  the  cliff,  which  a few  days  ago 
divided  from  the  reff,  and  fell  down  upon  the 
beach. 

* Friday  30.  In  returning  to  London,  I read 
the  life  of  the  late  Czar,  Peter  the  Great.  Un- 
doubtedly he  was  a foldier,  a general,  and  a 
ftatefman,  fcarce  inferior  to  any.  But  why  was 
he  called  a Ckrijiian  ? What  has  Chriftianity  to 
do  either  with  deep  diffimulation  or  favage- 
cruelty  ? 

Friday,  February  6.  The  faff-day  was  a glori- 
ous day  ; fuch  as  London  has  fcarce  feen  fince 
the  refforation.  Every  church  in  the  city  was 
C 5 more 


[ <58  ] 

more  than  full  : and  a folernn  feiioufnefs  fat  on 
every  face.  Surely  God  heareth  the  prayer  : 
and  there  will  yet  be  a lengthening  of  our  tran- 
quility. 

* Even  the  Jews  obferved  this  day  with  a pe- 
culiar folemnity.  The  form  of  prayer  which 
was  ufed  in  their  fynagogue,  began,  “ Come, 
and  let  us  return  unto  the  Lord  ; for  he  hath 
torn  and  he  will  heal  us and  concluded  with 
thofe  remarkable  words  : “ Incline  the  heart  of 
our  fovereign  lord  King  George,  as  well  as  the 
hearts  of  his  lords  and  counfellors,  to  ufe  U3 
kindly,  and  all  our  brethren,  the  children  of 
Ifrae! : that  in  his  days  and  in  our  days  we  may 
fee  the  reftoration  of  Judah,  and  that  Ifrael  may 
dwell  in  fafety,  and  the  Redeemer  may  come  to 
Zion.  May  it  be  thy  will ! And  we  all  fay. 
Amen.” 

Monday  23.  I paid  another  vifit  to  Canter- 
bury, but  came  in  too  late  to  preach. 

Tuefday  24.  Abundance  of  fc-ldiers  and  many 
officers  came  to  the  preaching.  And  furely  the 
fear  and  the  love  of  God  will  prepare  them  ei- 
ther for  death  or  victory. 

Wednefday  2,5.  I dined  with  Col.  — who 
faid,  “ No  men  fight  like  thofe  who  fear  God  : 

I had  rather  command  five  hundred  fuch,  than 
any  regiment  in  his  Majefty’s  army/’ 

Thurfday  22.  I had  fo  fevere  a cold,  that  I 
could  harldly  fpeak  to  be  heard.  However  I 

preached 


[ 59  ] 

preached  morning  and  evening  as  I could,  and 
the  next  day.  returned  to  London. 

Monday  March  1.  I fet  out  for  Briftol.  Some 
time  after,  I received  the  copy  of  another  let- 
ter, dated  March  2,  from  the  Rev.  Mr.  Davies  in 
Virginia,  part  of  which  I have  fubjoined. 

“ When  the  books  arrived,  I gave  public 
notice  after  fermon,  and  defired  fuch  negroes  as 
could  read,  and  fuch  white  people  as  would 
make  good  ufe  of  them,  and  were  not  able  to 
buv,  to  come  to  my  houfe.  For  fome  time 
after,  the  poor  (laves,  whenever  they  could  get 
an  hour's  leifure,  hurried  away  to  me,  and  re- 
ceived them  with  all  the  genuine  indication  of 
paflionate  gratitude.  All  the  books  were  very 
acceptable,  but  none  more  fo  than  the  pfalms 
and  hymns,  which  enabled  them  to  gratify  their 
peculiar  tafte  for  pfalmody.  Sundry  of  them 
lodged  all  night  in  my  kitchen.  And  fometimes 
when  I have  awaked,  at  two  or  three  in  the 
morning,  a torrent  of  feared  pfalmody  has  pour- 
ed into  my  chamber.  In  this  exercife  fome  of 
them  fpend  the  whole  night. 

“ The  good  effefls  of  this  chairty  are  already 
apparent.  It  convinces  the  heathen,  that  how- 
ever carelefs  about  religion  the  generality  of  the 
white  people  are,  yet  there  are  fome,  who  think 
it  a matter  of  importance.  It  has  excited  fome 
of  their  mailers  to  emulation,  and  they  are  afham- 
ed,  that  Grangers  on  the  other  fide  the  Atlan- 
C 6 tic 


[ 6o  ] 

tic  ocean,  fhould  be  at  fuch  pains  to  teach  their 
domeitics,  while  themfelves  are  negligent  about 
it.  Such  of  the  negroes  as  can  read  already,  are 
evidently  improving  in  knowledge.  It  has  excit- 
ed others  to  learn  to  read  : for  as  I give  books 
to  none  but  fuch  as  can  read,  they  confider  them 
as  a reward  for  their  indultry.  And  I am  told, 
that  in  almoft  every  houfe  in  my  congregation, 
and  in  many  other  places  they  fpend  every  lei- 
fure  hour,  in  endeavouring  to  learn.  Many  do 
this  from  a fincere  defire  to  know  the  will  of 
God  ; And  if  fome  Ihould  do  it  from  the 
meaner  principle  of  vanity  or  curiofity,  yet  I 
cannot  but  rejoice,  that  it  renders  them  the 
more  capable  of  receiving  inllruftion.  To  all  this 
I may  add,  that  the  very  diftributing  thefe  books 
gives  me  an  opportunity  of  fpeaking  ferioufly, 
and  with  particular  application  to  many  who 
would  not  otherwife  come  in  my  way. 

* “ There  are  thoufands  of  negroes  in  this  co- 
lony, who  flill  continue  in  the  grofTefl  ignor- 
ance, and  are  as  rank  Pagans  now,  as  they  were 
in  the  wilds  of  Africa.  Not  a few  of  thefe  are 
within  the  bounds  of  my  congregation.  But  all 
are  not  of  this  character.  Upon  fome  my  mi- 
niftry  of  late  has  been  fuccefsful.  Two  Sunday’s 
ago  I had  the  pleafure  of  feeing  forty  of  their 
black  faces  at  the  Lord’s  table,  feveral  of  whom 
give  unufual  evidence  of  their  fincerity  in  reli- 
gion. Laft  Sunday,  I baptized  feven  or  eight, 


[ 6i  ] 

who  had  been  catechized  for  fome  time.  Indeed 
many  of  them  appear  determined  to  prefs  into 
the  kingdom,  and  I am  perfwaded  will  find  an 
abundant  entrance,  when  many  of  the  children  of 
the  kingdom  are  (hut  out. 

“ I have  diftributed  fome  of  the  books  among 
the  poor  white  people,  with  a charge  to  circulate 
them  among  fuch  of  their  neighbours,  as  would 
ferioufly  read  them,  that  they  might  he  as  exten- 
fively  ferviceable  as  poffible.  And  fome  of  them 
have  fince  aifcovered  to  me,  what  folemn  im- 
preffions  they  received  in  reading  them. 

“ I fent  a few  of  each  fort  to  my  friend  Mr. 
Wright,  minifter  of  Cumberland,  about  ninety 
miles  hence,  where  there  are  not  a few  negroes 
thoughtful  about  Chriflianity,  and  fundry  real 
converts.  And  he  informs  me  they  have  met 
with  a very  agreeable  and  promifing  reception. 
He  takes  much  pains  in  inftrufting  them,  and 
has  fet  up  two  or  three  fchools  among  them  : 
where  they  attend  on  Sundays,  before  and  after 
fermon  ; for  they  have  no  other  leifure  time.” 

Wednef.  3.  I found  Briftol  all  in  a flame,  vo- 
ters and  non  voters  being  ready  to  tear  each  other 
in  pieces.  I had  not  recovered  mv  voice,  fo  as 
either  to  preach,  or  fpeak  to  the  whole  fociety  ; 
but  I defired  thofe  members  who  were  freemen, 
to  meet  me  by  themfelves:  whom  I mildly  and 
lovingly  informed  how  they  ought  to  aft  in  this 

hour 


[ 62  ] 


hour  of  temptation.  And  I believe  the  far 
greater  part  of  them  received,  and  profited  by 
the  advice. 

Thurf.  11.  I rode  to  Pill,  and  preached  to  a 
large  and  attentive  congregation.  A great  part  of 
them  were  feafaring  men.  In  the  middle  of  my 
difcoui  fe,  a prefs-gang  landed  from  a man  of  war, 
and  came  up  to  the  place.  But  after  they  had 
liftened  a while,  they  went  quietly  by,  and  mo- 
Idled  no  body. 

Mond.  ij.  I rode  to  the  Old  Paffage.  But 
finding  we  could  not  pafs,  we  went  to  Purton, 
which  we  reached  about  four  in  the  afternoon. 
But  we  were  no  nearer  Hill : for  the  boat-men 
lived  the  other  fide,  and  the  wind  was  fo  hiah. 
we  could  not  pofiibly  make  them  hear.  How- 
ever  we  determined  to  wait  awhile:  and  in  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  they  came  of  their  own  ac- 
cord. We  reached  Coleford  before  feven,  and 
found  a plain,  loving  people,  who  received  the 
word  of  God  with  allgladnefs. 

Tuef.  16.  Examining  the  little  focietv,  I found 
them  grievoufly  harraffed  by  difputations.  Bap- 
tifts  on  one  fide  and  quakers  on  the  other.  And 
hereby  five  or  fix  perfons  have  been  con- 
fufed.  But  the  reft  cleave  fo  much  the  clofer 
together.  Nor  does  it  appear,  that  there  is  now 
onetrifler,  muchlefs  a diforderly  walker  among 
them. 

* Wednef.  17. 1 learned  the  particulars  of  that 
n-  i ■ furprizing 


C 63  ] 

furprizing  florin,  which  was  here  the  year  before 
laft.  It  began  near  Cheltenham,  on  June  14, 
17^4,  and  palled  on  over  Coleford,  in  a line 
about  three  miles  broad.  It  was  rain  mixt  with 
hail.  The  hail  broke  all  the  windows  it  had  ac- 
cefs  to,  flript  all  the  trees  both  of  fruit  and 
leaves,  and  dellroyed  every  green  thing.  Many 
of  the  (tones  were  as  large  as  hen-eggs ; fome 
were  fourteen  or  fifteen  inches  round.  The  rain 
occafioned  fuch  a torrent  of  water  in  the  llreet, 
as  bore  away  man  and  beaft.  A mile  or  two  far- 
ther it  joined  with  the  waters  of  a mill-dam, 
which  it  broke  down,  and  carried  away  feveral 
houfes.  How  frequent  would  accidents  of  this 
kind  be,  if  chance,  not  God,  governed  the 
world  ? 

Thurf.  18.  We  rode  through  hard  rain  to 
Brecknock,  and  came  juft  at  the  hour  appointed 
for  preaching.  The  Town-hall,  in  which  I was 
defired  to  preach,  is  a large  and  commodious 
place:  and  the  whole  congregation  (one  poor 
gentleman  excepted)  behaved  with  ferioufnefs 
and  decency. 

Frid.  19.  I rode  over  to  Howell  Harris  at 
Trevecka,  though  not  knowing  how  to  get  any 
further.  But  he  helped  us  out  of  our  difficulties, 
offering  to  fend  one  with  us,  who  would  flrew  us 
the  way,  and  bring  our  horfes  back.  So  I then 
determined  to  go  on  to  Holy-head,  after  fpending 
a day  or  two  at  Brecknock. 

Satur.  20.  It  being  the  day  appointed  for  the 

juftices 


[ 6i  j 

juftices  and  commiffioners  to  meet,  the  town  was 
extremely  full.  And  curiofity  (if  no  better  mo- 
tive) brought  moft  of  the  gentlemen  to  the 
preaching.  Such  another  opportunity  could  not 
have  been,  of  fpeaking  to  all  the  rich  and  great 
of  the  county.  And  they  all  appeared  to  be  feTi- 
ous  and  attentive.  Perhaps  one  or  two  may  lay  it 
to  heart. 

Sund.  21.  I delayed  preaching  till  nine,  for 
the  fake  of  the  tender  and  delicate  ones.  At  two 
we  had  near  the  whole  town,  and  God  referved 
the  great  blelfing  for  the  lad.  Afterward  we  rode 
to  Trevecka.  But  our  guide  was  ill.  So  in  the 
morning  we  fet  out  without  him. 

Before  I talked  with  him  myfelf,  I wondered 
H.  Harris  did  not  go  out  and  preach  as  ufual. 
But  he  now  informed  me,  he  preached  till  he 
could  preach  no  longer,  his  conftitution  being 
entirely  broken.  While  he  was  thus  confined, 
be  was  prefi  in  fpirit,  to  build  a large  houfe, 
though  he  knew  not  why  or  for  whom.  But  as 
foon  as  it  was  built,  men,  women  and  children, 
without  his  feeking,  came  to  it  from  all  parts  of 
Wales.  And  except  in  the  cafe  of  the  orphan- 
houfe  at  Hall,  I never  heard  of  fo  many  fignal 
interpofitions  of  divine  Providence. 

Mond.  22.  It  continued  fair,  till  we  came  to 
Builth,  where  I preached  to  the  ufual  congrega- 
tion. Mr.  Phillips  then  guided  us  to  Royader, 
about  fourteen  Englilh  miles.  It  fnowed  hard  be- 
hind 


[ «5  ] 

hind  us  and  on  both  fides,  but  not  at  all  where 
we  were. 

Tuef.  23.  When  we  took  horfe,  there  was  no- 
thing to  be  feen  but  a wafte  of  white,  the  fnow 
covered  both  hills  and  vales.  As  we  could  fee  no 
path,  it  was  not  without  much  difficulty,  as  well 
as  danger,  that  we  went  on.  But  between  feven 
and  eight  the  fun  broke  out,  and  the  fnow  began 
to  melt.  So  we  thought  all  our  difficulty  was 
over,  till  about  nine  the  fnow  fell  falter  than  ever. 
In  an  hour,  it  changed  into  hail,  which  as  we 
rode  over  the  mountains  drove  violently  in  our 
face.  About  twelve  this  turned  into  hard  rain, 
followed  by  an  impetuous  wind.  However  we 
puffied  on  through  all,  and  before  funfet  came  to 
Dolly  gel  le. 

Here  we  found  every  thing  we  wanted  except 
fleep,  of  which  we  were  deprived  by  a company 
of  drunken,  roaring  fea-captains,  who  kept  pof- 
feffion  of  the  room  beneath  us,  till  between  two 
and  three  in  the  morning.  So  that  we  did  not 
take  horfe  tillafter  fix:  and  then  we  could  make  no 
great  fpeed,  the  froll  being  exceeding  fharp,  and 
much  ice  in  the  road.  Hence  we  were  not  able 
to  reach  Tannabull,  till  between  eleven  and 
twelve.  An  honeft  Welchman  here  gave  us  to 
know  (though  he  fpoke  no  Engliffi)  that  he  was 
juft  going  over  the  fands.  So  we  haftened  on 
with  him,  and  by  that  means  came  in  g*ood  time 
to  Carnarvon. 

a Here  we  pall  a quiet  and  comfortable  night, 

and 


[ 66  ] 

and  took  horfe  about  fix  in  the  morning.  Sup- 
pofing  after  we  had  rode  near  an  hour,  that  a lit- 
tle houfe  on  the  other  fide  was  the  ferry-houfe, 
we  went  down  to  the  water,  and  called  amain : 
but  we  could  not  procure  any  anfwer.  In  the 
mean  time  it  began  to  rain  hard,  though  the  wind 
was  extremely  high.  Finding  none  would  come 
over,  we  went  to  a little  church  which  flood 
near,  for  fhelter.  We  had  waited  about  an  hour, 
when  a woman  and  girl  came  into  the  church- 
yard, whom  I did  not  mind,  fuppoftng  they 
could  fpeak  no  Englifh.  They  were  following  a 
fbeep,  which  ran  clofe  to  us.  I then  afked,  “ Is 
not  this  Baldon-ferry  ?”  The  girl  anfwrered, 
“ Baldon-ferry  ! No.  The  ferry  is  two  miles  fur- 
ther.” So  we  might  have  called  long  enough. 
When  we  came  to  Baldon,  the  wind  fell,  the  fky 
cleared  up,  the  boat  came  over  without  delay, 
and  foon  landed  us  in  Anglefey.  On  our  way  to 
Holy-head,  one  met  and  informed  us,  the  packet 
failed  the  night  before.  I faid,  “ Perhaps  it  may 
carry  me  for  all  that.”  So  wTe  pufhed  on  and 
came  thither  in  the  afternoon.  The  packet  did 
fail  the  night  before,  and  got  more  than  half  fea 
over.  But  the  wind  turning  againil  them  and 
blowing  hard,  they  were  glad  to  get  back  this 
afternoon. 

I fcarce  ever  remember  fo  violent  a florm  as 
blew  all  the  night  long.  The  uTind  continued  con- 
trary the  next  day. 

Sund.  27.  About  nine  in  the  morning,  I ipcnt 

fome 


[ 6;  ] 


fome  time  with  a few  ferious  people,  and  gave 
notice  of  preaching  at  four  in  the  afternoon,  as 
foon  as  the  evening  fervice  was  ended.  It  began 
foon  after  three : ten  minutes  before  four  Mr. 
E.  began  catechizing  the  children  in  Welfh.  I 
flayed  till  after  five.  As  there  was  no  fign  of  his 
concluding,  I then  went  home,  and  found  the 
people  waiting  : to  whom  I expounded  thofe  fo- 
lemn  words,  Watch  and  pray  always , that  ye  may 
be  counted  worthy  to  tfcape  all  thefe  things  which 
are  coming  upon  the  earth. 

Mond.  29.  We  left  the  harbour  about  twelve, 
having  fix  or  feven  officers,  and  abundance  of 
paffengers  on  board.  The  wind  wTas  full  weft, 
and  there  was  great  probability  of  a ftormy  night. 
So  it  was  judged  beft,  to  put  back  : but  one  gen- 
tleman making  a motion,  to  try  a little  longer, 
in  a ffiort  time  brought  all  over  to  his  opinion. 
So  they  agreed,  to  go  out,  and  “ look  for  a 
wind.” 

The  wind  continued  wefterly  all  the  night. 
Neverthelefs  in  the  morning  we  were  within  two 
leagues  of  Ireland!  Between  nine  and  ten  I 
landed  at  Hoath,  and  walked  on  for  Dublin. 
The  congregation  in  the  evening  was  fuch  as  I 
never  law  here  before.  I hope  this  alfo  is  a token 
for  good. 

Wednef.  31.  In  converting  with  many,  I was 
furprized  to  find,  that  all  Ireland  is  in  perfeft 
fafety ! None  here  has  any  more  apprehenfion  of 

an 


[ 68  ] 

an  invafion,  than  of  being  fwallowed  up  in  the 
fea  : every  one  being  abfolutely  affured,  that  the 
French  dare  not  attempt  any  fuch  thing  ! 

Thurf.  April  1.  I bought  one  or  two  books  at 
Mr.  Smith’s,  on  the  Blind  Quay.  I wanted 
change  for  a guinea,  but  he  could  not  give  it ; fo 
I borrowed  fome  filver  of  my  companion.  The 
next  evening  a young  gentleman  came  from  Mr. 
Smith’s,  to  tell  me,  I had  left  a guinea  on  his 
counter.  Such  an  inllance  of  honefty  I have 
rarely  met  with,  either  in  Briftol  or  London. 

Satur.  4.  I went  to  the  college  chappel,  at 
which  about  forty  perfons  were  prefent,  Dr.  K. 
preached  a plain,  practical  fermon,  after  which 
the  facrament  was  adtniniflered.  I never  faw 
fo  much  decency  at  any  chappel  in  Oxford,  no, 
not  even  at  Lincoln-college.  Scarce  any  perfon 
ftirred,  or  coughed,  or  fpit,  from  the  beginning 
to  the  end  of  the  fervice. 

In  the  evening  our  houfe  was  crowded  above 
and  below : yet  many  were  obliged  to  ftand 
without.  The  whole  congregation  appeared 
ftayed  and  folid.  Do  even  the  people  of  Dublin 
know  the  day  of  their  vifitation  ? 

*■  Mond.  5.  Enquiring  for  one  whom  I faw 
three  or  four  days  ago  in  the  height  of  a violent 
pleurify,  I found  he  was  perfeftly  recovered,  and 
returned  into  the  country.  A brimftone-plaifler 
in  a few  minutes  took  away  both  the  pain  and 
the  fever.  O why  will  phyficians  play  with  the 

lives  of  their  patients ! Do  not  others  (as  well  as 

old 


[ 69  ] 

old  Dr.  Cockburn)  know,  that  “ no  end  is  art- 
fwered  by  bleeding  in  a pleurify,  which  may  not 
be  much  better  anfwered  without  it  ?” 

To  night  the  lleepers  here  began  to  open  their 
eyes,  it  being  rumoured,  that  an  exprefs  was  come 
to  the  Lord  Lieutenant,  to  inform  him,  “ The 
French  were  haftening  their  preparation,  being 
determined  to  land  in  Ireland.”  And  fo  they 
will — if  God  gives  them  leave.  But  he  has  the 
reins  in  his  own  hand. 

* Tuef.  6.  One  was  informing  me  of  an  emi- 
nent inftance  of  the  power  of  faith,  “ Many 
years  ago,  faid  fhe,  I fell  and  fprained  my  ankle., 
fo  that  I never  expended  it  would  be  quite  well. 
Seven  years  fince  laft  September,  I was  coming 
home  from  the  preaching  in  a very  dark  night,  and 
Humbling  over  a piece  of  wood,  fell  with  the 
whole  weight  of  my  body  upon  my  lame  foot.  I 
thought,  O Lord,  I fhall  not  be  able  to  hear  thy 
word  again  for  many  weeks.  Immediately  a 
voice  went  through  my  heart,  name  the  name  of 
Chrift,  and  thou  (halt  Hand.  “ I leaped  up,  and 
ftretched  out  my  foot  and  faid,  “ Lord,  Jefus 
Chrift,  I name  thy  name,  let  me  Hand.”  And 
my  pain  ceafed.  And  I ftood  up.  And  my  foot 
was  as  ftr-ong  as  ever.” 

Frid.  9.  I fpent  an  hour  with  Dr.  F— — 
a fenfible,  agreeable  man.  He  faid,  “ Six  weeks 

ago,  the  informed  the  Lord  L , 

that  he  had  exprefs  orders  from  his  Majefty,  to 
put  this  kingdom  in  a pofture  of  defence,  againft 

the 


[ 70  ] 


the  intended  invafion.  And  he  was  impowered 
to  raife  what  men  he  pleafed.  And  nothing 
has  ever  been  done  fince,  So  that  we  conclude 
the  whole  to  be  a grimace,  a mere  trick  of 
hate.” 

Sund.  11.  I met  about  an  hundred  children, 
who  are  catechized  publicly  twice  a w'eek. 
Thomas  Walfh  began  this  fome  months  ago; 
and  the  fruit  of  it  appears  already.  What  a 
pity,  that  all  our  preachers  in  every  place, 
have  not  the  zeal  and  wifdom  to  follow  his  ex- 
ample ? 

Tuef.  13.  I breakfafled  with  one  of  the  molt 
lovely  old  men  I ever  faw,  John  Garret,  a 
Dutchman,  by  birth,  and  a fpeaker  among  the 
quakers. 

Thence  we  went  to  a poor,  dying  backflider. 
When  we  came  in,  he  was  crying  to  God  out  of 
the  deep.  But  before  we  left  him,  his  heavinefs 
was  gone,  and  he  deftrcd  nothing  but  to  be  with 
Chriff. 

* Wednef.  14  I looked  over  a celebrated 
book,  The  Fable  oj  the  Bees.  Till  now  I imagined 
there  had  never  appeared  in  the  world  fuch  a 
book  as  the  works  of  Machiavel.  But  Dr.  Man- 
devile,  goes  far  beyond  it.  The  Italian  only  re- 
commends a few  vices,  as  nfeful  to  fome  particu- 
lar men,  and  on  fome  particular  occafons.  But 
the  Englifhman  loves  and  cordially  recommends 
vice  of  every  kind  : not  only  as  ufeful  now  and 

then, 


[ 7*  1 

then,  but  as  abfolutely  necejfary , at  all  times  for 
all  communities ! Surely  Voltaire  would  hardly 
have  faid  fo  much!  And  even  Mr.  Sandiman 
could  not  have  faid  more  ! 

April  16.  Being  Good-friday,  near  four  hun- 
dred ofthe  fociety  met,  to  follow  the  example  of 
their  brethren  in  England,  and  renew  their  cove- 
nant with  God.  It  was  a folemn  hour. 
Many  mourned  before  God,  and  many  were 
comforted. 

In  the  following  week  all  our  preachers  met. 
I never  before  found  fuch  unanimity  among 
them.  They  appeared  now  to  be  not  only  of 
one  heart,  but  likewife  of  one  mind  and  judg- 
ment. 

Sund.  25.  One  of  the  Germans  Humbled  in, 
while  I was  expounding.  Is  Chrijl  the  minifter  of 
(in  ? For  a time  fhe  Teemed  greatly  diverted. 
But  the  application  fpoiled  her  mirth.  She  foon 
hung  down  her  head,  and  felt  the  difference  be- 
tween the  chaff  and  the  wheat. 

Mond.  26.  I fet  cut  for  Cork,  purpofing  to  fee 
as  manv  focieties  as  I could  in  my  way.  In  the 
afternoon  I came  to  Edinderry,  where  the  little 
fociety  havebuilt  a commodious  preaching-houfe. 
I had  deftgned  to  preach  abroad  ; but  the  keen 
north  wind  drove  us  into  the  houfe.  The  concrre- 

O 

gation  (though  they  had  no  previous  notice) 
filled  it  from  end  to  end.  But  fome  of  them  found 
it  too  hot,  and  hurried  out,  while  I applied,  Ye 

mini:  tig  hoifn  again . 


About 


[ 72  ] 

About  this  time  I received  the  following 
letter : 

Reverend  Sir, 

I once  through  the  influence  of  thofe  about  me 
was  ready  to  join  the  common  cry  againfl  you, 
not  knowing  what  I did.  But  fince,  by  hearing 
your  difcourfes  with  fome  of  Mr.  Walfh’s ; and 
by  reading  your  fermons  and  appeals,  I have 
learned  a better  leflon.  I have  learned,  that  true 
Chriftianity  confifts,  not  in  a fet  of  opinions,  or 
of  forms  and  ceremonies,  but  in  holinefs  of  heart 
and  life,  in  a thorough  imitation  of  our  Divine 
Mafler.  And  this  I take  to  be  the  do£trine  of  the 
church  of  England,  nor  do  I apprehend  you  dif- 
fer from  her  at  all  in  do&rine.  And  I am 
grieved  to  know,  you  have  too  much  caufe  to 
differ  from  many  of  her  prefent  clergy.  Why 
then  fhould  I cavil  at  you,  for  feeding  thofe 
fheep,  that  are  ftarved  by  their  own  fhepherds? 
For  endeavouring  to  recover  them  from  that  flu- 
pid  lethargy  and  open  wickednefs,  which  in- 
volve the  generality  of  mankind  ? This  is  your 
happinefs : would  to  God  it  could  be  mine!  I 
have  often  had  a flrong  defire  for  it ; and  would 
now  gladly  dedicate  my  life  to  it,  if  my  poor 
abilities  and  mean  education,  together  with  the 
twenty-third  article  of  our  church,  did  not  crufh 
the  thought.  However,  as  I do  not  fee  you  vary 
from  the  doEtrine  of  the  church,  I fhould  not 
fcruple  to  join  with  you.  My  chief  motives 

(befide 


[ 73  ] 

(befide  that  ftrong  defire)  are,  firft,  Irefledl,  there 
is  fcarce  a Ration  in  life,  at  leaft  in  the  trading 
world,  without  its  attendant  frauds  or  vices, 
which  are  now  fcarce  feparable  from  it.  Se- 
condly, I am  at  prefent  of  no  ufe  in  fociety  : fo 
that  on  account  of  any  advantage  that  now  ac- 
crues from  me  to  the  public,  I need  not  fcruple 
giving  myfelf  to  my  darling  employment. 
Thirdly,  1 am  convinced,  a man  may  inftru&and 
reform  himfelf,  by  inftrufting  and  reforming 
others.  But  may  I attempt  this,  otherwife  than 
by  the  ordinary  method  of  admitting  labourers 
into  the  Lord’s  vineyard  ? Your  thoughts  on 
this  fubjcct  would  be  received  as  a fingular  fa- 
vour : for  which  1 dial!  impatiently  wait,  who  am, 
Reverend  Sir, 

Your  affediionate  and  ready  fervant. 

Wednef.  28.  I rode  to  Tullamore:  where 
one  of  the  fociety,  Edward  Wallis,  gave  me  a 
very  furprizing  account  of  himfelf.  He  faid, 
“ When  I was  about  twenty  years  old,  I went  to 
Waterford  for  bufinefs.  After  a few  weeks  I 
refolved  to  leave  it,  and  packed  up  my 
things,  in  order  to  fet  out  the  next  morning. 
This  was  Sunday ; but  my  lan  llord  preft  me 
much  not  to  go  till  the  next  day.  In  the  after- 
noon we  walked  out  together,  and  went  into  the 
river.  After  a-while,  leaving  him  near  the 
fhore,  I flruck  out  into  the  deep.  I foon  heard 
Vol.  XXX,  D a cry. 


[ 74  ] 

a cry,  and  turning  faw  him  rifing  and  finking  in 
the  channel  of  the  river.  I fwam  back  with  all 
fpeed,  and  feeing  him  fink  again,  dived  down 
after  him.  When  I was  near  the  bottom,  he 
clafped  his  arm  round  my  neck,  and  held  me  fo 
fall  that  I could  not  rife.  Seeing  death  before 
me,  all  my  fins  came  into  my  mind,  and  I faintly 
called  for  mercy.  In  a-while  mv  fenfes  went 
away,  and  I thought  I was  in  a place  full  of 
light  and  glory,  with  abundance  of  people. 
While  I was  thus,  he  who  held  me  died,  and  I 
floated  up  to  the  top  of  the  water.  I then  imme- 
diately came  to  myfelf,  and  fwam  to  the  fhore, 
where  feveral  Hood  who  had  feen  us  fink,  and 
faid,  “ They  never  knew  fuch  a deliverance  be- 
fore : for  I had  been  under  water  full  twenty 
minutes.  It  made  me  more  ferious  for  two 
or  three  months.  Then  I returned  to  all  my 
fins/’ 

“ But  in  the  midll  of  all,  I had  a voice  follow- 
ing me  every  where,  “ When  an  able  minilter 
of  the  gofpel  comes,  it  will  be  well  with  thee 
Some  years  after  I entered  into  the  army  : our 
troop  lay  at  Phillips-Town,  when  Mr.  W.  came. 
I was  much  a fleeted  by  his  preaching,  but  not  fo 
as  to  leave  my  fins.  The  voice  followed  me  Hill: 
and  when  Mr.  J.  W.  came,  before  I faw  him  I 
had  an  unfpeakable  conviftion,  that  he  was  the 
man  I looked  for.  And  foon  after  I found  peace 
with  God,  and  it  was  well  with  me  indeed.” 

Thurf.  29. 1 preached  on  one  fide  of  the  market- 
place, 


[ 75  ] 

place,  to  a numerous  congregation.  I was  after- 
wards invited  by  fome  of  the  officers,  to  fpend  an 
hour  with  them  at  the  barracks.  It  at  leaf!  freed 
them  from  prejudice  againft  the  prefent  work  of 
God,  if  it  anfwered  no  farther  end. 

Frid.  go.  I was  prefl  to  turn  afide  to  Athlone, 
a gentlewoman  of  Barbadoes,  who  was  obliged 
to  return  thither  ffiortly,  having  a great  defire  to 
fee  me.  So  I went  to  Athlone,  and  fpent  one 
or  two  hours  in  clofe  converfation  with  her  and 
her  huiband.  We  had  a comfortable  meeting  in 
the  evening  ; and  molt  of  the  gentry  in  the  town 
were  piefent  : but  who  can  warn  them  to  flee 
from  the  wrath  to  come?  They  are  increafed  in 
goods,  and  need  nothing  ! 

Satur.  May  1.  I rode  to  Birr  through  rain,  hail 
and  fnow,  fuch  as  is  ufual  on  the  firlt  of  January. 
I had  defigned  to  preach  abroad  ; but  the  wind 
was  too  ffiarp  to  be  borne  either  by  me  or  the 
people. 

Sund.  2.  We  rode  to  Mountmelick.  About 
five  I preached  in  the  market-place.  I was 
on  the  point  of  concluding  when  a violent 
florin  came.  1 ill  then  the  bottles  of  heaven  were 
Jlayea. 

Tuef.  4.  We  rode  to  Portarlington  : where  on 
Wednef.  5.  at  the  defire  of  feveral  who  could 
not  attend  the  early  preaching,  I preached  in  the 
affembly-room  at  ten,  on.  Ye  mvjl  be  born  again. 
Many  of  the  beji  in  the  town  (fo  calledj  were  pre- 
fent, and  feemed  not  a little  amazed.  Many 
D 2 more 


C 76  ] 

more  came  in  the  evening,  among  whom  I found 
an  unufual  liberty  of  fpirit.  For  the  prefent  moll 
of  them  feemed  much  affe&ed.  But  how  foon 
will  the  thorns  grow  un? 

Thurf.  6.  1 rode  to  Kilkenny.  One  of  the  dra- 
goons who  were  quartered  here,  foon  found  us 
out.  A few  both  of  the  army  and  of  the  town, 
are  joined  and  conftantly  meet  together.  I 
preached  in  the  barracks,  in  one  of  the  officer's 
rooms.  Still,  in  Ireland,  the  fit  ft  call  is  to  the 
foldiery. 

Frid.  7.  We  rode  to  Waterford,  where  after 
preaching  I earneftly  exhorted  the  fociety,  to 
love,  as  brethren.  On  the  fame  fubjeft;  I preached 
in  the  morning,  and  fpent  great  part  of  the  day, 
in  Driving  to  remove  mifunderftancings  and  of- 
fences. It  was  not  loft  labour.  Six  and  twenty 
were  left  in  the  morning:  before  night  feven 
and  fifty  were  joined  together. 

T.  Walfh  preached  at  five  ; but  the  room  be- 
ing too  frnall,  they  were  obliged  to  go  into  the 
card.  In  the  evening  we  had  high  and  low,  rich 
and  poor,  both  in  the  yard  and  adjoining  gardens. 
There  feemed  now  to  be  a general  call  to  this 
city.  So  I thought  it  beft  the  next  morning, 
Mond.  to.  to  leave  Mr.  Walih  there,  while  I 
went  forward  to  Clonmell,  the  pleanmteft  town 
beyond  ail  companion  which  I have  yet  feen  in 
Ireland.  It  has  four  broad,  ftrai:  flreets  of  well- 
built  houfes,  which  crofseach  other  in  the  center 
of  the  town.  Clofe  to  the  walls,  on  the  fouth  fide, 


runs 


t 77  J 

runs  a broa3,  clear  river.  Beyond  -this  rites  a 
green  and  fruitful  mountain,  and  hangs  over  the 
town.  The  vale  runs  many  miles  both  eaft 
and  well,  and  is  well  cultivated  throughout. 

I preached  at  five  in  a large  loft,  capable  ol 
containing  3 or  600  people.  But  it  was  not  full : 
many  being  afraid  of  its  falling,  as  another  did 
fome  years  before ; by  which  feveral  of  the  hear- 
ers were  much  hurt,  and  one  fo  bruifed,  that  fhe 
died  in  a few  days. 

* Tuef.  lx.  I was  at  a lofs  where  to  preach, 
tire  perfon  who  owned  the  loft,  refufmg  to  let. 
me  preach  there,  or  even  in  the  yard  below.  And 
the  commanding  officer  being  afked  for  the  ufe 
of  the  barrack  yard,  anfwered,  “ It  was  not  a pro- 
per place.  Not,  faid  he,  that  I have  any  objec- 
tion to  Mr.  Wefiey.  I will  hear  him,  if  he 
preaches  under  the  gallows.”  It  remained,  to 
pieach  in  the  fireet:  and  by  this  means  the  con- 
gregation was  more  than  doubled.  Both  the  offi- 
cers and  foldiersgave  great  attention,  till  a poor 
man,  fpecial  drunk,  came  marching  down  the 
fireet,  attended  by  a popilh  mob,  with  a club  in 
one  hand,  and  a large  cleaver  in  the  other,  griev- 
oufly  curbing  and  blafpheming,  and  fwearing 
“ He  would  cut  off  the  preacher’s  head.”  It  was 
with  difficulty  that  I reflrained  the  troopers,  ef- 
peciallv  them  that  were  not  of  the  fociety.  When 
he  came  nearer,  the  mayor  fiept  out  of  the  con- 
gregation, and  drove  by  good  words  to  make  him 
quiet.  But  he  could  not  prevail ; on  which  he 
D 3 went 


[ 78  ] 


went  into  hishoufe,  2nd  returned  with  his  white 
wand.  At  the  fame  time  he  fent  for  two  confla- 
bles,  who.  prefently  came  with  their  ffaves.  He 
charged  them,  not  t©  flrike  the  man,  unlefs  he 
ffruck  firft  : but  this  he  did  immediately,  as  foon 
as  they  came  within  his  reach,  and  wounded  one 
of  them  in  the  wrift.  On  this  the  other  knocked 
him  down,  which  he  did  three  times,  before  he 
would  fubmit.  The  mayor  then  walked  belore, 
the  conflables  on  either  hand,  and  conduced 
him  to  goal. 

Wednef.  12.  In  the  evening  I prea.ched  in 
the  new  hoiife  at  Corke,  very  near  as 
large  as  that  in  Dublin  ; and  far  better  finilhed 
in  every  refpefd,  though  at  four  hundred  pounds 
lefs  expence. 

* Mond.  17.  Walking  up  the  Red-houfe  walk 
(which  runs  between  two  rows  of  meadows,  with 
the  river  winding  through  them,  and  a chain  of 
fruitful  hills  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left)  I 
faw  the  plain  reafon,  why  ftrangers  ufuallv  com- 
plain, of  the  unwholefomnefs  of  the  water  in 
Corke.  Many  women  were  filling  veffels  with  ri- 
ver water,  (which  is  that  commonly  ufed  in  the 
city,  for  tea  and  molt  other  purpofes)  when  the 
tide  w7as  at  the  height.  Now  although  this  is  not 
fait,  vet  it  cannot  but  affect  both  the  ftomach  and 
bowels  of  tender  perfons. 

Wednef.  19.  I preached  in  the  evening,  on 
Chrijl  crucified , to  the  Jews  a /tumbling- block  and 

to 


[ 79  1 

to  the  Greeks  foolijhnefs  : while  I was  fpeaking,  a 
gentleman  in  the  gallery,  cried  out  with  a loud 
voice,  and  fwore  to  it,  “ I am  of  the  church  : I 
Hand  up  for  the  church  : I will  fhcd  my  blood 
for  the  church.”  But  finding  none  to  contradibl 
him,  he  fat  down,  and  I finifhed  my  difcourfe. 

Thurf.  20.  One  came  in  a great  conffernation, 
to  inform  us,  Capt.  F.  (the  gentleman  who  fpoke) 
was  raifing  a mob  againft  the  evening.  This  re- 
port fpread  up  and  down,  and  greatly  increafed 
the  evening  congregation.  But  no  mob  appeared, 
nor  was  there  any  difluibance,  but  fuch  a blef- 
fing  as  we  have  feldom  found  : I fuppofe,  in  an- 
fwer  to  the  prayers  of  many,  who  had  been  ear- 
neflly  crvingunto  God. 

On  Sunday  laid  I was  de fired  by  one  to  call 
on  her  dying  father,  though  fhe  faid  he  was 
fpeechlefs  and  fenfelefs.  But  as  foon  as  I fpoke, 
he  appeared  fenfible  : while  we  prayed,  he  reco- 
vered his  fpeeph.  The  next  day  he  was  able  to 
walk  abroad,  but  continued  deeply  ferious.  On 
F’rid.  21.  his  illnefs  returned,  and  he  lay  down 
and  died  in  peace. 

Mond.  24.  I preached  in  the  market-place  at 
Kinfale. 

Tuef.  25.  I walked  to  the  fort.  It  commands 
the  entrance  of  the  harbour,  and  has  three  tier  of 
guns,  one  over  the  other.  It  is  built  upon  the 
firm  rock,  is  of  a large  extent,  and  the  upper  part 
of  a great  height  from  the  water.  But  all  is  out  of 
repair  : many  of  the  cannon  are  difmounted ; 

D 4 moil: 


[ 8o  ] 


mou  of  them  unfit  for  fervice  ; fo  that  many 
think  a fecond  rate  man  of  war,  might  take  it  in 
a few  hours  time. 

At  one  I preached  in  the  exchange.  Abun- 
dance of  foldiers,  and  the  colonel  with  feveral 
officers  were  prefent.  So  that  I conceived  fome 
hopes  that  the  feed  fown  even  at  Kinfale  will  not 
all  be  loft. 

At  five  I preached  in  the  market-houfe  at  In- 
niffiannon,  to  a very  large  and  well  behaved  con- 
gregation, and  then  went  on  to  Bandon. 

* Frid.  28.  I rode  out  with  Mrs.  Jones,  as  I 
did  every  day  to  fave  her  life,  if  poffible.  From 
the  hill  we  had  a fair  view  of  Caftle  Barnard, 
with  the  park  adjoining:  in  which,  a few  yeats 
ago,  Judge  Barnard  ufed  to  take  fuch  delight. 
Indeed  it  is  a beautiful  place  in  every  refpeft. 
The  houfe  is  one  of  the  moftelegant  I havefeen 
in  the  kingdom,  both  as  to  the  flru&ure  and  the 
fituation.  Handing  on  the  fide  of  a fruitful  hill, 
and  having  a full  command  of  the  vale,  the  river 
and  the  oppofite  mountain.  The  ground  near 
the  houfe  is  laid  out  with  the  fineft  tafle,  in  gar- 
dens of  every  kind,  with  a wildernefs,  canals, 
filh-ponds,  water-works,  and  rows  01  trees 
in  various  forms.  The  park  includes  part  of 
each  hill,  with  the  river  between,  running 
through  the  meadow  and  lawns,  which  are  tufted 
over  with  trees  of  every  kind,  and  every  now 
and  then  a thicket  or  grove.  The  Judge  finiffied 


[ 8i  ] 

his  plan,  called  the  land  after  his  name,  and 
dropt  into  the  duft. 

Sunday  30.  I returned  to  Corke.  About  that 
time  I received  a letter  from  Mr.  Gillies,  part  of 
which  follows. 

“ The  Lord  hath  been  pleafed  to  inflift  a 
heavy  ftroke  upon  us,  by  calling  home  his  faith- 
ful fervant  Mr.Wardrobe.  Concerning  his  death, 
a Chriftian  friend  writes  thus,  “ May  7,  Four  in 
the  morning. 

“ I am  juft  come  from  witnefting  the  laft 
fighs  of  one  dear  to  you,  to  me,  and  to  all  that 
knew  him.  Mr.  Wardrobe  died  laft  night.  He 
was  feized  on  fabbath  laft,  juft  as  he  was  going  to 
the  kirk,  with  a moft  violent  cholic,  which  ter- 
minated in  a mortification  of  his  bowels.  The 
cirumftances  of  his  death  are  worthy  to  be  re- 
corded. With  what  pleafure  he  received  the 
meffage,  and  went  off  in  all  the  triumph  of  a 
conqueror  ! crying  out,  “ My  warfare  is  accomp- 
lifted:  I have  fou fit  the  good  fight : my  viftory 
is  compleated.  Crowns  of  grace  (hall  adorn  this 
head  (taking  off  his  cap)  and  palms  be  put  into 
thefe  hands.  Yet  a little  while  and  I fhall  fing 
for  ever.  I know  that  my  Redeemer  livelkN 
When  he  was  within  a few  moments  of  his  laft* 
he  gave  me  his  hand,  and  a little  after  faid,  “ Now 
leltefi  thou  thy  fervant  depart  in  peace',  for  mine 
eyes  have  feen  thy  falvation.”  Were  I to  repeat 
half  what  he  fpoke  I fhould  write  you  three 
hours.  It  fhall  fuffice  at  this  time  to  fay,  that  as 

D 5 he 


[ 8=  ] 

he  lived  the  life,  fo  he  died  the  death  of  a Chris- 
tian. We  weep  not  for  him  : we  weep  for  our- 
felves.  I wifli  we  may  know  how  to  improve 
this  awful  judgment,  fo  as  to  be  alfo  ready,  not 
knowing  when  our  Lord  cometh.” 

Mr.  Adams,  minifter  of  Falkirk  w'rites  thus: 
* “ On  Friday  night,  about  ten,  I witneffed  Mr. 
Wardrobe  of  Bathgate’s  entrance  into  the  joy  of 
his  Lord.  But  ah!  Who  can  help  mourning 
the  lofs  to  the  church  of  Chrift?  His  amiable 
charafter  gave  him  a diftinguifhed  w'eight  and 
influence  ; which  his  Lord  had  given  him  to 
value,  only  for  its  fubferviency  to  his  honour 
and  glory.  Fie  was  Suddenly  taken  ill  on  the 
laft  Lord’s-day,  and  from  the  firfl  moment  believ- 
ed it  was  for  death.  I went  to  fee  him  on  Thurf- 
day  evening,  and  heard  feme  of  the  liveliefl  ex- 
preffions  of  triumphant  faith,  zeal  for  the  glory 
of  Chrift  and  the  Salvation  of  fouls,  mixt  with 
the  moll  amiable  humility  and  modefty.  Yet  a 
little  while,  faid  he,  and  this  mortal  Jhall put  on 
immortality.  Mortality  Jhall  be  fwallowed  up  of 
life  : this  vile  body  Jafhioned  like  to  his  glorious 
body  ! 0 for  the  vitlory  ! I Jhall  get  the  vidory. 
I know  in  whom  I have  believed.  Then  with  a re- 
markably audible  voice,  lifting  up  his  hands  he 
cried  out,  0 for  a draught  oj  the  well  of  the  wa- 
ter of  life , that  I may  begin  the  Jong  before  l 
go  off  to  the  church  triumphant ! I go  forth  in 
thy  name , making  mention  oj  thy  righteoufnefs , 
even  thine  only.  I die  at  the feet  of  mercy.''  Then 

ftretching 


[ 83  ] 


ftretching  out  his  arms,  he  put  his  hand  upon 
his  head,  and  with  the  moll  ferene  and  fteddy, 
majeftic  eye  I ever  faw,  looking  upward,  he 
faid,  Crowns  of grace,  crowns  of  grace,  and  palms 
in  their  hands  ! 0 Lord  God  of  truth , into  thy 
hands  I commend  my  fpirit ! Afte'r  an  unexpect- 
ed revival,  he  faid,  0,  I fear  his  tarrying , left 
the  profpeEl  become  more  dark.  I fometimes  fear 
he  may  fpare  me  to  live,  and  be  lefs  faithful  than 
he  has  helped  vie  to  be  hitherto.  He  fays  to  me. 
You  that  are  minifers,  bear  a proper  teflimony, 
againf  the  profeffors  of  this  age,  who  have  a form 
of  god/inefs  without  the  power . Obferving  fome 
of  his  people  about  his  bed,  he  faid,  May  I have 
Jome feals  among  you ! 0 where  will,  the  ungodly 
and [inner s of  Bathgate  appear  ? Labour  all  to  be 
in  Chrifl.  Then  he  ftretched  out  his  hand  to  fe- 
veral  and  faid,  Farewell,  farewell,  farewell: 
And  now,  0 Lord , what  wait  I for  ? My  hope  is 
in  thee ! Once  or  twice  he  faid,  Let  me  be  laid 
acrofs  the  bed  to  expire,  where  1 have  fometimes 
prayed  and  fometimes  meditated  with  plea  fire  A 
He  expreft  his  grateful  fenfe  of  the  affiduous 
care  which  Mr.  Wardrobe  of  Cult  had  taken  of 
him  : and  on  his  replying,  “ Too  much  could 
not  be  done  for  fo  valuable  a life,”  faid,  0 fpeak 
not  fo,  or  you  will  provoke  God.  Glory  be  to  God, 
that  I have  ever  had  any  regard  paid  me  for  Chrifl' s 
fake."  I am  greatly  funk  under  the  event.  G 
help  me  by  your  prayers,  to  get  the  proper  fub« 
million  and  improvement,” 

D 6 Thurfd?,»: 


C 84  ] 


Thurfday,  June  3.  I received  a remarkable 
letter  from  a clergyman,  with  whom  I had  been 
a day  or  two  before.  Part  of  it  ran  thus. 

“ I had  the  following  account  from  the  gentle- 
woman herfelf,  a perfon  of  piety  and  veracity. 

She  is  now  the  wife  of  Mr.  J B — , filver- 

fmith  in  Corke. 

“ About  thirty  years  ago,  I was  addreffed  by 
way  of  marriage,  by  Mr.  Richard  Mercier,  then 
a volunteer  in  the  army.  The  young  gentleman 
was  quartered  at  that  time  in  Charleville,  where 
my  lather  lived,  who  approved  of  his  addrelfes, 
and  direfted  me  to  look  upon  him  as  my  future 
hufband.  When  the  regiment  left  the  town,  he 
promifed  to  return  in  two  months,  and  marry 
me.  From  Charleville  he  went  to  Dublin, 
thence  to  his  father’s,  and  from  thence  to  Eng- 
land : where  his  father  having  bought  him  a cor- 
netcy  of  horfe,  he  purchafed  many  ornaments  for 
the  wedding;  and  returning  to  Ireland  let  us 
know,  that  he  would  be  at  our  houfe  in  Charle- 
ville,  in  a few  days.  On  this  the  family  was 
bufied  to  prepare  for  his  reception,  and  the  en- 
fuing  marriage  : when  one  night,  my  filler  Mol- 
ly and  I being  afleep  in  our  bed,  I was  awaken- 
’ ed  by  the  fudden  opening  of  the  fide-curtain, 
and  ftarting  up  faw  Mr.  Mercier,  Handing  by 
the  bedftde.  He  was  wrapt  up  in  a loofe  fheet, 
and  had  a napkin  folded  like  a night-cap  on  his 
head.  He  looked  at  me  very  earneltly,  and  lift- 
ing 


C 8s  ] 

mg  up  the  napkin  which  much  (haded  his  face, 
(hewed  me  the  left  fide  of  his  head,  all  bloody 
and  covered  with  his  brains.  The  room  mean 
time  was  quite  light.  My  terror  was  exceflive, 
which  was  (fill  increafed  by  his  (looping  over 
the  bed,  and  embracing  me  in  his  arms.  My 
cries  alarmed  the  whole  family,  who  came 
crowding  into  the  room.  Upon  their  entrance, 
he  gently  withdrew  his  arms,  and  afcended  as  it 
were  through  the  ceiling.  I continued  for  fome 
time  in  (Irong  fits.  When  I could  fpeak,  I told 
them  what  I had  feen.  One  of  them  a day  or 
two  after,  going  to  the  poft-mafter  for  letters, 
found  him  reading  the  news-papers,  in  which 
was  an  account,  that  cornet  Mercier,  going  in- 
to Chrift-church  Belfry,  in  Dublin,  juft  after 
the  bells  had  been  ringing,  and  (landing  under 
the  bells,  one  of  them  which  was  turned  bottom 
upwards,  fuddenly  turning  again,  ftruck  one 
fide  of  his  head,  and  killed  him  on  the  fpot.  On 
further  enquiry,  we  found  he  was  ftruck,  on  the 
left  fide  of  his  head.” 

Sunday  6.  I gave  my  lad  exhortation  to  the 
fociety  in  Corke,  and  fetting  out  early  on  Mon- 
day 7,  in  the  evening  came  to  Limerick. 

Saturday  ig.  The  account  which  one  of  our 
fillers  gave  of  Ann  Beauchamp  was  as  follows  : 

Aug  lS,  1753. 1 went  to  fee  Ann  Beauchamp 
who  had  been  ill  for  about  a week.  I afked  her. 
In  what  (late  (he  found  her  foul  P She  anfwered, 

I am 


C 86  ] 

I am  quite  happy.  I know  that  my  Redeemer 
livetb,  and  has  taken  away  all  my  fins.  And  my 
heart  is  comforted  with  the  prefence  of  God  t I 
long  to  die,  that  I may  be  with  him.  I afked, 
But  are  you  refigned,  either  to  live  or  die,  as 
he  (hall  fee  fit  ? She  anfwered,  I cannot  fay,  I 
am  willing  to  live  : it  would  go  hard  with  me  to 
live  now.  Pray  that  the  Lord  may  perfeft  his 
work  of  fanftification  in  my  foul. 

Being  afked,  if  fire  could  freely  part  with  all 
her  friends  ? She  faid,  yes  : And  as  to  my  chil- 
dren, I have  call  them  upon  the  Lord.  I know 
he  will  take  care  of  them,  and  I give  them 
freely  up  to  him,  without  one  anxious  thought. 
She  then  prayed  for  her  friends  and  acquaintance 
one  by  one,  and  afterward  fervently  and  with 
tears,  for  each  perfon  in  her  band  : Then  for 
Mr.  John  Wefley,  defiring  fhe  might  be  found 
at  his  feet  in  the  day  of  the  Lord. 

Soon  after  fhe  called  her  mother,  defired 
forgivenefs  for  any  thing  wherein  fhe  had  ignor- 
antly offended  her,  and  exhorted  her,  not  to 
grieve  ; adding  God  will  comfort  you,  and  give 
you  flrength  to  bear  your  trial.  It  is  your  lofs  : 
but  it  is  my  everlafting  gain  ; and  I am  going 
but  a little  before  you.  She  then  prayed  over 
her,  and  kiffing  her,  took  her  leave.  In  the 
fame  manner  fhe  took  leave  of  all  about  her,  ex- 
horting, praying  for,  and  kiffing  them,  one  by 
one.  Afterward  fhe  called  for,  and  took  her 
leave  of  her  fervants. 


Seeing 


[ 8;  ] 

Seeing  one  of  her  neighbours  in  the  room,, 
fhe  called  her  and  faid,  O Mary,  you  are  old 
in  years,  and  old  in  fin.  The  Lord  has  borne 
long  with  you,  and  you  know  not  the  day  or  the 
hour  when  he  will  call  you.  lam  young,  and 
he  is  calling  me  away  ; and  what  fhould  I do 
without  an  intereft  in  Chrift  ? Was  my  work 
now  to  do,  it  would  never  be  done  : but  bleffed 
be  God,  it  is  not.  I know  the  Lord  hath  walk- 
ed me  from  my  fins  in  his  own  blood,  and  is 
preparing  me  for  himfelf.  O fly  from  the  wrath 
to  come,  and  never  reft,  till  you  reft  in  the 
wounds  of  Jefus  ! I am  almoft  fpent  : but  had  I 
ftrength,  I could  exhort  you  all  till  morning. 

To  another  {he  faid,  Martha,  Martha  ! Thou 
art  careful  and  troubled  about  many  things.  But 
One  thing  is  needful:  And  this  one  thing  you 
have  neglefted  : O feek  God,  and  he  will  fup- 
ply  all  your  wants.  It  is  time  for  you  to  begin  : 
your  glafs  is  almoft  run,  and  what  will  all  your 
toil  profit,  when  you  come  to  be  as  I am  now  ? 
Find  time  for  this,  whatever  goes  undone.  My 
neighbours  ufed  to  wonder,  how  I could  find 
time,  and  think  me  foolifh  for  fpending  it  fo. 
But  now  I know  it  was  not  foolifhnefs.  Soon 
I {hall  receive  an  exceeding  great  reward. 

Perhaps  fome  of  you  will  fay,  you  was  never 
called.  Then  remember  I call  you  now.  I,  exhort 
every  one  of  you,  to  feek  the  Lord,  while  he  may 
be  found.  Think  not  to  make  excufes  in  that 
day  : God  will  have  his  witneftes.  And  I fhal.l 

appear 


C 83  ] 


appear  as  awitnefs  againftyou.  Ifyou  repent  not, 
thefe  my  dying  words  will  rife  up  in  judgment 
againft  you. 

To  her  — — (he  faid,  I forgive  you  all  that 
you  have  done  againft  me.  And  I have  prayed 
the  Lord  to  forgive  you,  return  to  him  now,  and 
he  will  receive  you  ; for  he  defires  not  the  death 
of  a finner.  I am  a witnefs  of  this  : For  he  has 
forgiven  all  my  fins.  O!  I want  (Length  to  fing 
hispraife!  But  I am  going  where  I fhallfing 
his  praife  for  ever, 

Then  calling  for  her  hufband  (he  faid,  My 
dear,  God  has  given  you  many  calls  even  in 
dreams.  And  when  we  will  not  hear  his  call,  it 
is  often  his  way  to  make  us  feel  his  rod  by 
removing  our  darling  from  us.  I was  vour  darl- 
ing. And  feeing  you  refufed  the  many  calls  of 
God,  he  is  now  taking  me  away  from  you,  if  by 
any  means  he  may  bring  you  to  himfelf.  She 
then  prayed  for,  and  took  her  leave  of  him. 

The  next  day  when  I came  in,  and  afked, 
How  do  you  find  yourfelf  now?  She  anfwered, 
blefied  be  God,  very  well.  I know  that  mv  Re- 
deemer lives.  He  is  dear  to  me  and  I am  dear  to 
him.  I know  he  is  preparing  me  for  himfelf, 
and  I fhall  foonbe  with  him. 

She  then  prayed  earneftlv  for  entire  fanclifi- 
cation  ; ’till  a friend  coming  in,  (he  faid,  The 
Lord  has  brought  you  and  all  my  dear  friends  to 
my  remembrance  : I have  not  forgotten  you  in 
my  prayers.  You  mud  come  and  pray  my  laft 

prayer. 


C 89  ] 

prayer.  When  you  fee  me  near  my  deliverance, 
go  all  to  prayer,  and  continue  therein,  till  my 
Ipirit  is  gone.  Let  there  be  no  crying  over  me, 
but  all  of  you  ftng  praifes  and  rejoice  over  me. 

She  never  once  complained  of  her  pain  ; but 
behaved  from  the  beginning  with  that  patience, 
fweetnefs  and  love  to  all,  that  befpoke  a foul 
which  knew  lierfel f juft  entering  into  the  joy  of 
her  Lord.  Thus  fhe  died  the  next  morning,  Au- 
guft  the  20th,  after  crying  out  as  in  extacy, 

“ Bold  I approach  the  eternal  throne. 

And  claim  the  crown  thro’  Chrift  my  own.” 

Wednefday  16.  I rode  over  to  New-Market 
and  preached  to  an  earned  congregation  of  poor 
people.  In  the  morning,  at  the  requeft  of  fome 
of  the  neighbouring  gentry,  I deferred  preaching 
till  ten  o’clock.  Many  of  them  were  then  pre- 
fent  and  feemed  not  a little  aftonilhed  : perhaps 
they  may  remember  it 3 week. 

In  the  afternoon  I rode  to  Ballygarrane,  a town 
of  Palatines,  who  came  over  in  Queen  Ann’s 
time.  They  retain  much  of  the  temper  and  man- 
ners of  their  own  country,  having  no  refembl- 
ance  of  thofe  among  whom  they  live.  I found 
much  life  among  this  plain,  artlefs,  ferious  peo- 
ple. The  whole  town  came  together  in  the  even- 
ing, and  praifed  God  for  the  confolation.  Many 
of  thofe  who  are  not  outwardly  joined  with  us, 
walk  in  the  light  of  God’s  countenance : yea, 

and 


[ 9°  ] 

and  have  divided  themfelves  into  clafies,  in  imi- 
tation of  our  brethren,  with  whom  they  live  in 
perfeft  harmony. 

* Friday  18.  In  examining  the  fociety,  I was 
obliged  to  paufe  feveral  times.  The  words  of 
the  plain,  honeft  people,  came  with  fo  much 
weight,  as  frequently  to  flop  me  for  a while, 
and  raife  a general  cry  among  the  hearers.  I 
rode  back  through  Adare,  once  a flrong  and 
flourifhing  town,  well-walled  and  full  of  people  : 
now  without  walls  and  almoft.  without  inhabi- 
tants ; only  a few  poor  huts  remain.  At  a frnall 
diflance  from  thefe  are  the  ample  ruins  of  three 
or  four  convents,  delightfully  fituated  by  the 
river,  which  runs  through  a mod  fruitful  vale. 

Monday  21.  I talked  with  one  who  was  in 
deep  diilrefs.  She  had  been  reprefented  to  me, 
as  in  defpair.  But  I foon  found  her  diforder  (na- 
tural or  preternatural}  had  nothing  to  do  with  re- 
ligion. She  was  greatly  troubled,  but  knew  not 
why  : not  for  her  fins,  they  fcarce  came  into 
her  mind.  I know  not  that  prayer  will  avail  for 
her,  till  fine  is  troubled  in  quite  another  man- 
ner : till  rhe  cries  out  from  her  inmofl  foul, 
“ God  be  merciful  to  me  a firmer  !” 

Tuefday  22.  I called  on  Mrs.  F.  whom  I faw 
fome  years  fince  in  defpair  of  quite  another  kind. 
Between  nine  and  ten  years  ago,  her  daughter 
married  without  her  confent.  This  was  follow- 
ed by  other  difireffing  circumftances,  in  the  tnidfl 
of  which  fhe  cried  out,  “ God  has  forfaken  me.” 

She 


L 9i  ] 

She  was  immediately  feized  with  violent  paiir; 
She  could  not  fee  the  fun,  or  the  light,  only  a 
dim  twilight.  She  could  not  tafte  her  meat  or 
drink,  any  more  than  the  white  of  an  egg.  She 
had  a conftant  impulfe  to  kill  herfelf,  which  fhe 
believed  fhe  muft  do,  and  attempted  feveral 
times.  After  having  continued  thus  three  years 
and  an  half,  fhe  refolved  to  endure  it  no  longer. 
Accordingly  fhe  procured  a knife  to  cut  her 
throat,  and  did  cut  through  the  fkin,  but  could 
get  no  further.  It  feemed  to  her  as  if  the  flefh 
were  iron.  She  threw  down  the  knife,  burfl 
into  tears,  fell  upon  her  knees,  and  began 
(what  file  had  not  done  all  the  time)  to  pour  out 
her  foul  before  God.  Fear  and  forrow  fled  a- 
way.  She  rejoiced  in  God.  She  faw  the  light 
of  the  fun.  Her  natural  tafte  returned.  And 
fhe  has  been  ever  ft  nee  in  health  of  body  and 
peace  of  mind. 

Wednefday  23.  I took  my  leave  of  Limerick, 
and  rode  to  Six  Mile  Bridge.  There  I left  T. 
Walfh  to  preach  in  Irifh,  and  went  on  to  Rath- 
lahine. 

Thurfday  24.  I went  on  to  Ennis,  a town 
confiding  almoft  wholly  of  papifts,  except  a few 
proteflant  gentlemen.  One  of  thefe,  (the  chief 
perfon  in  the  town)  had  invited  me  to  his  houfe-, 
and  walked  with  me  to  the  Court-houfe,  where 
I preached  to  an  huge,  wild,  unawakened  mul- 
titude, proteflants  and  papifts,  many  of  whom 
would  have  been  rude  enough  if  they  durft. 

Friday 


C 92  ] 

Friday  25.  Mr.  Walfh  preached  at  fix,  firft  in 
I * i Hi  and  then  in  Englifh.  The  papifh  prieft  had 
contrived  to  have  his  fervice  juft  at  the  fame 
hour.  And  his  man  came  again  and  again  with 
his  bell  ; but  not  one  in  ten  of  his  people  would 
ftir.  At  eight  I preached  to  a far  more  ferious 
congregation.  And  the  word  feemed  to  fink  in- 
to their  hearts. 

We  took  horfe  about  ten,  and  rode  through 
the  fruitful  and  pleafant  county  of  Galway.  After 
having  heard  fo  much  of  the  barrennefs  of  this 
county,  I was  furprized,  in  riding  almoft  the 
whole  length  of  it,  from  fouth-eaft,  to  north- 
sveft,  to  find  only  four  or  five  miles  of  rocky 
ground,  like  the  weft  of  Cornwall : all  the  reft 
exceeded  moft  that  I have  feen  in  Ireland.  W e 
came  to  Galway  pretty  well  tired,  and  would 
willingly  have  refted  at  the  inn  where  we  alight- 
ed from  our  horfes  : but  the  landlord  informed 
us,  he  had  no  room;  both  his  houfe  and  ftables 
were  full.  Two  regiments  of  foldiers  paffing 
through  the  town  had  taken  up  all  the  inns. 
However  we  procured  a private  lodging,  which 
was  full  as  agreeable. 

The  town  is  old,  and  not  ill-built,  moft  of  the 
houfes  being  of  ftone,  and  feveral  (lories  high. 
It  is  incompaft  with  an  old,  bad  wall,  and  is  in 
no  pollute  of  defence,  either  toward  the  land, 
or  toward  the  fea.  Such  is  the  fupine  negli- 
gence of  both  Englifh  and  Irifh  ! 

Five  or  fix  perfons,  who  feemed  to  fear  God, 

came 


C 93  J 

came  to  us  at  our  lodgings.  We  fpent  a little 
time  with  them  in  prayer,  and  early  in  the  morn- 
ing fet  out  for  Caftlebarr. 

This  day  likevvife  I was  agreeably  furprized  at 
the  plealantnefs  and  fruitfulnefs  of  the  country'. 
About  none  two  or  three  friends  met  us,  and  beg- 
ged us  to  turn  aftde  to  Hollymount,  a town  twelve 
miles  from  Caftlebarr,  where  the  minifter  readily 
confented  to  my  preaching  in  the  church.  Many 
papifts  as  well  as  proteftants  were  there,  and  my 
heart  was  much  mlarged  toward  them.  Through 
| a delightful  mixture  of  vales  and  gently-rifing 
hills,  we  then  rode  on  to  Caftlebarr. 

* Stand.  27.  The  reftor  having  left  word, 
that  I fhould  have  the  ufe  of  the  church,  I 
preached  there  morning  and  afternoon,  to  fuch  a 
congregation  as  (they  fa  id)  was  never  there  be- 
fore. And  furely  the  word  of  God  had  free 
courfe : I faw  not  one  light  or  inattentive 
hearer.  Mr.  Walfh  afterward  preached  in  the 
feffion-houfe,  to  another  large  and  ferious  con- 
gregation. And  Tuef.  29.  being  St.  Peter’s 
day,  I read  prayers  and  preached  to  as  large  a 
congregation  as  on  Sunday.  In  the  afternoon  I 
rode  ov'er  to  Newport,  eleven  miles  from  Caftle- 
barr. About  thirty  years  ago,  a little  company 
of  proteftants  fettled  here,  by  a river-fide,  on  the 
very  extremity  of  the  land,  and  builtafmall  town. 
It  has  a fruitful  hill  on  each  fide,  and  a large  bay 
to  the  weft,  full  of  fmall  fertile  i Hands,  contain- 
ing  from  one  to  feveral  thoufand  acres.  Of  thefe 

they 


[ 94  ] 


they  compute  above  three  hundred;  and  near  an 
hundred  are  inhabited:  but  by  papifls  alone, 
there  not  being  fo  much  as  a fmgle  proteflant 
among  them  ! I went  direflly  to  the  reflor’s,  who 
had  before  given  me  an  invitation.  Between  fe- 
ven  and  eight  I preached  to  (I  fuppofe)  more 
than  all  the  proteflants  in  the  town.  Deep  atten- 
tion fat  on  every  face.  Perhaps  God  touched 
fome  hearts. 

Wednef.  30.  At  eleven  Mr.  H.  read  prayers, 
and  I preached  on  Gal.  vi.  14.  The  church 
Hands  at  a diflance  from  the  town,  and  it 
rained  hard  ; but  that  could  not  flop  the  congre- 
gation. In  the  afternoon,  I returned  to  CafUe- 
barr. 

* Thurf.  July  1.  There  is  juft  fuch  a work 
here  as  was  fome  years  fince  at  Athlone.  The 
whole  town  is  pleafed , but  few  are  convinced. 
The  flream  runs  very  wide,  but  very  fhallow. 

Sund.  4.  I read  prayers  and  preached  at  Bal- 
lyhean,  Mr.  E ’s  other  chuich.  The  con- 

gregation at  Caftlebarr  in  the  afternoon  was  larger 
than  ever  before.  In  the  morning,  Mond.  5. 
the  greater  half  of  them  were  prefent,  and  we 
had  a folemn  parting.  In  the  afternoon  we  came 
to  Hollymount,  fome  years  fince  one  of  the 
pleafantefl  places  in  Ireland.  * Dr.  Vefey,  then 
archbifhop  of  Tuam,  fixt  on  this  fpot,  nine  miles 
from  his  fee,  built  a neat  commodious  houfe  on 
a little  eminence,  laid  out  fruit  and  flower  gar- 
dens round  it,  brought  a river  to  run  through 

them. 


[ 95  ] 


them,  and  incompafled  the  whole  with  walks- 
and  proves  of  (lately  trees.  When  he  had 

O ' 

finilhed  his  plan,  round  a flone  pillar  which 
hands  in  a bafon  furrounded  by  a fmall  green 
plat  of  ground,  he  placed  the  following  in- 
fcription : 

Linquenda  tellus,  et  domus,  et  placens 

Uxor , cum  numerofa  et  JpecioJa  prole, 

Char  a charce  Matris  fobole  : 

Neque  harum  quas  cells  arborum 
Te  precter  invijam  cuprejfum 
Vila  brevem  douiinum  Jequetur  ! 

I was  juft:  going  to  preach  in  the  church-yard: 
when  Mr.  C.  fent  his  fon  with  the  key  of  the 
church.  Almoll  half  the  congregation  were  pa- 
pifts,  whom  all  the  threats  of  their  prieft  could  not 
keep  away.  Not  expecting  to  fee  any  of  them 
again,  I fpake  very  plain  once  for  all. 

In  the  morning  we  rode  through  Tuam,  a neat 
little  town,  fcarce  half  fo  large  as  Iftington:  nor 
is  the  cathedral  hall  fo  large  as  Iftington  church. 
The  old  church  at  Killconnel,  two  miles  from 
Aghrim,  is  abundantly  larger.  If  one  may  judge 
by  the  vail  ruins  that  remain  (over  all  which  we 
walked  in  the  afternoon)  it  was  a far  more  ftately 
pileof  building,  than  any  that  is  now  Handing  in 
Ireland.  Adjoining  to  it  are  the  ruins  of  a 
large  monaftry ; many  of  the  cells  and  apart- 
ments 


[ 96  ] 

frier, ts  are  pretty  entire.  At  the  weft  end  of  the 
church  lie  abundance  of  fculls,  piled  one  upon 
another;  with  innumerable  bones  round  about, 
fcattered  as  dung  upon  the  earth.  O fin,  what 
haft  thou  done  ? 

Wednef.  7.  I preached  at  Aghrim,  morning 
and  evening,  and  then  rode  over  to  Caftlebarr. 
Mr.  M.  has  now  loft  both  his  brother  and  his 
two  daughters,  two  of  the  moft  agreeable  women 
in  the  kingdom,  caught  away  in  the  full  bloom  of 
youth  and  beauty  : if  they  can  be  termed  lojl , 
who  all  committed  their  fouls  unto  him  they 
loved,  in  the  full  triumph  of  faith. 

Thurf.  8.  A coach  full  of  us,  with  feveral 
liorfemen,  and  others  on  foot,  went  to  Ahalkra 
in  the  morning.  The  reft  of  the  congregation 
were  moftly  papifls.  But  all  heard  with  earneft 
attention.  I preached  in  the  evening  at  Ath- 
lone,  where  on  Frid.  9.  we  had  a folemn  watch- 
night. 

Sund.  11.  We  had  a blefted  opportunity  in 
the  evening  on  the  Connaught  fide  of  the  river. 
Almoft  all  the  proteftants  in  the  town  were  pre- 
fent,  with  abundance  ofpapiils.  And  many  of 
them  acknowledged  the  dofhine  of  Chrift  cru- 
cified to  be  the  pou'er  of  God  and  the  wifdom  oi 
God. 

Mond.  12.  After  preaching  at  Abidarrig  about 
noon,  I went  on  to  Longford.  Many  fuppofed 
the  mob  would  be  too  violent  there,  to  allow  me 

a peace- 


[97  3 

a peaceable  hearing.  I began  at  five  in  the  yard 
of  the  Old  Barrack.  An  huge  croud  foon  flocked 
in : but  moll  of  the  papifis  flood  at  the  gate, 
or  juft  without  the  wall.  They  were  all  ft  ill  as 
night  : nor  did  I hear  an  uncivil  wTord  while  we 
afterwards  walked  from  one  end  of  the  town  to 
the  other. 

Tuef.  ig.  A large  congregation  was  prefent  at 
five,  and  flood  unmoved,  notwithftanding  fome 
heavy  fhowers.  At  noon  I preached  at  Cleg- 
hill  : at  five  in  the  barrack-yard  again,  where  the 
concourfe  of  people  was  greater  than  before; 
Mr.  P,  the  minifterof  a neighbouring  parifli,  and 
another  clergyman  who  came  with  him,  received 
the  truth  in  love  : Mrs.  P.  (his  wife)  found  reft 
to  her  foul. 

* But  how  is  it,  that  almoft  in  every  place, 
even  where  there  is  no  lafting  fruit,  there  is  ft> 
great  an  imprelhon  made  at  firft,  upon  a confi- 
derable  number  of  people  P The  fa£l  is  this. 
Every  where  the  work  of  God  rifes  higher  and 
higher,  till  it  comes  to  a point.  Here  it  feemsfor 
a fhort  time  to  be  at  a flay.  And  then  it  graduallv 
finks  again. 

All  this  may  eafily  be  accounted  for.  At  firft 
curiofity  brings  many  hearers  : at  the  fame  time 
God  draws  many  by  his  preventing  grace  to  hear 
his  word,  and  comforts  them  in  hearing.  One 
then  tells  another.  By  this  means  on  the  one 
hand  curiofity  fpreads  and  increafes  : and  on  the 
other,  drawings  of  God’s  Spirit  touch  more 

Vol.  XXX.  E hearts; 


[ 98  1 

hearts;  and  many  of  them  more  powerfully  than 
before.  He  now  offers  grace  to  all  that  hear ; 
mod  of  whom  are  in  fome  meafure  aflfeftea,  and 
more  or  lefs  moved  with  approbation  of  what 
they  hear,  defire  to  pleafe  God,  and  good-will  to 
his  meffenger ; thefe  principles  varioufly  com- 
bined and  increafing,  raife  the  general  work  to 
its  highed  point.  But  it  cannot  (land  here.  For 
in  the  nature  of  things,  curiofity  mud  foon  de- 
cline. Again,  the  drawings  of  God  are  not  fol- 
lowed, and  thereby  the  Spirit  of  God  is  grieved. 
The  confequence  is,  he  drives  with  this  and  this 
man,  no  more,  and  fo  his  drawings  end.  Thus 
both  the  natural  and  fupernatural  power  declin- 
ing, mod  of  the  hearers  will  be  lefs  and  lefs  af- 
fefted.  Add  to  this,  that  in  the  procefs  of  the 
work,  it  mujl  be , that  offences  will  come.  Some 
of  the  hearers,  if  not  preachers  alfo,  will  aft  con- 
trary to  their  profedion.  Either  their  follies  or 
faults  will  be  told  from  one  to  another,  and  lofe 
nothing  in  the  telling.  Men  once  curious  to 
hear,  will  now  draw  back : men  once  drawn, 
having  ltifled  their  good  dedres,  will  difapprove 
what  thev  approved  before,  and  feel  didike  in- 
dead of  good-will,  to  the  preacher.  Others  who 
were  more  or  lefs  convinced,  will  be  afraid  or 
afhamed  to  acknowledge  that  conviftion.  And 
all  thefe  will  catch  at  ill  dories  (true  or  falfe)  in 
order  to  judify  their  change.  When  by  this 
means,  all  w’ho  do  not  favingly  believe,  have 

quenched 


[ 99  ] 

quenched  the  Spirit  of  God,  the  little  flock  goes 
on  from  faith  to  faith  ; the  reft  fleep  on  and  take 
their  reft.  And  thus  the  number  of  hearers 
in  every  place,  may  be  expended,  firli  to  increafe, 
and  then  decreafe. 

Wednef.  14.  At  noon  I preached  at  Cooly-, 
lough,  where  the  preachers  and  ftewards  met. 

Thurf.  15.  In  the  evening  I preached  at  Tul- 
lamore  in  Barrack-ftreet.  And  many  who  never 
had  fo  much  curiofity,  as  to  walk  an  hundred 
yards  to  hear  the  preaching,  vouchfafed  to  hear 
it  at  their  own  doors.  In  the  middle  of  the  fer- 
mon  came  a quarter-mafler  very  drunk,  and 
rufhed  in  among  the  people.  In  a fhort  time, 
he  flipped  olf  his  hat,  and  gave  all  the  atten- 
tion of  which  he  was  capable.  So  did  many  of 
the  foldiers  and  many  officers.  O let  fome  lay  it 
to  heart ! 

* Frid.  16.  We  walked  down  to  Lord  Tulla- 
more’s,  (that  was  his  title  then)  an  old  mile  from 
the  town.  His  gardens  are  extremely  pleafant. 
They  contain  groves,  little  meadows,  kitchen 
gardens,  plats  of  flowers,  and  little  orchards  in- 
terinixt  with  fine  canals  and  pieces  of  water. 
And  will  not  all  thefe  make  their  owner  happy  ! 
Not  if  he  has  one  unholy  temper  ! Not  unlefs  he 
has  in  himfelf  a fountain  of  water,  fpringing  up 
into  everlafting  life. 

* About  this  lime  I received  a letter  without  a 
name,  part  of  which  I have  fubjoined. 

E 2 


Sir, 


[ 100  ] 


Sir, 

“ Having  obferved  your  Chriftian  condefcen- 
fion  in  thofe  labours  of  love,  fo  truly  calculated 
for  the  ufe  of  common  people , I prefume  to  beg 
your  pen  in  behalf  of  the  next  clafs  of  God’s 
creatures.  And  I would  afk,  if  nature,  reafon  and 
revelation  do  not  all  plead  in  favour  even  of  the 
brute  creation  ? Is  it  not  unnatural  and  inhuman, 
to  put  them  to  more  pain  than  is  necedary  for 
the  fervice  of  man  ? Can  reafon  confent  to  the 
making  fport  with  the  life  or  rnifery  of  any  crea- 
ture ? May  not  the  great  law  of  equity,  doing  as 
we  would  be  done  to,  be  extended  even  to  them? 
May  we  not  fuppofe  ourfelves  in  their  place,  and 
thence  determine,  what  they  may  fairly  expefft 
from  us  ? Hath  not  the  fupreme  Being  given  in- 
junflions  againft  cruelty  toward  them,  and  com- 
manded, that  they  Ihould  enjoy  the  reft  of  his 
•day  ? Did  he  not  rebuke  the  prophet,  for  find- 
ing his  beaft  without  caufe  ? And  mention  the 
muck  cattle , as  one  motive  to  the  divine  compaf- 
fion,  in  fparing  the  great  city  ? The  fcripture 
faith,  a good  man  is  merciful  to  his  beafl.  And 
can  he  be  a good  man  that  is  not  fo,  il  goodnefs 
confiftsin  imitating  him,  whofe  mercy  is  over  all 
his  works  ? For  he  openeth  his  hand,  and Jatisfetk 
the  defire  of  every  living  thing. 

If  tendernefs,  mercy  and  companion  to  the 
brute  creatures  were  imprefied  on  the  infant 
breaft,  and  conduced  into  atiion  according  to 

its 


[ iO1  ] 

its  little  power,  would  it  not  be  confirmed  in 
the  human  heart?  And  might  not  this  early 
prepoffeftion  he  for  ever  .eftablifhed  there,  and 
through  an  happy  bias  extend  its  benevolence  to 
the  whole  creation  ? 

Does  not  experience  fhew  the  fad  efle&s  of  a 
contrary  education  ? While  children  inflead  of 
being  taught  benevolence  to  irrationals,  are  fuf- 
fered  to  torment  fir  ft  poor,  little  infefts,  and  then 
every  helpleft  creature  that  comes  in  their  way : 
can  it  be  expected,  that  being  thus  inured  to 
cruelty  and  oppreftion  even  in  their  tender  years, 
they  fihould  relent  when  they  come  to  age,  and 
be  fufceptible  of  compaftion,  even  to  rationals  ? 
It  cannot.  For  is  pity  fhewn  to  man,  only  be- 
caufe  he  has  reafon  ? If  fo,  thofe  would  lofe 
their  claim  to  our  compaftion,  who  ftand  in  the 
greateft  need  of  it,  namely,  children,  ideots 
and  lunatics.  But  if  pity  is  fhewn  to  all  that  are 
capable  of  pain,  then  may  it  juftly  be  expefted 
that  we  fliculd  fympathize  with  every  thing  that 
has  life. 

I am  perfuaded  you  are  not  infenfible  of  the 
pain  given  to  every  Chriftian,  every  humane 
heart,  by  thofe  favage  diverfions,  hull-baiting, 
cock-fighting,  horfe-racing  and  hunting.  Can 
any  of  thefe  irrational  and  unnatural  fports  ap- 
pear otherwife  than  cruel,  unlefs  through  early 
prejudice,  or  entire  want  of  confideration  and 
reflection?  And  if  man  is  void  of  thefe,  does  he 
deferve  the  name  of  man  ? Or  is  he  fit  for  fo- 
E 3 ciety  ? 


[ 102  ] 

ciety  ? And  befides ; how  dreadful  are  the  con- 
comitant and  the  confequent  vices  of  thefe  fa- 
vage  routs  ? Yet  fuch  cowards  are  we  grown, 
that  fcarce  any  man  has  courage  to  draw  his  pen 
againft  them  !” 

Satur.  17.  I preached  in  Tyrrels-pafs  at  five, 
and  I . W alih  at  eight.  Hence  we  rode  to  Eally- 
beg,  near  Drumcree,  where  we  found  a little 
company  ofearneft  people,  moft  of  them  rejoic- 
ing in  the  love  of  God.  To  thefe  were  added  a 
few  horn  the  county  of  Cavan.  Jo;  h Charles 
going  thither,  fome  time  fince,  on  temporal 
bufinefs,  occalionally  fpoke  of  the  hings  of 
God.  Many  believed  his  report : at  fome 
found  his  words  the  power  cj  God  unto  fol- 
iation. 

Sund.  18.  A little  before  twelve  (the  ufual  hour 
in  Ireland)  the  morning  fervice  began  at  Rof- 
rnead  church,  where  Mr.  Booker  preached  an 
tifeful  fermon.  I preached  at  five  to  abundance 
of  plain  country  people,  and  two  coach-full's  of 
gentry.  vO  how  hard  is  it  for  thefe  to  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  ? 

Mond.  19.  No  fooner  did  we  enter  Ulfler, 
than  we  obferved  the  difference.  The  ground 
was  cultivated  juft  as  in  England,  and  the  cottages 
not  only  neat,  but  with  doors,  chimneys  and 
windows.  Newry,  the  firft  town  we  cante  to 
(allowing  for  the  fize)  is  built  much  after  the 
manner  of  Liverpool.  I preached  foon  after 

feven 


[ ,03  ] 

feven  to  a large  congregation,  and  to  great  part 
of  them  at  five  in  the  morning.  Afterwards  I 
fpoke  to  the  members  of  the  fociety,  confiding  of 
churchmen,  diffenters,  and  papifts  (that  were.) 
But  there  is  no  driving  among  them,  unlefs  to 
enter  in  at  the  Jlr ait  gate. 

Wednef.  21.  In  the  morning  there  was  fuch 
violent  lightning,  thunder  and  rain,  that  the  very 
beads  ran  out  of  the  fields,  and  the  birds  flew 
from  their  ufual  coverts,  to  take  fhelter  in  the 
houfes.  But  before  we  took  horfe,  the  Iky 
cleared  up,  and  we  had  a pleafant  ride  to  Terry- 
hugan,  near  Scarva.  The  road  lay  on  the  edge 
of  a fmooth  canal,  with  fruitful,  gently-rifing 
hills  on  either  fide.  We  were  at  a lone  houfe  : 
but  the  people  found  their  way  thither  in  the 
evening  from  all  quarters.  I preached  in  a mea- 
dow near  the  houfe,  the  congregation  fitting  on 
the  grafs,  And  furely  they  had  ears  to  hear.  God 
give  them  hearts  to  underdand  ! 

Thurf.  22.  We  rode  through  heavy  rain  to 
Lifburn.  I preached  in  the  inarket-houfe  at  fe- 
ven. One  man  only  gainfaid  : but  the  by-dand- 
ers  ufed  him  fo  roughly,  that  he  was  fcon  glad  to 
hold  his  peace. 

* Frid.  23.  The  reftor  with  his  curate  called 
upon  me,  candidly  propofed  their  obje&ions,  and 
fpent  about  two  hours,  in  free,  ferious,  friendly 
converfation.  How  much  evil  might  be  prevented 
or  removed,  would  other  clergymen  follow  their 
example  ? 

E4 


I rode 


[ io4  ] 

I rode  in  the  afternoon  to  Belfaft,  the  larged 
town  in  Ulfter.  Some  think,  it  contains  near  as 
many  people  as  Limerick : it  is  far  cleaner  and 
pleafanter.  At  feven  I preached  in  the  market- 
houfe  to  as  large  a congregation  as  at  Lifburn: 
and  to  near  the  fame  number  in  the  morning. 
But  fome  of  them  did  not  flay  till  I con- 
cluded. They  went  away  in  hafle  when  I 
Qiewed,  how  Chrijl  crucified  is  to  the  Greeks 
foolifhnejs. 

Hence  we  rode  along  the  fhore  to  Carrick- 
fergus,  faid  to  be  the  moft  antient  town  i Ul- 
fler.  The  walls  are  flill,  as  it  were,  Landing; 
and  the  caflle  built  upon  a rock.  P ut  it  is  little 
more  than  a heap  of  ruins,  with  eight  or  nine 
old,  difmounted,  rufly  cannon.  What  it  was,  in 
the  reign  of  its  founder,  King  Fergus,  does  not 
much  concern  us  to  know. 

I preached  in  the  feflion-houfe  at  feven,  to 
mod  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town.  But  Satan 
had  prepared  one  of  his  infiruments  when  I had 
done,  to  catch  the  feed  out  of  their  hearts.  A poor 
enthuhaft  began  a dull,  pointlefs  harrangue  about 
hirelings  and  falfe  prophets.  But  the  door-keeper 
crying  out,  “ I am  going  to  lock  the  doors,  ’ cut 
his  difcourfe  fhort. 

Sund.  25.  I preached  at  nine  in  the  upper 
CoUrt-houfe,  which  was  confiuerably  larger 
than  the  other.  James  Rely  began^  his  bad 

work  again,  as  foon  as  I had  done  ipeaking. 
5 5 But 


[ 10  5 3 

But  I walked  quietly  away  ; as  did  alfo  the  con- 
gregation. 

* At  eleven  I went  to  church,  to  the  furprize 
of  many,  and  heard  a lively,  ufeful  fermon.  After 
dinner  one  of  our  brethren  afked,  “ If  I was  ready 
to  go  to  the  meeting  ?”  1 told  him,  “ I never  go 
to  a meeting.”  He  feemed  as  much  aflonifhed 
as  the  old  Scot  at  Newcaftle,  who  left  us,  “ be- 
caufe  we  were  mere  church  of  England,  men.” 
We  are  fo  : although  we  condemn  none,  who 
have  been  brought  up  in  another  way. 

* About  five,  even  the  larger  Court-houfe 
being  too  fmall  to  contain  the  congregation,  I 
the  more  readily  complied  with  the  defire  of 
the  prifoners,  to  preach  in  the  flreet,  near  the 
prifon  door.  I fpoke  as  plain  and  as  home  as 
ever  in  my  life,  on,  Ye  mufl  be  born  again. 
Poor  James  was  now  refolved  to  fpeak,  and  got 
on  a little  eminence  on  purpofe.  And  what 
could  hinder  him  ? Why 

Vox  faucibus  ha  fit! 

He  cawed  and  cawed,  but  could  utter  nothing, 
hardly  three  words  together.  This  alfo  hath  God 
wrought.  He  hath  flopped  the  mouth  of  the 
gainfayer,  and  preferved  the  weak  from  being 
offended. 

Moud.  26.  Mr.  Walfh  met  me  at  Belfafl, 
and  informed  me,  that  the  day  before  he  was  at 
E 5 Newtown, 


[ io6  ] 


Newtown,  intending  to  preach.  But  while  he 

was  at  prayer,  Mr.  M r came  with  a 

drunken  mob,  feized  him  by  the  throat  and  drag- 
ged him  along,  till  a flout  man  feized  him,  and 
conflrained  him  to  quit  his  hold.  Mr.  W.  having 
refrefhed  himfelf  at  a friend’s  houfe,  began  a fe- 
cond  time.  But  in  a quarter  of  an  hour,  Mr.  M. 
having  rallied  his  mob,  came  again  : on  which 
Mr.  W.  gave  him  the  ground,  and  walked  away 
over  the  fields. 

In  the  evening  I fpoke  very  plain  at  Lifburn, 
both  to  the  great  vulgar  and  the  fmall.  But 
between  feceders,  old  felf- conceited  prefbyte- 
rians,  new-light  men,  Moravians,  Cameronians, 
and  formal  churchmen,  it  is  a miracle  of 
miracles,  if  any  here  bring  forth  fruit  to  per- 
feflion. 

The  country  between  Lifburn  and  Moyra,  is 
much  like  Berkfhire,  having  fruitful  vales  on 
each  fide  of  the  road,  and  well-wooded  hills  run- 
ning even  with  them,  at  a fmall  difiance.  At  fe- 
ven  I preached  in  the  market-houfe  at  Lurgan. 
Many  of  the  gentry  were  met  in  the  room  over 
it,  it  being  the  time  of  the  affembly.  The 
violins  were  juft  tuning.  But  they  ceafed 
till  I had  done:  and  the  novelty  (at  leaftj 
drew  and  fixt  the  attention  of  the  whole  com- 
pany. 

Wednef.  28.  I read  Mr.  Barton's  ingenious 
le&ures  on  Lough  Neagh,  near  Lurgan,  which 

turns 


[ *<>7  ] 

turns  wood  into  ftone,  and  cures  the  king’s  evil, 
and  mod  cutaneous  diflempers.  Under  part  of 
this  lake,  there  is  firfl  a ftratum  of  firm  clay,  and 
under  that  a ftratum  of  trees  four  foot  thick,  all 
compared  into  one  mafs,  doubtlefs  by  the  pref- 
fure  of  the  incumbent  earth  (perhaps  water  too) 
which  it  has  probably  fuftained  ever  fince  the 
general  deluge. 

In  the  evening  we  had  the  largeft  congrega- 
tion  which  I have  feen  fince  we  left  Corke.  It 
was  almoft  as  large  at  five  in  the  morning.  Why 
fbould  we  defpair  of  doing  good  at  Lurgart 
alfo  ? • 

Thurf.  29.  I preached  at  Newry,  and  the  three 
following  days ; on  Mond.  Aug.  2.  I returned 
to  Rofmead. 

Tuef.  3.  We  rode  to  Tullamor e through 
heavy  rain,  which  a ftrong  wind  drove  full  in 
our  face.  The  only  wild  Irijk  whom  I have 
feen  yet,  a knot  of  officers,  were  prefent  at  the 
preaching  in  the  evening,  and  behaved  tolerably 
well. 

Wednef.  4.  I preached  at  Portarlington  in  the 
evening,  and  was  going  to  take  horfe  in  the 
morning,  when  a gentleman  came  and  faid,  he 
was  juft  fetting  out  for  Dublin,  and  would  be 
glad  of  my  company  in  his  chariot*  I accompa-- 
nied  him  to  Johnftown  where  we  dined;  and 
then  took  horfe  and  rode  on  to  Dublin. 

Frid.  6.  On  this  and  the  .next  day  I finiihed 

E 6 my: 


[ *°8  ] 

my  btifinefs  in  Ireland,  fo  as  to  be  ready  to  fail 
at  an  hour’s  warning. 

* Sund.  8.  We  were  to  fail,  the  wind  being 
fair  ; but  as  we  were  going  abroad,  it  turned  full 
ead.  I find  it  of  great  ufe,  to  be  in  fufpence.  It 
is  an  excellent  means  ofbreaking  our  will.  May 
we  be  ready,  either  to  flay  longer  on  this  fhore, 
as  to  launch  into  eternity. 

On  Tuefday  evening  I preached  my  farewell- 
lermon.  Mr.  Walfh  did  the  fame  in  the  morn- 
ing. We  then  walked  to  the  key.  But  it  was 
Hill  a doubt,  whether  we  cvere  to  fail  or  no  : Sir 
T.  P.  having  fent  word  to  the  captain'of  the 
packet,  that  if  the  wind  was  fair,  he  would  go 
over  ; and  it  being  his  cuftom  ( ho  minis  magniji- 
centiam  !)  to  keep  the  whole  {hip  to  himfelf.  But 
the  wind  coming  to  the  eaft,  he  would  not  go  : 
fo  about  noon  we  went  on  board.  In  turn  or 
three  hours  we  reached  the  mouth  of  the  harbour. 
It  then  fell  calm.  We  had  five  cabin  pafTen- 
crers,  befide  Mr.  Wa'lfh,  Haughton,  Morgan 
and  me.  They  were  all  civil,  and  tolerably  feri- 
ous  ; the  failors  likewife  behaved  uncommonly 
well. 

Thurf.  12.  About  eight  we  begun  finging  on 
the  quarter-deck,  which  foon  drewT  all  our  fellow- 
paffengers,  as  well  as  the  captain,  with  the  great- 
eft  part  of  his  men.  I afterwards  gave  an  exhor- 
tation. We  then  fpent  fome  time  in  prayer. 
They  all  kneeled  down  with  us.  Nor  did  their 
ferioufnefs  wear  off  all  the  day.  About  nine  ure 

landed 


[ 109  J 

landed  at  Holy-head,  after  a pleafant  palfage  of 
twenty-three  hours. 

Friday  13.  Having  hired  horfes  for  Chefter, 
we  fet  out  about  feven.  Before  one  we  reached 
Bangor,  the  fituation  of  which  is  delightful  be- 
yond expreffion.  Here  we  faw  a large  and  hand- 
fome  cathedral,  but  no  trace  ol  the  good,  old 
monks  of  Bangor,  fo  many  hundreds  of  whom 
fell  a facrifice  at  once  to  cruelty  and  revenge. 
The  country  from  hence  to  Penmenmauris  far 
pleafanter  than  any  garden.  Mountains  of  every 
thape  and  fize,  vales  clothed  with  grafs  or  corn, 
woods  and  fmaller  tufts  of  trees,  were  continu- 
ally varying  on  the  one  hand,  as  was  the  fea  pro-  „ 
fpecl  on  the  other.  Penmenmaur  itfelf  rifes  al- 
moft  perpendicular  to  an  enormous  height  from 
the  fea.  The  road  runs  along  the  fide  of  it  fo 
far  above  the  beach,  that  one  could  not  ven- 
ture to  look  down,  but  that  there  is  a wall 
built  all  along,  about  four  foot  high.  Mean 
time  the  ragged  cliff  hangs  over  ones  head, 
as  if  it  would  fall  every  moment.  An  hour 
after  we  had  left  this  awful  place,  we  came  to  the 
antient  town  of  Conway.  It  is  walled  round. 
And  the  walls  are  in  tolerably  good  repair.  The 
caftle  is  the  nobleft  ruin  I ever  faw.  It  is  four 
fquare,  and  has  four  large  round  towers,  on  each 
fide,  the  infide  of  which  have  been  {lately  apart- 
ments. One  fide  of  the  caftle  is  a large  church, 
the  windows  and  arches  of  which  have  been  curi- 
oufly  wrought.  Art  arm  of  the  fea  runs  round 

two 


[ ”0  ] 


two  fules  of  the  hill  on  which  the  caflie  Hands : 
once  the  delight  of  Kings,  now  overgrown  with 
thorns,  and  inhabited  by  doleful  birds  only. 

About  eight  we  reached  Place-bagh,  where  as. 
foon  as  I named  my  name,  William  Roberts  re- 
ceived us  with  all  gladnefs.  But  neither  he  nor 
any  of  his  family  could  fpeak  one  fentence  of 
Eriglifh.  Yet  our  guide  helped  us  out  pretty  well: 
after  fupper  we  fung  and  went  to  prayers.  Tho’ 
they  could  not  fpeak  it,  mofl  of  them  underflood 
Englifh.  And  God  fpoke  to  their  hearts. 

Saturday  14.  Several  of  the  neighbours  came 
early  in  the  morning,  and  gladly  received  a few 
words  of  exhortation.  We  then  rode  on,  thro’ 
one  of  the  pleafantefl  countries  in  the  world,  by 
Holy-well,  to  Chefler.  Here  we  had  a comfort- 
able meeting  in  the  evening  ; as  well  as  the 
next  dav,  both  in  the  room,  and  in  the 
fquare. 

Monday  16.  The  rain  was  fufpended,  while  I 
preached  to  a large  and  quiet  congregation. 

Tuefday  1 7.  I rode  to  Bolton.  Tho’ I came 
unexpe&ed,  the  houfe  was  well  filled.  After  reft- 
ing  a day,  on  Thurfday  tg.  I went  on  to  Man- 
chefter  and  preached  in  the  evening  to  a large 
congregation,  without  the  leafl  difturbance.  The 
tumults  here  are  now  at  an  end  ; chiefly  thro’ 
the  courage  and  aflivity  of  a fingle  conflable. 

Friday  20.  I rode  to  Chelmortonin  the  Peak. 
Altho’  the  poor  people  had  no  previous  notice, 
they  fupplied  the  want  of  it,  by  fending  quickly 

to 


C jn  ] 

to  the  nighbouring  villages.  Between  feven  and 
eight  the  houfe  was  pretty  well  filled.  And 
many  of  them  were  extremely  thankful. 

Satur.  21.  We  fet  out  early  and  after  {pending 
an  hour  at  Afhbourn,  haftened  on  to  Litchfield. 
But  it  was  not  without  difficulty,  the  waters 
being  out,  to  a very  uncommon  degree  in  many 
places.  About  eight  we  reached  Wednefbury, 
tired  enough.  There  we  flayed  the  nextdav. 

Monday  23.  W e rode  forward  to  Redditch, 
It  had  rained  all  the  way,  fo  that  Mr.  Walfh 
was  obliged  to  go  to  bed  as  foon  as  we  came  in. 
Having  dried  foine  of  our  cloaths,  Mr. Bruce  and 
I took  horfe  again  about  two  : Having  one  with 
us  who  knew  the  by-roads,  the  common  road 
being unpaffable  thro’  the  floods.  About  five  we 
came  to  a broad  water,  which  our  guide  did  not 
care  to  pafs.  Mr.  Bruce  feeing  a foot  bridge, 
walked  over  it,  leading  his  horfe  by  a long  rein 
thro’  the  water.  But  in  an  inflant  the  horfe  dis- 
appeared. However  he  foon  emerged  and 
gained  the  bank.  I rode  thro’  at  a fmall  diflance 
very  fafely,  and  in  the  evening  preached  at 
Evefham. 

Tuefday  24.  Finding  we  could  not  ride  the 
ufual  way,  we  procured  another  guide,  and  rode 
by  Andover  Ford  to  Stroud.  Mr.  Jones  and  my 
brother  met  us  here. 

Wednefday  25.  we  rode  on  to  Briflol. 

Thurfday  26.  About  fifty  of  us  being  met,  the 
rules  of  the  fociety  were  read  over,  and  care- 
fully 


L 112  ] 

fully  confidered  one  by  one.  But  we  did  not 
find  any  that  could  be  fpared.  So  we  all  agreed, 
to  abide  by  them  all,  and  to  recommend  them 
with  our  might. 

We  then  largely  confidered,  the  nerelfity  of 
keeping  in  the  church,  and  ufing  the  clergy  with 
tendernefs  ; and  there  was  no  difienting  voice. 
God  gave  us  all  to  be  of  one  mind  and  of  one 
judgment. 

Friday  27.  The  rules  of  the  bands  were  read 
over  and  confidered,  one  by  one  ; which  after 
home  verbal  alterations,  we  all  agreed  to  obferve 
and  inforce. 

Saturday  28.  The  rules  of  Kingfwood  fchool 
were  read  and  confidered.  one  bv  one.  And  we 
were  all  convinced,  they  were  agreeable  to  fcrip- 
ture  and  reafon.  In  confequence  of  which  it  was 
agreed  ; 

1.  That  a fhort  account  ofthedefign  and  pre- 
fent  ftateof  the  fchool,  be  read  by  every  aiTiftant 
in  every  fociety  : And 

2.  That  a fubfcription  for  it  be  begun  in  every 
place,  and  (if  need  be)  a colleftion  made  every 
year. 

My  brother  and  I clofed  the  conference  by  a 
folemn  declartion  of  our  purpofe,  never  to  fepa- 
rate  from  the  church.  And  all  our  brethren 
concurred  therein. 

For  a few  days  I v'as  laid  up  with  a flux.  But 
on  Sunday,  September  5.  I crept  out  again  and 

preached 


[ «3  ] 


preached  at  Kingfwood  in  the  morning,  and 
Stokes-Croft  in  the  afternoon. 

Monday  6.  I fet  out  in  the  machine,  and  on 
Tuefday  evening  came  to  London. 

Wednefday  and  Thurfday  I fettled  my  tem- 
poral bufinefs.  It  is  now  about  eighteen  years, 
fince  I began  writing  and  printing  books.  And 
how  much  in  that  time  have  I gained  by  print- 
ing ? Why,  on  fumming  up  my  accounts,  I found 
that  on  March  1,  1756,  (the  day  I left  London 
laflj  I had  gained  by  printing  and  preaching  to- 
gether, a debt  of  twelve  hundred  and  thirty  fix 
pounds. 


Friday  10.  I preached  at  a famous  place,  com- 


monly called  The  Bull  and  Mouth  meeting,  which 


had  belonged,  I fuppofe,  near  an  hundred  years, 
to  the  people  called  Quakers.  As  much  of  real 
religion  as  was  ever  preached  there,  I truft,  will 
be  preached  there  fiill  : and  perhaps  in  a more 
rational,  fcriptural  and  intelligible  manner. 

Saturday  11.  I read  over  Mr.  Fry’s  “ cafe  of 
marriage  between  near  relations,  confidered.” 
It  is  the  bell  tra£l  I ever  read  upon  the 
fubjedl  : I fuppofe  the  bell  that  is  extant. 

I And  two  points,  I think,  he  has  fully  proved, 
1.  That  many  marriages  commonly  fuppofed  to 
be  unlawful,  are  neither  contrary  to  the  law  of 
nature,  nor  the  revealed  law  of  God,  nor  the  law 
of  the  land  : 2.  That  ecclefiaftical  courts  have  no 
right  to  meddle  with  any  cafe  of  this  kind. 

Thurfday  16.  I walked  over  to  Bilhop  Bon- 


ner’s, 


[ “4  ] 

ner’s,  and  preached  to  a large  and  ferious  congre- 
gation. I found  fome  faintnefs,  the  fun  being  ex- 
treamly  hot  ; but  more  in  walking  from  thence 
to  Weftminfter,  where  I preached  at  Seven.  In 
the  night  my  old  diforder  returned  and  gradually 
increafed,  in  fpite  of  all  medicines-  However  on 
Sunday  and  Monday  it  was  fo  far  fufpended, 
that  I abated  nothing  of  my  ufual  employment. 

Wednefday  22.  I wTas  confidering  I had  not 
yet  afked  help  of  the  great  Phyfician,  and  I re- 
folved  to  delay  no  longer.  In  that  hour  I felt  a 
change.  I flept  found  that  night,  and  was  well 
the  next  day. 

Sunday,  Oftober  3.  My  diforder  returned 
as  violent  as  ever.  But  I regarded  it  not,  while 
I was  performing  the  fervice  at  Snowfields  in 
the  morning,  or  afterward  at  Spittlefields,  till  I 
went  to  the  Lord’s  table  in  order  to  adminifter. 
A thought  then  came  into  my  mind,  “ Why 
do  I not  apply  to  God,  in  the  beginning  rather 
than  the  end  of  an  illnefs”  ? I did  fo,  and  found 
immediate  relief,  fo  that  I needed  no  farther 
medicines. 

Tuefday  5.  I wrote  a fecond  letter  to  the  au- 
thors of  the  Monthly  Review  : ingenious  men, 
but  no  friends  to  the  Godhead  of  Chriil.  Yet 
upon  farther  confideration,  I judged  it  beft,  to 
drop  the  controverfy.  It  is  enough  that  I have 
delivered  my  own  foul : if  thev  fcorn,  they 
alone  Jhall  bear  it, 

Sunday  10.  I preached  to  an  huge  multitude 

in 


[ Hi  ] 

in  Moorfields,  on  Why  will  ye  die , 0 houfe  of 
IJ'rael?  It  is  field-preaching  which  does  the  exe- 
cution ftill.  For  ufefulnefs  there  is  none  com- 
parable to  it. 

Monday  11.  I went  to  Leigh.  Where  we 
dined,  a poor  woman  came  to  the  door,  with 
two  little  children.  They  feemed  to  be  half- 
flarved,  as  well  as  their  mother,  who  was  alfo 
fhivering  with  an  ague.  She  was  extremely 
thankful  for  a little  food,  and  Hill  more  fo  for  a 
few  pills,  which  feldom  fail  to  cure  that  diforder. 

* In  this  little  journey  I read  over  a curiofity 
indeed,  a French  heroic  poem  : Voltaire's  Hen - 
riade.  He  is  a very  lively  writer,  of  a fine  ima- 
gination : and  allowed,  I fuppofe,  by  all  com- 
petent judges,  to  he  a perfeft  mafter  of  the 
French  language.  And  by  him  1 was  more  than 
ever  convinced,  that  the  French  is  the  pooreft, 
meaneft  language  in  Europe  : that  it  is  no  more 
comparable  to  the  German  or  Spanifh,  than  a 
bag-pipe  is  to  an  organ  : and  that  with  regard  to 
poetry  in  particular,  confidering  the  incorrigi- 
ble uncouthnefs  of  their  meafure,  and  their  al- 
ways writing  in  rhyme,  (to  fay  nothing  of  their 
vile  double  rhymes,  nay  and  frequent  falfe 
rhymes)  it  is  as  impofiible  to  write  a fine  poem 
in  French,  as  to  make  fine  mafic  upon  a Jews- 
harp. 

Saturday  16.  I baptized  Hannah  C , late 

a Quaker.  God,  as  ufual,  bore  witnefs  to  his 
ordinance.  A folemn  awe  fpread  over  the 

whole 


C ] 

whole  congregation,  and  many  could  not  refrain 
from  tears. 

Wednefday  20.  I received  the  following 
letter. 

Rev.  Sir, 

“ The  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  mankind 
are  the  motives  that  induce  me  to  write  the  fol- 
lowing— 

“ As  it  is  our  duty  to  do  all  we  can  to  make  all 
around  us  happy,  I think  there  is  one  thing  that 
may  be  done  to  promote  fobleffed  an  end,  which 
will  at  the  fame  time  be  very  advantageous  to 
them  that  pra&ife  it,  namely,  To  efface  all  the 
obfcene  words  w'hich  are  written  on  houfes, 
doors,  or  walls,  by  evil-minded  men.  This 
which  I recommend  to  others  I conflantly  prac- 
tife  myfelf:  and  if  ever  I omit  doing  it,  lam 
feverely  checked,  unlefs  I can  produce  fome 
good  reafon  for  that  omifTion.  I do  it  with  a 
fpunge  which  for  that  purpofe  I carry  in  my 
pocket.  The  advantages  I reap  from  hence  are, 
1.  Peace  of  confcience  in  doing  my  duty,  2. 
It  helps  me  to  conquer  the  fear  of  man,  which 
is  one  of  my  greateft  trials,  3.  It  is  matter  of  joy, 
that  I can  do  any,  the  leaf!  fervice  to  any  one. 
And  as  all  perfons,  efpecially  the  young,  are 
liable  to  temptations  to  impurity,  I cannot  do 
too  much  to  remove  fuch  temptations,  either 
from  myfelf  or  others.  Perhaps  too,  when  the 
unhappy  writers  pafs  by,  and  fee  their  bad  la- 
bours 


[ ll7  ] 

hours  foort  effaced,  they  may  be  difcouraged 
from  purfuing  fo  fhameful  a work,  yea,  and 
brought  to  a better  mind. 

“ Perhaps  in  fome  places  it  might  not  be  a- 
mifs  in  the  room  of  what  is  effaced,  to  write 
fome  ferious  fentence,  or  fhort  text  of  fcripture. 
And  wherever  we  do  this,  would  it  not  be  well 
to  lift  up  our  heart  to  God,  in  behalf  of  thofe 
finners,  in  this  or  the  like  manner,  “Lord,  lay 
not  this  fin  to  their  charge : Father,  forgive 
them  : For  they  know  now  not  what  they  do.15 

Monday  23.  I began  reading  that  excellent 
book,  The  Gofpel-glafs,  to  the  morning  congre- 
gation : a method  wdiich  I find  more  profitable 
for  injlruciicn  in  right eoufnej's,  than  any  other 
manner  of  preaching. 

Tuefday  26.  I began  reading  over  with  the 
preachers  that  were  in  town,  Mr.  Pike’s  Philo - 
fophia  Sacra.  It  contains  the  marrow  of  Mr. 
Hutchinfon’s  philofophy  clearly  and  modefily 
propofed.  But  upon  a clofe  examination,  I 
found  the  proofs  w'ere  grievoufiy  defeftive.  I 
fhall  never  receive  Mr.  Hu — ’s  creed,  unlefs  ipfe 
dixit  pafs  for  evidence. 

Saturday  30.  I yielded  to  importunity,  and 
fpent  an  hour  with  poor  Mr.  V — - — , v'ho  was 
awakened  and  found  peace  in  attending  our 
preaching,  2nd  foon  after  turned  Quaker.  I did 
wonder  at  it  once,  but  I no  not  now.  One  fo 
full  of  himfeif might  turn  Papift  and  Mahometan. 

Monday,  November  1.  Was  a day  of  trium- 
phant 


[ “8  ] 

phantjoy  as  All-faints  day  generally  is.  How  fu. 
perftitious  are  they  who  fcruple  giving  God  fo- 
lemn  thanks  for  the  lives  and  deaths  of  his 
faints  ! 

Tuefday  g.  Having  procured  an  apparatus  on 
purpofe,  I ordered  feveral  perfons  to  be  ele&ri- 
fied,  who  were  ill  of  various  diforders  : fome 
of  whom  found  an  immediate,  fome  a gradual 
cure.  From  this  time  I appointed,  firftfome  hours 
in  every  week,  and  afterward  an  hour  in  every 
day,  wherein  any  that  denred  it,  might  try  the 
virtue  of  this  furprizing  medicine.  Two  or  there 
years  after,  our  patients  were  fo  numerous,  that 
we  were  obliged  to  divide  them  : fo  part  were 
eleftrified  in  Southwark,  part  at  the  Foundery : 
others,  near  St.  Paul’s:  and  the  reft,  near  the 
Seven-dials  : the  fame  method  we  have  taken 
ever  fince.  And  to  this  day,  while  hundreds, 
perhaps  thoufands,  have  received  unfpeakable 
good,  I have  not  known  one  man,  woman  or 
child,  who  has  received  any  hurt  thereby.  So 
that  when  I hear  any  talk  of  the  danger  of  being 
elebh'ified,  (efpeciallv  if  they  are  medical  men 
who  talk  fo)  I cannot  but  impute  it  to  great 
w:ant  either  of  fenfe  or  honefty. 

Fridav  12,  I read  over  Leufden  s differation, 
in  defence  of  the  Hebrew  points,  and  was 
fully  convinced,  there,  is  at  leaft  as  much  to  be 
faid,  on  this  as  on  the  other  fide  of  the  queftion. 
But  how  is  it,  that  men  are  fo  pofitive  on  both 
fides,  while  demonilratioti  is  to  be  had  on 

neither  ? 


neither  ? Certainly  to  be  peremptory  and  dog- 
matial  can  never  be  fo  inexcufable,  as  in  a point 
fo  doubtful  as  this  ! 

Mon.  22.  I read  with  the  preachers  this  week 
the  Glagfow  Abridgment  of  Mr.  Hutchinfon’s 
works.  Wherein  the  abridgers  have  expreffed 
with  fuprizing  exadlnefs,  not  only  his  fenfe,  but 
his  very  fpirit.  But  in  truth  I cannot  admire  either: 
nay,  I admire  his  hypothehs  lefs  and  lefs  : as 
I fee  the  whole  is  unfupported  by  fcripture  : 
very  ingenious,  but  quite  precarious. 

Wednef.  December  x.  One  or  two  remark- 
able letters  were  put  into  my  hands,  part  of  the 
firft  ran  thus. 

“ Bleffed  be  God,  who  defireth  not  the  death 
of  a finner  ! It  pleafed  him,  not  to  cut  off  my 
fon  in  his  fins.  He  gave  him  time  to  repent,  and 
not  only  fo  but  a heart  to  repent.  He  fhewed 
him  his  loft  eftate  by  nature,  and  that  unlefs  he 
was  reconciled  to  God  by  his  Son,  and  wafhed 
in  his  blood  from  all  his  fins,  he  could  never  be 
faved.  After  he  was  condemned  at  York  for  a 
robbery  on  the  highway,  I attended  him  in  the 
condemned  room.  And  bleffed  be  God,  he  en- 
abled me  to  preach  the  everlafting  gofpel  to  him. 
It  was  on  Saturday  he  was  condemned.  It  was 
on  the  Saturday  following  the  Lord  touched  his 
heart.  He  then  began  to  wreflle  with  God  in 
prayer,  and  left  not  off,  till  Sunday  in  the  after- 
noon, when  God  who  is  rich  in  merer,  applied 
the  blood  of  his  Son,  and  convinced  him,  he 

had 


[ 120  ] 

had  forgiven  him  all  his  fins.  He  felt  his  foul  at 
peace  with  God,  and  longed  to  depart  and  to  be 
with  Chrift.  The  following  week  his  peace  in- 
creafed  daily,  till  on  Saturday,  the  day  he  was 
to  die,  he  came  out  of  the  condemned  room 
cloathed  in  his  fhroud,  and  went  into  the  cart. 
As  he  went  on,  the  chearfulnefs  and  compofure 
of  his  countenance  were  amazing  to  all  the  fpec- 
tors.  At  the  place  of  execution,  after  he  had 
fpent  fome  time  in  prayer,  he  rofe  up,  took  a 
chearful  leave  of  his  friends,  and  faid,  “ Glory 
be  to  God  for  free  grace.”  His  laft  words  were, 
“ Lord  Jefus,  receive  my  foul.” 

Part  of  the  other  letter  wrote  by  himfclf  to  bis 
wife,  was  as  follows. 

“ My  dear, 

Righteous  is  the  Lord,  and  juft  are  his  judg- 
ments! His  hand  of  juftice  cuts  my  life  fhort, 
but  his  hand  of  mercy  faves  my  foul.  You  for 
one  are  a witnefs  of  the  courfe  of  life  I led. 
Were  it  in  my  power  I would  gladly  make  a- 
mends,  to  you  and  every  one  elfe  that  I have 
wronged.  But  feeing  it  is  not,  I hope  that  God 
and  you,  and  everv  one  elfe,  will  accept  of  my 
willing  mind.  In  a few  hours  I (hall  be  deliver- 
ed out  of  this  miferable  world.  But  glory  be  to 
God,  he  has  given  repentance  and  remiffion  of 
fins  to  me,  the  worft  of  finners  He  has  taken 
away  the  fling  of  death,  and  I am  prepared  to 
meet  my  God.  Let  my  example  encourage  every 
firmer,  to  forfake  fin  and  come  unto  God  thro’ 

Jefus 


[ 121  ] 

Jefus  Chrift.  As  a dying  man  I give  you  this 
advice,  give  yourfelf  wholly  up  to  God.  Pray  to 
him  and  never  reft,  ’till  you  have  fecured  an 
intereft  in  the  blood  of  Chrift.  Live  in  his  fear, 
and  you  (as  well  as  I)  fhall  die  in  his  favour.  So 
no  more  from, 

York  Caftle,  Your  dying  hulhand, 

Aug®  20.  Richard  Varley.” 

Monday  6.  I began  reading  to  our  preachers 
the  late  bilhop  of  Corke’s  excellent  treatife  on 
Human  Underftanding  : in  moft  points  far  clear- 
er and  more  judicious  than  Mr.  Locke’s,  as  well 
as  defigned  to  advance  a better  caufe. 

Friday  20.  A Perfon  who  was  dying  of  a can- 
cer in  her  breaft,  and  deeply  convinced  of  fin,  fent 
a poft-chaife,  in  which  I went  to  her  atEpfom.  I 
left  her  on  Saturday  morning  in  ftronghope,  fhe 
fhould  not  go  hence,  ’till  her  eyes  had  feen  his 
falvation. 

In  my  fragments  of  time  in  the  following  week, 
I read  Mr.  Hanway’s  accurate  hiftory  of  Shah 
Nadir,  commonly  called  Kouli  Khan:  a fcourge 
of  God  indeed  ! A prodigy  of  valour  and  con- 
duct, but  an  unparallelled  monfter  of  rapine  and 
cruelty.  Alexander  the  Great,  yea  Nero  or  Domi - 
tian,  was  an  innocent  in  comparifon  of  him. 

Sunday  26.  I buried  the  remains  of  Jofeph 
Yarner,  an  Ifraelite  indeed.  The  peace  which 
filled  his  heart  during  his  laft  hours,  gave  fuch 
a bloom  to  his  very  countenance,  as  remained 
Vol.  XXX.  F ’ after 


[ 122  ] 

after  death,  to  the  furpiize  of  all,  who  remem- 
bered  the  cloud  that  ufed  to  hang  upon  it. 

Monday,  January  3,  1757.  I vifited  a poor 
dving  backflider,  full  of  good  refolutions.  But 
who  can  tell,  when  thefe  imply  a real  change  of 
heart?  And  when  they  do  not,  when  they  fpring 
from  fear  only,  what  will  they  avail  before  God  ? 

Monday  10.  I walked  to  bifhop  Bonner’s, 
with  Mr.  D — , lately  entered  at  Cambridge,  full 
of  good  refolutions.  May  God  continue  him 
fimple  of  heart ! Then  his  fenfe  and  learning 
will  do  him  good.  But  how  great  are  the  odds 
againft  him  ? 

Saturday  22.  I called  upon  one,  who  did  run 
well  for  feveral  years.  But  for  a confiderab  le 
time  he  had  cafl:  off  the  very  form  of  religion. 
Yet  his  heart  was  not  utterly  hardened.  He  de- 
termined to  fet  out  once  more.  And  fince  that 
time,  he  has  been  more  confirmed  in  walking 
fuitably  to  the  gofpel. 

Friday  28.  Mr.  Meier,  chaplain  to  one  of  the 
Hanoverian  regiments,  called  and  fpent  an  hour 
with  me.  I am  furprized  at  the  ferioufnefs  of 
all  the  German  minifiers,  with  whom  I have  had 
occafion  to  converfe  : entirely  different  from 
that  pertnefs  and  affectation  of  wit,  which  is 
too  common  in  our  own  country. 

* The  following  letter  (which  I received  two 
or  three  months  after)  was  dated  on  this  day. 

“ Though  you  and  I may  differ  in  fome  lit- 
tle things  I have  long  loved  you  and  your  brother, 

and 


[ 123  ] 

and  wiflied  and  prayed  for  your  fuccefs,  as  zeal- 
ous revivers  of  experimental  Chrifliamty.  If  I 
differ  from  you  in  temper  and  defign,  or  in  the 
effentials  of  religion,  I am  fure  the  erior  mutt 
lie  on  my  fide.  Blefled  be  God  for  hearts  to 
love  one  another ! 

As  I knew  your  correfpondence  muff  be  very 
extenfive,  and  your  labours  various  and  inceffant, 

I intended  to  have  kept  my  peculiar  love  for  you 
a fecret,  till  we  arrived  where  feas  fhall  no  more 
roll  between  us.  But  your  late  pious  charity 
conftrains  me  to  give  you  the  trouble  of  a letter. 
I am  confident  God  will  attend  it  with  his  blef- 
fing,  and  render  you  ufeful  at  the  diflance  of 
near  4000  miles. 

How  great  is  the  honour  God  has  conferred 
upon  you,  in  making  you  a reftorer  of  declining 
religion  ? And  after  ftruggling  through  fo  much 
oppofition,  and  Handing  almoft  fingle,  with  what 
pleafure  muft  you  behold  fo  many  railed  up, 
zealous  in  the  fame  caufe,  though  perhaps  not 
ranked  under  the  fame  name,  nor  openly  con- 
nected with  you ! 

I am  endeavouring  in  my  poor  manner  to 
promote  the  fame  caufe  in  this  part  of  our  guilty 
globe.  My  fuccefs  is  not  equal  to  my  wifhes  ; 
but  it  vaftly  furpaffes  both  my  deferts  and  my 
expectation.  I have  baptized  near  an  hundred 
and  fifty  adult  negroes,  of  whom  about  fixty  are 
communicants.  Unpolifhed  as  they  are,  I find 
foine  of  them  have  the  art  to  diffemble.  But, 
F 2 bleffed 


t 


[ ^4  ] 

bleffed  be  God,  the  generality  of  them,  as  far 
as  I can  learn,  are  real  Chriftians.  And  I have 
no  doubt,  but  fundrv  of  them  are  genuine  chil- 
dren of  Abraham.  Among  them,  in  the  firft 
place,  and  then  among  the  poor  white  people,  I 
have  di ffributed  the  books  you  fent  me. 

I defire  you  to  communicate  this  to  your 
brother,  as  equally  intended  for  him.  And  let 
me  and  my  congregation,  particularly  my  poor 
negro-converts,  be  favoured  with  your  prayers. 
In  return  for  which,  I hope  neither  you  nor 
your  caufe  will  be  forgotten,  by 
Reverend  Sir,  Your  affe&ionate  fellow-labourer, 
and  obliged  fervant, 

Hanover  (in  Virginia]  Samuel  Davis. 

Jan.  28,  17,57. 

Sunday  30.  Knowing  God  was  able  to  ftregth- 
en  me  for  his  own  work,  I officiated  at  Snow- 
fields  as  ufual,  before  I went  to  Wefl-ftreet, 
where  the  fervice  took  me  up  between  four  and 
five  hours.  I preached  in  the  evening  and  met 
the  fociety : and  my  firength  was  as  my  day.  I 
felt  no  more  wearinefs  at  night,  than  at  eight  in 
the  morning. 

Sunday,  February  6.  The  number  of  commu- 
nicants at  Spittlefields,  made  this  Lord’s-day  a 
little  more  laborious  than  the  former.  But  God 
added  proportionably  to  my  firength.  So  I felt 
no  difference. 

* Thurfday  10.  At  the  requefi  of  the  author, 
1 took  fome  pains,  in  correfting  an  ingenious 

book. 


[ 125  ] 


book,  ffiortly  to  be  published.  But  the  more  I 
confider  them,  the  more  I doubt,  of  all  fyftems 
of  aftronomy.  I doubt  whether  we  can  certain- 
ly know,  either  the  diftance  or  magnitude  of 
any  flar  in  the  firmament.  Elfe  why  do  aftrono- 
mers  fo  immenfely  differ,  even  with  regard  to 
the  diltance  of  the  fun  from  the  earth  ? Some 
affirming  it  to  be  only  twelve,  others  ninety  mil- 
lions of  miles ! 

About  this  time  the  following  note  was  given 
into  my  hand  at  Wapping. 

“ John  White,  mailer  at  arms,  aboard  his 
Majefly’s  fhip  Tartar,  now  at  Plymouth,  delires 
to  return  Almighty  God  thanks,  for  himfelf  and 
all  the  ffiip’s  company,  for  their  prefervation  in 
four  different  engagements  they  have  had  with 
four  privateers  which  they  have  taken  ; particu- 
larly the  lad,  wherein  the  enemy  fii ft  boarded, 
them.  They  cleared  the  deck,  boarded  in  their 
turn,  and  took  the  fhip,  30  of  the  enemy  being  kil- 
led, and  30  more  wounded.  Only  two  of  our  crew 
were  wounded,  who,  it  is  hoped,  will  recover.” 

* Wednefday  16.  Calling  on  a friend,  I 
found  him  juft  feized  with  all  the  fymptoms  of  a 
pleurifv.  I advifed  him  to  apply  a brimftone- 
plaifter,  and  in  a few  hours  he  was  perfeftly  well. 
Now,  to  what  end  fhould  this  patient  have  taken 
a heap  of  drugs,  and  loft  twenty  ounces  of  blood  ? 
“ To  what  end  ? Why,  to  oblige  the  doflor 
and  apothecary.”  Enough  ! Reafon  good ! 

Tuefday  22.  I preached  at  Deptford.  Even 
F 3 this 


[ 126  ] 


this  wildernefs  does  at  length  blojfom  and  bud  as 
ike  rofe.  Never  was  there  fuch  life  in  this  little 
flock  before,  nor  fuch  an  increafe  in  the  num- 
jnumber  of  hearers. 

The  following  letter  was  wrote  on  Sat.  28. 

“ Reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

“ When  I was  at  Frefhford,  on  January  30, 
in  the  morning,  I fcrupled  finging  thofe  words, 

Ye  now  afflified  are, 

And  hated  for  his  name. 

And  in  your  bodies  bear 
The  tokens  of  the  Lamb. 

I thought  I was  not  affli&ed  or  hated  for  the 
name  of  Cbrift.  But  this  fcruple  was  foon  re- 
moved. For  at  Bradford,  in  the  evening,  I was 
preft  for  a foldier,  and  carried  to  an  inn,  where 
the  gentlemen  were.  Mr.  Pearfe  hearing  of  it, 
came,  and  offered  bail  for  my  appearance  the 
next  day.  They  faid,  “ They  would  - take  his 
word  for  ten  thoufand  pound  : but  not  for  me; 
I mull  go  to  the  round-houfe  the  little  ftone- 
room  on  the  fide  of  the  bridge.  So  thither  I 
was  conveyed  by  five  foldiers.  There  I found 
nothing  to  fit  on  but  a ftone,  and  nothing  to  lie 
on  but  a little  flraw.  But  foon  after  a friend 
fent  me  a chair,  on  which  I fat  all  night.  I had 
a double  guard,  twelve  foldiers  in  all : two  with- 
out, one  in  the  door,  and  the  reft  within.  I 
paffed  the  night  without  fleep,  but  not  without 

reft ; 


C 127  ] 

reft  ; for,  bleffed  be  God,  my  peace  was  not 
broken  a moment.  My  body  was  in  prifon  ; 
but  I was  Chrift’s  freeman  : my  foul  was  at  li- 
berty. And  even  there  I found  fome  work  to 
do  for  God  : 1 had  fair  opportunity,  of  fpeak- 
ing  to  them  who  durft  not  leave  me.  And  I 
hope  it  was  not  in  vain. 

In  the  morning  I had  leave  to  go  to  a private 
houfe  with  only  one  foldier  to  guard  me.  About 
three  in  the  afternoon  I was  carried  before  the 
commiffioners,  and  part  of  the  aft  read,  which 
impowered  them  to  take  “ Such  able-bodied 
men,  as  followed  no  bufinefs,  and  had  no  lawful 
or  fufficient  maintenance/’  Then  I faid,  “ If 
thefe  are  the  men  you  are  to  take  I am  not  a pro- 
per pc-rfon.  For  I do  follow  a lawful  calling  in 
partnerlhip  with  my  brother,  and  have  alfo  an 
eftate.”  The  juftice  faid,  “ If  you  will  make 
oath  of  that,  I think,  we  muft  let  you  go.”  But 
the  commiffioners  faid,  “ no  man  could  fwear 
for  himfelf.”  I faid,  “ Gentlemen,  give  me  time 
and  you  fhall  have  full  proof.”  After  a long  de- 
bate they  took  a fifty  poundbond,  for  my  appear- 
ance on  that  day  three  weeks.  All  the  time  I 
could  blefs  God  that  he  counted  me  worthy  to 
fuffer  for  his  name’s  fake. 

“ The  next  day  I fet  out  for  Cornwall.  I 
tarried  at  home  four  days,  and  then  fetting  out 
with  my  brother  James,  came  to  Bradford  laft 
Saturday.  On  Monday  in  the  afternoon-  I ap- 
peared before  the  commiffioners,  with  the  writ- 
F 4 tings 

IK 


[ 1*8  ] 

tings  of  my  eftate.  When  the  juflice  had  per- 
ufed  them,  and  my  brother  had  taken  his  oath, 
I was  fet  at  liberty.  So  the  fiercenefs  of  man 
turns  to  God’s  praife,  and  all  this  is  for  the  fur- 
therance of  the  gofpel.  I hope  you  will  return 
God  thanks  for  my  deliverance  out  of  the  hands 
of  unreafonable  and  wicked  men. 

William  Hitchens.” 

Sunday  27.  After  the  fervice  at  Snow-rields, 
I found  myfelf  much  weaker  than  ufual,  and 
feared  I fhouid  not  be  able  to  go  thro’  the  work 
of  the  day,  which  is  equal  to  preaching  eight 
times.  I therefore  prayed  that  God  would  fend  me 
help  : and  as  foon  as  I had  done  preaching  at 
Weff-ftreet,  a clergyman  who  was  come  to  town 
for  a few  days,  came  and  offered  me  his  fervice. 
So  when  I afked  for  ffrength  God  gave  me 
ffrength  : when  for  help,  he  gave  this 
alfo. 

I had  been  long  defired  to  fee  the  little  flock 
at  Norwich.  But  this  I could  not  decently  do, 
’till  I was  able  to  re-build  part  of  the  Founder)' 
there,  to  which  I was  engaged  by  my  leafe.  A 
film  fufhcient  for  that  end  was  now  unexpect- 
edly given  me,  by  one  of  whom  I had  no  per- 
fonal  knowledge.  So  I fet  out  on  Monday  28, 
and  preached  in  Norwich  on  Tuefday  evening, 
Mr.  Walfh  had  been  there  twelve  or  fourteen 
days;  and  not  without  a bleffing.  After  preach- 
ing I entered  into  contraCl  with  a builder, 
and  gave  him  part  of  the  money  in  hand.  On 

Wednefday 


[ 129  ] 

Wednefday  andThurfday  I fettled  all  our  fpiri- 
tual  and  temporal  bufinefs,  and  on  Friday  and 
Saturday  returned  with  Mr.  Walfh  to  London. 

Sunday  6.  1 had  no  help,  and  I wanted  none, 
for  God  renewed  my  ftrength.  But  on  Sunday 
13,  finding  myfelf  weak  at  Snow-fields,  I prayed 
(if  he  faw  good)  that  God  would  fend  me  help 
at  the  chappel.  And  I had  it.  A clergyman 
whom  I never  faw  before,  came  and  offered  me 
his  affiftance.  And  as  foon  as  I had  done  preach- 
ing, Mr.  Fletcher  came,  who  had  juft  then  been 
ordained  prieft,  and  haftened  to  the  chappel,  on 
purpofe  to  affift,  as  he  fuppofed  me  to  be 
alone. 

Monday  14.  I went  with  T.  Wallh  to  Canter- 
bury, where  I preached  in  the  evening  with 
great  enlargement  of  fpirit  : but  with  greater 
in  the  morning,  being  much  refrefhed  at  the 
fight  of  fo  large  a number  of  foldiers.  And  is 
not  God  able  to  kindle  the  fame  fire  in  the  fleet 
which  he  has  already  begun  to  kindle  in  the 
army  ? 

Wednefday  16.  I had  the  fatisfaftion  to  find 
an  old  ftout-hearted  finner,  who  had  been  defy- 
ing God  for  near  four-fcore  years,  now  become  as 
a little  child,  and  complaining  of  his  own  ignor- 
ance and  ingratitude  to  God. 

Frid.  1S.  I returned  to  London. 

Sund.  20.  Mr.  Fletcher  helped  me  again. 
How  wonderful  are  the  ways  of  God  ! when  my 
bodily  ftrength  failed,  and  none  in  England  were 
E 5 able. 


C *3°  ] 

able  and  willing  to  affift  me,  he  fent  me  help 
from  the  mountains  of  Swifferland  ! And  an  help 
meet  for  me  in  every  refpeft  : where  could  I 
have  found  fuch  another? 

Frid.  25.  After  I had  read  to  a ferious  clergy- 
man the  conclufiori  of  “ The  Doftrine  of  Ori- 
ginal Sin,  he  moved,  that  we  might  fpend  fome 
time  in  prayer.”  And  I found  great  liberty  of 
fpirit,  in  praying  for  Dr.  Taylor,  and  a ftrong 
hope,  that  God  would  fhew  him  the  truth  as  it  is 
in  Jefus. 

About  this  time,  many  of  the  children  of  God 
refled  from  their  labours. 

On  Sund.  13.  I buried  Elizabeth  Langdon, 
who  after  fevere  inward  trials,  was  for  feveral 
days  in  great  pain,  but  in  great  peace. 

On  Sund.  25. 1 buried  Hannah  Lee,  a pattern 
of  induftry,  meeknefs  and  patience. 

* And  on  Sund.  27.  I buried  Mary  Naylor, 
who  for  feveral  years  was  a moft  eminent  pat- 
tern, of  truly  Chriftian  courage,  plainnefs  of 
fpeech,  and  plainnefs  of  apparel.  A week  be- 
fore, I had  an  opportunity  of  telling  her  all  that 
was  in  mv  heart,  concerning  her  change,  (not  for 
the  better)  in  all  thefe  particulars.  In  the  begin- 
ning  of  her  illnefs,  the  was  in  great  darknefs  and 
diftrefs  of  foul.  But  while  prayer  was  made  for 
her,  her  bodily  pain  ceafed,  and  her  foul  received 
comfort. 

And  on  Mond.  21,  juft  at  midnight,  fire  quietly 
fell  a'leep. 


Wednef. 


[ *3*  ] 

Wednef.  30.  I rode  to  a gentleman’s  near 
Beconsfield,  and  preached  at  fix  in  the  evening, 
in  a large,  convenient  place,  filled  with  ferious 
hearers,  feveral  of  whom  had  come  five  or  fix 
miles. 

Satur.  31.  I was  earneftly  importuned,  to  go 
over  to  High  Wycombe.  I went  and  preached 
there  at  noon,  on  the  parable  of  the  fower.  Per- 
haps fome  of  the  feed  which  has  been  fown 
here  for  many  years,  will  at  length  bring  forth 
fruit. 

At  fix  it  feemed  as  if  the  whole  town  of  Be- 
consfield was  affembled  together.  And  I bear 
them  witnefs,  they  gave  earned:  heed,  high  and 
low,  to  the  things  which  were  fpoken.  A large 
number  of  them  were  prefent  in  the  morning, 
on  Friday  April  1.  Fair  beginnings,  thefe ! 
But  he  that  endureth  to  the  end,  the  fame  fhall  be 
faved . 

In  returning  to  London,  I read  a tra&on  “ the 
Law  of  Nature,”  wrote  by  a counfellor  of  Ge- 
neva. I am  forry  to  find  Dr.  Taylor’s  poiforv 
fpread  to  the  Alps  alfo  ! And  even  printed  and 
publifhed  at  Geneva,  without  any  hindrance  or 
animadverfion ! 

Sund.  3.  I paid  one  more  vifit  to  • Thomas- 
Singleton,  an  amiable  young  man,  called  away. 
at  five  and  twenty,  in  the.  dawn  of  a flourifh- 
ing  bufinefs.  The  next  day  his  fpirit  returned  to- 


On 


C *3*  ] 

On  Good-friday  in  the  evening  at  the  meeting 
of  the  fociety,  God  was  eminently  prefent  with 
us.  I read  over  and  enlarged  upon  Jofeph  Al- 
leyne’s  dire&ions  for  a thorough  converfion  to 
God  ; and  defired,  all  who  were  able  would 
meet  me  on  Monday  that  we  might  perform  our 
vows  unto  the  Lord. 

* Mond.  11.  At  five  in  the  evening  about 
twelve  hundred  of  the  fociety  met  me,  at  Spittle- 
fields.  I expefited  two  to  help  me,  but  none 
came.  I held  out  till  between  feven  and  eight. 
I was  then  fcarce  able  to  walk  or  fpeak:  but  I 
looked  up  and  received  ftrength.  At  half  hour 
after  nine,  God  broke  in  mightily  upon  the  con- 
gregation. Great  indeed  was  our  glorying  in  him  : 
we  were  filed  with  conflation.  And  when  I re- 
turned home  between  ten  and  eleven,  I was  no 
more  tired  than  at  ten  in  the  morning. 

Mond.  12.  I fet  out  at  five  for  Bedford. 
About  (even  the  rain  began.  It  did  not  intermit 
till  noon,  and  was  driven  upon  us  by  a mod  furi- 
ous wind.  In  the  afternoon  we  had  fome  inter- 
vals of  fair  weather,  and  before  five  we  reached 
Bedford. 

Mr.  Parker,  now  mayor,  received  us  gladly. 
He  hath  not  borne  the  fword  in  vain.  There  is 
no  curling  or  fwearing  heard  in  thefe  flreets : no 
work  done  on  the  Lord’s  day.  Indeed  there  is 
no  open  wickednefs  of  any  kind  now  to  be 
.een  in  Bedford.  O what  may  not  one  magif- 

trate 


[ *33  ] 

trate  do,  who  has  a fingleeye  and  a confidence  in 
God? 

Both  in  the  evening  and  the  following  morn- 
ing, I preached  the  law,  as  well  as  the  gofpel. 
The  next  evening  I preached  on,  All  things  are 
ready  : come  ye  to  the  marriage.  And  God  emi- 
nently confirmed  his  word.  It  feemed  as  if  not 
one  would  be  left  behind. 

Wednef.  14.  We  rode  to  Leiceller,  where 
John  Brandan  has  gathered  a fmall  fociety.  I 
preached  at  feven.  The  houfe  (fuppofed  to  con- 
tain a thoufand  people)  was  throughly  filled.  I 
believe  there  were  forty  or  fifty  foldiers  : and  all 
heard,  as  for  life. 

Thurf.  15.  Being  informed  the  ftrait  road 
to  Birmingham  was  fcarce  paffable,  wrn  went 
round  by  Coventry.  Before  fix  we  reached  Bir- 
mingham. 

Satur.  16.  I fpoke  to  each  member  of  the 
fociety.  What  havock  have  the  two  oppofite 
extreams,  myfiicifm  and  antinomianifm  made, 
among  this  once-earnefi  and  fimple  people  ! 
Had  it  not  been  good  for  thofe  men,  not  to  have 
been  born,  by  whom  thefe  little  ones  have  been 
offended  ? 

In  the  afternoon  I rode  to  Dudley,  where  the 
work  of  God  increafes  greatly,  notwithftanding 
the  immenfe  fcandal  which  has  been  given,  by 
thofe  who  once  rejoiced  in  the  love  of  God.  One 
of  thefe  has  lately  killed  his  own  child,  by  a blow 
upon  the  head.  After  preaching  I talked  with  M. 

B, 


C *34  ] 


B.  who  has  been  long  a mother  in  Jfrael.  “ I was 
under  flrong  conviftions,  faid  fhe,  when  twelve 
or  thirteen  years  old,  and  foon  after  found  peace 
with  God.  But  I loft  it  by  degrees,  and  then  con- 
tented myfelf  with  living  a quiet,  harmlefs  life, 
till  Mr.  Charles  Wefley  came  to  Wednefbury, 
in  the  year  1742.  Soon  after  this  my  convictions 
returned  though  not  with  terror,  as  before,  but 
with  ftrong  hope,  and  in  a little  time,  I reco- 
vered peace  and  joy  in  believing.  This  I never 
loft  fince,  but  for  forty-eight  hours  (by  fpeaking 
angrily  to  my  child.)  Not  long  after,  Mr.  Jones 
talked  particularly  with  me,  about  the  vvicked- 
nefs  of  my  heart.  I went  home  in  great  trouble, 
which  did  not  ceafe,  till  one  day,  fitting  in  my 
houfe,  I heard  a voice  fay,  in  my  inmoft  foul* 
“ Be  ye  holy;  fori  am  holy.”  From  that  hour 
for  a year  and  a quarter,  (though  I never  loft  my 
peace)  I did  nothing  but  long,  and  weep,  and 
pray,  for  inward  holinefs.  I was  then  fitting  one 
day,  Aug.  23,  1744,  about  eight  in  the  morning, 
mufing  and  praying  as  ufual,  when  I feemed  to 
hear  a loud  voice,  faying  at  once  to  my  heart  and 
to  my  outward  ears,  “ This  day  fhall  falvation 
come  to  this  houfe.”  I ran  up  ftairs,  and  pre- 
fently  the  power  of  God  came  upon  me,  fo  that 
I fhook  all  over  like  a leaf.  Then  a voice  faid, 
“ This  day  is  falvation  come  to  this  houfe.”  At 
the  inftant  I felt  an  entire  change.  I was  full  of 
love,  and  full  of  God.  I had  the  witnefs  in  my» 

felf. 


[ *3  5 3 

felf.  That  he  had  made  an  end  of  fin,  and  taken 
my  whole  heart  for  ever,  And  from  that  mo- 
ment, I have  never  loft  the  witnefs,  nor  felt  any 
thing  in  my  heart  but  pure  love.” 

Sund.  17.  The  rain  conftrained  me  to  preach 
within  at  eight,  though  the  houfe  would  ill  con- 
tain the  congregation:  but  we  prayed,  that  God, 
if  he  faw  good,  would  fay  the  bottles  of  heaven , 
for  the  fakeof  thofe  at  Wednefbury.  And  before 
we  came  thither,  the  rain  flayed,  fo  that  I pro- 
claimed Chrift  crucified,  in  the  open  air,  to  fuch 
a congregation  as  no  houfe  could  have  contained. 
At  five  I preached  to  a ftill  larger  congregation, 
on,  He.  that  believeth  Jhall  be  faved.  As  foon  as  I 
had  done,  the  rain  returned,  and  continued 
great  part  of  the  night. 

Mond.  18.  In  the  evening  I preached  at  Bil- 
brook  to  an  earneft  congregation,  and  joined 
twenty  of  them  in  a fociety  : one  of  whom  had 
Chrift  clearly  revealed  in  him,  thirty  years  ago. 
But  he  could  find  none  who  underftood  what  he 
faid,  till  the  Methodijls  (fo  called 7 came.  He 
clave  to  them  immediately,  rejoicing  with  them 
and  over  them,  who  were  partakers  of  like  preci- 
ous faith. 

Tuef.  19.  Between  Nantwich  and  Poole,  a 
thick,  black  cloud  came  acrofs  us,  out  of  which 
iffued  fuch  a violent  wind,  as  was  ready  to 
bear  us  off  our  horfes.  But  in  five  minutes 
time,  the  wind  fell,  and  the  cloud  bore  clear 
away. 


Wednefi 


[ >36  ] 

Wednef.  20.  The  congregation  at  Chefter 
in  the  evening  was  as  quiet  and  ferious  as  that 
at  the  Foundery  : and  the  fociety  was  near 
a third  part  larger,  than  when  I was  here  in  au- 
tumn. 

Thurf.  21.  I rode  to  Liverpool,  where  I found 
about  half  of  thofe  I left  in  the  fociety.  James 

S Id,  had  fwept  away  the  reft,  in  order 

to  which  he  had  told  lies  innumerable.  But 
none  who  make  lies  their  refuge  will  profper. 
A little  while  and  his  building  will  moulder 
away. 

Sund.  24.  We  had  two  very  ufeful  fermons 
at  St.  Thomas  church:  the  one,  on  counting  the 
co/l,  before  we  begin  to  build;  the  other  on,  Be 
ye  angry , and  Jin  not.  And  both  of  them  were  ex- 
actly fuitable  to  the  prefent  cafe  of  many  in  the 
congregation. 

The  upper  part  of  the  high  fpire  of  the  church, 
was  blown  down  in  the  late  ftorm.  The  ftones 
being  bound  together  by  ftrong  iron-cramps, 
hung  waving  in  the  air  for  fome  time.  Then 
they  broke  through  roof,  gallery,  pews  and 
pavement,  and  made  a deep  dint  in  the 
ground. 

Mond.  25.  I walked  to  the  infirmary,  ftanding 
on  an  hill,  at  the  north-end  of  the  town.  The 
feamens  hofpital  is  joined  to  it,  on  each  fide,  by 
femi-circular  piazzas.  All  is  extremely  clean  and 
neat,  at  leaft  equal  to  any  thing  in  London.  The 
old  feamen  have  fmalleror  larger  allowance,  ac- 
cording 


C 137  ] 

cording  to  their  families.  So  that  nothing  is 
wanting  to  make  their  lives  eafy  and  comforta- 
ble— but  the  love  of  God. 

I afterward  fpent  an  hour  with  Mr.  Peter 
Whitefield,  a man  of  ftrong  underftanding  and 
various  learning.  His  dilfertation  in  defence  of 
the  Hebrew  points  (which  he  fent  me  the 
next  morning)  is  far  more  fatisfafilory  than 
any  thing,  which  I ever  heard  or  read  upon  the 
fubjeft. 

Thurf.  28.  I talked  with  one,  who  by  the  ad- 
vice of  his  pallor,  had  very  calmly  and  delibe- 
rately, beat  his  wife  with  a large  flick,  till  fire  was 
black  and  blue,  almoft  from  head  to  foot.  And 
he  infilled,  “ It  was  his  duty  fo  to  do,  becaufe  Ihe 
was  furly  and  ill-natured:  and  that  he  was  full  of 
faith  all  the  time  he  was  doing  it,  and  had  been  fo 
ever  fince !” 

Satur.  30.  I took  a view  of  the  free-fchool,  a 
truly  noble  benefadlion.  Here  feventy  boys  and 
thirty  girls  are  entirely  provided  for.  The  build- 
ing forms  three  fides  of  a fquare,  and  is  rather 
elegant  than  magnificent.  The  children  are  taught 
to  work,  in  their  feveral  ways,  as  well  as  to  read 
and  write.  The  fchool,  the  dining-rooms  and  the 
lodgings  are  plain  and  clean.  The  whole  was  the 
gift  of  one  man,  Mr.  Blundell,  a merchant  of  Li- 
verpool. 

Mond.  May  2.  I preached  atWarrington  about 
noon,  to  a wild,  flaring  people  (very  few  ex- 
cepted) who  feemedjufl  ripe  formifchief.  But 

the 


[ 138  ] 

the  bridle  was  in  their  jaws.  In  the  evening  I 
preached  at  Manchefter. 

Wednefday  4.  I rode  over  to  Hay  field,  and 
preached  at  one  in  the  church,  to  a congrega- 
tion, gathered  from  all  parts. 

* Thurfday  5.  I enquired  of  John  Johnfon, 
concerning  Adifs  Berresford.  The  fum  of  his 
account  was  this.  She  was  always  an  innocent 
fober  young  woman,  having  the  form  of  godli- 
nefs,  till  fhe  was  convinced  of  fin,  and  foon  after 
jufiified.  She  was  a pattern  both  of  piety  and 
induftry.  Notwithftanding  her  fortune  and  her 
ficklinefs,  fhe  was  never  unemployed  ; when 
fhe  bad  no  other  work,  working  for  the  poor. 
And  the  whole  tenor  of  her  converfation  was 
fuch,  that  it  is  ftill  a common  faying,  “ If  Mifs 
Berresford  is  not  gone  to  heaven,  no  body  ever 
will.” 

She  had  a vehement  love  to  the  word  of  God, 
and  fpared  no  pains  in  order  to  hear  it.  Fre- 
quently fhe  would  not  go  to  bed  all  night,  left 
file  fhould  mifs  the  morning  preaching.  She  loft 
no  opportunity  of  meeting  with  her  brethren,  to 
whom  her  heart  was  clofelv  united  : nor  was 
fhe  afraid  or  alhamed  to  own  the  pooreft  of  them, 
wherever  fhe  met  them,  and  whatever  company 
fire  was  in.  The  very  fight  of  them  occafioned 
a joy  in  her  foul,  which  fire  neither  could,  nor 
defired  to  hide. 

When  her  weaknefs  confined  her  to  her  room, 
fhe  rejoiced  with  joy  unfpeakable:  more  efpe- 

cially 


[ J39  1 

eially  when  the  was  delivered  from  all  her  doubts* 
concerning  Chriftian  perfe&ion.  Never  was 
any  one  more  athirft  for  this,  for  the  whole  mind 
that  was  in  Chrift.  And  fhe  earneftly  exhorted 
all  her  brethren,  vehemently  to  prefs  after  it. 

The  more  her  bodily  ftrength  decayed,  the  more 
fhe  was  ft  rengthened  in  fpirit.  She  called  upon  all 
that  were  with  her:  “ Help  me  to  rejoice  ; help 
me  to  praife  God.”  Having  no  fear,  butajea- 
loufy  over  herfelf,  left  (he  fhould  exceed  in  her 
defire  to  be  with  Chrift. 

As  foon  as  I came  to  Afhbourn,  fhe  fent  for 
me  and  broke  out,  “ I am  juft  at  my  journey’s 
end.  What  a mercy,  that  I who  have  done  fo 
little  for  God,  fhould  be  fo  foon  taken  up  to  him  ! 
O,  I am  full  of  the  love  of  God.  I dare  not  exer* 
cife  mv  faith  fully  upon  God:  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  is  fo  great,  that  I cannot  bear  it.  I am 
overwhelmed.  My  natural  life  is  almoftgone,  with 
the  brightnefs  of  his  prefence.  Sometimes  I am 
even  forced  to  cry  out,  “ Lord,  flay  thy  hand, 
till  I come  into  glory.”  I afked,  “ Have  you 
lately  felt  any  remains  of  fin  in  you  ?”  She  faid, 
I felt  pride  fome  weeks  ago.”  And  it  feems,  this 
was  the  laft  time.  She  added,  I have  now  no 
will  : the  will  of  God  is  mine.  I can  bring  my 
deareft  friends  before  the  Lord.  And  while  I 
am  praying  for  them,  the  glory  of  the  Lord  fo 
overpowers  me  that  I am  loft,  and  adore  in 
filence  the  God  of  heaven.”  She  cried  out,  “ Tell 
all  from  me,  Ldiat  perfe&ion  is  attainable,  and 

exhort 


'[  Ho  ] 

exhort  all  to  prefs  after  it,  What  a blefling  is  it, 
that  I have  no  weary  hours  ? Tho’  I am  confined 
to  my  bed,  night  and  day  and  can  take  fcarce  any 
thing  but  water  to  refrefh  me,  yet  I am  like  a 
giant  refreflred  with  wine.” 

Afterward  file  b^oke  out,  “ If  I had  lived  in  what 
the  world  calls  pieafure,  what  a miferable  creature 
fhould  I have  been  now  ? What  fhould  I be,  if 
1 had  no  God  on  iny  fide  ? When  the  fire  has 
made  me  bright,  then  I {hall  go  to  my  God.” 

She  prayed  largely  for  all  ftates  of  mankind  : 
but  particularly,  for  the  profperity  of  the  church: 
and  for  the  fociety  at  Afirbourn,  that  God  would 
continue  and  increafe  his  work  among  them. 

When  file  altered  for  death,  fire  called  for  her 
mother  and  brothers,  to  each  of  whom  £he  gave 
an  earned  exhortation.  Then  file  faid,  “ Now  I 
have  no  more  to  do  here.  I am  ready  to  die. 
Send  to  Mr.  W.  and  tell  him  I am  forry,  I did 
not  fooner  believe  the  doftrine  of  perfeft  hoi i - 
nefs.  Blefied  be  God  I now  know  it  to  be  the 
truth  !”  After  greatly  rejoicing  in  God  for  two 
days  more,  fire  faid  one  morning,  “ I dreamed 
laft  night,  I heard  a voice,  “ Chrift  will  come 
to  day  for  his  bride.  It  is  for  me.  He  will  come 
for  me  to  day.”  And  a few  hours  after  without 
one  flruggle,  or  figh,  or  groan,  file  fweetly  fell 
afleep. 

One  who  was  intimately  acquainted  with  her 
writes  thus  ; “ Glorv  he  to  God  for  the  blefied 
privilege  I enjoyed,  of  being  with  her,  night  and 

day, 


day,  for  a month  before  fhe  died.  When  I went 
to  her  firft,  fhe  had  kept  her  bed  fome  days,  and 
was  extremely  weak.  And  yet  fhe  fpoke  confider- 
ablv  plainer,  than  ever  I heard  her  in  my  life. 
She  called  as  foon  as  I entered  the  room,  “ My 
dear  friend,  give  me  your  hand.  Let  us  rejoice 
that  my  time  is  fo  near  approaching.  Do  not 
mourn  : you  know  it  is  what  we  expended.” 

I was  foon  brought  to  wilh  her  fafe  on  the 
happy  fhore.  She  faid,  “ this  is  true  friendfhip.” 
But  h<*w  is  it  that  I do  not  feel  greater  tranfports 
of  love  now  I am  fo  near  the  time  of  feeing  my 
Lord  face  to  face  P Indeed  I am  afhamed  to 
approach  him,  before  whom  the  angels  veil  their 
faces  !”  She  often  faid,  “ I take  it  as  a frelh  token 
of  his  love,  that  he  fent  you  to  me  at  this  time.” 
Her  pains  were  great  '.  but  fhe  bore  all  with  in- 
vincible patience  and  refignation,  and  often  faid, 

“ I find  it  good  for  me  to  be  affli&ed  ; in  his 
time  I fhall  come  out  throughly  purified.”  After- 
ward fire  faid,  “ I experience  more  upon  this 
bed  of  my  own  nothingnefs,  and  the  free  grace 
of  God  in  Chrift  than  ever  I did  in  all  my  life.” 
The  bell;  of  my  performances,  would  be  damn- 
able without  Chrift. 

Several  days  before  her  death  her  love  was  fo 
great  that  fhe  cried,  “ I am  overcome,  I am  over 

O 

come,  I am  overcome.”  And  when  fhe  had 
fcarce  ftrength  to  fpeak,  fhe  praifed  God  in  a 
wonderful  manner.  Even  when  fhe  was  light- 
headed, her  talk  was 


wholly  concerning  the  things 


[ *42  ] 

of  God.  She  called  to  Mr.  Weflev,  as  if  he  had 
been  by  her,  and  faid,  “ O fir,  how  hard  it  is  for 
the  rich  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ? I 
am  faved.  But  I am  but  juft  faved.”  When 
her  fever  abated,  fine  told  me,  “ She  had  dream, 
ed  that  fhe  was  with  him.”  And  fometimes  I 
could  fcarce  perfuade  her  but  he  had  been  there. 

She  after  afked,  “ If  I faw  no  more  appear- 
ance of  death  in  her  face  yet?”  When  I told 
her,  there  was,  fhe  begged  I would  indulge  her 
with  a looking-glafs.  And  looking  earneftly  in- 
to it,  fhe  faid  with  tranfport,  “ I never  faw  my- 
felf  with  fo  much  pleafure  in  my  life.” 

On  Saturday  morning  at  fix  fhe  faid,  “ My 
Saviour  will  come  to  day,  and  fetch  his  bride.” 
Yet  about  eight  fhe  faid,  “ If  you  had  felt  what 
1 have  done  this  morning,  it  would  have  killed 
you.  I had  loft  fight  of  God.”  (Perhaps  in  the 
laft  conflift  with  principalities  and  powers J From 
this  time  fhe  was  filled  with  joy,  but  fpoke  little. 
Her  eyes  were  ftill  lifted  up  to  heaven,  till  her 
foul  was  releafed,  with  fo  much  eafe,  that  I did 
not  know  when  fhe  drew  her  laft  breath. 

So  died  Judith  Berresford,  as  it  were  an  hun- 
dred years  old,  at  the  age  of  four  and  twenty. 
A little  more  of  her  life  and  of  her  fpirit,  may 
be  learned  from  one  or  two  of  her  letters. 

* “ How  can  you  love  me,  fince  there  is  ftill 
fuch  a mixture  of  evil  in  all  I fay  and  do  ? But 
why  fhould  I afk  this  queftion  ? The  Lord  him- 
felf  loves  me  : and  in  the  late  difpenfation  of 

his 


his  providence  he  has  mercifully  difcovered  to  me 
fome  fins  of  a refined  nature,  which  before  I was 
almoft  ignorant  of,  and  now  wail  and  pray  to  be 
delivered  from.  And  I can  joyfully  add,  the  Lord  is 
nigh  to  all  that  call  upon  him.  He  will  fulfil  my 

defire,  though  not  as  I defired -His  way  and 

his  will  are  heft.  But  how  long  (hall  I acknow- 
ledge this,  without  implicitly  fubmitting  to  it  ? 
My  own  will  I am  apt  to  think  good  in  fuch 
cafes,  and  to  grieve  when  it  is  croft.  So  that  I 
eafily  difcern,  how  needful  it  is  for  me  to  be  tri- 
ed, and  made  to  facrifice  to  the  Lord  of  that 
which  cofts  me  fomething.  I need  not  fay,  for 
the  above,  alas  ! will  tell  you,  that  I cannot  an- 
f fwer  all  your  queftions  in  the  affirmative.  For 
did  I continually  find  God  prefent  with  me,  and 
always  walk  in  the  light  of  his  countenance, 
moftfurely  there  could  be  no  part  dark  in  me.  Yet 


1|  And  if  it  can  ferve  any  good  purpofe,  he  will 
open  my  lips  to  declare  his  praife,  and  let  a poor 
i.  creature  glorify  him  in  her  death.  For  this  I 
pray,  and  rejoice  in  hope,  knowing  the  God 
v 1 whom  I ferve  is  able  to  fulfil  in  me  all  the  good 
pleafure  of  his  will,  and  the  work  of  faith  with 
[ill!  power. 

U As  to  the  fhadows  of  this  world,  I think  I 
jj.j  may  truly  fay,  they  are  as  nothing  to  me.  The 
of  evil  (for  certainly  it  mull  be  fome)  that  at  times 
hif.  | interpofes 


[ M4  ] 

interpofes  between  God  and  my  foul,  is  I be* 
lieve  of  a more  fpiritual  nature.  The  flirrings 
of  pride  I fometimes  feel,  and  I trufl,  fhall  be- 
wail as  long  as  one  fpark  remains. 

My  dear  friend,  adieu  ! I trull  we  fhall  have 
an  happy  meeting  at  lafl.  In  the  mean  time  I 
am  perfuaded,  a few  lines  from  you  would  add 
greatly  to  my  peace  and  comfort. 

I am 

Your  very  loving,  and  (I  hope) 
obedient  child, 

Sept.  7,  1756.  I.  B. 

* In  anfwer  to  a letter  wherein  I defired  fome 
account  of  her  experience,  fhe  wrote  as  fol- 
lows. 

“ How  does  it  add  to  the  glory  of  the  Al- 
mighty Saviour,  that  from  my  very  infancy, 
this  rebel  heart  has  felt  the  drawings  of  his  love  P 
Therefore  fince  you  defire  to  know,  how  I was 
firft  convinced,  that  I was  a poor,  guilty  finner, 

I mull  begin  with  faying,  that  goodnefs  and  mer- 
cy have  followed  me  all  my  days.  But  I know 
not  how  to  proceed,  the  workings  of  fin  and 
grace  that  I have  felt  are  beyond  defcription.  : 
Yet  out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  fucklings  the  I 
Lord  can  perfefl  praife. 

Mv  childhood  was  fpent  in  much  fimplicity  j 
and  peace.  The  Lord  drew  me  to  himfelf  with 
the  cords  of  love  and  I found  great  joy,  in  pour-  1 
ing  out  my  foul  before  him.  Original  fin  I was 
quite  ignorant  of ; but  afctual  fins  I felt  and  be- 
wailed, I 


[ m ] 

wailed,  and  after  fome  time  fpent  in  weeping  for 
them,  I felt  peace  and  renewed  my  refolutions. 
But  they  could  not  laft  long:  for  pride,  envy,  and 
all  manner  of  evil,  now  fprung  up  in  my  heart. 
Yet  at  times  I had  hrong  convifilions,  and  often 
refolved  to  be  very  ferious  when  I was  older. 

So  I went  on  from  eight  or  ten  years  old  till 
feventeen.  Then  I was  indeed  as  bad  as  bad 
could  be  : defired  nothing  but  to  be  admired, 
and  was  filled  with  all  that  foolifh  vanity,  which 
poor  young  women  are  moll  prone  to.  Chrift- 
mas  1750,  I was  advifed,  to  partake  of  the 
Lord's  fupper.  I knew  it  was  right,  but  was 
confcious  of  my  ignorance  and  unfitnefs  for  it. 
However  I endeavoured  to  prepare  mvfelf,  and 
was  pretty  well  fatisfied,  after  I had  made  a for- 
mal confefiion  of  my  fins,  and  filed  fome  tears 
for  them. 

About  this  time  there  was  a great  talk  of  Me- 
thodifm,  and  a coufin  of  mine  was  brought  to 
feek  the  Lord.  I went  to  vifit  her  in  January 
1751,  and  told  her  before  I came  away,  “ I 
knew  I was  not  what  I ought  to  be,  and  fiiould 
be  glad  to  be  inftrufled.”  From  this  time  we 
carried  cn  a correfpondence,  and  by  degrees 
light  broke  in  upon  my  heart.  But  alas  ! tho’ 
I well  knew,  that  in  me  was  no  good  thing,  and 
feemed  to  difclaim  my  own  righteoufnefs,  yet 
the  idol  lurked  within,  and  I really  trailed  in 
my  own  prayers  and  other  duties.  In  this  man- 
ner I went  on  that  whole  year,  toward  the  end 
Vol.  XXX.  ’ G of 


[ i46  ] 

of  which  my  corruptions  were  more  violent. 
Sin  hook  occafton  by  the  commandment,  and  I 
was  often  ready  to  be  carried  away  by  the  tor- 
rent. 

February  1752,  It  pleafed  God  to  take  my 
dear  friend.  This  appeared  to  me  a heavy  judg- 
ment. Yet  I afterwards  faw  how  it  was  temper- 
ed with  mercy,  as  it  taught  me,  to  trull  in  none 
but  the  everl  ailing  arm.  Her  death  happily  prov- 
ed the  occafion  of  her  elder  filler’s  converfion. 
I he  blelfing  of  a Chrillian  friend  was  rellored  to 
me,  and  v/e  received  each  other  as  from  the 
Lord. 

In  53  and  54,  I had  great  outward  afflictions, 
and  at  times  llrong  inward  confli£ls,  though  blef- 
fed  be  God,  I generally  found  comfort  in  pour- 
ing out  my  complaints  before  him.  But  towards 
the  end  of  1754  I began  to  feel  my  hope  decline  : 
and  for  feveral  nights  in  fecret  prayer  I was  in 
llrong  agony  of  fpirit.  The  Lord  then,  while 
I was  upon  my  knees  llripped  off  all  my  fig- 
leaves.  At  the  fame  time  he  fhewed  me  the  all- 
fufficiency  of  Jefus  Chriit  to  fave  linnets,  to  fave 
me,  the  chief,  and  I was  enabled  to  cry  out, 
“ My  Lord,  and  my  God ! I have  redemption 
in  thy  blood.”  From  this  happy  time  I went 
on  my  way  rejoicing,  though  1 was  at  times  grie- 
voufly  affaulted,  both  by  the  llirrings  of  my  old 
corruptions,  and  temptations  from  the  devil, 
blafphenrous  thoughts  in  particular.  I always  e» 

perinced 


[ *47  ] 

perienced  fomething  of  this  before  the  facra- 
ment ; but  the  Lord  made  a way  for  me  to  ef- 
cape. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  year  1755,  we  had 
preaching  near  Afhbourn.  T.  his  I had  wifhed 
for  long.  And  now  I was  honoured  with  fuf- 
ferino'  a little  for  the  name  of  Chrift.  At  firfl:  I 

O 

was  rather  alhamed  : but  the  Lord  {Lengthened 
me.  And  fo  great  a bleffing  did  I find,  by  con- 
verfing  with  thefe  dear  people,  that  I feared 
none  of  thofe  things,  which  I did,  or  might  fuf- 
fer.  My  acquaintance  were  now  lefs  fond  of 
my  company,  and  they  that  looked  upon  me 
fhaked  their  heads.  This  proved  an  unfpeaka^ 
ble  bleffing:  for  often  1 had  caufe  to  fear  the 
love  of  men. 

From  the  time  of  my  becoming  ferious,  or 
rather  beginning  to  aim  at  it,  my  health  vifibly 
declined.  This  at  firft  occafioned  me  fome 
trouble  ; becaufe  all  cried  out,  “ It  was  being 
too  religious.”  But  afterwards  I faw  great  mer- 
cy in  this  chaftifement  and  the  confequences  of 
it  : one  of  which  was,  that  I had  a juji  excufe, 
even  in  the  judgment  of  others,  for  refraining 
from  many  things  which  in  my  circumftances 
could  not  otherwife  have  been  avoided,  with- 
out great  oppofition  from  thofe  who  were  near 
and  dear  unto  me.  Not  that  I ever  faded  : God 
knows  I have  been  deficient  in  this,  as  well  as 
every  other  duty,  But  I had  an  happy  liber- 
ty of  ufing  fome  little  felf-denial : for  which  the 
Lord  be  praifed ! 

G 2 


O how 


C '48  ] 

0 how  has  he  led  me  and  carried  me  in  his 
bofom ! Is  it  not  wonderful  ? And  yet  I have 
not  told  you  a tenth  part.  But  the  time  fails. 
And  my  flrength  fails.  Praife  God  with  me, 
and  let  us  magnify  his  name  together. 

Oft.  1,  1756. 

1 believe,  this  was  one  of  the  lafl  letters  fhe 
wrote.  Shortly  after  fhe  was  called  hence. 

“ So  unaffeaed,  fcj  compos’d  a mind, 

So  firm,  yet  foft,  fo  ftrong,  yet  fo  refin’d, 

Heaven  as  it’s  pure  If  gold  with  torture  try’d  ; 

The  faint  fuflained  it ; but  the  woman  dy’d.” 

An  account  of  a widely  different  nature  I re- 
ceived about  this  time  from  Ireland.  “ Thomas 
B.  about  three  miles  from  Tyrrel’s-pafs,  was  at 
the  point  of  death,  by  a violent  rupture.  While 
they  were  praying  for  him  in  the  fociety,  he  was 
at  once  reftored  to  perfea  health.  He  continued 
in  health  for  feveral  years,  and  in  the  knowledge 
and  love  of  God.  Butnofooner  did  he  return 
to  folly,  than  his  diforder  returned.  And  in 
fome  months  it  put  an  end  to  his  life.  He  died 
as  ftupid  as  an  ox.” 

Monday  9.  I rode  over  the  mountains  to  Hud- 
dersfield. A wilder  people  I never  fatv  in  Eng- 
land. The  men,  women  and  children,  filled  the 
flreet  as  we  rode  along,  and  appeared  juft  ready 
to  devour  us.  They  were  however  tolerably  quiet 
while  I preached  ; only,  a few  pieces  of  dirt 

were 


[ M9  I 


were  thrown  : and  the  bellman  came  In  the 
middle  of  the  fermon  : but  was  Hopped  by  a 
gentleman  of  the  town.  I had  almoft  done,  when 
they  began  to  ring  the  bells  ; fo  that  it  did  us 
final!  diflervice.  How  intolerable  a thing  is  the 


gofpel  of  Chrilf,  to  them  who  are  refolved  to 
ferve  the  devil  ! 

Wednelday  n.  I preached  about  one  at 
Wakefield,  in  a fmall  meadow  near  the  town. 
When  I began  the  fun  {hone  exceeding  hot  : 
But  in  a few  minutes  it  was  covered  with  clouds. 
The  congregation  was  more  quiet  and  ferious 
than  ever  I faw  there  before.  Almoft  as  foon  as 
I had  done  fpeaking,  the  fun  broke  out  again. 

Thur.  12.I  finifhed  Dr.  Roger’s  “ Eflay  on  the 
learning  of  the  antients.”  I think  he  has  clearly 
proved  that  they  had  microfcopes  and  telefcopes, 
and  knew  all  that  is  valuable  in  the  modern 
aftronomy.  But  indeed  he  has  fully  {hewn  the 
whole  frame  of  this,  to  be  quite  uncertain,  if 
not  felf-contradi&ory. 

The  latter  end  of  the  week  1 fpent  at  Bradford. 

Sunday  13.  At  five  the  houfe  contained  the 
congregation  : but  at  eight  they  covered  the 
plain  adjoining  to  it.  The  fun  was  hot,  ’till  the 
clouds  interpofed.  It  was  a folemn  and  comfort- 
able feafon.  As  foon  as  the  fervice  of  the 
church  was  ended,  I began  at  the  end  of  the 
houfe  again,  and  exhorted  a willing  multitude,  to 
follow  after  chanty.  A fhower  of  rain  and  hail 
G 3 fell 


[ *5°  ] 

fell  as  I drew  to  a conclufion  : but  it  did  not 
difturb  the  congregation. 

Soon  after  I took  horfe  for  Birftal.  The  con- 
gregation here  was  treble  to  that  at  Bradford.  But 
as  they  flood  one  above  another,  on  the  circular 
flope  of  the  hill,  my  voice  commanded  them  all. 
Though  I fpoke  longer  than  I ufually  do,  I found 
no  wearinefs  or  weaknefs.  Shall  not  they  that 
trujl  in  the  Lord  renew  their  Jirength?  Yea,  as 
long  as  the  fun  and  moon  endureth. 

On  Monday  and  Tuefday  I preached  in  the 
neighbouring  towns. 

* Wednefday  18.  I rode  in  the  afternoon  from 
Halifax,  over  the  huge,  but  extremely  pleafant 
and  fruitful  mountain;  to  Heptonltali.  A large 
congregation  was  waiting  for  us,  not  only  on 
the  ground,  but  on  the  fide  and  tops  of  the 
neighbouring  lioufes.  But  no  fcoffer  or  trifler 
was  feen  among  them.  It  rained  in  the  adjoin- 
ing valley,  all  or  mod  of  the  time  that  I was 
preaching.  But  it  was  fair  with  us,  on  the  top 
of  the  mountain.  What  an  emblem  of  God’s 
taking  up  his  people  into  a place  of  fafety,  while 
the  florm  falls  on  all  below? 

Here  I was  informed  of  the  earthquake  the 
day  before.  On  Tuefday,  May  17.  many  per- 
fons  in  feveral  parts  within  five  or  fix  miles, 
heard  a ftrange  noife  under  the  ground,  which 
fome  compared  to  thunder,  others  to  the  rumbl- 
ing of  carts : quickly  after  they  felt  the  earth  rock 

under 


C w ] 

under  them,  and  wave  to  and  fro.  Many  who 
were  within  doors  heard  their  pewter  and 
glafs  clatter,  many  in  the  fields  felt  the  ground 
lhake  under  their  feet : and  all  agreed  as  to  the 
time,  though  they  knew  nothing  of  each  other’s 
account. 

Thurf.  19.  I preached  at  Ewood  about  feven, 
not  intending  to  preach  again  till  the  evening. 
But  Mr.  Grimfhaw  begged  I would  give  them 
one  fermon  at  Gawklham ; after  which  we 
climbed  up  the  enormous  mountain,  I think 
equal  to  any  I faw  in  Germany,  on  the  brow  of 
which  we  were  faluted  by  a fevere  Ihower,  which 
an  high  wind  drove  full  in  our  faces,  almoft  till 
we  came  to  Haflenden.  * Here  I learned,  that 
the  earthquake  obferved  near  Heptonftal,  had 
been  fenlibly  felt  by  very  many  perfons,  from. 
Bingley,  three  miles  eaflward  of  Kighley,  to 
the  neighbourhood  of  Prefton.  It  was  every 
where  preceded  by  an  hoarfe  rumbling,  about 
three  o’clock:  fo  that  in  a few  minutes  it  had 
run  from  eall  to  weft,  between  fifty  and  fixty 
miles. 

Frid.  20.  I preached  near  Paddiham  at  eight, 
to  a large,  wild  congregation:  about  noon  at 
Rough  Lee,  where  thofe  who  ftood  firm  in  the 
fiorm,  had  melted  away  in  the  calm.  At  Kighley 
I had  neither  voice  nor  ftrength  left'.  But  while  I, 
was  preaching  my  ftrength  returned. 

Satur.  2i.  I had  a little  conference  with  our 
preachers.  In  the  afternoon  I preached  at  Bing- 
G 4 ley. 


t *52  ] 

ley.  J have  not  lately  feen  fo  genteel  a congre- 
gation : yet  the  word  of  God  fell  heavy  upon 
them. 

Sund.  22.  After  preaching  at  five,  I took 
horfe  for  Haworth.  A December  {form  met  us 
upon  the  mountain.  But  this  did  not  hinder 
fuch  a congregation,  as  the  church  could  not 
contain.  I fuppofe  we  had  near  a thoufand 
communicants,  and  fcarce  a trifler  among  them. 
In  the  afternoon,  the  church  not  containing 
more  than  a third  of  the  people,  I was  con- 
flrained  to  be  in  the  church-yard.  The  rain 
began  as  foon  as  I began  to  fpeak.  But 
they  regarded  it  not.  For  God  fent  into 
their  hearts 

The  former  and  the  latter  rain  ; 

The  love  of  God,  and  love  of  man. 

Alond.  23.  I took  horfe  at  four.  It  rained  till 
noon  without  intermiflion.  And  we  had  heavy 
fhowers  in  the  afternoon.  However  we  reached 
Amblefide  in  the  evening. 

Tuef.  24.  We  rode  by  Kefwick  to  White- 
haven. Within  a few  miles  of  the  town,  I was  fo 
tired  that  I could  fcarce  either  ride  or  w'alk. 
But  all  wearinefswas  gone  before  I had  preached 
a quarter  of  an  hour. 

* Wednef.  25. 1 was  furprized  to  fee  not  only 
hedges  and  fhrubs  without  a green  leaf  upon 

them, 


[ h53  3 

them,  but  abundance  of  trees  likewife  naked  as 
in  the  depth  of  winter.  Upon  enquiring  I found 
that  fome  time  before  a violent  wind  had  gone 
through  all  thefe  parts,  which  not  only  threw 
down  chimneys,  walls  and  barns,  and  tore  up 
trees  by  the  roots,  but  fcorched  every  green 
thing  it  touched,  as  with  fire,  fo  that  all  the  leaves 
immediately  fell  off,  and  not  only  bufhes  and 
fruit  trees,  but  elms,  oaks  and  firs,  withered 
away  to  the  very  roots. 

Frid.  27.  I preached  at  Branthwait  about 
noon.  Many  of  the  congregation  came  from 
far.  The  rain  was  fufpended  from  ten  till  even- 
ing,  fo  that  they  had  opportunity  both  of  com- 
ing and  returning.  This  alfo  was  an  anfwer  to 
prayer.  And  is  any  fuch  too  little  to  be  remem- 
bered ? 

Whitfunday,  May  29.  After  preaching  at 
eight  and  at  two,  I haltened  to  Cockermouth, 
I began  without  delay,  and  cried  to  a liften- 
ing  multitude.  If  any  ?nan  thirft , let  him  come 
unto  me  and  drink.  The  word  had  free  courfe. 
Even  the  gentry  feemed  defirous  to  drink  of  the- 
living  water. 

Mond.  30.  I rode  to  Wigton,  a neat,  well- 
built  town,  on  the  edge  of  Cumberland,  I 
preached  in  the  market-place  at  twelve.  The 
congregation  was  large  and  heavily  attentive. 
Between  four  3nd  five  we  eroded  Solway  Frith,, 
and  before  feven  reached  an  ill-looking  houfe, 
G 5,  called 


[ *54  3 


called  The  Brow,  which  we  came  to  by  miftake, 
having  palled  the  houfe  we  were  directed  to.  I 
believe,  God  dire&ed  us  better  than  man.  Two 
young  women,  we  found,  kept  the  houfe,  who 
had  loft  both  their  parents  ; their  mother  very 
lately.  I had  great  liberty  in  praying  with  them 
and  for  them.  Who  knows  but  God  will  fallen 
fomething  upon  them,  which  they  will  not  eafjly 
{hake  off!1 

TueC  31.I  breakfafted  at  Dumfries,  and  fpent 
an  hour  with  a poor  backtlider  of  London,  who 
had  been  for  fome  years  fettled  there.  We  then 
rode  through  an  uncommonly-pleafant  country, 
(fo  widely  diftant  is  common  report  from  truthj 
to  Thorny-hill,  two  or  three  miles  from  the  Duke 
of  Oueenfborough’s  feat,  an  antient  and  noble 
pile  of  building,  delightfully  lituated,  on  the  fide 
of  a pleafant  and  fruitful  hill.  But  it  gives  no 
pleafure  to  its  owner  : for  he  does  not  even  be- 
hold it  with  his  eyes.  Surely  this  is  a fore  evil 
under  the  fun  : a man  has  all  things,  and  enjoys 
noth  in  cr. 

O 

We  rode  afterward  partly  over,  and  partly 
between  fome  of  the  fineft  mountains,  I believe, 
in  Europe,  higher  than  moll,  if  not,  than  any  in 
England,  and  cloatbed  with  grafs  to  the  very  top. 
Soon  after  four  we  came  to  Lead-hill,  a little 
town  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains,  wholly  inha- 
bited by  miners. 

Wednef.  June  1.  We  rode  on  to  Glafgow:.  a 

mile 


C '55  ] 

mile  fliort  of  which,  we  met  Mr.  Gillies,  riding 
out  to  meet  us. 

* In  the  evening  the  tent  (fo  they  call  a co- 
vered pulpit)  was  placed  in  the  yard  of  the  poor- 
houfe,  a very  large  and  commodious  place. 
Fronting  the  pulpit  was  the  infirmary,  with  moll 
of  the  patients  at  or  near  the  windows.  Adjoin- 
ing to  this  was  the  hofpital  for  lunatics  : feveral 
of  them  gave  deep  attention.  And  cannot  God 
give  them  alfo  the  fpirit  of  a found  mind  ? After 
fermon,  they  brought  four  children  to  baptize.  I 
was  at  the  kirk  in  the  morning,  while  the  mini- 
fler  baptized  feveral,  immediately  after  fermon. 
So  I was  not  at  a lofs,  as  to  their  manner  of 
baptizing.  I believe  this  removed  much  preju~ 
dice. 

Frid.  3.  At  feven  the  congregation  was  in- 
oreafed,  and  earned:  attention  fat  on  every  face. 
In  the  afternoon  we  walked  to  the  college  and 
faw  the  new  library,  with  the  colleftion  of 
piflures.  Many  of  them  are  by  Raphael,  _ 

Rubens,  Vandyke,  and  other  eminent  hands. 
But  they  have  not  room  to  place  them 
to  advantage,  their  whole  building  being  very 
fmall. 

* Satur.  4.  r walked  through  all  parts  of  the 
old  cathedral,  a very  large  and  once  beautiful 
ftrufture ; I think,  more  lofty  than  that  at  Can= 
terbury,  and  nearly  the  fame  length,  and  breadth. 
We  then  went  up  the  main  fteeple,  which  gave 
us  a fine  profpeft,  both  of  the  city  and  the  adja- 

G 6.  cent! 


[ *56  ] 

cent  country.  A more  fruitful  and  better  culti- 
vated plain,  is  fcarce  to  be  feen  in  England.  In- 
deed nothing  is  wanting  but  more  trade  (which 
would  naturally  bring  more  people)  to  make  a 
great  part  of  Scotland  no  way  inferior  to  the  belt 
counties  in  England. 

I was  much  pleafed  with  the  ferioufnefs  of  the 
people  in  the  evening.  But  Hill  I prefer  the 
Englifh  congregation.  I cannot  be  reconciled  to 
men  fitting  at  prayer,  or  covering  their  heads 
while  they  are  finging  praife  to  God. 

Sund.  5.  At  feven  the  congregation  was  juft 
as  large  as  my  voice  could  reach.  And  I did  not 
fpare  them  at  all.  So  if  any  will  deceive  himfelf 
1 am  clear  of  his  blood.  In  the  afternoon,  it 
was  judged  two  thoufand,  at  leaft,  went  away, 
not  being  able  to  hear.  But  feveral  thoufands 
heard  very  diftin&jy,  the  evening  being  calm  and 
ftill.  After  preaching  1 met  as  many  as  defined 
it,  of  the  members  of  the  praying  focieties.  I 
earneilly  advified  them,  to  meet  Mr.  Gillies 
every  week:  and  at  their  other  meetings,  not 
to  talk  loofely  and  in  general  (as  their  manner 
had  been)  on  fiome  head  of  religion,  but  to  exa- 
mine each  others  hearts  and  lives. 

* Mond.  6.  We  took  horfe  early,  and  in  three 
hours  reached  the  Kirk  of  Shots : where  the  land- 
lord feemedtobeunufually  affefted,  by  a few  mi- 
nutes converfation  ; as  did  alfo  the  woman  of 
the  houfe  where  we  dined.  We  came  to  Muffel- 
borough  at  five.  I went  to  an  inn,  and  fent  for 

Mr. 


Mr.  Bailiff  Lindfey,  whom  I had  feen  feveral 
years  ago.  He  came  immediately,  and  defired 
me,  to  make  his  houfe  my  home.  At  feven  I 
preached  in  the  poor-houfe  to  a large  and  deeply 
attentive  congregation.  But  the  number  of 
people  making  the  room  extremely  hot,  I 
preached  in  the  morning  before  the  door.  Speak- 
ing aftewards  to  the  members  of  the  fociety,  I 
was  agreeably  furprized,  to  find  more  than  two- 
thirds  knew  in  whom  they  had  believed.  And 
the  tree  was  known  by  its  fruits.  The  national 
fhynefs  and  ftubbornnefs  were  gone,  and  they 
were  as  open  and  teachable  as  little  children. 
At  feven  five  or  fix  and  forty  of  the  fifty  dra- 
goons,  and  multitudes  of  the  towns-people 
attended.  Is  the  time  come,  that  even  thefe 
wife  Scots  fhall  become  fools  for  Chrifl’s 
fake  ? 

Wednef.  8.  I rode  to  Dunbar.  Here  alfo  I 
found  a little  fociety,  moil  of  them  rejoicing  in 
God  their  Saviour.  At  eleven  I went  out  into 
the  main  flreet,  and  began  fpeakingto  a congre- 
gation of  two  men  and  two  women,  Thefe  were 
foon  joined  by  above  twenty  little  children,  and 
not  long  after  by  a large  number  of  young  and 
old.  On  a fudden  the  fun  broke  out  and  fhone 
full  in  my  face : but  in  a few  moments  I felt  it 
not.  In  the  afternoon  I rode  to  Berwick-upon- 
Tweed.  They  did  not  expeft  me  till  the  next 
day : however  a congregation  quickly  affembled : 


[ >58  ] 

and  one  as  large,  If  not  larger,  at  five  in  the  morn- 
ing. 

Thurf.  9.  To-day,  Douglas,  the  play  which 
has  made  fo  much  noife,  was  put  into  my  hands. 
I was  aftonifhed  to  find,  it  is  one  of  the  fineft 
tragedies  I ever  read.  What  pity,  that  a few  lines 
were  not  left  out  ! And  that  it  was  ever  afled  at 
Edinburgh  ! 

Frid.  10.  I found  myfelf  much  out  of  order, 
till  the  flux  flopt  at  once,  without  any  medicine. 
But  being  Hill  weak,  and  the  fun  fhining  ex- 
tremely hot,  I was  afraid  I fhould  not  be  able  to 
go  round  by  Kelfo.  Vain  fear!  God  took  care 
for  this  alfo.  The  wind  which  had  been  full  eaft 
for  feveral  days,  turned  this  morning  full  weft  ; 
and  blew  juft  in  our  face.  And  about  ten 
the  clouds  rofe,  and  kept  us  cool  till  we  came  to 
Kelfo. 

* At  fix  William  Coward  and  I went  to  the 
market-hottfe.  We  flayed  fome  time,  and  nei- 
ther man,  woman  nor  child  came  near  us.  At 
length  I began  finging  a Scotch  pfalm,  and  fif- 
teen or  twenty  people  came  within  hearing,  but 
with  great  circumfpeflion,  keeping  their  diftance, 
as  though  they  knew  not  what  might  follow. 
But  wdiile  I prayed,  their  number  increafed,  fo 
that  in  a few  minutes  there  was  a pretty  large 
congregation.  I fuppofe  the  chief  men  of  the 
town  were  there  : and  I fpared  neither  rich  nor 
poor.  I almoft  wondered  at  myfelf,  it  not 

being 


[ m ] 

being  ufual  with  me  to  ufe  keen  and  cutting 
expreffions.  And  I believe,  many  felt,  that  for 
all  their  form,  they  were  but  Heathens  flill, 

* Satur.  1 1.  Near  as  many  were  prefent  at  five, 
to  whom  I fpoke  full  as  plain  as  before.  Many 
looked,  as  if  they  would  look  us  through  : but 
the  fhynefs  peculiar  to  this  nation,  prevented 
their  faying  any  thing  to  me,  good  or  bad,  while 
1 walked  through  them  to  our  inn. 

About  noon  I preached  at  Woller,  a pretty 
large  town,  eighteen  miles  from  Kelfo.  I flood 
on  one  fide  of  the  main  flreet,  near  the  middle 
of  the  town.  A.nd  I might  fiand.  For  no  crea- 
ture came  near  me,  till  I had  fung  part  of  a 
pfalm.  Then  a row  of  children  flood  before  me, 
and  in  fome  time,  about  an  hundred  men  and 
women.  I fpoke  full  as  plain  as  I did  at  Kelfo. 
And  Phatifees  themfelves  are  not  out  of  God’s 
reach. 

In  the  afternoon  we  came  to  Alnwick,  and  at 
fix  I preached  in  the  Court-houfe  to  a congre- 
gation of  another  fpirit. 

Sund.  12.  At  feven  they  were  gathered  from 
all  parts,  and  I was  greatly  refrefhed  among  them. 
At  five  the  Court-houfe  being  too  fmall,  I was 
obliged  to  go  out  into  the  market-place.  O what 
a difference  is  there  between  thefe  living 
ftones,  and  the  dead,  unfeeling  multitudes  in 
Scotland  ? 

* Mond.  13.  I proclaimed  the  love  of  Chrift 
to  Tinners,  in  the  market-place  at  Morpeth. 

Thence 


[ 16°  ] 


Thence  we  rode  to  Placey.  The  fociety  of  col- 
liers here  may  be  a pattern  to  all  the  focieties  in 
England.  No  perfon  ever  miffcs  his  band  or 
clafs : they  have  no  jar  of  any  kind  among 
them  : but  with  one  heart  and  one  mind  provoke 
one  another  to  love  and  to  good  works.  After 
preaching  I met  the  fociety  in  a room  as  warm 
as  any  in  Georgia : this,  with  the  fcorching 
heat  of  the  fun,  when  we  rode  on,  quite  exhaufted 
mv  ftrength.  But  after  we  came  to  Newcafile  I 
foon  recovered,  and  preached  with  as  much  eafe 
as  in  the  morning. 

* Thurf.  16.  In  the  evening  I preached  at 
Sunderland.  I then  met  the  fociety,  and  told 
them  plain,  None  could  flay  with  us,  unlefs  he 
would  part  with  all  fin:  particularly  robbing  the 
king,  felling  or  buying  run  goods,  which  I could 
no  more  fuffer  than  robbing  on  the  highway. 
This  I inforced  on  every  member  the  next  day. 
A few  would  not  promife  to  refrain.  So  thefe  I 
was  forced  to  cut  off.  About  two  hundred  and 
fifty  were  of  a better  mind. 

Satur.  18.  The  defk  was  placed  in  the  evening 
juft  oppofite  the  fun,  which  when  I begun  was 
covered  with  a cloud.  But  it  broke  out  in  a few 
minutes,  and  fhone  full  in  my  face,  for  three 
quarters  of  an  hour.  But  it  was  no  inconveni- 
ence at  all : nor  were  my  eyes  any  more  dazled, 
than  if  it  had  been  under  the  earth. 

Sund.  19.  I preached  at  eight  to  the  ufual 

congre- 


[ i6i  ] 


congregation,  and  haftened  to  Shields,  led  I 
•fhould  be  too  late  for  the  church.  Between 
twelve  and  one  I preached  in  a kind  of  fquare; 
But  here  we  had  a new  kind  of  inconvenience. 
Every  four  or  five  minutes,  a ftrong  wind  co~ 
vered  us  over  with  a fhower  of  dull:  fo  that  it 
was  not  eafy  to  look  up,  or  to  keep  ones  eyes 
open.  But  not  long  after,  the  rain  began,  which 
confirained  me  to  preach  within,  at  New- 
cafile.  I took  the  opportunity  of  making  a 
cohesion  for  the  poor:  many  of  whom  can 
very  hardly  fupport  life,  in  the  prefent  fcarcity. 

Wednef.  22.  In  the  evening  and  the  following 
morning  I preached  at  Chefter  on  the  Strate. 
Obferving  fome  very  fine  but  not  very  modell 
piftures  in  the  parlour  where  we  flipped,  I 
defired  my  companion  when  the  company 
was  gone,  to  put  them  where  they  could  do 
no  hurt.  He  piled  them  on  an  heap  in  a cor- 
ner of  the  room,  and  they  have  not  appeared 
fince. 

Thurf.  23.  I preached  at  Southbiddick  about 
noon,  on  I will  heal  thy  bachfliding:  God  was 
with  us  at  Sunderland  in  the  evening,  in  an  un- 
common manner.  And  the  next  day  1 left  the 
people  there  more  in  earned  than  they  have  been 
for  fome  years. 

Satur.  23.  We  walked  to  Swalwell  about  noon. 
The  fun  was  fcorching  hot,  and  there  w’as  no 
wind  or  cloud.  But  it  did  us  no  hurt.  The 
congregation  was  fuch  as  I never  faw  there  be- 
fore. 


[ ] 

fore.  And  I believe  God  blelfed  bis  word  t« 
them  that  were  nigh,  and  them  that  had  been  far 
from  him, 

Sund.  2 6.  I preached  at  Gatefhead  at  eight, 
at  Sheep-hill  about  noon,  and  at  five  in  the 
evening  at  Newcaflle,  near  Pandon-gate.  The 
rain  only  threatned  till  I had  done,  but  foon  af- 
ter, poured  down.  How  well  does  God  time  great 
and  fmall  events,  for  the  furtherance  of  his  king- 
dom ! 

Mond.  27.  I preached  at  Horfeley,  and  found 
fome  life  even  there.  Thence  we  rode  acrofs  the 
Tyne  to  Prudhoe,  a little  town  on  the  top  of  an 
high  hill.  I preached  at  the  fide  of  Mr.  H.’s 
houfe,  and  I fuppofe,  all  the  town  who  could  get 
out  were  prefent,  and  moll  of.  them  at  five  in 
the  morning.  At  both  times  it  pleafed  God  to 
make  bare  his  arm,  not  only  to  wound,  but  to 
heal. 

Tuef.  28.  I returned  to  Newcaflle,  hoarfe 
and  weak.  But  who  can  be  fpent  in  a better 
caufe  ? 

* Thurf.  30.  I read  Mr.  Baxter's  account  of 
his  own  life  and  times.  It  feems  to  be  the  moll 
impartial  account  of  thofe  times  which  has  yet 
ever  appeared.  And  none  that  I have  feen,  fo 
accurately  points  out  the  real  fprings  of  thofe 
public  calamities. 

Sund.  July  3.  The  high  wind  obliged  me  to 
Hand  on  the  weflern  fide  of  Gatefhead.  By  this 
means  the  fun  was  juft  in  my  face.  But  it  was. 

not 


[ i«3  ] 

not  long  before  the  clouds  covered  it.  As  1 be- 
gan fpeaking  in  the  afternoon  near  Pandon- 
gate,  the  rain  began,  fcattered  the  carelefs  hear- 
ers, and  ceafed.  An  earned,  attentive  multi- 
tude remained,  to  whom  I explained  part  of  the 
fecond  ledon  for  the  day,  concerning  the  joy 
which  is  in  heaven , over  one  j inner  that  repent - 
etk. 

Monday  4.  I took  my  leave  of  Newcaftle, 
and  about  noon  preached  at  Durham,  in  a plea- 
fant  meadow,  near  the  river’s  fide.  The  con- 
gregation was  large,  and  wild  enough.  Yet  in 
a fhort  time  they  were  deeply  attentive.  Only 
three  or  four  gentlemen  put  me  in  mind,  of  the 
honed,  man  at  London,  who  was  fo  gay  and  un- 
concerned, while  Dr.  Sherlock  was  preaching 
concerning  the  day  of  judgment.  One  afked, 
“ Do  you  not  hear  what  the  doftor  fays  ?”  He 
anfwered,  “ Yes  : but  1 am  not  of  this  parilh  !” 
Toward  the  clofe  I was  condrained  to  mention 
the  grofs  ignorance  1 had  obferved,  in  the  rich 
and  genteel  people  throughout  the  nation.  On 
this  they  drew  near,  and  fhewed  as  ferious  an 
attention,  as  if  they  had  been  poor  colliers. 

We  took  horfe  at  two.  The  clouds  and  wind 
in  our  face  kept  us  cool,  till  we  came  to  Hartle- 
pool. Mr.  Romaine  has  been  an  indrument  of 
awakening  feveral  here  : but  for  want  of  help, 
they  foon  dept  again.  I preached  in  the  main 
dreet  to  near  all  the  town.  And  they  behaved 
with  ferioufnefs. 


Tuefday 


[ <64  ] 

Tuefday  5.  At  feven  in  the  evening  I preach- 
in  the  main  ftreet  at  Stockton.  None  but  two 
or  three  gentlemen  feemed  unconcerned.  I 
went  thence  to  meet  the  fociety.  But  many 
others  begged  to  flay  with  them;  and  fo  earneft- 
ly  that  I could  not  refufe.  And  indeed  it  was  a 
day  of  God’s  power.  I fcarce  know  when  we 
have  found  the  like. 

Wednefday  6.  At  eleven  I preached  near  the 
Market-place  in  Yarm.  Many  gentry  were 
there,  and  all  ferious.  I find  in  all  thefe  parts, 
a folid  ferious  people,  quite  fimple  of  heart, 
ftrangers  to  various  opinions,  and  feeking  only 
the  faith  that  worketh  by  love.  And  moft  of 
the  believers  are  waiting  and  longing  for  the 
fulnefs  of  the  promifes. 

One  young  woman,  late  a papift,  I talked 
with  at  large,  who  laft  night  took  leave  of  her 
prieft.  Inftead  of  Haying  to  be  fent  for,  fhe 
fent  for  him,  and  after  afking  him  feveral  quef- 
tions,  frankly  told  him,  “ She  haJ  now  found 
the  true  religion,  and  by  the  grace  of  God  would 
continue  therein.”  She  has  been  concerned  for 
her  foul  from  thirteen  years  of  age.  About  two 
years  ago  fhe  began  to  hear  our  preachers.  Soon 
after  fhe  found  the  peace  of  God,  and  has  never 
left  it  fince. 

About  feven  I preached  at  Ofmotherly. 

Thurfday  7.  I rode  through  one  of  the  plea- 
fanteft  parts  of  England  to  Hornby.  Here  the 
zealous  landlord  turned  all  the  Methodifls  out  of 

their 


[ *65  ] 


their  houfes.  This  proved  a fingular  kindnefs : 
For  they  built  fome  little  houfes  at  the  end  of  the 
town,  in  which  forty  or  fifty  of  them  live  toge- 
ther. Hence  with  much  ado  I found  my  way 
to  Robinhood’s  bay,  and  preached  on  the  Kay  to 
the  greateft  part  of  the  town.  All  (except  one 
or  two,  who  were  very  wife  in  their  own  eyes) 
feemed  to  receive  the  truth  in  love. 

This  day,  between  Hemfiey  and  Kirkby-Moor- 
fide,  we  rode  over  a little  river,  which  fudden- 
ly  difappears,  and  after  running  a mile  under 
ground,  rifes  again  andpurfues  its  courfe. 

Sunday  to.  I preached  at  feven,  on  Repent 
and  believe  the  gofpel.  At  the  church,  which 
Hands  on  the  hill,  a mile  from  the  town,  we 
had  a found,  ufeful  fermon.  After  I preached 
at  a little  village  called  Normanby : and  about 
five  on  the  Kay.  In  the  evening,  talking  with 
the  fociety,  I faw  more  than  ever  the  care  of 
God  over  them  that  fear  him.  What  was  it 
which  flopped  their  growing  in  grace  ? Why 
they  had  a well-meaning  preacher  among  them, 
who  was  inflaming  them  more  and  more  againll 
the  clergy.  Nor  could  he  advife  them  to  attend 
the  public  ordinances  : for  he  never  went  ei- 
ther to  church  or  facrament  himfelf.  This  I 
knew  not : but  God  did  : and  by  his  wife  provi- 
dence prevented  the  confequences  which  would 
naturally  have  enfued.  William  Manuel  was 
preft  for  a foldier:  fo  the  people  go  to  church 
; and  facrament  as  before. 


* Monday 


. 

[ 166  ] 

* Monday  11.  We  fet  out  early.  This  and 
the  three  next  days  were  the  hotteft  I ever  knew 
In  England.  A gentleman  who  formerly  trad- 
ed to  Guinea,  allured  me,  that  the  lpirits  in  his 
thermometer  (the  fame  he  had  when  abroad)  rofe 
as  high  as  they  did  within  a few  degrees  of  the 
line.  About  nine  we  fhould  have  been  glad  to 
bait:  but  there  being  no  inn  to  be  found,  we 
lay  down  for  a quarter  of  an  hour  under  fome 
trees,  and  then  rode  on  to  Slingfby.  The  mi- 
nifter,  an  old  acquaintance  of  my  father’s,  hav- 
ing defired  to  fee  me,  I called  at  his  houfe  be- 
fore I preached.  And  1 could  gladly  have  flay- 
ed longer  with  him,  but  I knew  the  congrega- 
tion waited.  One  poor  drunkard  made  a little 
difturbance  : but  after  he  was  filenced,  all  were 
flill,  and  fteadily  attentive. 

It  continued  intenfely  hot.  But  having  the 
wind  in  our  faces,  (as  we  generally  had,  all 
along  from  Newcaftle  ; and  that,  which  way  fo 
ever  we  rode)  we  received  no  hurt,  till  we  came 
to  York.  But  the  difficulty  was,  how  to  preach 
there,  in  a room  which  in  winter  ufed  to  be  as 
hot  as  an  oven  ? I cut  the  knot,  by  preaching 
in  Blake’s  fquare,  where  (the  mob  not  being 
aware  of  us,)  I began  and  ended  my  difcourfe  to 
a numerous  congregation,  without  the  leaft  dif- 
turbance. 

Tuefday  12.  I fet  a fubfcription  on  foot  for 
building  a more  commodious  room.  In  the 
evening  I preached  at  Acombe,  to  a calm,  foiid 

congregation. 


[ l67  ] 


congregation.  The  next  evening  I preach  ed  at 
Popleton,  where  the  poor  gladly  received  the 
gofpel.  The  rich  heard  it  and  even  feemed  to 
approve.  God  give  them  to  underjland,  and 
pra&ife  it. 

Thurfday  14.  I refolved  to  preach  in  the 
fquare  once  more,  knowing  God  has  the  hearts 
of  all  men  in  his  hands.  One  egg  was  thrown 
and  fome  bits  of  dirt.  But  this  did  not  hinder  a 
large  congregation,  from  taking  earnefl  heed  to 
what  was  fpoken,  of  Chrift  the  wifdom  of  God 
and  the  power  of  God. 

Friday  15.  At  three  in  the  morning  there 
were  all  the  probable  figns  of  a violently  hot 
day.  But  about  four  God  fent  a cooling  rain.  It 

iceafed  about  feven.  But  the  clouds  continued 
and  fhaded  us  to  Pocklington.  Yet  it  was  too 
hot  to  bear  the  houfe.  So  I flood  in  the  main 
flreet  and  cried,  If  any  man  thirjl , let  him  come 
unto  me  and  drink.  A large  mob  toon  gathered 
on  the  other  fide.  And  for  fear  they  fhould  not 
make  noife  enough,  the  good  church-warden 
hired  men  to  ring  the  bells.  But  it  was  loll  lab- 
our. For  flill  the  bulk  of  the  congregation  heard, 
hill  I quietly  finifhed  mydifcourfe. 

Before  feven  I reached  Epworth,  and  preached 
in  the  market-place  to  a lillening  multitude. 

Saturday  16.  I rode  on  to  Lafeby,  about  thirty 
meafured  miles.  After  fo  many  longjournies 
'which  I hardly-felt, this  fliort  one  quite  exhaufled 
my  flrength.  However  I quickly  recovered,  fo 

as 


[ 168:] 

as  to  preach  at  three  in  a meadow,  to  a large  con- 
gregation. They  all  kneeled  when  I prayed,  and 
fhewed  fuch  a genuine  fimplicity  as  greatly  re- 
vived my  fpirit.  At  feven  I preached  in  the  New 
room,  which  they  have  juft  finilhed  at  Grimfby. 

Sunday  17.  At  feven  in  the  morning,  the 
houfejuft  contained  the  people.  I defigned  to 
preach  abroad  in  the  afternoon  : but  the  rain 
drove  us  into  the  houfe  again  ; as  many  as  could 
crouded  in.  The  reft  ftood  without,  tho’  many 
I fear,  were  wet  to  the  fkin. 

Tuefday  19.  Before  I left  Newcaftle  I heard 
a ftrange  relation  which  I knew  not  what  to 
think  of.  I then  defired  T.  Lee,  who  was  going 
to  the  place,  to  enquire  particularly  concerning 
it.  He  did  fo,  and  in  confequence  of  that  en- 
quir /,  wrote  me  the  following  account. 

“ F. J lived  about  twelve  miles  from 

Newcaftle. 

His  fon  fome  time  lince  married  without  his 
confent.  At  this  he  was  fo  enraged,  that  he 
wifhed  his  “ Right  arm  might  burn  off,  if  ever 
he  gave  or  left  him  fixpence.” 

* However  in  March  laft,  being  taken  ill,  he 
made  his  will,  and  left  him  all  his  eftate.  The 
fame  evening  he  died.  On  Tnurfday  10,  his 
widow  laying  her  hand  on  his  back,  found  it 
warm.  In  the  evening,  thofe  who  were  with 
him,  went  into  the  next  room,  to  take  a little  re- 
frefhment.  As  they  were  eating,  they  obferv- 
ed  a difagreeable  fmell,  but  could  find  nothing 

in 


[ l67  ] 


in  the  room  to  caufe  it.  Returning  into  the 
room  where  the  corps  lay,  they  found  it  full  of 
fmoke.  Removing  the  fheet  which  covered 
the  corpfe,  they  faw  (to  their  no  fmall  amaze- 
ment) the  body  fo  burnt,  that  the  entrails  were 
bare,  and  might  be  feen  through  the  ribs.  His 
right  arm  was  nearly  burnt  off,  his  head  fo  burnt, 
that  the  brains  appeared.  And  a fmoke  came 
out  of  the  crown  of  his  head,  like  the  fleam  of 
boiling  water.  When  they  cafl  water  upon  his 
body,  it  bifTed,  juft  as  if  cafl  on  red-hot  iron. 
Yet  the  fheet  which  was  upon  him  was  not  fing- 
ed  ; but  that  under  him,  with  the  pillow-beer 
and  pillow,  and  the  plank  on  which  he  lay,  were 
all  burned,  and  looked  as  black  as  charcoal. 

They  haflened  to  put  what  was  left  of  him  into 
the  coffin,  leaving  fome  to  watch  by  it.  But 
after  it  was  nailed  up,  a noife  of  burning  and 
crackling  was  heard  therein.  None  was  permit- 
ed  to  look  into  it,  till  it  was  carried  to  Abchefler 
church-yard.  It  was  buried  near  the  fleeple. 
As  foon  as  it  was  brought  to  the  grave,  the 
fleeple  was  obferved  to  ffiake.  The  people 
haflened  away ; and  it  was  well  they  did:  for 
prefently  part  of  the  fleeple  fell.  So  that  had 
they  flayed  two  minutes  longer,  they  mull  have 
been  crufbed  in  pieces.  All  thefe  circumllances 
were  related  to  me  and  my  wife,  by  thofe  who 
were  eye  and  ear  witneffes.” 

I preached  in  a ground  adjoining  to  the  houfe. 
Toward  the  conclufion  of  my  fermon,  the  per- 
Von.  XXX.  H fon 


[ >68  ] 

fon  with  whom  I lodged  was  much  offended  at 
one,  who  funk  down  and  cried  aloud  for  mercy. 
Herfelf  dropt  down  next  and  cried  as  loud  as 
her  : fo  did  feveral  others  quickly  after.  When 
prayer  was  made  for  them,  one  was  prefently 
filled  with  peace  and  joy  in  believing.  In  the 
morning  I left  the  reft  refilling  to  be  comforted, 
'"till  Chrifl  fhould  be  revealed  in  their  hearts. 

Wednefday  20.  I preached  at  Ferry  in  my 
way,  and  in  Epworth  marl  et-place  about  feven. 
The  rain  began  juft  as  I began  fpeaking.  But 
God  heard  the  prayer,  and  ittvas  flayed. 

Saturday  23.  I preached  a Weftwood-fide 
where  the  breach  of  fifteen  years  is  now 'healed  : 
all  the  wanderers  being  returned  to  the  fold, 
with  him  who  led  them  aftrav. 

* Sunday  24.  As  we  rode  over  Haxev-Car  to- 
wards Mifterton,  one  wras  relating  a furprizing 
thing  that  happened  lately.  A Woman  of  Stock- 
wiih  told  her  filler  who  lived  with  her,  “ I do 
not  think  to  go  to  market  today,  for  I dreamed, 
that  I was  drowned  in  riding  acrofs  one  of  the 
drains  on  Haxey-Car.”  But  fhe  was  foon  laugh- 
ed out  of  it,  and  went.  She  rode  over  the  Car 
with  many  other  market-folks,  and  in  crofting 
one  of  the  drains,  where  the  water  was  fcarce  a 
yard  deep,  dipt  off  her  horle.  Several  looked 
on,  but  none  once  thought  oi  pulling  her  out  till 
fhe  was  pall  recovery  . 

At  One  I preached  to  the  largeft  congrega- 
tion I have  feen  fince  I left  Newcaftle.  All  be- 
haved 


[ l69  ] 


haved  with  deep  ferioufnefs  but  one  man,  whom 
I afterward  learnt  to  be  a Baptift-preacher.  Juft 
as  I was  taking  horfe  he  came  again,  and  labour- 
ed hard  to  begin  a difpute.  But  having  neither 
time  nor  ftrength  to  fpare,  I gave  him  the 
ground  and  rode  away. 

The  congregation  at  Epworth  was  full  as 
large,  if  not  larger  than  that  at  Mifterton.  A- 
niong  them  was  a poor  grey-headed  finner,  a 
mocker  at  all  religion.  But  his  mocking  is  part. 
He  was  in  tears  moft  of  the  time,  and  is  now 
feeling  after  God. 

Monday  25.  I left  Epworth  with  great  fatis- 
faflion,  and  about  one  preached  at  Clayworth. 
I think  none  was  unmoved,  but  Michael  Fen- 
wick, who  fell  fall  afleep  under  an  adjoining 
hay-rick.  From  thence  we  rode  to  Rotherham. 
When  I came  in,  I had  no  ftrength  and  no 
voice  left.  However  in  an  hour  I was  able  to 
preach  to  thelargeif  congregation  that  1 fuppofe, 
was  ever  feen  there. 

Tuefday  20.  1 was  not  able  to  fit  up  above 
two  or  three  hours  together.  However  I preach- 
ed in  the  morning  and  evening,  and  fpoke  fe- 
verally  to  the  members  of  the  focieiy. 

Wednefday  27.  I preached  about  noon  at  Bar- 
ley-hall, and  in  the  evening  at  Sheffield.  After 
fpending  a fhort  time  with  the  fociety,  I lay 
down  as  foon  as  poffible.  But  I could  not  deep  be- 
fore twelve  o’clock  ; and  not  long  together  after. 

H 2 Yet 


[ 170  ] 

Yet  I felt  no  faintnefs  in  the  morning,  but  rofe 
lively  and  well,  and  had  my  voice  more  clear 
and  flrong  in  preaching,  than  it  had  been  for  fe- 
veral  days. 

* I hurfdav  28.  I received  a ftrange  account 
from  Edward  Bennet’s  eldeft  daughter.  “ On 
Tuefday,  the  12th  of  this  month,  I told  my 
hulband  in  the  morning,  I defire  you  will  not 
go  into  the  water  to  day  : at  leaft,  not  into  the 
deep  water,  on  the  far  fide  of  the  town.  For  I 
dreamed,  I faw  you  there  out  of  your  depth, 
and  only  your  head  came  up  juft  above  the  wa- 
ter. He  promifed  me,  “ he  would  not,  and 
went  to  work.”  Soon  after  four  in  the  after- 
noon, being  at  John  Hanfon’6,  his  partner's 
houfe,  Ihe  was  on  a fudden  extremely  fick,  fo 
that  for  fom e minutes  fhe  feemed  juft  ready  to 
expire.  Then  Ihe  was  well  in  a moment.  Juft 
at  that  time,  John  Hanfon,  who  was  an  ex- 
cellent fwimmer,  perfuaded  her  hufband  to  go 
into  the  Heater  on  the  far  fide  of  the  town.  He 
objeffed,  the  water  was  deep,  and  he  could  not 
fwim  ; and  being  much  importuned  to  go  in, 
flood  fome  time  after  he  was  undreft,  and  then 
kneeling  down,  prayed  with  an  earneft  and  loud 
voice.  When  he  rofe  from  his  knees,  John 
who  was  fwimmingi  called  him  again,  and  tread- 
ing the  water,  faid,  “ See,  it  is  onlybreaft  high.” 
He  ftepped  in,  and  funk.  A man  who  was  near, 
cutting  fern,  and  had  obferved  him  for  fome  time, 

ran 


[ *7‘  1 

ran  to  the  bank,  and  faw  his  head  come  up  juft 
above  the  water.  The  fecond  or  third  time  he 
rofe,  he  clafped  his  hands,  and  cried  aloud, 

“ Lord  Jefus  receive  my  fpiiit.”  Immediately 
he  funk  and  rofe  no  more. 

“ One  might  naturally  inquire,  what  became 
of  John  Hanfon  ? As  foon  as  he  faw  his  part- 
ner fink,  he  fwam  from  him  to  the  other  fide, 
put  on  his  cloaths  and  went  ftrait  home.” 

About  noon  I preached  at  Woodfeats  ; in  the 
evening  at  Sheffield.  I do  indeed  live  by  preach- 
ing .' 

How  quiet  is  this  country  now  ? Since  the 
chief  perfecutors  are  no  more  feen.  How 
many  of  them  have  been  fnatched  away,  in  an 
hour  when  they  looked  not  for  it  ? Some  time 
fince  a woman  of  Thorpe  often  fwore  fhe  would 
wafh  her  hands  in  the  heart’s  blood  of  the  next 
preacher  that  came.  But  before  the  next  preach- 
er came  fhe  was  carried  to  her  long  home.  A 
little  before  John  Johnfon  fettled  at  Wentworth, 
a flout  healthy  man  who  lived  there,  told  his 
neighbours.  “ After  May-day,  we  ffiall  have 
nothing  hut  praying  and  preaching.  But  I will 
make  noife  enough  to  flop  it.”  But  before  May- 
day  he  was  filent  in  his  grave.  A fervant  of 

Lord  R was  as  bitter  as  him,  and  told  many 

lies,  purpofely  to  make  mifchief.  But  before 
this  was  done,  his  mouth  was  flopped.  He  was 
drowned  in  one  of  the  fifhponds. 

H 3 


Friday 


[ J72  ] 

Friday  29.  I preached  at  Noitingham.  We 
want  nothing  here  but  a larger  houfe. 

Saturday  30.  I preached  in  the  evening  at 
Leicefter  to  a large  congregation. 

Sunday  31.  I rode  over  to  Markfield.  The 
church  contained  11s  tolerably  well  in  the  morn- 
ing : but  in  the  afternoon,  though  many  flayed 
without,  it  wa6  much  crouded  and  fultry  hot. 
I was  quite  faint  and  weary  while  I read  prayers  ; 
but  in  preaching  my  fliength  was  reftored.  At 
fix  I preached  once  more  at  Leicefter,  and  de- 
livered my  own  foul. 

Monday,  Auguft  1.  I had  much  converfation, 
with  Mr.  (whom  againft  a thoufand  appear- 

ances, I will  believe  to  be  an  honcfl,  though  ir- 
iefolute  man)  * “ While  I was  very  uneafy  (faid 
he)  in  the  year  1741,  my  brother  brought  me  to 
Fir.  Spangenberg,  and  then  to  others  of  the 
German  brethren,  to  whom  I was  more  and 
more  attached  till  in  the  year  1743, 1 went  over 
to  Marienborn.  There  I faw  many  things  which 
I could  not  approve  ; and  was  more  and  more 
uneafy  till  I returned  to  England.  I was  after- 
ward much  employed  by  the  brethren.  I was 
ordained  deacon.  But  flill  I had  a fore  and 
burdened  confcience,  and  gained  no  ground  in 
my  fpiritual  warfare  : rather,  having  laid  afide 
prayer,  and  fearching  the  fcripture,  I was  more 
and  more  dead  to  God.  But  in  1730,  I awoke 
again,  and  was  under  great  agonies  of  mind. 
And  from  this  time  I wrote  to  the  Count  again 

and 


[ *73  ] 

and  again,  and  to  mod  of  the  labourers  ; but  to 
no  purpofe.  Andrew  Frey’s  account  is  true. 
The  fpirit  of  levity  and  frolickfomenefs,  which 
hejuflly  defcribes  broke  in  about  1746,  and  is 
not  purged  out  yet.  In  May  lad  I wrote  and 
delivered  a declaration  to  the  brethren  met  in 
conference,  at  Lindfey-houfe,  that  I did  not 
dare  to  remain  in  their  connexion  any  longer. 
The  fame  declaration  I made  to  them  here,  a 
few  days  ago.  What  farther  1 am  to  do,  I know 
not.  But  I trud,  God  will  direft  me.” 

Tuefday  2.  On  his  exprefiing  a defire  to  be 
prefent  at  our  conference,  I invited  him  to  it  - 
and  on  Wednefday  3.  In  the  evening,  he  came 
to  the  Foundery.  Our  conference  began  the 
next  morning,  and  continued  till  the  Thurfday 
following.  From  the  did  hour  to  the  lad,  there 
was  no  jarring  dring,  but  all  was  harmony  and 
love. 

* Monday  8.  I took  a walk  in  the  Charter- 
houfe.  1 wondered,  that  all  the  fquares,  and. 
buildings,  and  efpecially  the  fchool-boys.  looked 
fo  little.  But  this  is  eafily  acounted  for.  I was 
little  myfelfwhenl  was  at  fchool,  and  meafured 
all  about  me  by  myfelf.  Accordingly  the  upper 
boys  being  then  bigger  than  myfelf,  feemed  to 
me  very  big  and  tall : quite  contrary  to  what 
they  appear  now  when  I am  taller  and  bigger 
than  them.  I quftion,  if  this  is  not  the  real 
ground  of  the  common  imagination,  that  our 
forefathers,  and  in  general  men  in  pad  ages,  were 
H 4 much 


C *74  ] 

much  larger  than  now:  an  imagination  cur- 
rent in  the  world,  eighteen  hundred  years  ago. 
So  Virgil  fuppofes  his  warrior  to  throw  a 
done,  that  could  fcarce  be  wielded  by  twelve 
men, 

Oualia  nunc  hcminum  producit  corpora  tellus. 

So  Homei  long  before.  Oioi  vw@foToi  inn, 

Whereas  in  reality  men  have  been,  at  lead,  ever 
fince  the  deluge,  very  nearly  the  fame  as  we 
find  them  now,  both  for  flature  and  undemand- 
ing. 

O 

Mond.  22.  I fet  out  in  the  machine,  and  the 
next  evening  reached  Briftol. 

Frid.  26.  I preached  at  nine  to  afmall  congre- 
gation of  earned  people  at  Clutton  : and  in  the 
evening  at  Middlefey.  On  Satur.  27.  we  rode  on 
to  Tiverton. 

Sund.  28.  I preached  in  the  market-houfe, 
to  as  large  a congregation  as  ever  I faw  here. 
And  all  were  quiet.  So  can  God  make,  when 
it  is  bed,  all  our  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with 
us. 

Mond.  29.  We  rode  through  vehement  wind, 
and  many  hard  Ihowers  to  Launcefton.  This 
gave  me  a violent  fit  of  the  tooth-ach,  which 
however  did  not  hinder  my  preaching.  Such 
a night  I never  remember  to  have  palled  be- 
fore : 


f J75  ] 

fore : but  all  is  good  which  lies  in  the  way  to 
glory. 

Tuef.  30.  We  rode  to  Camelford,  where  my 
tooth-ach  was  cured,  by  rubbing  treacle  upon  my 
cheek.  At  fix  1 preached  in  the  market-place. 
How  are  the  lions  in  this  town  alfo  become 
lambs  ! 

Wednef.  31.  I preached  about  noon  at  Tre- 
walder,  and  in  the  evening  at  Port-Ifaac.  This 
was  long  a barren  foil : but  is  at  length  likely  to 
bring  forth  much  fruit. 

Frid.  September  2.  I rode  to  St.  Agnes.  We 
found  the  great  man,  Mr.  Donythorne,  was 
dead.  His  mother  and  filler  fent,  to  invite  me 
to  their  houfe.  After  preaching  I went  thi- 
ther, and  was  received  into  a comfortable 
lodging,  with  the  moll  free  and  cordial  affec- 
tion. So  in  this  place  the  knowledge  of  God 
has  already  travelled,  from  the  leaf  unto  the 
g reatejl. 

* Satur.  3.  Some  who  live  here,  gave  me  an 
account  of  the  earthquake  on  July  15.  There 
was  firlt  a rumbling  noife  under  the  ground, 
hoarfer  and  deeper  than  common  thunder. 
Then  followed  a trembling  of  the  earth,  which 
afterward  waved  once  or  twice  to  and  fro  : fo 
violently,  that  one  faid,  he  was  obliged  to  take 
a back  Hep,  or  he  fhould  have  fallen  down  : and 
another,  that  the  wall  again!!  which  he  was  lean- 
ing, feemed  to  be  Ihrinking  from  him. 

* This  morning  I talked  at  large  with  old  Mrs. 

H 5 Dony- 


[ *76  1 


Donythorne,  who  has  her  underftanding  entire, 
reads  without  fpeftacles,  walks  without  a ftaff, 
and  has  fcarce  a wrinkle,  at  ninety  years  of  age. 
But  what  is  more  than  all  this,  fhe  is  reachable 
as  a child,  and  groaning  for  falvation.  In  the 
afternoon  I fpent  an  hour  with  Mr.  Vowier, 
curate  of  the  parifh,  who  rejoices  in  the  love 
ol  God,  and  both  preaches  and  lives  the  gofpel. 

Stand,  4.  I.  T.  preached  at  five.  I could  fcarce 
have  believed  if  I had  not  heard  it,  that  few  men 
of  learning  write  fo  corre&lv,  as  an  unlearned 
tinner  fpeaks  extempore.  Mr.  V.  preached  two 
fuch  thundering  fermons  at  church,  as  I have 
fcarce  heard  thefe  twenty  years.  O how  gracious 
is  God  to  the  poor  Tinners  of  St.  Agnes!  In  the 
church  and  out  of  the  church,  they  hear  the 
fame  great  truths  of  the  wrath  of  God  againft 
fin,  and  his  love  to  thofe  that  are  in  Chrift 
Jefus ! 

Mond.  5.  I rode  on  to  Illugan:  but  not  to  the 
houfe  where  I ufed  to  preach.  Indeed  his  wife 
promifed  Mr.  P.  before  he  died,  that  flie  would 
always  receive  the  preachers.  But  fhe  foon 
changed  her  mind.  God  had  juft  taken  her  only 
fon,  fuddenly  killed  by  a pit  falling  upon  him. 
And  on  Tuefday  laft,  a young,  ftrong  man,  rid- 
ing to  his  burial,  dropped  off  his  horfe,  ftone 
dead.  The  concurrence  of  thefe  awful  pro- 
vidences, added  confiderably  to  our  congrega- 
tion. 

Titef.  6.  I went  on  to  Cambburn,  and  rejoiced 

to 


[ *77  ] 

to  hear,  that  the  gentleman  who  prefTed  Mr. 
Maxfield,  no  longer  perfecutes  the  M'eihodijis , 
nor  will  fuffer  any  one  elfe  to  do  it.  And  in  the 
late  dearth  he  relieved  great  numbers  of  the  poor, 
and  faved  many  families  from  perilhing.  I 
preached  at  fix,  on  I will  heal  their  backjliding ; 
and  God  applied  his  word.  Several  who  had  left 
the  focietv  for  feme  years,  came  after  fermon, 
and  defired  to  be  re-admitted.  O how  fhould  our 
bowels  yearn  over  all,  that  did  once  run  well  ? 
This  is  the  very  thing  we  want : or  how  many 
fouls  might  we  yet  pluck  out  of  the  jaws  of  the 
lion  ! 

* Wednef.  7.  I obferved  more  and  more  the 
effe&s  of  that  burning  wind  which  was  in  thefe 
parts  on  Sunday  the  28th  of  laft  month.  It  not 
only  fcorched  all  the  leaves  of  the  trees,  fo  as  to 
bring  mid-winter  upon  them  in  two  hours,  but 
burnt  up  all  the  leaves  of  potatoes  and  cabbage, 
and  every  green  thing  which  it  touched.  What 
a mercy  that  it  did  not  come  a month  fooner  ? 
Then  it  would  have  left  little  work  -for  the 
reapers. 

* Thurf.  8.  As  we  rode  through  Gwithian  pa- 
rilh,  Mr.  Harris  pointed  out  the  place,  where  his 
lather  and  many  of  his  anceftors  lived.  It  is  now 
only  a mountain  of  fand.  Within  a few  years 
this  fo  increafed,  as  to  bury  both  the  church  and 
the  whole  town. 

I preached  at  fix  to  a numerous  congregation 
H 6 in 


[ >7*  ] 

jn  Ligeon.  Some  years  fince  when  there  was  a 
flourifhing  fociety  in  Gulval,  (the  parilh  adjoin- 
ing] there  was  none  at  all  here.  But  how  is  the 
fcene  changed  ? In  Gulval  not  one  clafs,  not  one 
member  remains:  in  Ligeon  there  is  a lively  fo- 
ciety ! 

frid.  9.  I preached  in  the  new  houfe  at  St. 
Juft,  the  largeft  and  moll  commodious  in  the 
county. 

* Satur.  10.  We  rode  to  the  Land’s- end.  I 
know  no  natural  curiofity  like  this.  The  vaft, 
ragged  ftones  rife  on  every  fide,  when  you  are 
near  the  point  of  land,  with  green  turf  between, 
as  level  and  fmooth  as  if  it  were  the  effeft  of  art. 
And  the  rocks  which  terminate  the  land,  are  fo 
torn  by  the  fea,  that  they  appear  like  great  heaps 
of  ruins. 

Sund.  11.  I preached  at  St.  Juft  at  nine.  At 
one  the  congregation  in  Morva,  ftood  on  a Hop- 
ing ground,  rank  above  rank,  as  in  a theatre. 
Many  of  them  bewailed  their  want  of  God. 
And  many  tailed  how  gracious  he  is. 

At  five  I preached  in  Newlin  to  an  huge  mul- 
titude. And  one  only  feemed  to  be  offended  : a 
very  good  Jort  oj  woman,  who  took  great  pains 
to  get  away,  crying  aloud,  “ Nay,  if  going  to 
church  and  facrament  will  not  put  us  to  heaven , 
I know  not  what  will.” 

* Mond.  12.  I preached  in  Lelant  at  one. 
Many  from  St.  Ives  were  prefent,  from  whom  I 
learned,  that  Mr.  Swindells  would  have  preached 

abroad 


C *79  ] 

abroad  the  day  before,  but  was  hindered.  It  is 
well  he  was:  for  this  occafioned  the  offer  of  a 
meadow  near  the  town,  far  more  convenient 
than  the  ftreet.  At  fix  I flood  at  the  bottom  of 
it,  the  people  rifing  higher  and  higher  before 
me.  I believe,  not  many  were  left  in  the  town  : 
and  all  behaved  as  in  the  prefence  of  God. 
The  next  evening  the  congregation  was  en- 
larged, by  the  addition  of  many  from  the  coun- 
try. And  Wednef.  14.  their  number  was  larger 
Hill.  We  did  not  open  the  door  of  the  room, 
till  juft  half  hour  paft  eight : by  which  means  the 
heat  was  not  intolerable,  till  I had  done  preach- 
ing. I then  retired,  and  left  the  other  preachers, 
to  perform  the  reft  of  the  fervice. 

Thurf.  15.  As  we  rode  toward  Helfton,  I 
think  the  fun  was  near  as  hot,  as  it  was  at  mid- 
fummer.  Yet  all  along  the  trees  looked  as  in  the 
depth  of  winter,  that  fcorching  wind  having  de- 
ftroyed  all  it  touched. 

Frid.  16.  I looked  over  Mr.  Borlafe’s  Antiqui- 
ties oj  Cornwall.  He  is  a fine  writer,  and  quite 
mailer  of  his  fubjedl,  who  has  diftinguifhed  with 
amazing  accuracy,  the  antient  Saxon  monuments 
from  the  more  antient  Roman,  and  from  thofe 
of  the  Druids,  the  moft  antient  of  all. 

Satur.  17.  I preached  at  Portkellis  at  one,  and 
at  Redruth  in  the  evening. 

Sund.  18.  At  eight,  many  of  the  French  pri- 
foners  were  mixt  with  the  ufual  congregation. 

This 


[ 180  ] 

This  was  double  d at  one  ; but  {till  came  nothing 
near  to  that  which  affembled  at  Gwenap  in 
the  evening.  It  rained  all  the  time  I preached  : 
but  none  went  away.  A {hower  of  rain  will  not 
fright  experienced  foldiers. 

* Here  I learnt  a remarkable  occurrence.  A 
few  days  ago,  fome  hundred  Englifh,  who  had 
been  prifoners  in  France,  were  landed  at  Pen- 
zance, by  a cartel  fhip.  Many  of  thefe  palled 
through  Redruth,  going  home  ; but  in  a moll 
forlorn  condition.  None  Ihewed  more  compalTion 
to  them  than  the  French.  They  gave  them  food, 
cloaths,  or  money,  and  told  them,  “ We  wifh  we 
could  do  more.  But  we  have  little  for  ourfelves 
here.”  Several  who  had  only  two  fhirts,  gave  a 
naked  Eriglilhman  one.  A French  boy,  meeting 
an  Englilh  boy  who  w7as  half  naked,  took  hold  of 
him,  and  ftopt  him  ; cried  over  him  a while, 
and  then  pulled  offhis  own  coat,  and  put  it  upon 
him ! 

Mond.  19.  In  the  evening  both  the  houfe  and 
court  at  Penryn  were  more  than  filled.  So  that  I 
willingly  embraced  the  offer  of  Mr.  H.  and 
preached  before  his  door  at  twelve  on  Tuefdav. 
It  was  an  extremely  pleafant  place,  on  the  fide 
of  an  hill,  commanding  a fruitlul  vale,  the  oppo- 
fite  hills,  and  Falmouth  harbour.  Tall  trees  hung 
over  me,  and  furrounded  a bowling-green  which 
was  behind  me.  A wide  door  is  now'  open  at 
Penryn  alfo.  O that  none  may  fhut  it! 

* At  fix  in  the  evening  I reached  Bezore,  and 

began 


[ i8i  ] 

began  preaching  immediately.  It  was  a feafon 
of  uncommon,  refrefhment ; particularly  to  fome 
of  Truro.  Afterwards  I met  the  fociety  in  the 
houfe.  A young  man  was  cut  to  the  heart,  and 
cried  aloud  : then  another  and  another,  till  my 
voice  was  quite  loft.  But  I continued  crying  to 
God,  and  he  heard,  and  gave  an  anfwer  of  peace. 
Many  were  filled  with  confolation  ; and  four, 
who  had  wandered  for  fome  years,  refolved  to 
fet  out  anew. 

Yet  I w'as  not  quite  reconciled  to  my  lodging. 
Not  but  the  grotto  itfelf  was  very  venerable  ; but 
I did  not  like  the  circumftance  of  having  a man 
and  his  wife  in  the  fame  room.  I therefore  will- 
ingly accepted  an  invitation  from  Mr.  Painter, 
and  walked  over  with  him  to  Truro. 

* Wednef.  21.  I walked  to  Bezore  and 
preached  at  fme.  Afterwards  I fpoke  to  each 
member  of  the  fociety.  They  furprized  me 
much.  So  lively  and  tender  hearted  a people  I 
have  not  lately  feen  ! After  fpending  an  hour 
with  a few  friends  in  Truro,  I rode  forward  to 
Grampond,  a mean,  inconfiderable,  dirtv  village. 
How’ever  it  is  a borough  town  ! Between  twelve 
and  one  I began  preaching  in  a meadow,  to  a 
numerous  congregation.  While  we  were  fing- 
ing,  I obferved  a perfon  in  black  on  the  far  fide 
of  the  meadow,  who  faid,  “ Come  down : you 
have  no  bufinefs  there.”  Some  boys  who  were 
on  a wall,  taking  it  for  granted,  that  he  fpoke  to 
them,  got  down  in  all  hafte.  I went  on,  and  he 

walked 


[ <8.  J 

walked  away.  I afterwards  underftood,  that  he 
was  the  minifter  and  the  mayor  of  Grampond. 
Soon  after  two  conftables  came  and  faid,  “ Sir, 
the  mayor  fays,  votr  fhall  not  preach  within  his 
borough.”  I anfwered,  “ The  mayor  has  no 
authority  to  hinder  me.  But  it  is  a point  not 
worth  contefting.”  So  I went  about  a mufket- 
fhot  farther,  and  left  the  borough  to  Mr.  mayor’s 
difpofal. 

* A large  congregation  was  at  St.  Ewe’s  in  the 
evening,  many  of  whom  were  in  Mr.  Walker’s 
focieties.  Some  of  them  came  from  St.  Co- 
lmnb’s,  twelve  miles  off.  And  they  did  not 
come  in  vain.  The  flame  of  love  ran  from 
heart  to  heart : and  fcarce  any  remained  un- 
moved. 

Thurf.  22.  I rode  to  Mevagizzy,  which  lies 
on  the  fouth  fea,  juft;  oppofite  to  Port-Ifaac  on 
the  north.  When  I was  here  laft,  we  had  no 
place  in  the  town  : I could  only  preach  about 
half  a mile  from  it.  But  things  are  altered  now.  I 
preached  juft  over  the  town,  to  almoft  all  the  in- 
habitants. And  all  were  ftill  as  night.  The  next 
evening  a drunken  man  made  fome  noife  be- 
hind me.  But  after  a few  words  were  fpoken 
to  him,  he  quietly  liftened  to  the  reft  of  the  dif- 
courfe. 

On  the  fouth  fide  of  the  town,  there  is  an  ex- 
tremely fine  walk,  broad  and  fmooth,  over  the 
top  of  high  rocks,  from  whence  is  a view  of  the 

main 


C 183  ] 

main  tea  at  a vaft  diftance  below,  and  all  the 
coaft,  eaft  and  weft. 

Satur.  24.  At  half  hour  after  twelve,  I preach- 
ed once  more,  and  took  my  leave  of  them.  All 
the  time  I flayed,  the  wind  blue  from  the  fea,  fo 
that  no  boat  could  ftir  out.  By  this  means  all  the 
fifhermen  (who  are  the  chief  part  of  the  town) 
had  opportunity  of  hearing. 

At  fix  I preached  at  St.  Awftle,  a neat  little 
town,  on  the  fide  of  a fruitful  hill. 

* Sund.  25.  The  whole  church  fervice  was 
performed,  by  a clergyman,  above  ninety  years 
of  age.  His  name  is  Stephen  Hugo.  He  has 
been  vicar  of  St.  Awftle  between  fixty  and  fe- 
venty  years.  O what  might  a man  full  of  faith 
and  zeal  have  done  for  God  in  fuch  a courfe  of 
time  I 

At  two  I preached  in  St.  Stephen’s  near  a 
lone  houfe,  on  the  fide  of  a barren  mountain. 
But  neither  the  houfe  nor  the  court  could  con- 
tain the  people.  So  we  went  into  a meadow, 
where  all  might  kneel,  (which  they  generally 
do  in  Cornwall)  as  well  as  ftand  and  hear. 
And  they  did  hear,  and  fing,  and  pray  as  for 
life.  I faw  none  carelefs  or  inattentive  among 
them. 

About  five  I preached  at  St.  Awftle  to  an  ex- 
ceeding civil  people.  But  when  will  they  be 
wounded,  that  they  may  be  healed  ? 

Mond.  26.  I rode  to  Medros,  in  Luxillian  pa- 
rifh. 

* I have 


[ *84  ] 

* I have  not  feen  fo  (lately  a room  in  Corn- 
wall, as  either  this  hall,  or  the  chamber  over  it. 
The  place  likewife  where  the  gardens  were,  the 
remains  of  the  terrace  walk,  the  (lately  trees  (till 
left,  with  many  other  tokens,  (hew  that  grand 
men  lived  here  once.  But  they  are  vanifhed  like 
fmoke,  their  eflates  torn  in  pieces,  and  w’ell  nigh 
their  memory  perifhed. 

* Tuef.  27.  We  rode  to  Lefcard,  I think  one 
of  the  larged  and  pleafanted  towns  in  Cornwall. 

1 preached  about  the  middle  of  the  town,  in  a 
broad,  convenient  place.  No  perfon  made  any 
noife  at  all.  At  fix  in  the  morning  I had  nearly 
the  fame  congregation.  Afterwards  I examined 
the  fociety,  and  was  agreeably  furprized  to  hear, 
that  every  one  of  them  had  found  peace  with 
God  : and  (what  was  dill  more  remarkable)  that 
none  of  them  has  left  their  firdlove:  thai  at  this 
day,  not  one  is  in  darknefs ! 

Wednef.  28.  We  rode  on  to  the  Dock,  which 
gave  us  a very  different  profpetl.  Of  thofe 
whom  I joined  Several  years  ago,  hardly  one  half 
remained.  Such  is  the  fruit  of  difputing!  And 
yet  the  congregations  are  more  numerous  than 
ever : and  as  deeply  attentive  as  any  in  the 
kingdom.  So  there  is  hope,  God  wfill  yet  revive 
his  work. 

Saturdays  Oflober  1.  I preached  at  Laun- 
cefton. 

Sunday  2.  I rode  to  Maty-Week.  A large 

congre- 


[ '35  ] 

rongregation  was  gathered  there,  many  of  whom 
came  feven  or  eight  miles.  The  hcufe  Hands  in 
the  midft  of  orchards  and  meadows,  furrounded 
by  gentlv-rifing  hills.  I preached  on  the  fide  of 
a meadow  newly-mown,  to  a deeply  attentive 
people. 

Mond.  3.  I rode  to  Bideford ; but  did  not  reach 
it  till  after  five,  the  hour  appointed  for  my  preach- 
ing. So  I began  without  delay,  in  an  open  part 
of  the  ftreet  where  we  alighted.  One  man  made 
a little  noife  at  firft  : but  he  was  eafily  filenced. 
All  the  red  (a  large  number)  quietly  attended, 
though  the  wind  was  piercing  cold,  while  I 
opened  and  applied,  Gcd  forbid,  that  I Jhould 
glory  favt  in  the  crof  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrifi . 

Tuef.  4.  Between  twelve  and  one  I reached 
North  Moulton,  and  finding  the  congregation 
ready,  began  immediately.  There  have  been 
great  tumults  here  fince  I faw  them  before : 
but  God  has  now  rebuked  the  ftorm.  When 
the  gentry  would  neither  head  nor  pay  the 
mob  any  more,  the  poor  rabble  were  quiet  as 
lambs. 

We  rode  on  to  Tiverton  in  the  afternoon.  On 
the  three  following  days  I faw  as  many  of  the  fo- 
cieties  as  I could. 

Saturday  8.  We  had  heavy  rain  for  fame 
miles.  Then  it  cleared  up,  and  we  had  a plea- 
fant  ride  to  Briftol. 

( Monday  10.  1 rofe  at  my  ufual  hour.  But  the 
forenefs  and  fwelling  of  my  face,  occafioned  by 

my 


i *86  ] 

my  taking  cold  on  Saturday  made  it  imprafli- 
cable  for  me  to  preach.  In  the  evening  I applied 
boiled  nettles.  They  took  away  the  pain  in  a mo- 
ment, and  the  fwelling  in  a few  hours. 

Sunday  16.  I began  vifitingthe  clalfes  at  Kingf- 
wood,  fteddy,  but  not  zealous.  It  is  impoflible 
they  fhould  Hand  here  long;  they  mull  go  on,  or. 
go  back. 

Monday  17.  About  two  I preached  at  Paul- 
ton  : but  no  houfe  could  contain  us.  So  that  I 
was  forced  to  {land  in  the  open  air,  tho’  the  wind 
was  very  high  and  very  cold.  Thence  we  rode 
to  the  honefl  colliers  at  Coleford.  Thefe  have 
the  zeal  which  their  brethren  atKingfwood  want. 
In  confequence  of  which,  they  are  the  moll  nu- 
merous, as  well  as  the  mod  lively  fociety  in 
Somerfetfhire. 

Tuefday  18.  I preached  to  a very  different 
congregation  at  Bradford,  well-dreft  and  well- 
bred  : and  yet  of  the  very  fame  fpirit,  hunger- 
ing and  thirfling  after  righteoufnefs. 

Wednefday  19.  After  preaching  at  Frefliford, 
I rode  on  to  Kingfwood. 

* Friday  21.  Being  at  dinner,  in  a moment  I 
felt  as  if  a fmall  bone  had  {luck  in  the  palate  of 
my  mouth.  Nothing  was  to  be  feen,  but  the 
fwelling  and  inflammation  increafed  till  toward 
evening  (notwithftanding  all  means  that  could  be 
ufed)  and  then  fpread  to  both  the  tonfils.  In 
the  morning  I was  rather  worfe  than  better,  till 

about  half  an  hour  after  eight.  Then  as  the  dif- 

order 


C >87  ] 

order  came  in  a moment,  it  went  in  a moment, 
and  I was  as  well  as  ever. 

Monday  24.  I preached  about  noon  at  Bath, 
and  in  the  evening  at  Efcot,  near  Lavington. 

* Tuefday  25.  In  my  return,  a man  met  me 
near  Hannam,  and  told  me  the  fchool-houfe  at 
Kingfwood  was  burnt  down  I felt  not  one  mo- 
ment’s  pain,  knowing  that  God  does  all  things 
well.  When  I came  thither,  I received  a fuller 
account.  About  eight  on  Monday  evening,  two 
or  three  boys  went  into  the  gallery,  up  two  pair 
of  flairs.  One  of  them  heard  a flrange  crackling 
in  the  room  above.  Opening  the  flair-cafe  door, 
he  was  beat  back  by  fmoke,  on  which  he  cried 
out,  “ Fire,  Murder,  Fire.”  Mr.  Baynes  hear- 
ing this,  ran  immediately  down,  and  brought  up 
a pail  of  water.  But  when  he  went  into  the 
I room  and  faw  the  blaze,  he  had  not  prefence  of 
mind  to  go  up  to  it,  but  threw  the  water  upon 
, the  floor.  Meantime  one  of  the  boys  rung  the 
bell ; another  called  John  Maddern  from  the 
; next  houfe,  who  ran  up,  as  did  James  Burges 
• quickly  after,  and  found  the  room  all  in  a flame. 

, The  deal-partitions  took  fire  immediately,  which 
fpread  to  the  roof  of  the  houfe.  Plenty  of  wa- 
ter was  now  brought;  but  they  could  not  come 
nigh  the  place  where  it  was  wanted,  the  room 
being  fo  filled  with  flame  and  fmoke,  that  none 
could  go  into  it.  At  lafl  a long  ladder  which  lay 
in  the  garden  was  reared  up  againfl  the  wall  of 
the  houfe.  But  it  was  then  obferved,  that  one  of 

the 


[ i88  ] 

the  Tides  of  it  was  broke  in  two,  and  the  othe 
quite  rotten.  However  John  How  (a  young  mail 
who  lived  next  door)  ran  up  it,  with  an  axe  ii 
his  hand.  But  he  then  found  the  ladder  was  f<  >. 
fhort,  that  as  he  flood  on  the  top  of  it,  he  coul< 
hut  juft  lay  one  hand  over  the  battlements.  Hot 
he  got  over  to  the  leads  none  can  tell  : but  h i 
did  fo  and  quickly  broke  thro’  the  roof,  on  wbic! 
a vent  being  made,  the  fmoke  and  flame  i(fue< 
out  as  from  a furnace  : thofe  who  were  at  the 
foot  of  the  flairs  with  water,  being  able  togom 
further,  then  went  thro’  the  fmoke  to  the  dooro 
the  leads,  and  poured  it  down  through  the  tiling 
By  this  means  the  fire  was  quickly  quenched  i 
having  only  confumed  a part  of  the  partition 
with  a box  of  cloaths.  and  a little  damaged  th 
roof  and  the  floor  beneath. 

It  is  amazing  that  fo  little  hurt  was  done.  Fo  I 
the  fire,  which  began  in  the  middle  of  the  Ion") 
room  (none  can  imagine  how  ; for  no  perfo: 
had  been  there  for  feveral  hours  before  was  f 
violent,  that  it  broke  every  pane  of  glafs  bu  i 
two,  in  the  window  both  at  the  eail  and  weft  end  | 
What  was  more  amazing  ftill,  was  that  it  did  no  ! 
hurt  either  the  beds,  (which  when  J anes  Burge 
came  in,  feerned  all  covered  with  flame)  nor  th 
deal  paititions  on  the  other  fide  of  the  room 
tho’  it  beat  againfl  them  lor  a confiderable  time  j 
What  can  we  fay  to  thefe  things,  but  that  God 
had  fixtthe  bounds,  which  it  could  not  pafs  ? 

Weobferved  Fridav  the  28th  as  a folenv 

faf 


[ »«9  3 


fall.  And  from  this  time  the  work  of  God  re- 
vived in  Briftol.  "We  were  indeed  brought  very 
low.  A fociety  of  nine  hundred  members  was 
Ihrunk  to  little  more  then  half  the  number.  But 
God  now  began  to  turn  our  captivity,  and  put  a 
new  fong  in  our  mouth. 

Thurf.  November  3. 1 preached  in  the  New 
preaching- houfe  at  Pill.  How  is  the  face  oi 
things  changed  here  ! Such  a fink  of  fin  was 
fcarce  to  be  found  ! And  now  how  many  are 
rejoicing  in  God  their  Saviour  ? 

Monday  7.  Leaving  the  flamejull  kindling  in 
Brillol,  I rode  to  Newbury,  and  on  Tuefday  to 
London.  I found  the  fame  fire  kindled  here  alfo 
and  increafing  more  3nd  more. 

Monday  14.  I rode  to  Bedford  and  talked 

largely  with  Mr. whom  God  had  well  nigh 

fet  at  liberty.  But  his  feet  are  again  inuhe  net. 
He  did  not  indeed  deny,  nor  much  extenuate  any 
of  the  things  he  had  often  related.  But  at  length 
he  told  me  in  terms,  “ There  are  fuch  things 
among  the  brethren,  that  I can  never  join  them 
more.  Yet  I dare  not  fpeak  againft  them,  and 
join  any  other  people,  for  fear  of  grieving  the 
Saviour  ?’’  O Lord,  when  lhali  this  witchcraft 
come  to  an  end  ? When  wilt  thou  maintain 
thine  own  caufe  ? 

Wednefday  1 6.  We  rode  to  Newmarket,  and 
the  next  day  to  Norwich,  where  I now  found  a 
profpefl  of  doing  good.  The  congregation  daily 
increafed  and  grew  more  and  more  ferious.  I 

fpoke 


[ *9°  ] 

fpoke  to  many  who  were  deeply  convinced  of 
fin,  and  fome  who  were  rejoicing  in  God,  and 
walking  in  the  light  of  his  countenance. 

Wednefday  23.  I was  fhewn  Dr.  Taylor’s 
new  meeting-houfe,  perhaps  the  mod  elegant 
one  in  Europe.  It  is  eight  fquare,  built  of  the 
fined,  brick,  with  fixteen  fafh-windows  below,  as 
many  above,  and  eight  fkylights  in  the  dome, 
which  indeed  are  purely  ornamental.  The  infide 
is  finilhed  in  the  highefl  fade,  and  is  as  clean  as 
any  nobleman’s  faloon.  The  communion  table 
is  fine  mahogany  ; the  very  latches  of  the  pew- 
doors  are  polifhed  brafs.  How  can  it  be  thought 
that  the  old,  coarfe  gofpel  fhould  find  admifiion 
here  ? 

Thurfday  24.  A man  had  fpoken  to  me  the 
lad  week,  as  I was  going  thro’  Thetford,  and 
defired  me  to. preach  at  Lakenheth  near  Milden- 
liall  in  Suffolk  : I now  purpofed  fo  to  do,  and 
rode  thither  from  Thetford.  One  Mr.  Evans 
had  lately  built  a large  and  convenient  preaching 
houfe  there  at  his  own  expence.  It  was  more 
then  filled  at  fix  o’clock,  many  (landing  at  the 
door.  At  five  in  the  morning  (as  uncommon  a 
thing  as  this  was  in  thofe  parts)  the  houfe  was 
nearly  filled  again,  with  earned,  loving,  firnple 
people,  feveral  of  them  came  in  to  Mr.  E’s, 
houfe  afterward,  (food  a while  and  then  burlt 
into  tears.  I promifed  to  call  upon  them  again, 
and  left  them  much  comforted. 

Saturday  26.  I returned  to  London.  Much 

confufion 


[ »9‘  ] 

confufion  had  been  in  my  abfence,  occafioned  by 
fome  imprudent  words,  fpokenby  one  who  feem- 
ed  to  be  ftrong  in  the  faith. 

Monday  28. 1 heard  all  who  were  concerned 
face  to  face,  but  was  utterly  unable  to  judge, 
whether  there  was  wilful  fin,  lying,  on  either 
fide,  or  only  human  infirmity.  For  the  prefent 
I leave  it  to  the  fearcher  of  hearts,  who  will  bring 
all  things  to  light  in  due  feafon. 

Wed.  30.  I had  another  long  hearing  of  the 
fame  intricate  caufe.  But  with  no  more  fuccefs  : 
one  fide  flatly  affirmed,  the  other  flatly  denied; 
This  is  ftrange  ! But  it  is  more  ftrange,  that 
thofe  who  feem  fo  ftrong  in  faith,  fhould  have  no 
union  of  fpirit  wdth  each  other. 

Friday,  Dec.  3.  I baptized  Henriquez  Judah 
Seniore,  a Portugueze  Jew,  more  than  fixty 
years  of  age  : he  feemed  to  have  no  confidence 
in  himfelf,  but  to  be  waiting  for  the  confolation 
oj  I fra  el. 

Sunday  11.  In  the  evening  I retired  to  Lewi- 
fliam,  and  fpent  the  following  days,  in  finifhing, 
“ A prefervative  againft  unfettled  notions  in  re- 
ligion defigned  for  the  ufe  of  all  thofe  who 
are  under  my  care,  but  chiefly  of  the  young 
preachers. 

Sunday  18.  I had  an  opportunity  (which  I 
had  long  defired)  of  fpending  an  hour  or  two, 
with  the  Rev.  Mr. . I would  have  appoint- 

ed a time  for  our  meeting  weekly.  But  he  de- 
clined it.  Why  ? I cannot  tell. 

Vol.  XXX.  I Friday 


C J92  ] 

Friday  23.  John  Nelfon  wrote  me  a letter, 
part  of  which  I have  fubjoined. 

“ We  have  had  Four  triumphant  deaths  lately, 
of  three  men  and  one  woman.  The  woman  was 
Hannah  Richardfon  of  Brell  field.  When  Enoch 
Williams  preached  there,  Ihe  was  the  bittereft 
perfecutor  in  the  town,  and  vowed  if  ever  he 
preached  there  again,  fhe  would  help  to  Hone 
him  to  death.  But  he  never  went  to  try.  The 
only  one  of  this  way  in  the  town  was  Ruth 
Blacker.  Againfl  her  (he  was  violently  inraged, 
till  Ruth  went  to  her  houfe,  reafoned  the  cafe, 
and  at  length  perfuaded  her  to  go  to  Dewfbury, 
to  hear  Mr.  Charles  Wefley.  That  day  God 
begot  her  by  his  word,  fo  that  fhe  could  never 
reft  till  fhe  found  Chrift  in  her  own  heart.  And 
for  two  years  fhe  has  been  a fteady  follower  of 
him.  By  her  zeal  and  circumfpeft  walking,  ma- 
ny have  been  fince  flirt  ed  up  to  feek  the  Lord. 
As  foon  as  fhe  was  taken  ill,  {he  began  to  praife 
God  more  than  ever,  for  the  work  he  had 
wrought  in  her  foul.  She  faid,  “ At  firft  I 
thought,  I had  no  will,  and  that  God’s  love 
was  all  that  was  in  my  heart.  But  when  my  little 
child  gave  a fudden  fhriek,  I found  my  heart 
was  not  free.  And  it  damped  the  love  of  God 
in  my  foul  for  two  hours.  But  the  Lord  is 
come  again,  and  now  I am  fully  allured,  he 
does  take  up  all  the  room  in  my  heart.  He  has 
fanflified  me  throughout,  body,  foul,  and  fpi- 
rit.  I am  a witnefs  for  Jefus  Chrift,  that  he  is 

a greater 


C *93  ] 

a greater  Saviour,  than  Adam  was  a {Inner.  O 
watch  and  pray,  and  ye  {hall  not  be  overcome 
in  the  hour  of  temptation.  Keep  clofe  to  your 
meetings,  and  the  Lord  will  meet  you.  If  you 
negleft  thefeor  private  prayer,  you  will  become 
barren  in  your  own  fouls,  and  the  God  of  this 
world  will  get  an  advantage  over  you.  But  if  you 
keep  clofe  to  God  and  one  another,  you  will 
find  Jefus  a Saviour  to  the  uttermolf,  as  I,  the 
moll  unworthy  of  mankind,  do.”  For  fome 
time  before  lhe  died,  her  prayer  was  turned  into 
praife.  All  her  prayer  then  was,  “ Thy  will  be 
done.”  We  have  one  by  us,  that  we  think  will 
hardly  live  till  to-morrow,  who  is  above  feven- 
ty,  and  is  as  a fhock  of  corn  full  ripe,  crying 
out,  “ Come  Lord  Jefus!” 

In  the  Chriftmas  week  I rode  down  to  Brif« 
tol : where,  Sunday,  January  1,  1758,  we  be- 
gan the  year  with  the  great  congregation  at 
four,  rejoicing  and  praifing  God. 

Tuefday  3.  At  the  requeft  of  feveral  of  mv 
friends,  I wrote  “ A letter  to  a gentleman  of 
Briftol,”  in  order  to  guard  them  from  feeking 
falvation  by  works  on  one  hand,  and  antinomi- 
anifm  on  the  other.  From  thofe  who  lean  to 
either  extreme  I {hall  have  no  thanks.  But 
wifdom  is  jufiified  of  her  children. 

Wednefday  4.  I rode  to  Kingfwood,  and  re- 
joiced over  the  fchool,  which  is  at  length  what  I 
have  fo  long  wifhed  it  to  be,  a bleifing  to  all  that 
I 2 are 


[ >94  ] 

are  therein,  and  an  honour  to  the  whole  body 
of  Method!  ds. 

* Monday  g.  I began  a letter  to  Mr.  Too- 
good,  author  of  “ the  difTenting  gentleman’s 
reafons  : I think,  the  mod  faucy  and  virulent 
fatire  on  the  church  of  England,  that  ever  my 
eyes  beheld.  How  much  rather  would  I write 
prafticallv  than  controverfially  ? But  even  this 
talent  I dare  not  bury  in  the  earth. 

Friday  13.  Having  ended  my  bufinefs  at  Brif- 
tol,  I rode  to  Newbury,  and  the  next  day  to 
London.  Now  if  it  be  the  will  of  God,  I 
fliould  be  glad  of  a little  red.  If  not,  let  me  re- 
joice to  be  without  it. 

Tuefday  17.  I preached  at  Wandfworth.  A 
gentleman  come  from  America,  has  again  opend 
a door  in  this  defolate  place.  In  the  morning  I 
preached  in  Mr.  Gilbert’s  houfe.  Two  negro 
fervants  of  his,  and  a malatto  appear  to  be  much 
awakened.  Shall  not  his  faving  health  be  made 
known  to  all  nations  ? 

Saturday  28.  I was  enquiring  ofWilliam  Hurd, 
who  difcharged  him  from  the  army  ? And  he 
might  fairly  fay,  God  difcharged  him  : his  officers 
being  determined  not  to  do  it.  Neverihelefs  he 
dood  among  the  men  whom  they  had  picked  out. 
for  that  purpofe.  And  when  he  came  in  his  turn, 
his  difcharge  was  written,  and  no  man  gainfay- 
ed. 

Sunday  29.  We  had  an  uncommon  blefling  at 
Wed-ilreet,  and  a dill  greater  at  Spittlefields. 

Some 


r 195  ] 

Some  could  not  refrain  from  crying  aloud  to  God. 
And  he  did  not  caft  out  their  prayers.  Many 
thankfgivings  have  fince  been  offered  to  God, 
for  the  bleffings  of  that  hour. 

Wednefday,  February  1.  I talked  with  a gentle- 
woman  who  had  been  a mighty  good  Chriftiati 
for  near  feventy  years.  But  fhe  now  found  her- 
felf  out,  and  began  to  cry  with  many  tears  to  the 
friend  of  Tinners  for  pardoning  mercy. 

Friday  3.  Mr.  Parker  (laft  year  mayor  of  Bed- 
ford) preached  at  the  foundery.  A more  artlefs 
preacher  I never  heard  ; but  not  deftitute  of 
pathos.  I doubt  not,  he  may  be  of  much  ufe, 
among  honeft  fimple-hearted  people. 

Sunday  12.  At  therequeft  of  the  vicar,  Mr.  J. 
I rode  over  to  Uxbridge.  I preached  for  him 
both  morning  and  afternoon,  to  a large  and  feri- 
ous  congregation.  How  uncommon  a provi- 
dence is  this  ? The  gofpel  was  preached  in  the 
church  at  Hyes.  Several  of  the  parifhioners  ran 
from  it,  and  took  pews  at  Hillingdon.  It  followed 
them  into  Hillingdon  church,  where  I preached 
twice  in  one  day.  Some  of  them  went  to  Ux- 
bridge. And  now  it  is  come  to  torment  them  at 
Uxbridge  alfo  ! 

Wednefday  13.  I read  over  the  “ memoirs  of 
the  houfe  of  Brandenburgk .”  Quanta  de  fpe 
decidi  ! ’Tis  hard  to  determine  from  his  writing, 
whether  the  author  be  a Mahometan  or  a Chris- 
tian. I fuppofe,  he  is  as  near  one  as  the  other! 

On  Friday  17.  the  public  fail,  I preached  at 
I 3 Weft- 


t <9«  ] 

Wefl-ftreet  in  the  morning,  atSpittlefields  in  the 
ahernoon,  and  Bull  and  Mouth  in  the  evening, 
every  where  to  a croudea  audience.  Indeed 
every  place  of  worfhip  throughout  the  citv  was 
extremely  crouded  all  the  day  long.  Surely  all 
the  prayers  which  have  Seen  offered  up  this  day, 
will  not  fall  to  the  ground  ! 

Monday  20.  I rode,  thro’  much  rain,  to  Mai- 
don  in  Effex.  Their  new  preaching  houfe  is 
large  : but  it  would  in  no  wife  contain  the  con- 
gregation. which  flocked  together  in  the  even- 
ing. For  a time  there  was  much  perfecution 
here  ; hut  all  is  now  calm  and  quiet.  And  pro- 
bably good  will  be  done,  if  thofe  who  now  run 
well,  do  not  draw  back  to  perdition.  We  had 
a large  congregation  at  five  in  the  morning,  and 
more  than  we  had  room  for  in  the  evening. 
Fair  bloffoms!  But  which  of  thefe  will  bring 
forth  fruit  ? O Lord,  thou  knoweft  ! 

Wednefday  22.  It  rained  without  ceaOng,  till 
we  came  to  a fmall  inn,  nineteen  miles  from 
Maldon.  Here  we  dried  our  cloaths  Soon 
after  the  rain  ceafed,  and  we  had  a pleafant 
ride  to  London. 

Monday  27.  Having  a ferroon  to  write  againfl 
the  affizes  at  Bedford,  I retired  for  a few  days 
to  Lewifham. 

Friday,  March  3.  I returned  to  Loudon. 

Monday  6.  I took  horfe  about  feven  o’clock. 
The  wind  being  eafl,  I was  pleafing  myfelf,  that 

we  fhould  have  it  on  our  back.  But  in  a quar- 
ter 


[ l97  ] 

ter  of  an  hour,  it  fhifted  to  the  north-weft,  and 
blew  the  rain  fuil  in  our  face.  And  both  increaf- 
ed,  fo  that  when  we  came  to  Finchley  common, 
it  was  hard  work  to  fit  our  horfes.  The  rain  con- 
tinued sd  the  way  to  Dunftable,  where  we  ex- 
changed the  main  road  for  the  fields,  which  hav- 
ing been  juft  ploughed  were  deep  enough.  How- 
ever before  three  we  came  to  Sundon. 

Hence  on  Thurfday  9.  I rode  to  Bedford, 
and  found  the  fermon  was  not  to  be  preached  till 
Friday.  Had  I known  this  in  time,  I fhouid  ne- 
ver have  thought  of  preaching  it,  having  engag- 
ed to  be  at  Epworth  on  Saturday. 

4 Mr.  came  to  me  in  the  evening,  and 

faid,  “ He  could  not  remain  as  he  was  any 
longer  ; that  he  had  no  reft  in  his  fpirit  while 
he  was  thus  halting  between  two,  and  therefore 
defired  to  go  with  me  without  delay.”  I an- 
fwered,  “ If  he  was  fo  refolved,  he  was  wel- 
come to  fet  out  with  me  for  Epworth  the  next 
day.”  He  faid,  he  would.  We  fpent  fome 
time  in  prayer,  and  parted  for  the  prefent. 

Friday  10.  The  congregation  at  St.  Paul’s 
was  very  large  and  very  attentive.  The  judge, 
immediately  after  fermon  fent  me  an  invitation 
to  dine  with  him.  But  having  no  time,  I was 
obliged  to  fend  my  excufe,  and  fet  out  between 
one  and  two.  The  north-eaft  wind  was  pierc- 
ing cold,  and  blowing  exa£ily  in  our  face,  foon 
brought_an  heavy  fhower  of  fnow,  then  of  fleet, 
and  afterwards  of  hail.  However  we  reached 
I 4 Stilton 


[ i98  ] 


Stilton  at  feven,  about  thirty  miles  from  Bed- 
ford. 

Reft  was  now  the  more  fweet,  becau  fe  both 
our  horfes  were  lame.  However  refoiving  to 
reach  Epworth  at  the  time  appointed,  I fet  out 
in  a poft-chaife  between  four  and  five  in  the 
Morning  : But  the  froft  made  it  fo  bad  driving, 
that  my  companion  came  with  the  lame  horfes 
into  Stamford  as  foon  as  me.  The  next  ftage  I 
went  on  horfe-back:  but  1 was  then  obliged  to 
leave  my  mare,  and  take  another  poft-chaife.  I 
came  to  Bawtrv  a:  out  fix.  Some  from  Epworth 
had  come  to  meet  me ; but  were  gone  half  an 
hour  before  I came.  1 knew  no  chaife  could  go  the 
reft  of  the.  road.  So  it  remained  only  to  hire 
horfes  and  a guide.  We  fet  out  about  feven, 
but  I foon  found  my  guide  knew  no  more  of  the 
way  than  mvfelf.  However  we  got  pretty  well 
to  Idle-fiop,  about  four  miles  from  Bawtry, 
where  we  had  juft  light  to  difcern  the  river  at 
our  fide,  and  the  country  covered  with  water. 
I had  heard,  that  one  Richard  Wright  lived 
thereabouts,  who  knew  the  road  over  the  moor 
perfeftly  well.  Hearing  one  fpeak  (for  we 
could  not  fee  him)  1 called,  “ Who  is  there  ? ’ 
He  anfwered,  “ Richard  Wright.”  I foon 
agreed  with  him,  and  he  quickly  mounted  his 
horfe  and  rode  boldly  forward.  The  north-eaft 
wind  blew  full  in  our  face  : and  I heard  them 
fay,  “ It  is  very  cold  !”  But  neithei  my  face, 
nor  hands,  nor  feet  were  cold,  till  between  nine 

ten 


[ *99  ] 

and  ten  we  came  to  Epworth  : after  travelling 
more  than  ninety  miles,  I was  little  more  tired 
than  when  I rofe  in  the  morning. 

Sunday  12.  I was  much  comforted  at  church, 
both  morning  and  afternoon,  by  the  ferious  be- 
haviour of  the  whole  congregation,  fo  different 
from  what  it  was  formerly.  After  evening  fer- 
vice  I took  my  ffatid  in  the  market  place,  with  a 
multitude  of  people  from  all  parts.  Toward  the 
end  of  the  fermon  the  rain  was  heavy:  but  it 
neither  Leflened  nor  diffurbed  the  congregation. 

Monday  13.  I preached  in  the  fbell  of  the 
new  houfe,  and  then  fet  out  for  York.  The 
banks  over  which  we  crept  along,  were  ready  to 
fwallow  up  man  and  bead.  However  we  came 
fafe  to  York  in  the  afternoon.  After  fettling  the 
little  affairs,  on  Wednefdav  15.  I rode  to  Leeds, 
where  in  the  evening  a multitude  of  people  were 
prefent.  I never  before  faw  things  in  fo  good 
order  here,  and  took  knowledge,  the  affrilant 
had  not  been  idle. 

I was  apprehenfive,  having  been  at  an  uncom- 
mon expence,  of  being  a little  ftraintened  for 
money.  But  after  preaching,  one  with  whom 
I had  never  exchanged  a word,  put  a letter  into 
my  hand,  in  which  was  a bill  for  ten  pounds. 
Is  not  the  earth  the  Lord's,  and  the  fullnejs 
? thereof? 

Thurfday  16.  I rode  through  heavy  rain  to 
Manchefter.  I was  fcarce  fet  down,  when  Mr. 
- came  from  Bedford.  If  he  comes  fin* 
I 5 cerely 


[ 200  ] 

cerely  (as  I believe]  God  will  blefs  him ; 
but  if  not,  Ego  in  porlu  navigo.  He  can  find 
out  nothing  with  regard  to  me ; I have  no  fe- 
rrets. 

Frid.  17.  In  riding  from  Manchefter  to  Bolton, 
I read  the  life  of  Theodore,  King  of  Corfica  : a 
great  man,  both  as  a general  and  as  a prince  : 
and  one  who  if  he  had  not  been  facrificed  to 
the  French,  might  have  made  a Ihining  figure  in 
hiftory. 

Satur.  18.  We  rode  to  Liverpool. 

Thurf.  23.  I walked  over  to  Mr.  E.’s  a gen- 
tleman who  had  little  thought  of  God,  till  his 
favourite  child  lay  at  the  point  of  death.  It  then 
came  into  his  mind,  to  pray  for  his  life.  He  did 
fo,  and  the  child  recovered.  This  {truck  him  to 
the  heart,andhereftedno  more,  till  his  own  foul 
was  healed. 

I never  faw  the  houfe  fo  crouded  as  it  was  on 
Eafter-day,  March  26  : efpecially  with  rich  and 
genteel  people  : whom  I did  not  at  all  fpare. 
They  are  now  warned  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come.  God  grant  they  may  remember  the 
warning ! 

Tuef.  28.  We  went  on  board  and  fet  fail  for 
Dublin.  The  wind  was  fair,  and  the  day  ex- 
tremely fine.  Seven  or  eight  miles  from  the 
town,  a fmall  boat  overtook  us,  which  brought 
me  letters  from  London.  Some  of  theie  ear- 
neftly  prefled  me  to  return  to  London,  or  how- 
ever, “ Not  to  go  to  Ireland.”  I confulted  my 

friends, 


[ 201  ] 

friends,  and  juft  as  we  began  our  little  debate, 
the  wind  which  till  then  was  fair  and  fmall, 
turned  from  eaft  to  weft,  and  blew  harder  and 
harder.  But  the  point  was  foon  decided.  For 
upon  enquiry,  we  found  the  boat  was  gone  back, 
and  no  other  was  to  be  had.  Prefently  after  the 
wind  returned  to  the  eaft,  and  we  faw  the  hand 
of  God. 

The  Liverpool  boat  went  away  in  fucli  hafte 
that  it  left  a young  man,  James  Gafsbrook  be- 
hind : fo  we  were  five  in  all.  We  had  feven. 
more  cabbin  paflengers,  and  many  common  ones. 
So  good-natured  a company  I never  met  with 
in  a fhip  before.  The  fea  was  as  fmooth  as  glafs, 
the  fun  {hone  without  a cloud,  and  the  wind  was 
fmall  and  quite  fair.  So  we  glided  on,  till  about 
nine,  1 went  to  prayers  with  them,  and  then 
quietly  lay  down. 

Wednef.  29.  We  were  even  with  the  great 
Welfh  mountain,  Penmenmaur,  at  five  in  the 
morning.  But  it  then  fell  calm,  fo  that  we  were 
fcarce  abreaft  of  Holyhead  in  the  evening.  This 
gave  us  time  to  fpeak  to  all  our  fellow- 
paflengers.  And  fome  fruit  quickly  appeared. 
For  no  oath,  no  immodeft,  or  paflionate  word, 
was  any  more  heard  in  the  fhip  while  we  were 
on  board. 

Thurf,  30.  Having  no  wind  ft  ill,  I defirecf  our 
brethren  to  come  upon  the  quarter  deck  : where 
we  no  fooner  began  finging  an  hymn,  than  both 
I 6 paflengers 


[ 202  j 

paffengers  and  failors  gladly  affembled.  The  wind 
fprung  up  almoft  as  foon  as  I began,  and  about 
nine  the  next  day  we  entered  Dublin  bay  : after 
fo  fmooth  and  pleafant  a paffage,  as  the  captain 
declared,  he  had  not  had  at  that  time  of  year  for 
forty  years. 

Confidering  the  fhortnefs  of  the  warning,  we 
had  a large  congregation  in  the  evening  ; but  a 
very  fmall  one  in  the  morning,  April  1.  At  this 
I did  not  wonder  when  I was  informed,  that  the 
preaching  at  five  had  been  difcontinued  for  near 
a vear  and  an  half.  At  eight  likewife,  Sund.  2. 
the  congregation  was  fmall.  I took  knowledge, 
that  the  people  of  Dublin,  had  neither  feen  nor 
heard  much  of  felf-deniak  fince  T.  Walfh  left  the 
kingdom. 

* AH  the  evenings  of  the  following  week  we 
had  numerous  congregations.  Nothing  is  want- 
ing here  but  rigorous  difcipline.  Which  is 
more  needful  in  this  than  in  any  other  na- 
tion : the  people  in  general  being  fo  foft  and 
delicate,  that  the  leafl  flacknefs  utterly  deftroys 
them. 

Thurf.  6.  We  walked  round  the  college,  and 
faw  what  was  accounted  moll  worthy  of  obferva* 
tion.  The  new  front  is  exceeding  grand  ; and  the 
whole  fquare  (about  as  large  as  Peckwater  in 
Chrift-church)  would  be  beautiful,  were  not  the 
windows  too  fmall,  as  every  one  will  fee,  when 
the  prefent  fafhion  is  out  of  date. 


Frid. 


Frid.  7.  I preached  in  the  evening  on  Reu- 
ben’s charadter,  unjiabk  as  water,  fo  applicable 
to  moft  of  this  nation.  Some  were  deeply  con- 
vinced, and  refelved,  not  to  reft,  till  they  were 
eflablifhed  in  grace. 

Sund.  9.  I exhorted  the  fociety,  To  follow  the 
example  of  their  Englifh  brethren,  by  jointly 
renewing  their  covenant  with  God.  On  Tuefday 
evening  I read  the  letters;  by  one  of  which  a 
poor  backilider,  who  had  been  wandring  near 
eleven  years,  was  cut  to  the  heart,  and  deter- 
mined to  return  to  him  from  whom  he  had  fo 
deeply  revolted. 

Thurf.  13.  I explained  at  large  the  nature  and 
manner  of  entering  into  covenant  with  God,  and 
defoed  all  who  were  purpofed  fo  to  do,  to  fet 
Friday  apart  for  folemn  fading  and  prayer. 
Many  did  fo,  and  met  both  at  five  in  the  morn- 
ing, at  noon,  and  in  the  evening. 

Sund.  16.  I was  much  grieved  at  St.  Peter’s 
church  at  fuch  a fight  as  I never  faw  in  England, 
communicants  as  well  as  others,  behaving  in  a 
manner  that  fhocked  common  fenfe  as  well  as 
religion.  O who  has  the  courage  to  fpeak  plain 
to  thefe  rich  and,  honourable  finners  ? If  they  pe- 
rifh  in  their  iniquity,  will  not  their  blood  be  on 
the  watchman’s  head  ? 

Mond.  17.  We  met  in  the  evening,  to  renew 
our  covenant  with  God.  It  was  a glorious  feafon. 
I believe  all  that  were  prefent  found  that  God 
was  there. 


[ 204  ] 


* Tuef.  18.  Among  the  letters  I read  in  public 
laftweek,was  oneofMr.Gillies,givingan  account 
of  a fociety  lately  formed  at  Glafgow,  for  pro- 
moting Chriftian  knowledge  among  the  poor, 
chiefly  by  diftributing  bibles  among  them,  and 
other  religious  books.  I could  not  then  help 
expreffing  my  amazement,  that  nothing  of  this 
kind  had  been  attempted  in  Ireland  : and  en- 
quiring, if  it  was  not  high  time,  that  fuch  a fo- 
ciety fhould  be  formed  in  Dublin  ? This  morn- 
ing Dr.  Tifdale  (hewed  me  a paper,  which  the 
archbifhop  had  juft  fent  to  each  of  his  clergy: 
exhorting  them  to  “ ere£l  a fociety,  for  the  dif- 
tribution  of  books  among  the  poor.”  Thanks 
be  to  God  for  this ! Whether  we  or  they, 
it  is  all  one,  fo  God  be  known,  loved,  and 
obeyed. 

Thurf.  20.  In  the  evening  I met  all  the  mar- 
ried men  and  women  of  the  fociety.  I believe 
it  was  high  time.  For  many  of  them  feemed  to 
know  very  little  of  relative  duties.  So  that  l 
brought  ftrange  things  to  their  ears,  when  I en- 
larged on  the  duties  of  hufbands,  and  wives,  and 
parents. 

Frid.  21.  I dined  at  lady . We  need 

great  grace  to  converfe  with  great  people  ! From 
which  therefore  (unlefs  in  fome  rare  inftances) 
I am  glad  to  be  excufed.  Horafugiunt  & impu- 
tantur ! Of  thefe  two  hours  I can  give  no  good 
account. 


Sund. 


C 215  ] 

Sund.  23.  I was  much  concerned  to  fee  two 
gentlemen,  who  were  clofe  to  me  at  St.  Patrick’9 
church,  fall  a talking  together,  in  the  mod  trif- 
ling manner,  immediately  after  they  had  re- 
ceived  the  Lord’s  fupper.  Indeed  one  who  fat  by 
could  not  but  reprove  them,  whom  I feconded 
in  ftrong  terms.  And  fo  far  (at  lead)  wTe 
gained  : they  talked  no  more  till  the  fervice  was 
ended, 

Mond.  24. 1 left  Dublin.  But  our  chaife-horfe 
tired  before  we  had  drove  eight  miles.  So  I 
went  into  another  chaife,  and  reached  Killcock 
between  eleven  and  twelve.  We  were  agreeably 
furprized  to  hear  the  maid  of  the  inn  fingingone 
of  our  hymns,  and  to  find,  that  her  miftrefs  had 
the  evening  before  been  at  the  preaching  in 
Dublin.  This  accounted  for  the  profound  civi- 
lity, with  which  all  the  fervantsbehaved.  About 
one  I took  horfe  and  rode  on  with  Robert  Swin- 
dells to  Edinderry. 

* On  the  road  I read  Mr.  Walker’s  account 
of  the  fiege  of  Londonderry,  and  the  relation  of 
that  of  Drogheda,  by  Dr,  Bernard,  a vain,  childifh, 
affe&ed  writer.  Sir  Henry  Titchburn’s  account 
of  that  fiege,  is  wrote  in  a ftrong  and  mafculine 
manner,  and  is  worthy  to  be  joined  with  Mr. 
Walker’s  plain  and  clear  account  of  that  other 
amazing  fcene  of  providence. 

Tuef.  15.  I read  an  account  of  the  Irifh  rebel- 
lion wrote  by  Dr.  Curry,  a Papift  of  Dublin, 
who  labours  to  walh  the  Ethiop  white,  by 

numberlefs 


[ 206  ] 


nurnberlefs  falffioods  and  prevarications.  But 
he  is  treated  according  to  his  merit  by  Mr. 
Harris,  in  a tra£l  intitled,  “ Fi£lion  Un- 
mafked.” 

In  the  evening  I preached  under  the  caftle- 
wall,  to  a very  numerous  congregation,  though 
fome  of  the  quakers  (fo  called)  had  laboured 
much,  to  dilfuade  their  people  from  coming. 
And  one  poor  man,  lately  reclaimed  by  hearing 
our  preachers  from  a courfe  of  open,  fcandalous 
fin,  they  did  perfuade  to  ftay  at  home.  When 
he  turns  back  to  his  vomit,  who  fhall  anfwer  for 
his  blood  ? 

Wednef.  26.  I walked  round  the  poor  remains 
of  the  callle.  The  fituation  is  extremely  fine.  It 
{lands  on  the  top  of  a gently-rifing  hill,  com- 
manding the  profpeft  all  four  ways,  and  having 
rows  of  tall  trees  reaching  down  to  the  vale  on 
three  fides,  with  a grove  covering  it  on  the 
north-eaft.  But  the  houfe,  as  well  as  the  gardens 
round  about  it,  are  now  utterly  run  to  ruin,  I» 
wonder  none  has  re-built  it : unlefs  there  is  a 
cur fe  on  the  place,  for  the  fins  of  its  former  inha- 
bitants ! 

* Thurf.  26.  I finifhed  Mr.  Spearman’s  En- 
quiry ; an  ingenious,  fenfible  book.  But  I cannot 
at  all  agree  with  his  fcheme  : I flill  think  Mr. 
Hutchinfon’s  whole  fyftem,  is  not  only  quite 
unfupported  by  fcripture,  but  loaded  with  infu- 
petable  difficulties.  I cannot  yet  fee  the  poflibility 
'•  ' i of 


[ 207  ] 

of  any  motion,  without  fo  much  as  a vacuum  dif- 
feminatum.  Is.  it  not  flatly  impoflible,  if  all  be 
full,  and  all  matter  be  impenetrable  ? Much  lefs 
can  I conceive,  how  the  ltreams  of  light  and  air, 
can  move  continually  in  oppofite  dire&ions,  and 
that  in  fpace  abfolutely  full,  without  jullling  with 
each  other ! 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Portarling- 
ton.  Both  this  day  and  the  next  I was  much 
concerned  for  my  rich,  gay  hearers,  and  God 
gave  me  fuch  a word  for  them,  as  I fcarce  ever 
had  before. 

Hence  at  his  earneft  requefl,  I rode  over  to 

Mr.  L y,  who  faid,  “ He  could  not  die 

in  peace  till  he  had  feen  me.”  For  feme  time 
he  had  been  quite  diflrafted:  but  he  fpoke  quite 
fenfibly  yefterday,  while  Mr.  Swindells  was 
there,  faying  with  many  tears,  “ He  had  never 
profpered  in  any  thing,  fince  he  ufed  Mr  W,  fo 
ill.”  That  night  he  had  found  and  refrefhing 
fleep,  which  he  had  not  had  for  many 
weeks  before  : and  when  we  called,  moll 
of  what  he  faid  was  reafonable  and  conne&ed. 
Perhaps  God  may  put  an  end  to  the  trou- 
bles, which  have  lately  incompaft  him  on  every 
fide. 

Satur.  29.  I preached  in  the  market-place  at 
Mountmelick  in  the  evening,  and  at  eight  in  the 
morning.  At  eleven  I went  to  church.  Soon  af- 
ter, feven  or  eight  troopers  came  in  to  the  fame 
pew.  Several  were  in  the  next  pew,  and  others 

fcattered 


C 3 

fcattered  up  and  down  the  church.  In  the 
middle  of  the  fervice  a perfon  came  in,  and  j 
whifpered  to  one  of  them  in  our  pew  : foon  af- 
ter another  perfon  came  in,  and  whifpered  to  the 
corporal.  Several  of  them  then  whifpered  toge- 
ther ; after  which  four  went  out,  but  quickly  i 
returned  with  many  fwords  and  piftols.  After 
whifpering  together  again,  they  all  rofe  up  from 
all  parts,  and  went  out  of  the  church  in  a body. 
This  put  the  whole  congregation  in  an  uproar, 
and  many  ran  out  in  all  hafle.  Afterwards  the  fe- 
cret  appeared  to  be  this.  Three  weeks  ago  a man 
of  the  town  grofly  abufed  a trooper,  whofe  pati- 
ence at  length  being  worne  out,  he  gave  him  a 
cut  acrofs  the  head.  A report  now  came,  that 
the  man  was  dead.  On  this  the  mob  gathered  to 
feize  the  trooper.  But  the  others  refolved,  not 
to  give  him  up  to  a mob,  but  to  the  peace- 
officer. 

I fuppofe  moft  of  the  proteflants  in  the  town, 
were  prefent  at  the  evening  fermon.  Many  pa- 
pifls  alfo  flood  in  the  fkirts  of  the  congregation, 
though  liable  to  heavy  penance  for  it.  I 
preached  much  longer  than  I am  accuftomed, 
finding  it  an  acceptable  time.  Well  might  Kem- 
pis  fay,  “ He  rides  eafily,  whom  the  grace  of 
God  carries.” 

Mond.  May  1.  I flrove  to  put  an  end  to  the 
bitter  contentions  which  had  well  nigh  torn  the 
fociety  in  pieces.  I heard  the  contending  par- 
ties face  to  face,  and  defired  them  to  fpeak  at 

large. 


[ 2»9  ] 

large.  God  gave  his  bleffing  therewith  : the 
fnare  was  broken,  and  they  were  cordially  re- 
conciled. Only  one  perfon  was  out  of  all  pati- 
ence, and  formally  renounced  us  all.  But 
within  an  hour  God  broke  her  heart  alfo,and  fhe 
afked  pardon  with  many  tears.  So  there  is  rea- 
fon  to  hope,  they  will  for  the  time  to  come  bear 
one  another's  burdens. 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Tullamore, 
not  only  to  a large  number  of  proteftants,  but  to 
many  papifts,  and  almoft  all  the  troopers  in  the 
town. 

Tuef,  2.  I wrote  a fbort  anfwer,  to  Dr.  Free’s 
weak,  bitter,  fcurrilous  inveftive,  againft  thepeo- 
ple  called  Methodifts.  But  I doubt,  whether  I (hall 
meddle  with  him  any  more.  He  is  too  dirty  a 
writer  for  me  to  touch. 

Wednef.  3. 1 preached  at  four  in  the  afternoon 
at  Coolylough,  and  at  eight  in  the  morning:  af- 
ter which  I rode  on  to  Tyrrel's-pafs.  The  letters 
which  I received  here  were  feafonable  as  rain  in 
drought.  I had  before  found  much  wearinefs  : 
but  God  thereby  gave  a check  to  my  faintnefs  of 
fpirit,  and  enabled  me  to  gird  up  the  loins  of  my 
mind. 

In  the  evening,  the  weather  being  calm  and 
mild,  I preached  on  the  fide  of  a meadow,  the 
people  handing  before  me,  one  above  another,  on 
the  fide  of  a gently-rifing  hill.  And  many  did 
indeed,  at  that  hour,  tajle  and  fee  that  the  Lord  is 
gracious. 


Frid. 


[ 210  ] 

Frid.  5.  In  the  evening  I preached  at  Drum- 
cree,  in  the  new  room,  built  in  ihe  tafte  of  the 
country.  The  roof  is  thatch,  the  waiis  mud; 
on  which  a ladder  was  fufpended  by  ropes 
of  ftraw  Hence  we  rode  to  Ro.mead.  The 
congregation  here  was  not  large,  but  deeply  fe- 
rioiis. 

Sunu.  7.  I preached  at  eight  and  at  five.  Af- 
terward I was  defired  to  make  a collection  for  a 
diftrefl  family.  Air.  Booker,  the  minifier  of  the 
parifh.  willingly  flood  at  tin  door  to  receive  it; 
and  encouraged  all  that  we  by,  to  be  merciful 
aflei  their  power. 

Monday  8.  I rode  to  Newrv,  and  preached 
at  feven  to  a large  and  ferious  congregation. 

* Tuefday  9.  We  rode  by  the  fide  of  the  ca- 
nal, through  a pleafant  vale,  to  Terry-hugan. 
The  room  built  on  purpofe  for  us  here,  is  three 
yards  long,  two  and  a quarter  broad,  and  fix  foot 
high.  The  walls,  floor  and  ceiling  are  mud: 
and  we  had  a clean,  chaff  bed.  At  feven  I 
preached  in  a neighbouring  ground,  having  a 
rock  behind  me,  and  a large  congregation  fitting 
on  the  grafs  before  me.  Thence  we  retired  to 
our  hut,  and  found  it  true, 

Licet  fub  paupere  teBo 

Reges  & regum  vita  prcecurrere  ainicos. 

Wednefday  10.  I fuppofe  all  the  inhabitants 

of 


[ «*»  ] 

of  the  village  with  many  others,  were  prefent  at 
five  in  the  morning.  Among  thefe  was  a poor 
woman,  brought  to  bed  ten  days  before,  who 
had  walked  four  Irifh  miles,  ((even  Englifh)  with 
her  child  in  her  arms,  to  have  it  baptized  by  me^ 
Another,  who  had  lived  at  Terry- hugan  had  ear- 
nelily  defired  the  fame  thing,  if  (he  was  de- 
livered before  I left  the  country.  She  was 

delivered  two  or  three  hours  before  the 

preaching.  So  God  gave  her  what  fhe  afked 
of  him. 

In  riding  to  Lifburn,_I  read  Mr.  Rollin’s  Anti- 
ent  Hiftory.  Could  fo  mafterly  a writer  make 
fo  palpable  blunders  ! Or  are  they  owing  to  the 
tranflator  P I have  obferved  many  as  grofs  as  that 
in  the  fourth  volume.  “ A revered  old  age  was 
the  fruit  of  Gelon’s  wifdom — He  was  fuc- 

ceeded  by  Hiero,  his  eldeft  brother.  This  young 

prince” How  ? If  Gelon  enjoyed  revered 

old  age,  could  his  eldejl  brother  be  young  after  his 
death  ? 

Abundance  of  people  attended  the  preach- 
ing in  the  evening,  as  well  as  in  the  morn- 
ing. 

Friday  12.  I preached  about  noon  at  Com- 
ber, and  then  rode  on  to  Newtown.  Thisfeems 
to  have  been  a place  of  ftrength,  large  fragments 
of  walls  ftill  remaining.  I preached  at  feven  on 
the  green,  to  the  largeft  congregation  I have  feen 
fince  I came  into  the  kingdom.  All  were  quietly 

atten- 


[ 212  ] 

attentive,  and  when  I had  done,  went  away  in 
deep  filence. 

Saturday  13.  We  went  into  the  church,  the 
burial-place  of  Mr.  Colvin’s  father  and  anceftors. 
The  quire,  turned  into  a chappel  many  years 
ago,  is  grancJ,  and  finely  finifhed.  But  as  no 
man  cares  for  it,  fince  the  eflate  was  fold,  it  is 
fwiftly  running  to  ruin. 

In  the  evening  we  had  a larger  congregation 
than  before.  I was  afraid  my  voice  would  not 
reach  them  all.  But  God  gave  me  flrength,  fo 
that  1 believe  every  one  prefent  might  hear  dif- 
tinftly. 

Sunday  14.  I preached  in  the  market-houfe 
at  Belfalt  about  one,  and  in  the  court-houfe  at 
Carrickfergus  in  the  evening. 

Monday  15.  I rode  over  the  mountains  to 
Larn,  a finall  feaport,  ten  miles  north  of  Car- 
rickiergus.  The  fun  fhone  bright  and  exceed- 
ing hot,  and  the  wind  was  pretty  high.  They 
fixed  the  tablejuft  fronting  the  mid-day  fun,  and 
where  an  eddy  of  wind  poured  in  continually. 
And  it  was  well  they  did.  For  the  fun  temper- 
ed the  wind,  fo  that  I could  bear  both,  better 
than  either.  I fuppofe  moll  of  the  town  were 
prefent,  rich  and  poor:  and  I believe  the  word 
of  God  did  not  return  empty. 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Carrick  again. 
The  old  earl  of  Donnegal,  one  of  the  richefl 
peers  in  Ireland,  took  much  pleafure  here,  in  his 
Ilately  houfe  furrounded  by  large  and  elegant  gar- 
dens. 


r si3  ] 

dens.  But  his  only  Ion  proved  an  ideot.  And 
the  prefent  heir  regards  them  not.  So  the  roof  of 
the  houfe  is  fallen  in  : and  the  horfes  and  fheep 
which  feed  in  the  gardens,  make  wild  work  with 
the  parterres,  and  curious  trees,  which  the  old 
Lord  fo  carefully  planted  ! 

Tuef.  16.  We  rode  to  Lurgan.  In  the  morn- 
ing I walked  to  Lough-Neagh,  the  moll  beauti- 
ful lake  I ever  faw.  On  the  fouth  eaft  /bore 
Hands  a fmall  mount,  fuppofed  to  be  raifed  by 
the  Danes  ; on  the  top  of  which  is  a kind  of 
arbour,  benched  round  with  turf,  which' might 
contain  twenty  or  thirty  people. 

, This  was  the  botteft  dav  I ever  felt  in  Ireland  : 

1 1 near  as  hot  as  any  I remember  in  Georgia.  The 
next  morning  I was  defired  to  fee  the  houfe  of  an 
j eminent  fcholar  near  the  town.  The  door  into 
the  yard,  we  found  nailed  up  : but  we  got  in  at 
j.  a gap  which  was  flopt  with  thorns.  I took  the 
houfe  at  firft  for  a very  old  barn,  but  was  allured 
,,  he  had  built  it  within  five  years : not  indeed  by 
any  old,  vulgar  model,  but  purely  to  his  own 
tafte.  The  walls  were  part  mud,  part  brick,  part 
. Hone,  and  part  bones  and  wood.  There  were  four 
windows,  but  no  glafs  in  any,  left  the  pure  air 
fhould  be  kept  out.  The  houfe  had  two  ftories, 
but  no  ftair-cafe  and  no  door : into  the  upper 
floor,  we  went  by  a ladder,  thro’ one  of  the  win- 
I dows : thro’  one  of  the  lower  windows,  into 
the  lower  floor,  which  was  about  four  foot  high. 
This  floor  had  three  rooms,  one  three  fquare, 

S*  I the 

im  I 


[ &,4  ] 


the  fecond  had  five  fides,  the  third,  I know  not 
how  many.  I give  a particular  defcription  ©f  this 
wonderful  edifice,  to  illuftrate  that  great  truth  ; 
there  is  no  folly  too  great  even  for  a man  of 
fenfe,  if  he  refolve  to  follow  his  own  imagina- 
tion ! 

1 fpent  Friday  and  Saturday  at  Newry,  a town 
rifen  out  of  its  alhes  withirvthefe  twenty  years. 

Sunday  21.  I was  much  pleafed  with  the 
ferioufnefs  and  decency  of  the  congregation  at 
church.  But  they  were  a little  hurried  in  the 
middle  of  the  fervice  A young  man  dropped 
down  as  dead.  In  a little  time  however  he  came 
to  himfelf,  and  was  led  out  of  church. 

Monday  22. 1 rode  tho3  a barren,  dreary  coun- 
try, and  by  a miferable  road,  to  Caftle-Blaney. 
The  morning  was  extremely  hot  ; but  we  had  a 
cooler  ride  in  the  afternoon  to  Ccot-hiH.  I preach- 
ed at  feven  in  an  open  place  near  the  lfreet, 
to  a tolerably  ferious  congregation.  At  fix  in  the 
morning  there  were  more  rather  than  fewer,  who 
then  feemed  to  feel  as  well  as  hear.  I walked  after- 
ward to  the  German  lioufe,  about  as  large  as  the 
chappel  in  Snow-fields.  They  have  pitched  upon 
a delightful  fituation,  laid  out  agarden  by  it,  plant- 
ed trees  round  the  ground,  and  every  way  ap- 
proved themfelves  wijt  in  their  gener dtion.  They 
often  put  me  in  mind  of  the  monks  of  old,  who 
had  picked  out  the  pleafanteft  fpots  in  our  nation. 
But  when  their  time  was  come,  God  fwept  them 
away  in  an  hour  they  looked  not  for  it. 


In 


[ 215  ] 

Irt  the  evening  I preached  at  Dingins,  in  the 
county  of  Cavan,  on  the  very  edge  ofUlfler. 
Many  came  from  far,  a few  of  whom  have  tailed 
that  the  Lord  is  gracious. 

Wednefday  24.  I preached  in  the  morning  at 
Granard,  in  the  barrack  yard.  I have  rarely  feen 
a congregation  in  a new  place  fo  much  affe&ed. 
About  one  I preached  at  Edgeworthtown,  to  a 
Very  genteel  congregation  : extremely  different 
from  that  which  gathered  at  Longford,  in  the 
yard  of  the  great  Inn  ; the  rudell,  furliell,  wild- 
ell  people  that  I have  found  fince  I came  into 
the  kingdom.  However  they  Hood  pretty  quiet, 
till  fome  pieces  of  turf  were  thrown  among 
them  over  the  houfes.  And  when  they  had  re- 
covered from  the  hurry  it  put  them  into,  they 
behaved  decently  till  I concluded. 

* Thurfday  2.5.  I preached  at  Cleg  hill  about 
one,  and  then  rede  on  to  Drumerfnave.  Wood, 
water,  fruitful  land,  and  gently-rifing  hills,  con- 
tribute to  make  this  place  a little  paradife.  Mr. 
Campbell,  the  proprietor  of  the  whole,  refolved 
to  make  it  fuch.  So  he  planted  groves,  laid  out 
walks,  formed  the  plan  of  a new  town,  with  a 
barrack  at  one  end,  and  his  own  fear  at  the  other. 
But  alas!  Death  Hepped  in  between,  and  all  his 
plan  fell  to  the  ground. 

I lodged  at  the  only  gentleman’s  houfe  in  the 
town,  whofe  wife  adorns  the  gofpel. 

Saturday  27.  I rode  through  James’s  Town, 
once  a ftrong  place,  now  an  heap  of  ruins,  and 
Vol.  XXX.  K through 

O 


[ 2.6  ] 

through  Carrick  and  Boyle,  both  inclofed  by  a 
pleafant  and  fruitful  country.  Soon  after,  we 
entered  the  county  of  Sligoe,  the  bell  peopled 
that  I have  feen  in  the  kingdom.  Eight  villages 
we  counted  within  feven  miles  ; the  town  itfelf 
I think  is  little  lefs  than  Limerick.  The  coun- 
try round  it  is  fertile  and  well-improved ; even 
the  mountains,  to  the  very  top.  It  lies  two 
miles  from  the  fea,  having  a large  harbour,  co- 
vered by  mountains  on  each  fide. 

The  mob  had  been  in  motion  all  the  day. 
But  their  bufinefs  was  only  with  the  forefiallers 
of  the  market,  who  had  bought  up  all  the  corn 
far  and  near,  to  flarve  the  poor,  and  load  a 
Dutch  fhip,  which  lay  at  the  kay.  But  the  mob 
brought  it  all  out  into  the  market,  and  fold  it  for 
the  owners  at  the  common  price.  And  this 
they  did,  with  all  the  calmnefs  and  compofure 
imaginable,  and  without  (hiking  or  hurting  any 
one. 

I preached  in  the  evening  near  the  main 
(ireet,  to  a final!,  quiet,  ferious  company  : at 
nine  Sunday  28,  in  the  market-houfe,  to  a nu- 
merous conmesration.  But  they  were  doubled 

O J 

at  five  in  the  afternoon  : and  God  made  his 
word  quick  and  powerful.  Even  the  rich  and 
genteel  part  of  the  audience  appeared  to  be 
deeply  affefted.  O for  labourers!  for  a few 
y)r,o->x  rUtx'  Defirous  only  to  fpend  and  be 
fpent  for  their  brethren  ! 

Monday  29.  I rode  to  Caftlebarr. 


Thurfday 


f 21 f ] 

Thurfday,  June  1.  I went  to  Newport.  I be- 
lieve all  the  proteftants  in  the  town  gladly  at- 
tended the  evening  preaching  : and  few  of  them 
were  wanting  at  five  in  the  morning.  How 
white  are  thefe  fields  to  the  harvefi  ! 

Friday,  June  2.  I rede  to  Hollymount,  and 
preached  in  the  church-yard.  I then  vi fifed 
my  antagonifl,  Mr.  Clark,  who  was  lying  ex- 
tremely ill. 

Saturday  3.  I preached  at  Mi  null  a,  a village 
four  miles  from  CafUebarr.  I was  furprized  to 
find,  how  little  the  Irifh  papifts  are  changed  in 
an  hundred  years.  Moll  of  them  retain  the  fame 
bitternefs,  yea  and  tbirft  for  blood  as  ever:  and 
would  as  freely  now  cut  the  throats  of  ail  the 
proteftants,  as  they  did  in  the  laft  century. 

Sunday  4.  As  they  have  the  Lord’s  fupper  here 
but  four  times  a year,  I adminiftred  it  in  the 
evening  to  about  fixty  perfons.  Scarce  one  of 
them  went  empty  away.  Many  were  filled  with 
confolation. 

Tuefday  6.  I fet  out  at  four  (the  hour  I had 
appointed;  on  foot,  the  horfe  brought  for  me 
having  neither  bridle  nor  faddle.  After  a time 
one  galloped  after  me  full  fpeed,  till  juft  as  he 
overtook  me,  horfe  and  man  came  down  toge- 
ther. The  horfe’s  knee  fpouted  out  blood,  as  if 
an  artery  had  been  cut.  But  on  a fudden  the 
blood  flopped  : nor  did  he  bleed  any  more  all 
the  way  to  Aghrim. 

K 8 


I found 


[ *i8  ] 

I found  a few  here,  and  left  more,  [riving  to 
enter  in  at  the  Jlrait  gate. 

Friday  g.  About  eight  I preached  at  Ahalkra, 
to  a congregation,  of  whom  lour  fifths  were  pa- 
pifts. Would  to  God  the  government  would  in- 
fure  to  all  the  papifts  in  the  land,  fo  much  liber- 
ty of  confcience,  that  none  might  hinder  them 
jrom  hearing  the  tiue  word  of  God  ! Then,  as 
they  hear,  fo  let  them  judge.  In  the  evening  I 
preached  at  Athlone. 

Sunday  11.  We  had  an  excellent  fermon  at 
church  on  the  intercefiion  of  Chiift.  In  the  af- 
ternoon abundance  of  papifts,  as  well  as  protef- 
tants,  were  prefent  on  the  Connaught  fide  of 
the  river,  while  I explained  the  joy  that  is  in 
heaven  over  one  [inner  that  repentelh.  Toward 
the  clofe  two  or  three  eggs  were  thrown,  and 
not  long  after,  two  ftones.  One  of  them  fell 
on  a gentleman's  fervant,  the  other  on  a drum- 
mer, which  fo  enraged  the  dragoons  (many  of 
whom  were  in  the  congregation]  that  as  loon  as 
I concluded,  they  run  all  ways  to  find  the  man 
that  threw.  The  fpirit  they  fhewed  did  much 
good,  by  ftriking  a terror  into  the  rabble.  But 
I was  glad  they  did  not  difcover  the  offender.  I 
believe  his  fright  w.s  punilhment  enough. 

Tuefday  14.  I met  the  preachers  and  ftewards 
at  Cooly  dough.  The  congregation  at  noon  was 
the  largeft  I ever  faw  there-  In  the  afternoon 
the  perplext  cafe  of  I.  C.  and  I.  A.  was  referred 
to  Mr.  S.  and  Mr,  H.  who  after  a long  hearing 

judged 


[ 219  ] 

judged  (as  did  all  prefent)  “ That  I.  C.  had  afled 
wrong,  in  feizing  and  felling  I.  A.’s  goods  for 
rent,  when  no  rent  was  due.” 

After  preaching  in  the  evening,  I talked  with 
Kath.  Shea  of  Athlone,  concerning  a flrange  ac- 
count which  1 had  heard  : there  are  many  now 
living,  who  atteft,  on  their  perfonal  knowledge, 
molt  of  the  particulars  of  it.  She  faid,  “When 
I was  ten  years  old,  the  preaching  began  at  Ath- 
lone. I liked,  and  often  heard  it,  though  my  pa- 
rents were  zealous  paptfls,  till  they  removed  into 
the  country.  I then  grew  as  zealous  as  them, 
and  was  diligent  in  reading  the  popifh  prayers, 
till  I was  about  thirteen  : when  taking  the  mafs- 
book  one  day,  to  read  mv  prayers,  I could  not 
fee  one  word.  I continued  blind,  j aid  able  to 
difcern  light  from  darknefs,  but  not  to  read  or  do 
any  work  : till  alter  three  months,  calling  my 
eye  on  a New  Teflament,  I could  read  clearly. 

1 faid  to  myfelf,  “ 1 won’t  read  this  proteflant 
book  : I will  read  my  own  book.”  Accordingly 
I opened  the  mafs-book,  but  could  not  fee  one 
word  : it  appeared  all  dark  and  black.  I made 
the  trial  thrice  over,  holding  the  mafs-book  in 
one  hand,  and  the  teflament  in  the  other.  I 
could  not  fee  any  thing  in  the  mafs-book,  but 
could  read  the  teflament  as  well  as  ever.  On  this 
I threw  away  the  mafs-book,  fully  refolved  to 
meddle  with  it  no  more. 

“ Afterwards  my  parents  returned  to  Ath- 
lone. Then  1 heard  the  preaching  at  all  oppor- 
K 3 tunities. 


[ 220  ] 

trinities.  For  this  they  beat  me  many  times, 
and  at  laff  turned  me  out  of  doors.  Yet  after 
this,  my  father  brought  me  to  the  prieft,  who 
difputed  witli  me  very  warmly.  At  length  my 
father  faid,  “ I think,  the  girl  is  in  the  right.” 
And  he  oppofed  me  no  more  to  the  day  of  his 
death.” 

Wednef.  14.  I preached  at  Tullamore  about 
eleven,  and  at  Birr  in  the  evening. 

Frid.  16.  I fet  out  for  Limerick.  I was  wet 
through  from  head  to  foot,  before  I came  thi- 
ther, but  received  no  hurt.  Here  Iliad  a particu* 
lar  account  of  the  melancholy  affair,  which  was 
in  the  mouths  of  all  men.  On  Sunday  evening 
laff,  two  officers  were  playing  at  dice,  when  they 
quarrelled  about  aleud  woman.  This  occaftoned 
a challenge  from  Mr.  I.  which  the  other  would 
Jain  have  declined.  But  he  would  not  be  denied, 
and  was  fo  bent  upon  it,  that  he  would  not  go  to 
bed.  About  three  in  the  morning  they  went 
out,  with  their  feconds,  to  the  Ifland.  Mr.  B. 
propofed  firing  at  twelve  yards  diffance.  But  Mr. 
I.  faid,  “ No,  no,  fix  is  enough.’5  So  they  killed 
one  another  (poor  farce  !)  and  before  they  were 
five  paces  afunder,  both  fired  at  the  fame  in- 
il ant.  The  ball  went  into  Mr.  I.’s  breaft, 
who  turned  round  twice  or  thrice,  and  fell. 
Fie  was  carried  home,  made  his  will,  and  about 
three  in  the  afternoon  died  like  a man  of  ho- 
nour ! 

* How  are  the  judgments  of  the  Lord  abroad  in 

the 


[ 221  ] 

the  earth ! About  Eafter  laft  Mr.  Beauchamp 
was  at  a gentleman’s  houfe  in  the  county  of 
Clare,  when  a gentleman  who  was  occafionally 
there,  finding  they  were  going  to  family  prayers, 
ran  away  in  all  hafte,  fwearing,  “ He  would 
have  none  of  their  fwadling  prayers.”  Two  or 
three  weeks  after,  he  imagined  himfelf  to  be  not 
very  well.  A phyfician  was  called,  who  for 
three  01  four  days  fuccefiively,  affirmed,  there 
was  no  danger  at  all.  On  the  fifth  day  a fecond 
phyfician  was  called  : who  feeling  his  pulfe  faid, 
“ Why  do  you  fend  for  me?  I can  do  nothing. 
He  is  a dead  man.”  Hearing  this,  he  cried  out, 
“ Dodlor,  you  have  deceived  me.  I leave  mo- 
ney enough.  But  my  ioul  is  loft,”  He  catched 
hold  of  one  and  another,  crying,  “ Save  me, 
fave  me.”  He  endeavoured  to  throw  himfelf 
into  the  fire.  Being  hindered  from  doing  this, 
he  feized  upon  his  own  arm,  and  tore  it 
with  his  teeth.  And  after  a ffiort  time,  in 
all  the  agony  of  rage,  defpair  and  horror, 
expired. 


K4 


A N 


[ 222  ] 


A N 

EXTRACT 

O F T H E 

Rev.  Mr.  John  Wesley’s 

JOURNAL, 

from  June  17,  1758,  to  May  5, 
1760. 


Number  X. 


Saturday,  June  17. 

* T Met  Thomas  Walfh  once  more,  in  Lime- 
rick,  alive,  and  but  juft  alive.  Three  of 
the  beft  phyficians  in  thefe  parts  have  attended 

him, 


[ 223  ] 

him,  and  all  agree,  that  it  is  a loft  cafe  : that  by 
violent  draining  of  his  voice,  added  to  frequent 
colds,  he  has  contracted  a pulmonary  confump- 
tion,  which  is  now  in  the  laft  ftage,  and  confe- 
quently  beyond  the  reach  of  any  human  help. 
O what  a man,  to  be  fnatched  away  in  the 
ftrength  of  his  years  ? Surely  thy  judgments  are 
a great  deep  ! 

Wednef.  21.  Our  little  conference  began,  at 
which  fourteen  preachers  were  piefent.  We 
fettled  all  things  here,  which  we  judged  would 
be  of  ufe  to  the  preachers  or  the  focieties,  and 
confulted  how  to  remove  whatever  might  be  an 
hindrance  to  the  work  of  God. 

Frid.  23.  I rode  over  to  Court-Mattrefs,  a co- 
lony of  Germans,  whefe  parents  came  out  of  the 
Palatinate,  about  fifty  years  ago.  Twenty  fami- 
lies of  them  fettled  here,  twenty  more  at  Ktlli- 
heen,  a mile  off;  fifty  at  BaJligarane,  about  two 
miles  eaftward,  and  twenty  at  Pallas,  four  miles, 
farther.  Each  family  had  a few  acres  of  ground, 
on  which  they  built  as  many  little  houfes.  They 
are  fince  confiderably  increafed  in  nurnbei  of 
fouls,  though  decreafed  in  number  of  tarn  lies. 
Having  no  minifter,  they  were  become  eminent 
for  drunkennefs,  curbing,  earing,  and  an  utter 
negle£l  of  religion.  Bur  they  are  wafhed,  fince 
they  heard  and  received  the  truth,  which  is  able 
to  fave  their  fouls.  An  oath  is  now  rarelv  heard 
among  them,  or  a drunkard  feen  in  their  bor- 
ders, Court-Mattrefs  is  built  in  the  form  of  a 
K 5 fquare. 


[ 2 24  '] 

square,  in  the  middle  of  which  they  have  placed 
a pretty  large  preaching-houfe.  But  it  would  not 
contain  one  half  of  the  congregation  : fo  I flood 
in  a large  yard.  The  wind  kept  off  the  rain 
while  I was  preaching.  As  foon  as  I ended,  it 
began. 

Sund.  25.  About  fix  I preached  in  the  Ifland 
in  a fquare,  green  inclofure,  which  was  formerly 
Oliver  Cromwell’s  camp.  I have  not  feen  fuch  a 
congregation  fince  we  left  London.  To  how 
much  better  purpofe  is  this  ground  employed, 
than  it  was  in  the  laft  century  ? 

Thurf.  29.  I rode  to  Clare,  and  at  fix  preached 
in  the  fireet  to  many  poor  papifts  and  rich  pro- 
tellants,  almoft  all  the  gentry  in  the  country  be- 
ing affembled  together.  Thence  I went  on  to 
Ennis,  and  at  ten  the  next  morning,  had  another 
genteel  congregation  in  the  Court-houfe.  In 
Ennis  many  fuppofe,  there  are  not  lefs  than  fifty 
papifis  to  one  protefiant.  They  would  have  been 
very  ready  to  {hew  their  good-will.  But  the  fight 

of  Mr.  B , kept  them  in  awe.  A report 

however  was  fpread  of  fome  terrible  things  they 
were  to  do  in  the  evening  : and  many  were  fur- 
prized  to  obferve,  that  more  than  nine  in  ten  of 
the  congregation  were  papifis.  But  none  fpoke 
an  unkind  or  uncivil  word,  either  while  I 
preached  or  after  I had  done. 

* How  unfpeakable  is  the  advantage,  in  point 
of  common  fenfe,  which  middling  people  have 

over 


C 225  ] 

over  the  rich ! There  is  fo  much  paint  and  affec* 
tation,  fo  many  unmeaning  words  and  fenfe- 
lefs  cuftoms  among  people  of  rank,  as  fully 
juftify  the  remark  made  feventeen  hundred 
years  ago, 

Senfus , communis  in  ilia  Fortuna  rarus. 

Sunday,  July  2.  I preached  in  the  Ifland  near 
Limerick,  both  morning  and  evening,  Handing 
on  the  fide  of  a large  hollow,  adjoining  to  the 
old  camp.  The  ground  on  the  Tides  of  it  Hoped 
upward,  fo  that  the  people  fat  on  the  grafs,  row 
above  row.  Such  an  amphitheatre  I never  faw 
before,  in  which  thoufands  of  hearers  were  fo 
commodiouHy  placed.  And  they  feemed  earneft- 
ly  to  attend  to  our  Lord’s  invitation,  Come,  for 
all  things  are  now  ready! 

I did  not  then  obferve,  that  I {trained  myfelf. 
But  in  the  morning  I was  extremely  hoarfe. 
This  increafed  all  day,  together  with  a load  and 
ftoppage  in  my  breaft.  On  Tuefday  morning  I 
began  fpitting  blood,  found  a pain  in  my  left 
fide,  a fenfible  decay  of  ftrength,  and  a deep 
wheezing  cough  ; juft  the  fymptoms  which  I 
had  fome  years  fince.  I immediately  applied  a 
brimftone  plaifter  to  my  fide,  and  ufed  a lin£tus 
of  roafted  lemon  and  honey.  Wednefday  5.  My 
fide  was  quite  eafy,  and  my  hoarfenefs  much 
abated.  So  in  the  evening  I made  Ihift  to  preach 
K 6 again* 


[ 226  ] 

again,  though  not  without  difficulty.  I had  pur- 
pofed  preaching  the  next  day  at  Shronill,  about 
twenty-four  Engltlh  miles  from  Limerick : and 
at  Clonmell  about  the  fame  diftance  from  Shro- 
nill. But  perceiving  my  ftrength  would  not  fuf- 
fice,  and  yielding  to  the  advice  of  my  friends,  I 
refted  another  day. 

Thurf.  6.  The  news  of  Prince  Ferdinand's 
viflory,  had  half  turned  the  heads  of  moll  of  the 
proteftants,  till  they  were  brought  to  themfelves 
by  news  of  another  kind,  which  ran  through  the 
city  as  in  an  inftant.  * One  who  was  well  known 
therein,  a great  curfer  and  blafphemer,  and  emi- 
nently without  God  in  the  world,  went  a filhing  a 
little  way  from  his  own  door,  and  flood  with  his 
angling-rod  on  the  edge  of  the  water.  Many  were 
looking  on,  when  his  foot  Hipping,  he  lell  for- 
ward and  funk.  As  help  was  at  hand,  he  was 
foon  drawn  out.  But  it  was  too  late.  There  were 
no  remains  of  life.  His  foul  was  gone  to  give  its 
account. 

T rid.  7.  I rode  in  a chaife  to  Charlevill,  and 
thence  on  an  eafy  horfe  to  Cork.  James  Maffiot 
died  in  peace  the  morning  before  ; fo  I was  juft 
in  time  to  perform  the  laft  office  for  him. 

Satur.  8.  The  congregation  was  large ; but 
my  voice  was  fo  weak  that  many  could  not 
hear.  Sunday  9,  after  the  burial  of  James 
Maffiot,  I preached  to  a multitude  of  people, 
on,  BUJfed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord.  And 

the 


[ 227  ] 

the  longer  1 fpoke,  the  more  my  voice  was 
{Lengthened. 

Tuefday  11.  I rode  with  James  Morgan  to 
Bandon,  and  preached  in  the  market-houfe  to  a 
liflening  multitude.  Wednef.  12.  I read  over 
the  analyfis  of  Lord  Bolingbroke’s  works.  Surely 
never  did  any  man  fo  flatly  contradift,  and  fo 
fully  anfwer  him.  Thurf.  13,  about  noon,  I 
preached  in  the  exchange  at  Kinfale.  The 
townsfolk^  care  for  none  of  theft  things. 
But  we  had  a large  congregation  of  foldiers, 
many  of  whom  aie  good  foldiers  of  Jefus 
Chrifl. 

In  the  evening  I preached  in  the  main 
ftreet  at  Bandon.  Having  now  need  of  all  my 
voice,  it  was  given  me  again  ; only  with  a lit- 
tle pain  in  my  fide,  which  ceafed  while  I was 
fpeaking. 

Satur.  15.  I preached  about  noon  at  Innifhan- 
non,  and  returned  to  Bandon.  A fortnight 
fince  they  laid  the  foundation  of  their  preaching- 
houfe.  This  evening  I preached  in  the  fhell 
of  it.  But  it  would  not  contain  the  congrega- 
tion. Truly  thefe  are  fu'ift  to  hear , though  not 
fow  to  fpeak. 

Sund.  16.  I preached  again  in  the  fhell  of  the 
houfe  at  eight,  and  in  the  main  flreet  at  fix  in  the 
evening.  Obferving  many  of  the  French  officers 
there,  I could  not  but  pray  for  them  in  particu- 
lar. Some  of  them  were  deeply  attentive.  Per- 
haps 


[ 228  ] 

haps  it  was  not  for  nothing,  that  God  brought 
them  into  a ftrange  land. 

Mond.  ly.  I returned  to  Cork.  Wednef.  18. 
I began  fpeaking  feverally  to  the  members  of  the 
fociety.  Many  of  them,  I found,  were  truly 
alive  to  God.  Old  mifunderffandings  were  re- 
moved. And  I had  the  fatisfaftion  of  feeing  them 
fo  united  together,  as  they  had  not  been  for  many 
years. 

* Frid.  21.  I met  with  a tra£f  which  utterly 
confounded  all  my  philofophy  : I had  long  be- 
lieved, that  microfcopic  animals,  were  gene- 
rated, like  all  other  animals,  by  parents  of  the 
fame  fpecies.  But  Mr.  Needham  makes  it  highly 
probable,  that  they  conftitute  a peculiar  clafs  of 
animals,  differing  from  all  others  in  this,  that  they 
neither  are  generated,  or  generate,  nor  fubfift  by 
food,  in  the  ordinary  way. 

Tuef.  25.  In  the  evening  I afiifted  the  fociety, 
in  renewing  their  covenant  with  God.  It  w-as  to 
many  a feafon  of  great  refrelhment,  and  the  fear 
of  God  was  upon  all. 

* Sund.  30.  I began  meeting  the  children 
in  the  afternoon,  though  with  little  hopes 
of  doing  them  good.  But  I had  not  fpoke 
long  on  our  natural  ffate,  before  many  of  them 
were  in  tears,  and  five  or  fix  fo  affefted,  that 
they  could  not  refrain  from  crying  aloud  to  God. 
When  1 began  praying,  their  cries  increafed,  fo 
that  my  voice  was  fcon  loff.  I have  feen  no  fuch 

work 


C 299  ] 

work  among  children  for  eighteen  or  nineteen 
years. 

* Mond.  31.  I finifhed  the  Glafgow  abridg- 
ment of  Mr.  Hutchinfon’s  works.  He  was  doubt- 
lefs  a man  of  uncommon  underftanding,  and  in- 
defatigable application.  Yet  the  more  I confider 
it,  the  lefs  can  I fubfcribe  to  his  fyflem  either  of 
divinity  or  philofophy  : as  I am  more  and  more 
convinced,  that  they  have  no  foundation  in 
fcripture  or  found  reafon. 

Tuef.  Auguft  1.  The  captain  with  whom  we 
were  to  fail,  was  in  great  haft  to  have  our  things 
on  board.  But  I would  not  fend  them  while  the 
wind  was  againft  us.  On  Wednefday  he  fent 
mefTage  after  melfage.  So  in  the  evening  we 
went  down  to  the  fhip,  near  Paffage.  But  there 
was  nothing  ready,  or  near  ready  for  failing. 
Hence  I learnt  two  or  three  rules,  very  needful 
for  thofe  who  fail  between  England  and  Ire- 
land. 1.  Never  pay  till  you  fet  fail.  2.  Go 
not  on  board,  till  the  captain  goes  on  board.  3. 
Send  not  your  baggage  on  board,  till  you  go 
yourfelf. 

Thurf.  3.  I returned  to  Cork.  On  Saturday  5. 
We  were  called  on  board  in  all  hafte.  But  the 
captain  being  in  no  hafte  to  fail,  I preached  at 
Cork  again  on  Sunday  at  five,  and  then  returned 
to  Paffage.  He  now  faid,  he  would  fall  down 
to  Cove  aireffly  : fo  we  took  boat  and  went 
down  thither.  But  no  captain  appeared  either 
this  day  or  the  next.  So,  that  I might  not  lie 

idle, 


[ 23°  ] 


idle,  I went  down  to  the  beach,  and  began  preach- 
ing to  as  wild,  unpromifing  a congregation,  as 
ever  I faw  in  this  kingdom.  However  they  per- 
formed more  than  they  promifed.  For  they  grew 
more  and  more  quiet  and  attentive.  And  fome  of 
them  appeared  to  be  deeply  affefted. 

* Mond.  7.  Hearing  nothing  of  our  captain 
vet,  in  the  afternoon  I went  to  the  middle  of  rhe 
town.  Abundance  of  people  ran  together.  But 
they  were  far  too  wild  and  ncify,  to  admit  of  my 
giving  out  a pfalm,  or  naming  a text,  in  the  ufual 
way.  So  I fell  abruptly  upon  as  many  as  could 
hear,  in  a free  and  familiar  manner.  In  a few 
minutes  the  whole  body  were  quiet,  and  to- 
lerably attentive.  They  were  more  and  more  fe- 
rious,  till  I concluded  with  a hymn  and  a fhort 
prayer. 

Immediately  after  preaching,  I was  fent  for  to  a 
gentleman,  who  was  ftruck  with  the  palfy.  I 
found  the  houfe  full  of  his  friends  and  relations, 
to  whom  I fpoke  freely  and  largely.  They 
feemed  to  be  more  than  ordinarily  aflFefted.  Per- 
haps for  this  alfo  we  were  detained  at  Cove. 

Tuef.  8.1  preached  not  far  from  the  beach,  to  a 
very  decent  and  ferious  congregation.  Prefently 
after,  a veffel  failed  by,  bound  for  Wales,  We 
went  on  board  without  delay,  got  out  of  the  har- 
bour by  eleven,  and  by  Wednefday  noon,  were  a- 
breaftoftheifle  ofLundy.  But  we  had  not  yet  done 
our  work : for  the  wind  fell,  and  we  did  not 
get  into  the  river  till  near  fun-fet.  Obferving 
three  or  four  failors  there  Handing  together,  I be- 
gan 


[ 23*  ] 

gan  explaining  to  them  the  nature  of  religion. 
In  a few  minutes  all  within  the  fhip  came  toge- 
ther; and  without  the  ceremony  of  naming  a 
text,  I inlarged  on  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  not 
meats  and  drinks , but  righttoufnejs  and  peace  and 
joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoji.  About  eleven  we  landed 
at  Penklawr,  and  in  the  morni  ng  rode  to 
Swan  fey. 

Thurfday  10.  We  rode  thro’  a pleafant 
country  to  Pde.  We  were  fetting  out  from  thence 
when  a violent  fhower  diove  us  into  the  ho  life 
again,  and  conftrained  us  to  talk  with  two  or  three 
travellers.  I believe  our  labour  was  not  loft  : for 
they  appeared  to  be  greatly  affedted.  I preached 
at  Cardiff  in  the  evening  and  the  next  morning. 
We  reached  the  New  Paffage  about  noon.  But 
thev  did  not  tell  us  till  half  hour  after  five,  that 
the  boat  would  not  pafs  that  night.  With  much 
difficulty  I procured  a finall  boat  to  carry  us 
over,  leaving  our  horfes  behind.  Landing  foon 
after  fix,  we  walked  on,  and  between  nine  and 
ten  came  to  Briftol. 

Here  I met  with  a trial  of  another  kind.  But 
this  alfofhall  be  for  good.  On  the  following  days 
was  our  yearly  conference,  began  and  ended  in 
perfe.dl  harmony.  Thurfday  17,  I went  to  the 
cathedral,  to  hear  Mr.  Handel’s  Meffiah.  I doubt 
if  that  congregation  was  ever  fo  ferious  at  a fer- 
mon,  as  they  were  during  this  performance. 
In  many  parts,  efpecially  feveral  of  the  chorus’s, 
it  exceeded  my  expeftation. 


Having 


[ 232  ] 

Having  promifed  to  take  a little  journey  into 
Wales,  on  Monday  21.  I fet  out  with  Jofeph 
Jones.  We  were  in  the  boat  before  nine,  but  did 
riot  land  our  horfes,  till  a quarter  before  three. 
However  I reached  Cardiff,  time  enough  to  preach 
in  the  room,  tho’  not  in  the  caflle. 

Tuefday  22.  I gathered  up  as  well  as  I could  the 
fragments  of  the  fociety.  At  fix  in  the  evening  I 
preached  in  the  cafile.  Wednefday  23.  We  rode 
to  Fonmon.  The  behaviour  of  Mr.  Jones  fur- 
prized  me  : it  feemed  as  if  he  inherited  the  fpirit 
of  his  father.  I preached  at  feven  to  a deeply 
ferious  congregation,  and  to  a good  part  of  them 
at  five  in  the  morning.  Thurfday  22.  I wrote  a 
fecond  letter  to  Dr.  Free,  the  warmed  opponent 
I have  had  for  many  years.  I leave  him  now  to 
laugh,  and  fcold,  and  witticife,  and  call  names, 
juft  as  he  pleafes ; fori  have  done.  Friday  25. 
I rode  to  Cowbridge,  and  preached  at  three  in 
the  afternoon,  in  the  new  affembly-room.  I ob- 
ferved  no  trifler  there,  though  there  were  feveral 
of  the  better  rank.  About  fix  I preached  in  a 
Green  court  at  Lanmais,  to  a company  of  right, 
old,  fimple  Chriftians.  I could  not  get  from  them 
fo  foon  as  I defigned,  fo  that  we  did  not  reach 
Fonmon  till  near  nine. 

Saturday  26.  One  undertook  to  guide  me  the 
neareft  way  into  the  main  road.  But  in  five  or 
fix  miles  he  loft  his  way,  fo  that  for  fome  time 
we  wandered  upon  the  mountains.  About  noon 
however  we  got  into  the  road,  and  an  hour  and 

half 


[ 233  ] 

half  after,  to  Pile.  Before  we  left  it,  I fpoke  a 
few  words  to  the  woman  of  the  houfe.  She 
feemed  quite  {truck.  How  few  words  fuffi.ce, 
when  God  applies  them  to  the  heart? 

* I knew  not  where  to  go  at  Neath : but  as 
we  entered  the  town,  a man  fixt  his  eyes  upon 
me,  (though  he  had  never  feen  me  before)  and 
faid,  “ Sir,  That  is  the  houfe  where  the  preach- 
ers put  up  their  horfes.”  I had  been  there  only 
a few  minutes,  when  another  came  in  and  faid, 
“ Sir,  Mrs.  Morgan  experts  you.  I will  ffiew 
you  the  way.”  To  Mrs.  Morgan’s  we  went,  and 
were  as  cordially  received  as  if  Ihe  had  known 
us  twenty  years.  It  was  market-day,  fo  I preach- 
ed about  five  in  the  room,  a large,  commodious 
place.  I believe  moll  that  were  prefent,  (feveral 
of  whom  were  backfliders)  felt  that  God  was 
there. 

Sunday  27.  We  reached  Swanfey  at  feven, 
and  were  met  by  one  who  conducted  us  to  his 
houfe,  and  thence  to  a kind  of  callle,  in  which 
was  a green  court,  furrounded  by  high,  old 
walls.  A large  congregation  affembled  foon, 
and  behaved  with  the  utmoll  decency.  A very 
uncommon  bleffing  was  among  them,  as  ufes  to 
be  among  them  that  are  fimple  of  heart. 

The  congregation  was  confiderably  more  than 
doubled,  at  five  in  the  afternoon.  Many  gay  and 
well-dreft  perfons  were  among  them  : but  they 
were  as  ferious  as  the  poorell.  Peter  Jaco,  who 

was 


[ 234  ] 

was  driven  to  us  by  contrary  winds,  was  agreeablv 
furpnzed  at  them. 

Monday,  2«.  I fcarce  ever  faw  fuch  a rain  in 
Europe,  as  we  had  for  coufiderahle  part  of 
this  morning.  In  one  of  the  main  (hee's.  the 
water  ran  with  a ftream  capable  of  turning  a mill. 
However  having  appointed  to  preach  at  noon,  in 
Newton  about  fix  miles  from  Swanfev,  I was  de- 
termined, not  to  bieak  my  word,  tho’  I fuppoftd 
but  few  would  attend.  But  I was  miflaken.  Such 
a number  of  people  came  together,  as  no  houfe 
in  the  town  could  contain.  A barn  was  foon  pre- 
pared. And  it  pleafed  God  to  fend  a gracious  rain 
upon  their  hearts. 

After  preaching  at  Swanfey  in  the  evening, 
I met  thofe  who  defited  to  join  in  a fociety,  and 
explained  to  them  the  nature  and  defignof  it  with 
which  they  were  quite  unacquainted.  Tuefday 
29,  I rode  back  to  Nea  h,  in  order  to  put  the 
fociety  there  (an  unlicked  mafs)  into  feme  form. 
This  on  Saturday  they  had  begged  me  to  do: 
but  they  feemed  now  to  have  quite  forgotten  it. 
Mr.  Evans,  the  prefbyterian  minifter,  had  turned 
them  upfide-down.  They  looked  as  if  they  had 
never  feen  me  before,  all  but  five  or  fix,  who 
were  much  afhamed  of  their  brethren. 

Wednef.  go.  I rode  on  to  Margum.  There 
nfed  to  be  preaching  here,  till  Lord  Manfel  dy- 
ing without  children,  left  the  eftate  to  Mr.  Tal- 
bot. He  forbad  all  his  tenants  to  receive  the 
preachers,  and  fo  effectually  put  a flop  to  it. 

But 


[ 235  ] 

But  he  did  not  glory  in  it  long.  A few  months 
after,  God  called  him  home. 

At  noon  I preached  again  in  the  aflembly- 
room  at  Cowbridge  : in  the  cable  at  Cardiif",  in 
the  evening.  Thurfday  31.  I talked  with  fe- 
veral  of  the  people,  and  found  the  old  fpirit 
fvviftly  reviving.  In  the  evening  I preached 
in  the  Town-hall.  Several  eminent  Tinners  were 
prefent.  And  God  was  prefent  in  an  uncom- 
mon manner  : as  alfo  at  the  meeting  of  the  fo- 
ciety. 

Friday*  September  1.  After  a bufy  and  com- 
fortable day,  I preached  once  more  in  the  Caf- 
tle.  The  word  feemed  to  fink  deep  into  the 
hearers,  though  many  of  them  were  of  the  gen- 
teeler  fort.  In  the  fociety  we  were  much  re- 
frefhed.  Many  followed  me  to  Thomas  G1 — ’s 
houfe:  where  two  or  three  were  cut  to  the 
heart,  particularly  both  his  daughters,  and  cried 
to  God  with  llrong  cries  and  tears. 

Saturday  2.  We  rode  to  the  New  PafTage, 
cfolfed  over  in  half  an  hour,  and  about  five 
came  to  Briftol. 

Saturday  9.  I wrote  the  account  of  an  ex- 
traordinary monument  of  divine  mercy,  Na- 
thanael Othen,  who  was  fhot  for  defertion  at 
Dover-CalUe,  in  Oftober  1757.  In  the  follow- 
ing week,  I met  Mr.  Fletcher,  and  the  other 
preachers  that  were  in  the  houfe,  and  fpent  a 
confiderable  time  in  clofe  converfation,  on  the 
head  of  Chriflian  perfe&iom  I afterwards  wrote 

dawn 


[ 236  ] 

down  the  general  propofitions  wherein  we  all 

i hurfdav  14.  I rode  to  Coleford  and  was 
much  refrefhed  among  the  fimple,  zealous  col- 
liers. Saturday  16.  In  the  evening  I preached 
at  Bradford,  as  alfo  at  five  and  eight  on  Sunday 
morning.  At  two,  as  foon  as  we  were  in  the 
houfe  at  Frefhford,  it  poured  down  with  rain  : 
fo  that  after  as  many  as  could  had  crowded  in, 
the  reft  were  conftrained  to  go  away.  But  the 
rain  ceafed  as  foon  as  we  took  horfe,  and  we 
had  a pleafant  ride  to  Briftol. 

Wednefday  20.  I rode  over  to  Bath  : but  the 
room  would  ill  contain  the  congregation.  So  I 
encouraged  them  in  their  defign  of  taking  a 
piece  of  ground,  and  building  without  delay.  In 
the  evening  I preached  at  Shepton,  and  feveral 
of  the  rich  and  honourable  took  it  into  their 
mind  to  come.  But  they  came  too  late.  For 
the  houfe  was  already  thoroughly  filled  with  the 
poor.  * Thurfday  21.  As  we  rode  homeward, 
we  faw  a fight  indeed  : a woman  in  the  extremi- 
ty of  pain,  rotting  away  piece-meal  by  the 
King’s-evil,  full  of  fores  from  head  to  foot,  with 
feveral  of  her  bones  appearing  through  the  fkin: 
and  continually  praifing  God  with  tears  of  joy, 
for  “ dealing  fo  mercifully  with  her.” 

Sunday  24.  The  famous  Roger  Balls  had  plant- 
ed himfelf  in  Stoke’s-Croft  before  I came.  How- 
ever as  there  was  a large  congregation,  I did  not 
think  it  right  to  leave  them  to  him,  but  began  as 

ufual, 


[ 237  ] 

ufual,  and  preached  till  near  fix  o’clock,  with- 
out paying  any  regard  to  him. 

Sunday,  Oftober  1.  I took  my  leave  of  the 
congregation  and  of  the  children,  in  Kingfwood. 
And  God  gave  us  a parting  bleffing.  Monday 
2.  I preached  at  Bradford,  (noon  and  night)  and 
met  the  ftewards  of  the  Wiltfhire  and  Someifet- 
fhire  focieties.  In  the  evening  I baptized  a young 
woman,  deeply  convinced  of  fin.  We  all  found 
the  power  of  God  was  prefent  to  heal,  and  file 
herfelf  felt  what  flie  had  not  words  to  exprefs. 

Tuefday  3.  One  of  Warminifler  who  was  at 
Bi  iflol  laft  week,  had  defired  me  to  call  at  his 
houfe.  I did  fo  this  morning,  and  preached  in 
his  yard  to  a numerous  congregation  of  faints 
and  finners,  rich  and  poor,  church-men,  quakers 
and  piefbyterians  both  of  the  old  and  new  way. 
Some  diffurbance  was  expe&ed  ; but  there  was 
none.  The  whole  aflembly  behaved  well.  And 
inftead  ofcurfes  or  hones,  we  had  many  blefs- 
ings  as  we  rode  thro’  the  town  for  Salifbury. 
Wednefday  4.  I refted  there.  Thurfday 
I rode  by  Redbridge  and  Fareham  to  Portfmouth: 
whereat  feven  I preached  in  Mr.  Whitefield’s 
tabernacle  to  a fmall  ferious  congregation. 

Friday  6.  I defigned  to  go  in  a wherry  to  the 
Ifle  of  Wight.  But  the  watermen  werefo  extra- 
vagent  in  their  demands,  that  I changed  my 
mind  and  went  in  the  hoy.  And  it  was  well  I did, 
for  the  fea  was  fo  high,  it  would  not  have  been 
eafy,  for  a fmall  boat  to  keep  above  water,  W e 

landed 


[ *3»  1 

landed  at  two,  and  walked  on,  five  little  miles,  to 
Newport.  The  neighbouring  camp  had  filled  the 
town  with  foldiers,  the  moll  abandoned  wretches 
whom  I ever  yet  faw.  Their  whole  glorying  was 
in  curling,  fwearing,  drukennefs  and  lewdnefs. 
How  gracious  is  God,  that  he  does  not  yet  fend 
thefe  mongers  to  their  own  place  ! 

At  five  I preached  in  the  Corn-market,  and 
at  fix  in  the  morning.  A few  even  of  the  fol- 
diers attended.  One  of  thefe,  Benjamin  Law- 
rence, walked  with  us  to  Wotton-bridge,  where 
we  intended  to  take  boat.  He  was  in  St.  Phi- 
lip’s Fort,  during  the  whole  fiege,  concerning 
which  I afked  him  many  quefiions.  He  faid,  1. 
“ Abundance  of  cattle  was  left  in  the  fields,  till 
the  French  (long  expe&ed)  came  and  took  them. 
2.  Abundance  of  zuine  was  left  in  the  town,  even 
more  than  the  French  could  ufe.  And  there 
was  not  enough  in  the  caltle,  even  for  the  fick 
men.  3.  A large,  flrong  Jlone-houJe  was  left 
flanding,  within  a fmall  dilfance  of  the  fort.  Be- 
hind this  the  French  often  formed  themfelves, 
particularly  before  the  laft  afiault.  4 This 
might  eafily  be  accounted  for.  We  had  few 
officers  of  any  experience  : and  the  governor  ne- 
ver came  out  of  his  houfe.  5.  The  French 
made  two  general  affaults  and  were  repulfed, 
and  many  blown  up  by  our  mines.  But  the 
mines  having  never  been  looked  after,  till  juft 
■when  we  wanted  them,  moft  of  them  were  ut- 
terly uielefs ; fo  that  only  two,  out  of  threelcore 

did 


[ 239  ] 

I 

did  any  execution.  6.  In  their  third  aflault 
(which  they  were  hardly  perfuaded  to  make) 

captain , who  commanded  the  guard  of 

an  hundred  men,  at  the  Sally-Port,  ran  away  be- 
fore he  was  attacked,  and  his  men  having  none 
to  command  them,  went  after.  I was  left  alone, 
till  I retired  alfo.  And  the  French,  having  none 
to  oppofe  them,  came  in.  7.  In  the  morning 
our  men  were  mad  to  drive  them  out:  and 
would  have  done  it  in  an  hour,  but  that  they 
were  told,  the  fort  was  given  up,  and  ordered 
to  ceafe  firing.  8.  We  had  at  the  approach  of 
the  enemy,  three  thoufand,  eight  hundred  and 
thirty-three  effe&ive  men.  And  we  had  very 
near  as  many  when  we  furrendered,  with  plenty 
of  provifion  and  ammunition.”  O human 
juflice!  One  great  man  isfhot!  And  another  is 
made  a lord ! 

* We  hired  a fmall  fifher-boat  at  Wotton- 
Bridge,  there  being  fcarce  any  wind.  But  it  in- 
creafed  more  and  more,  when  we  were  on  the 
fea,  which  was  feven  miles  over.  Our  cock-boat 
danced  on  the  waves,  and  mull  have  funk,  if  one 
large  wave  had  come  over  her.  But  God  fuffered 
it  not.  We  landed  in  two  hours,  and  walked 
away  to  Gofport. 

Sunday  8.  The  wind  and  rain  drove  us 
into  the  tabernacle.  In  the  afternoon  I 
preached  in  the  main  llreet  at  Fareham. 
A wild  multitude  was  prefent:  yet  a few 
Vo l.  XXX.  L only 


[ 2 4°  ] 

only  mocked : the  greater  part  were  foon 
deeply  attentive. 

Mond.  9.  I fet  out  for  Suffex,  and  in  the 
evening  reached  Rottingdean,  a village  four 
miles  eaft  of  Brighthelmftone.  The  next  day 
we  rode  over  the  downs  to  Rye,  lying  on  the  top 
of  a round  fruitful  hill.  I preached  at  feven  to 
a crouded  audience,  with  great  enlargement  of 
fpirit. 

Wednef.  11.  I rode  to  Rolvenden,  about  ten 
miles  from  Rye,  and  preached  at  five  to  a large, 
ferious  congregation.  A few  drunkards  Rood  in 
the  road  at  fome  difiance,  and  took  fome  pains 
to  divert  their  attention.  But  it  was  labour  loft. 
Thurf.  12.  It  was  a rainy  morning,  fo  that  the 
houfe  contained  the  congregation.  Many  of  them 
were  in  tears,  being  deeply  convinced,  that  they 
were  as  yet  without  God  in  the  world.  About 
one  I preached  at  Northjam.  The  houfe  was 
. llowed  as  full  as  pofiible,  but  ftill  many  were 
conftrained  to  ftand  without,  though  it  rained 
much.  About  five  in  the  evening  I preached 
again  at  Rye. 

Friday  13.  In  the  evening,  we  had  a fo- 
lemn  feafon.  After  I had  concluded  my  fer- 
mon,  I read  over  the  rules  of  the  fociety,  in  the 
open  congregation.  The  number  of  thofe 
who  came  at  five  in  the  morning,  {hewed 
that  God  had  touched  many  hearts.  On 
Saturday  evening  many  were  obliged  to  ftand 

without, 


without,  though  the  wind  was  high  and  extremely 
cold. 

Sund.  15.  After  preaching  at  eight,  I rode 
again  to  Northjam,  and  preached  in  Mr.  Stone- 
dreet’s  orchard,  to  far  the  larged  congregation  I 
have  feen  in  Sudex.  One  of  Rye,  in  our  return 
thither,  gave  us  a remarkable  account.  * “ Mr. 

— one  mod  eminent  for  profanenefs, 

drunkennefs,  and  all  manner  of  wickednefs, 
when  you  met  the  fociety  on  Thurfday  evening 
at  your  lodgings,  was  curious  to  liden  at  the 
window.  The  next  day  he  furprixed  his  com- 
pany by  crying  out,  “ 1 am  the  greated  finner 
on  the  whole  earth.”  On  Friday  evening  he  was 
wounded  more  deeply  dill,  and  was  at  the 
preaching  at  five  in  the  morning.”  Surely  thus 
far  God  has  helped  him.  But  athoufandto  one, 
he  will  return  as  a dog  to  his  vomit. 

* Mond.  16.  I rode  to  Canterbury.  As  we 
came  into  the  city,  a done  flew  out  of  the  pave- 
ment, and  druck  my  mare  upon  the  leg  with  fuch 
violence,  that  die  dropt  down  at  once.  I kept 
my  feat,  till  in  druggling  to  arife,  die  fell  again 
and  rolled  over  me.  When  die  rofe,  I endea- 
voured to  rife  too,  but  found  I had  no  ufe  of  my 
right  leg  or  thigh.  But  an  honed  barber 
came  oui,  lifted  me  up,  and  helped  me  into 
his  Ihop.  Feeling  myfelf  very  hck,  I defired 
a glals  of  cold  water,  which  indantly  gave  me 
eafe. 

Tuef.  17.  I found  reafon  to  rejoice  over  this 
L 2 little 


[ 242  ] 

little  flock,  now  free  from  all  divifions  and 
offences.  And  on  Saturday  I chearfully  re* 
turned  to  London,  after  an  abfence  of  near 
eight  months. 

Here  I relied  four  days  : and  on  Wednefday 
25,  went  partly  by  coach,  partly  on  horfeback  to 
Malden.  Frid.  27.  I rode  on,  through  an  ex- 
tremely pleafant  and  fruitful  country  to  Col- 
chefter.  I have  feen  very  few  fuch  towns  in 
England.  It  lies  on  the  ridge  of  an  hill,  with 
other  hills  on  each  fide  which  run  parallel 
with  it,  at  a fmall  dillance.  The  two  main 
Hi  eets,  one  running  eaft  and  well,  the  other 
north  and  fouth,  are  quite  flrait,  the  whole 
length  of  the  town,  and  full  as  broad  as  Cheap- 
fide. 

* I preached  at  four  on  St.  John’s-green,  at  the 
fide  of  an  high,  old  wall,  (a  pace  that  feemed  to 
be  made  on  purpofe)  to  an  extremely  attentive 
audience:  and  again  at  eight  in  the  morning, 
on  Saturday  28,  and  at  four  in  the  afternoon. 

In  the  hours  between  I took  the  opportunity  of 
fpeakingto  the  members  of  the  fociety.  In  three 
months  here  are  joined  together,  an  hundred  and  1 
twenty  perfons.  A few  of  thefe  know  in  whom  : 
they  have  believed  ; and  many  are  fenfible  of 
their  wants. 

Sund.  29.  At  eight  the  congregation  was  very  i 
large.  And  I believe  God  made  his  word  quick  • 
and  powerful.  At  four  in  the  afternoon  we  had  a 
Moorfields  congregation.  Many  of  the  bafer  fort 

flood  ; 


[ 243  ] 

flood  at  a didance.  But  they  made  no  diftur- 
bance,  knowing  the  magiftrates  are  determined, 
to  buffer  no  riot  at  Colchefter. 

Mond.  30.  Though  I was  not  quite  recovered 
from  the  lamenefs,  occafioned  by  the  fall  of  my 
horfe,  I made  fhift  to  ride  to  Norwich  : where 
on  the  following  days  I had  the  fatisfaftion  to  ob- 
ferve,  that  the  lociety  was  not  lelTened  (as  I had 
feared]  but  rather  increafed  fince  1 left  them. 
And  there  is  a probability  they  will  increafe  ftill, 
as  they  are  far  more  eftablithed  in  grace. 

Friday,  November  3.  James  Wheatley  called 
upon  me,  and  offered  me  the  tabernacle.  But 
whether  to  accept  the  offer  or  not,  I cannot  tell. 
This  muft  be  maturely  confidered.  I found 
all  this  week  great  liberty  of  fpirit ; and  the  con- 
gregations were  large  and  attentive.  It  feemsihe 
time  is  come  when  our  labour  even  at  Norwich 
will  not  be  in  vain. 

Sund.  5.  We  went  to  St.  Peter’s  church,  the 
Lord’s  fupper  being  adminiftered  there.  I fcarce 
ever  remember  to  have  feen  a more  beautiful 
parifh  church  : the  more  fo,  becaufe  its  beauty 
refults  not  from  foreign  ornaments,  but  from  the 
very  form  and  ftruftufe  of  it.  It  is  very  large, 
and  of  an  uncommon  height : and  the  fides  are 
almoft  all  window  : fo  that  it  has  an  awful  and 
venerable  look,  and  at  the  fame  time  furpriz- 
ingly  chearful. 

Mond.  6.  A large  congregation  attended,  be- 
tween four  and  five  in  the  morning.  I fet  out  at 
L 3 fix 


[ 244  ] 


fix  with  much  comfort,  leaving  a fettled  and 
well-united  fociety.  1 preached  at  Kenninghall 
about  ten,  and  at  Lakenheath  in  the  evening. 
After  relling  a day,  on  Wednefday  8,  w’ent  on 
an  hard  day’s  journey,  to  Bedford. 

I had  deftgned  to  fpend  two  evenings  here. 
But  Mr  Parker  informing  me,  “ That  Mr. 
Berridge  defired  I would  come  to  him  as  foon  as 
poffible.”  I fet  out  for  Everton  on  Thurfday  9.- 
I found  Mr.  B.  juft  taking  horfe,  with  whom  I 
rode  on,  and  in  the  evening  preached  at  Wreft- 
ling- worth,  in  a large  church,  well  filled  with 
ferrous  hearers. 

* We  lodged  at  Mr.  Hickes’,  the  vicar,  a 
witnefs  of  the  faith  which  once  he  perfecuted. 
The  next  morning  I preached  in  his  church 
again.  In  the  middle  of  the  fennon,  a woman 
before  me  dropt  down  as  dead,  as  one  had  done 
the  night  before.  In  a Ihort  time  flie  came  to 
herfelf,  and  remained  deeplylenfible  of  her  want 
of  Chrift. 

Hence  we  rode  to  Mr.  B.’s  at  Everton.  For 
many  years  he  was  feeking  to  be  juftified  by  his 
works.  But  a few  months  ago,  he  was  throughly 
convinced,  that  by  grace  we  are  Javed  through 
faith.  Immediately  he  began  to  proclaim  aloud 
the  redemption  that  is  in  Jefus.  And  God  con- 
firmed his  own  word,  exaftly  as  he  did  at  Briftol 
in  the  beginning,  by  working  repentance  and 
faith  in  the  hearers,  and  with  the  fame  violent 
outward  fymptoms. 

I preached 


[ 24 5 ] 

I preached  at  fix  in  the  evening  and  five  in 
the  morning,  and  fome  were  {truck  juft  as  at 
Wreftling-worth.  One  of  thefe  was  brought 
into  the  houfe,  with  whom  we  fpent  a confi- 
derable  time  in  prayer.  I then  haftened  forward, 
and  a little  before  it  was  dark,  reached  the 
Foundery. 

Sund.  2 6.  I was  well-pleafed  to  have  fome 

converfation,  with  Mrs.  A 1,  lately  come 

from  Barbadoes.  She  gave  me  an  account  of 
her  poor  hufband  : (firft  a red-hot  predeftinarian, 
talking  of  God’s  “ blowing  whole  worlds  to 
hell,”  then  a quaker,  now  a deift  :)  as  alfo  of 
the  narrow  efcape  which  Mr.  H.  lately  had. 
“ Ten  negroes  broke  into  his  houfe  ; one  of 
whom  was  upon  the  point  of  cutting  his  throat, 
when  E.  R.  knocked  him  down  with  a pewter- 
pot  ; which  put  the  reft  into  fuch  confu- 
fion,  that  fhe  had  time  to  fecure  herfelf  and 
her  children,  and  Mr.  H.  to  leap  out  of  a bal- 
cony.” 

* Wednef.  29.  I rode  to  Wandfworth,  and 
baptized  two  negroes  belonging  to  Mr.  Gilbert, 
a gentleman  lately  come  from  Antigua.  One  of 
thefe  is  deeply  convinced  of  fin  : the  other  re- 
joices in  God  her  Saviour,  and  is  the  firft  Afri- 
can Chriftian  I have  known.  But  fhall  not  our 
Lord  in  due  time,  have  thefe  Heathens  alfo  for 
his  inheritance. 

Monday,  December  4.  I was  defired  to  ftep 
L 4 into 


C 246  ] 


into  the  little  church  behind  the  manfion-houfe, 
commonly  called  St.  Stephen’s  Wall-brook.  It 
is  nothing  grand;  but  neat  and  elegant  beyond 
exprefiion.  So  that  I do  not  wonder  at  the 
fpeecii  ot  the  famous  Italian  architect,  who  met 
Lord  Burlington  in  Italy  : “ My  Lord,  go  back 
and  fee  St.  Stephen’s  in  London.  We  have  not 
fo  fine  a piece  of  architecture  in  Rome.” 

Friday  8.  Poor  Mr.  Goudirheau  called  upon 
me,  formerly  a Romifh  pried,  row  ready  to 
peri  fir  for  want  of  bread,  though  of  an  unble- 
mifiied  character.  Can  any  one  wonder,  that 
we  have  not  many  converts  from  the  church  of 
Rome  ? 

Monday  11.  Mo  ft  of  this  week  I fpen  in 
preparing  materials  for  “ a furvey  of  the  wifdom 
of  God  in  the  creation  or  a full,  plain  and  cor- 
rect fyftem  of  natural  philofophy. 

Mond.  18.  I rode  to  Everton.  The  church 
was  well  filled,  foon  after  fix  in  the  evening. 
God  gave  me  great  liberty  of  fpeech,  and  ap- 
plied his  word  to  the  hearts  of  the  hearers:  many 
of  whom  were  not  able  to  contain  themfelves, 
but  cried  aloud  for  mercy. 

* Tuef.  19.  I rode  on  to  Lakenheath.  How 
furpizing  a providence  has  been  over  this  little 
village ! Forty  years  ago  a poor  man  lived  here 
who  walked  with  God,  and  was  the  means  of 
awakening  a few  others.  When  thefe  were 
nearly  extinft,  Charles  Skelton  came,  awakened 
a few  more,  and  forfook  them.  A year  ago,  one 

©f 


[ 247  ] 

of  Lakenheath,  feeing  me  pafs  through  Thetford, 
defired  me  to  come  and  preach  there.  I did  fo, 
and  occaftonally  mentioned  to  them  Mr.  Madan, 
then  at  Thetford.  They  went  over,  and  invited 
him  to  Lakenheath,  where  foon  after,  he 
preached  in  the  church.  The  redlor  defired  he 
would  help  him  to  a curate  ; fo  now  they  have 
one  that  both  preaches  and  lives  tbegofpel. 

Wednel.  20.  I rode  to  Norwich,  James 
Wheatley  now  repeated  his  offer  of  the  taber- 
nacle. But  1 was  in  no  hafte.  I wanted  to  con- 
fult  my  friends,  and  confider  the  thing  tho- 
roughly. One  glaring  objeftion  to  it  was,  “ The 
congregation  there,  will  not  hear  me.”  He  rea- 
ched, “ Sir,  you  cannot  tell  that,  unlefs  you 
will  make  the  trial.”  I confented  fo  to  do,  on. 
Thurfday  21.  But  many  declared,  “ No!  he- 
fhall  never  come  into  that  pulpit:”  and  planted 
themfelves  in  the  way  to  prevent  it.  Hitherto 
only  could  they  go.  I went  up  and  preached  to 
a large  congregation,  without  any  let  or  hin- 
drance. I preached  there  again  on  Saturday 
evening  : and  again  God  flopped  the  mouths  of  1 
the  lions.  Sund.  24. 1 preached  in  the  taberna- 
cle at  eight,  to  a very  ferious  congregation,  and 
at  the  Foundery  between  four  and  five.  About 
fix  the  tabernacle  was  thoroughly,  filled,  and 
moftly  with  quiet  hearers.  I faw  none  who 
behaved  amifs,  but  two  foldiers,  who  ftruck 
fome  that  defired  them  to  be  filent.  But 
L5  they 


[ m ] 

they  were  feized  and  carried  to  the  command- 
ing officer,  who  ordered  them  to  be  foundly 
]y  whipped. 

* Monday  25.  Ourfervice  began  in  the  Foun- 
dery  at  four,  in  the  tabernacle  at  eight.  God 
was  now  efpecially  pleafed  to  make  bare  his  arm. 
There  was  a great  cry  among  the  people.  Stony 
hearts  were  broke  : many  mourners  comforted  ; 
many  believers  ftrengthened.  Prejudice  vanifh- 
ed  away  : a few  only  kept  their  fiercenefs  till  the 
afternoon.  One  of  thefe,  ff ill  vehemently  angry, 
planted  himfelf  juft  over  againft  me.  But  before 
I concluded,  hp  cried  out,  “ I am  overcome,  I 
am  overcome.” 

Having  now  weighed  the  matter  thoroughly, 
1 yielded  to  the  importunity  of  our  brethren. 
So  in  the  evening  the  copy  of  the  leafe  was  per- 
fefled,  which  was  executed  the  next  morning  : 
a whole  train  of  providences  fo  plainly  incurred 
thereto,  that  all  might  clearly  fee  the  hand  of 
God. 

Tuefday  26.  I took  my  leave  of  Norwich  for 
the  prefent  ; about  noon  preached  at  Kenning- 
hall,  and  in  the  evening  came  to  Lakenheath. 
Being  informed  fome  of  the  gentry  in  the  town 
were  very  defirous  to  hear  me  preach,  if  I would 
preach  in  the  church;  I fent  them  word,  “I 
had  defigned  to  be  at  Colchefter  the  next  day. 
But  as  they  defired  it,  I would  delay  my  jour- 
ney, and  preach  at  ten  the  next  morning.” 

* Wednefday  27.  1 was  fo  much  out  of  order, 

that 


[ 24g  I 

that  I knew  not  how  I ftvould  get  to  church. 
Between  nine  and  ten  I was  informed,  that  lome 
hot  men  in  the  parifh  would  not  confent  to  my 
preaching  there.  I faw  the  hand  of  God  and 
was  thankful,  having  now  a little  more  time  to 
refl.  In  the  afternoon  the  fun  broke  out  through 
the  fog,  and  we  had  a pleafant  ride  to  Bury.  But 
I was  fo  extremely  Tick,  foon  after  I came  in  that 
I knew  not  how  I fhould  be  able  to  preach.  An 
hour’s  fleep  however  refrefhed  me  much,  fo  that 
I found  no  want  of  ftrength  in  preaching.  Indeed 
my  diforder  increafed  during  the  night.  But 
while  I was  preaching  in  the  morning,  I felt  my- 
felf  well.  And  I found  no  more  ficknefs  or  com- 
plaint of  any  kind.  In  the  evening  I reached. 
Colchefler. 

Friday  29.  I found  the  fociety  had  decreafed, 
fince  L — C — went  away.  And  yet  they  had 
had  full  as  good  preachers.  But  that  is  not  fuf- 
ficient.  By  repeated  experiments  we  learn, 
that  though  a man  preach  like  an  angel,  he  will 
neither  colleft,  nor  preferve  a fociety  which  is 
colle&ed,  without  vifiting  them  from  houfe  to- 
houfe. 

* To  day  I walked  all  over  the  famous  caftle, 
perhaps  the  moll  antient  building  in  England. 
A confiderable  part  of  it  is  without  queltion, 
fourteen  or  fifteen  hundred  years  old.  It  was- 
moftly  built  with  Roman  bricks,  each  of  which, 
is  about  two  inches  thick,  feven  broad,  and  thir- 
teen or  fourteen  long.  Seat  of  antient  kings  ! 
Britilh  and  Roman!  Once  dreaded  far  and  near., 
L 6^  Butt 


[ 2 <5°  ] 

But  what  are  they  now  ? Is  not  a living  dog  bet- 
ter than  a dead  lion  ? And  what  is  it  wherein 
they  prided  themfelves  ? As  do  the  prefent  great 
ones  of  the  earth. 

“ A little  pomp,  a little  fway, 

A fun  beam  in  a winter’s  day, 

Is  all  the  great  and  mighty  have 
Between  the  cradle  and  the  grave !” 

Saturday  30.  I returned  to  London,  and  re- 
ceived a prefling  letter  from  Briftol : in  confe- 
quence  of  which  I took  borfe  on  Monday  morn- 
ing,  January  the  firfl,  1759,  and  came  thither 
the  next  evening.  After  re  fling  two  days  (only 
preaching  morning  and  evening)  I examined  fe- 
verally  the  members  of  the  fociety.  This  was 
one  great  end  of  my  coming  down.  Another 
was,  to  provide  for  the  poor.  Accordingly  on 
Sunday  7,  I preached  a fermon  for  them,  to 
which  God  was  pleafed  to  give  his  blefling,  fo 
that’the  colle£lion  was  a great  deal  more  than 
double,  of  what  it  ufed  to  be. 

Wednefday  10.  Having  finifhed  my  work  at 
Briftol,  I rode  to  Salifbury,  and  advifed  our 
our  brethren,  concerning  the  preaching-houfe, 
which  they  are  about  to  build.  On  Friday  12. 
I went  on  to  Whitechurch,  and  preached  at 
one  to  a large  and  ferious  congregation.  In  the 
afternoon  we  rode  to  Bafingftoke,  where  the 
people  put  me  in  mind  of  the  wild  btajls  at 

EphefuSi 


[ 25*  ] 

Ephefus.  Yet  they  were  unufually  attentive  hi  the 
evening,  although  many  of  them  could  not  hear, 
Saturday  13.  After  preaching  to  a fmall,  ferious 
company,  I went  on  to  London. 

Saturday  27.  I began  reading  with  huge  ex- 
pectation, a tra£l  wrote  by  a fon-in-law  of  the 
great  Bengelius,  Mr.  Oetinger,  defenfu  commu- 
ni  & Ratione.  But  how  was  I difappointed  ! So 
obfcure  a writer  I fcarce  ever  faw  before  : I 
think  he  goes  beyond  Perhus  himfelf.  When 
I had  with  huge  labour  read  fifty  or  fixty  pages, 
finding  the  fenfe  did  by  no  means  make  amends, 
for  the  time  and  pains  beftowed  in  fearching  it 
out,  I took  my  leave  of  him  for  ever. 

Saturday,  Pebruary  3.  I fpent  an  hour  with 
one,  who  by  the  lofs  of  his  fight,  his  fortune  and 
his  liberty,  (for  he  has  been  a ptifoner  fome 
time)  is  likely  to  gain  more  than  all  the  world 
can  give. 

Tuefday  6.  I took  much  pains  to  convince 
Mr.  S — n,  that  he  was  not  the  wifeft  man  in 
the  world.  But  I could  not  change  the  Ethiopi- 
an’s [kin.  Yet  even  this  is  not  too  hard  for 

God. 

* Friday  9.  I felt  fuddenly,  as  if  a needle  had 
been  run  into  the  fide  of  my  face.  I fuppofed, 
it  would  be  well  by  the  morning;  hut  found  it 
abundantly  worfe  : the  tonfil  being  come  down 
(as  they  term  it)  and  the  fide  of  my  face  much 
fwelled.  It  grew  worfe  all  day,  fo  that  it  was 
with  great  difficulty  I preached  at  Snowfields  in 

the 


[ 25a  ] 

the  evening.  But  on  Sunday  11,  it  went  away 
as  unaccountably  as  it  came.  In  the  afternoon 
I called  on  E.  H.  in  St.  George’s  hofpital.  Ma- 
ny there  had  been  greatly  prejudiced  againft  me. 
But  it  was  now  vanifhed  away.  Her  behaviour 
had  reconciled  them  quite.  And  all  in  the 
ward,  (fixty  or  feventy  perfons)  feemed  hardly 
to  breathe,  all  the  time  I was  fpeaking  and  pray- 
ing by  her  bedfide. 

Tuefday  13.  I preached  at  Deptford  and  Wel- 
ling, and  in  the  morning;  rode  to  Wandfworth. 

O 7 O 

I preached  Wednefday  and  Thurfday  evening  in 
the  town  ; in  the  mornings,  at  Mr.  Gilbert’s. 
Will  this  barren  tree  bear  fruit  at  laft  ? How 
long  has  God  had  patience  with  it  ? 

Friday  16.  Being  the  public  faff.  I preached 
at  five  in  Wandfworth,  at  nine  and  three  in  the 
church  at  Spittalfields,  and  at  half  paft  eight,  in 
the  Foundery.  Every  place  of  public  worfhip 
was  crouded  on  this,  as  on  the  two  preceding 
faff-days.  And  it  is  plain,  even  outward  humi- 
liation has  been  a means  of  outward  bleffings. 

* Friday  23.  I faw  a furprifing  fpe£facle  : one 
who  by  a blow  firfl  loft  her  nofe,  then  one  eye, 
and  then  the  other  with  moft  of  the  roof  of  her 
mouth  ; and  yet  inftead  of  murmuring,  acknow- 
ledges the  love  of  God  in  all,  and  praifes  him 
continually. 

Tuefday  27.  I walked  with  my  brother  and 
Mr.  Maxfield  to  L — H — ’s.  After  breakfaft 
came  in  Mr.  Whitefield,  Madan,  Romatne, 

Jones, 


[ 2S3  ] 


Jones,  Downing  and  Venn,  with  fome  perfons 
of  quality  and  a few  others.  Mr.  Whitefield, 
1 found  was  to  have  adm  ini  tiered  the  facrament. 
But  he  infilled  upon  my  doing  it : after  which 

at  the  requeft  of  L H , I preached  on 

a Cor.  xiii,  13.  O what  are  the  greatell  men, 
to  the  great  God  ? As  the  fmall  dull  of  the  bal- 
lance. 

Thurfday,  March  l.I  reached  Everton,  about 
four  in  the  afternoon.  But  Mr.  Berridge  did 
not  expeft  me  till  the  next  day.  So  he  thought 
it  bed,  I (hould  preach  in  his  houfe.  The  next 
evening  the  church  was  well  filled.  And  my 
mouth  was  filled  with  arguments : which  I trufl 
God  applied,  for  the  convi&ion  of  fome  and  the 
confolation  of  others. 

Saturday  3.  We  had  a mild,  delightful  day, 
and  a pleafant  ride  to  Colchefter.  In  the  even- 
ing and  on  Sunday  morning,  the  houfe  contain- 
ed the  congregation  tolerably  well.  But  in  the 
afternoon  1 was  obliged  to  go  out ; and  I fup- 
pofe  we  had  on  St.  John’s  green,  five  or  fix 
times  as  many  as  the  room  would  contain. 
Such  is  the  advantage  of  field-preaching ! 

Monday  5.  On  examining  the  fociety  I found, 
that  out  of  the  hundred  and  twenty-fix  members 
I had  left  in  Oflober  we  had  loft  only  twelve  ; 
in  the  place  of  whom  we  have  gained  forty. 
And  many  of  thefe  whom  we  left  in  forrow  and 
heavinefs,  are  now  rejoicing  in  God  their  Sa- 
viour. 


*Tuefday 


[ 2 .54  ] 

* Tuefday  6.  I rode  to  Norwich.  Wednef- 
day  7.  I inquired  into  the  date  of  affairs  at  the 
tabernacle;  and  found  the  fociety,  once  con- 
fiding of  many  hundred  members,  was  moul- 
dered into  nothing.  Of  the  fifteen  or  fixteen 
hundred  fubfcnbers,  not  twenty,  not  one  was 
left ; but  every  one  that  pleafed  went  into  the 
galleries,  without  any  quedions  afked.  So  that 
every  thing  was  to  be  wrought  out  of  the  ore, 
or  lather  out  of  the  cinders  ! Surely  whatever 
help  is  done  here,  God  mud  do  it  himfelf. 

In  the  evening  I defired  that  thofe  who  w'ere 
willing  to  join  in  a fociety,  would  fpeak  w ith 
me  the  next  evening.  About  twenty  did  fo  : 
but  the  greater  part  of  thefe,  appeared  like 
frighted  Iheep.  And  no  marvel,  when  they 
had  been  fo  long  accudomed,  to  hear  all  man- 
ner of  evil  of  me. 

Friday  9.  I preached  morning  and  evening  at 
the  Foundery.  Flow  pleafing  w'ould  it  be  to 
flefh  and  blood,  to  remain  in  this  little,  quiet 
place,  where  wre  have  at  length  weathered  the 
dorm  ? Nay,  I am  not  to  confult  my  ow7n  cafe,, 
but  the  advancing  the  kingdom  of  God. 

On  Saturday  and  Sunday  about  forty  more 
gave  in  their  names.  On  Sunday  in  the  after- 
noon I met  the  fociety  after  ordering  the  doors 
to  be  fhut,  w'hich  they  had  not  been  for 
two  years  before.  Thirty  or  forty  more  fpoke 
to  me  on  Monday.  I think,  two  thirds  of 
thofe  I have  yet  feen  have  had  a clear  fenfe  of 

God’s 


[ 2 <55  ] 

God’s  pardoning  love.  Doth  he  not  fend  by 
whom  he  will fend  ? 

Sunday  18.  I adminiltered  the  Lord’s  {upper 
to  near  two  hundred  communicants.  So  folemn 
a feafon  I never  remember  to  have  known  in  the 
city  of  Norwich.  Asa  confiderable  part  of  them 
were  di  {Tenters,  I defired  every  one  to  Life  what 
poflure  he  judged  belf.  Had  I required  them  to 
kneel,  probably  half  would  have  fat.  Now  all  but 
one  kneeled  down. 

Finding  it  was  needful  to  fee  them  once  more 
at  Colchefter,  I took  horfe  between  four  and 
five  in  the  morning.  The  frofl  was  extremely 
{harp  for  fome  hours.  It  was  then  a fair,  mild 
day.  About  two  in  the  afternoon  it  began  to 
rain  ; but  we  reached  Colchelter  before  we  were 
wet  thro’. 

The  room  was  more  than  filled  in  the  evening, 
fo  that  many  were  obliged  to  go  away.  Wednef- 
day,  21.  I baptized  feven  adults,  two  of  them 
by  immerfion.  And  in  the  evening  (their  own 
minifters  having  call;  them  out  “ for  going  to 
hear  the  Methodifls,”)  I adminiflred  the  Lord's 
fupper  to  them  and  many  others,  whom  their 
feveral  teachers  had  repelled  for  the  fame 
reafon. 

Thurfday  22.  Before  we  fet  out,  the  rough 
north  wind  fell,  and  we  had  a calm,  fun-fhinv 
day.  I preached  in  the  tabernacle  at  Norwich  in 
the  evening. 

Sunday  25.  I rode  to  Forncet,  twelve 

miles 


[ 256  ] 

miles  from  Norwich,  where  alfo  was  a build- 
ing of  James  Wheatley’s  which  without  my 
defire,  he  had  included  in  the  leafe.  We 
found  William  Cudworth  had  preached  there  in 
the  morning.  It  was  exceeding  good  for  my 
fenfe  of  honour,  to  come  juft  after  him.  The 
people  looked  as  direful  upon  me,  as  if  it  had 
been  Satan  in  perfon.  However  they  flocked 
from  all  parts,  fo  that  the  tabernacle  would  not 
near  contain  them.  I preached  about  two  : God 
bare  witnefs  to  his  truth,  and  many  were  cut  to 
the  heart.  After  preaching  I found  Mr.  Cud- 
worth  fitting  in  the  pulpit  behind  me,  w’hom  I 
quietly  and  filently  pafted  by.  About  fix  I preach- 
ed at  the  tabernacle  in  Norwich,  crouded  with 
attentive  hearers.  Perhaps  thefe  too  will  be 
brought  into  order  by  and  by,  hitherto  there 
has  been  no  King  in  Ifrael. 

Monday  and  Tuefday  I fpoke  to  as  many  of 
both  focieties,  now  united  together,  as  hadleifure 
and  inclination  to  come.  The  whole  number 
is  about  four  hundred  and  twenty  : of  whom  I 
do  not  think  it  improbable  two  hundred  may 
continue  together. 

Tuefday  2 7.  I had  an  interview  with  Mr. 
Cudworth,  I obferved  upon  the  whole.  1.  That 
his  opinions  are  all  his  own,  quite  new  ; and  his 
phrafes  as  new  as  his  opinions:  2.  That  all  thefe 
opinions,  yea  and  phrafes  too,  he  affirms  to  be 
necejfary  to  falvation  : maintaining  that  all  who  do 
not  receive  them,  worjhip  another  God.  and  3. 

That 


[ 2 <57  ] 

That  he  is  as  incapable  as  a brute  beaft,  of  being 
convinced  even  in  the  fmalleft  point. 

Wednefday  28.  I rode  over  to  Forncet  again, 
and  preached  to  a large  congregation.  Great 
part  of  them  were  now  exceedingly  foftened  : 
but  fome  were  ftill  bitter  as  wormwood.  In  the 
evening  we  had  another  kind  of  congregation  at 
the  Foundery,  by  whom  I was  much  comforted  : 
But  much  more  in  meeting  the  bands,  when  all 
our  hearts  were  melted  down  by  the  power  of 
God. 

Thurfday  29.  I divided  the  Norwich  fociety 
into  clafTes  without  any  diftin&ion  between  them 
who  had  belonged  to  the  Foundery,  or  the  Taber- 
nacle. Sunday,  April  1.  I met  them  all  at  fix, 
requiring  every  one  to  fhew  his  ticket  when  he 
came  in,  a thing  they  had  never  heard  of  before. 
I likewife  infilled  on  another  ftrange  regulation, 
That  the  men  and  women  fhould  fit  apart.  A 
third  was  made  the  fame  day.  It  had  been  a 
cuftom  ever  fince  the  tabernacle  was  built  to 
have  the  galleries  full  of  fpeftators,  while  the 
Lord’s  fupper  was  adminiffred.  This  I judged 
highly  improper,  and  therefore  ordered  none  to 
be  admitted,  but  thofe  who  defired  to  communi- 
cate. And  I found  far  lefs  difficulty  than  I ex- 
pefled,  in  bringing  them  to  fubmit  to  this 
alfo. 

* The  fociety  now  contained  above  five 
hundred  and  feventy  members  : an  hundred  and 
three  of  whom  were  in  no  fociety  before, 

although 


C 1 


although  many  of  them  had  found  peace  with 
God.  I believe  they  would  have  increafed  to  a 
thoufand,  if  I could  have  flayed  a fort  night 
longer.  Which  of  thefe  will  hold  fafl  their  pro- 
feflion  ? The  fowls  cf  the  air  will  devour  fome. 
The  fun  will  fcorch  more  ; and  others  will  be 
choaked  by  the  thorns  fpringing  up.  I wonder 
we  fhould  ever  expedf,  that  half  of  thofe  who 
hear  the.  zvord  zvith  joy,  will  bring  forth  jrmt  unto 
perfetlion. 

Monday  2.  I left  Norwich,  and  about  feven 
o’clock  came  to  Crofs-keys  Walh.  They  would 
fain  have  perfuaded  us,  we  could  not  pafs.  But 
finding  we  were  refolved  to  try,  our  guide  put 
forward,  and  brought  us  over  in  half  an  hour: 
fo  that  about  eight  we  reached  Sutton,  and 
found  a quiet,  civil  houfe,  with  every  thing  we 
wanted. 

Tuefday  3.  We  came  to  Fofs-dyke  Wafh, 
juft  time  enough  to  pafs.  At  three  in  the  af- 
ternoon I preached  at  Bofton,  A rude  multi- 
tude quickly  ran  together,  to  a paddock  adjoin- 
ing to  the  town.  A more  unawakened  congre- 
gation I have  not  feen  for  fome  years.  How- 
ever the  far  greater  part  were  attentive:  nor 
did  any  interrupt,  or  offer  the  leaft  rudenefs. 

At  feven  I met  the  little  fociety  in  the  houfe  : 
but  they  were  the  leaft  part  of  the  company. 
People  crowded  in  from  all  fides  ; and  I believe 
God  touched  moft  of  their  hearts. 

Wednefday  4.  At  fix,  finding  the  houfe 

would 


[ 259  1 


would  not  contain  one  fourth  of  the  congrega- 
tion, I was  conllrained  to  hand  in  the  ftreet. 
Abundance  of  people  affembled  together,  whom 
I exhorted,  to  repent  and  believe  the gojpel.  The 
word  of  God  fell  heavy  upon  them,  and  I trull, 
broke  fome  of  the  ftony  hearts. 

* Hence  we  rode  over  the  Fens,  fifteen  miles 
broad,  and  near  thirty  miles  long,  to  Coningf- 
bv,  where  we  found  a numerous  congregation, 
of  a far  different  fpirit.  Scarce  one  ofthefe  but 
had  tajled,  more  or  lefs,  of  the  powers  of  the 
world  to  come.  After  a comfortable  opportunity 
here,  we  rode  on  to  HorncalHe.  We  were  but 
roughly  faluted  at  our  entrance.  And  the  mob 
increafed  more  and  more  till  fix,  I then  began 
to  preach  in  a vard  near  the  Market-place,  to  a 
large  concourfe  of  people.  But  their  behaviour 
quite  difappointed  us ; for  there  was  no  tumult, 
no  noife,  but  an  earnefl  attention  through  the 
whole  congregation. 

Thurfday  5.  I preached  again  at  feven,  to 
nearly  the  fame  congregation,  and  was  again  re- 
frefhed,  by  the  remarkable  decency  and  feriouf- 
nefs  of  their  behaviour.  At  four  in  the  after- 
noon I preached  at  Marum  in  the  hill,  two  miles 
from  Horncaltle.  The  number  of  people  con- 
ftrained  me  to  preach  without,  and  the  rain,  to 
fhorten  my  fermon  : though  none  went  away. 
Indeed  I believe  none  were  prefent,  who  had 
not  known  fome  work  of  grace  in  their  hearts. 

Friday  6.  We  rode  over  the  Wolds  (a  chain 

of 


[ 26o  ] 

of  hills)  to  North-Elkington,  three  miles  from 
Lowth.  The  congregation  was  large,  notwith- 
flanding  the  rain,  which  drove  full  in  our  face, 
till  we  came  to  Grimfiby. 

Sunday  8.  The  houfe  was  pretty  well  filled  at 
eight.  At  two  I was  obliged  to  go  into  the  old 
church-yard  : where  was  fuch  a concourfe  of 
people,  as  had  hardly  ever,  they  faid,  been 
feen  at  Grimfby  before.  As  many  as  the  room 
would  well  contain,  were  prefent  at  the  watch- 
night  : and  at  feven  in  the  morning.  I then 
commended  them  to  the  grace  of  God. 

Monday  g.  I preached  in  the  evening  at  Lafe- 
by  : the  next  afternoon  at  Ferry,  (after  riding 
through  much  water  and  continued  rain)  and  in 
the  evening  in  the  new  houfe,  atEpworth. 

Fiiday  13.  Having  appointed  to  preach  at 
Awkborough  at  one,  I fet  out  between  feven  and 
eight.  I was  in  hopes  of  coming  thither  before 
church  began  ; but  I did  not  confider  the  Lin- 
colnfhire  roads.  With  fome  difficulty  we  reach- 
ed it  before  noon,  and  found  there  was  no  fer- 
vice  at  the  church.  I preached  in  the  church- 
yard at  one  to  a liilning  multitude : null  of 
whom,  I fuppofe,  had  never  heard  this  kind  ol 
preaching  before.  Many  of  them  were  in  tears, 
and  prelied  after  me  into  the  houfe  where  we 
met  the  fociety.  I could  not  but  hope,  that 
fome  of  thefe  will  prefs  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven. 

* Returning  thence  I called  on  Mr.  Romlev 

of 


[ ] 


of  Burton,  one  of  my  former  parifhioners,  a 
lively,  fenfible  man  of  eighty-three  years  old,  by 
whom  I was  much  comforted.  An  hour  or  two 
after,  we  took  boat  ; but  could  not  crofs  over. 
The  violence  of  the  ftream  fwollen  by  the  late 
rains,  bore  us  down  in  fpite  of  all  we  could  do. 
Having  ffriven  againft  it  a confiderable  time,  we 
were  obliged  to  calf  anchor.  After  waiting  fome 
time,  we  got  near  the  fhore,  and  were  towed  up 
to  the  place  of  landing.  A toilfome  day  was  fol- 
lowed by  a comforable  night.  At  half  hour  after 
eight  the  houfe  at  Epworth  was  well  filled.  And 
moll  of  the  congregation  flayed,  ’till  the  whole 
fervice  was  concluded. 

It  was  on  this  day,  that  after  the  battle  of  Ber- 
gen in  Germany,  “ Among  the  many  wounded 
who  were  brought  into  Frankfort  upon  the 
Mayne,  there  was  the  right  honourable  George 
Charles  Dykern,  baron,  lieutenant-general  of 
the  Saxon  troops,  in  the  fervice  of  the  king  of 
France.  He  was  born  of  an  antient  and  noble 
family  in  Silefia,  on  April  10th,  1710,  fo  that  it 
was  juft  on  his  birth-day,  he  received  his  wound. 
He  was  of  equal  abilities  as  a minifter  in  the 
clofet,  and  a general  in  the  field.  In  his  younger 
years,  he  had  gone  through  a regular  courfe  of 
ftudy  in  the  univerfity,  and  made  great  profi- 
ciency in  philofophy,  efpecially  in  mathe- 
matics. Afterwards  he  ftudied  polemic  divinity, 
till  he  reafoned  himfelf  into  an  infidel.  Dur- 
ing his  illnefs  he  fhewed  not  the  leaft  defire  of 

pious 


- [ 262  ] 

pious  company  or  ferious  difcourfe,  till  the  fur- 
geon  let  his  valet  de  chambre  know,  that  he 
could  not  live  long.  The  man  then  afked  his 
mailer,  Whether  he  did  not  chufe  to  be  vifited 
by  a clergyman  ? He  anfwered  with  warmth. 

“ I fhall  not  trouble  tliofe  gentlemen.  I know 
well  myfell  what  to  believe  and  do.”  His  man 
not difcouraged,  continued  thus,  “My  lord,  have 
you  never  found  me  wanting  in  my  duty,  all 
the  time  1 have  been  in  your  fervice?”  He  an- 
fwered, “ No.”  “ Then,  replied  he,  I will  not 
be  wanting  now.”  The  furgeons  count  you  pall 
hopes  of  recovery  ; but  every  one  is  afraid  to 
tell  you  fo.  You  ftand  upon  the  brink  of  eter- 
nity. Pray,  Sir,  order  a clergyman  to  be  cal- 
led.” He  paufed  a little,  but  foon  gave  his 
hand  to  his  fervant,  thanked  him  for  his  honef- 
ty,  and  ordered  him  to  fend  for  me.+  When  I 
came,  the  man  told  me  plainly,  the  general  was 
a pro fe (fed  infidel.  1 went  in,  and  after  a fhort 
compliment,  faid,  “ I am  told,  my  Lord,  your 
life  is  near  an  end.”  Therefore  1 prefume, 
without  any  ceremony,  to  afk  you  one  plain 
queftion  : is  the  Hate  of  your  foul  fuch,  that  you 
can  entertain  a folid  hope  of  falvation  ?”  He  • 
anfwered,  “ Yes.”  “ On  what  do  you  ground 
this  hope  ?”  He  replied,  “ 1 never  committed 
any  wilful  fin.  1 have  been  liable  to  frailties; 
but  I trull  in  God’s  mercy,  and  the  merits  of  his 
Son,  that  he  will  have  mercy  upon  me.”  Thefe 

words 

+ Dr.  Frefnius,  fenior  of  the  clergy  at  Frankfort. 


[ **3  ] 

words  he  uttered  very  (lowly,  efpecially,  the  me- 
rits of  his  Son.”  I made  the  following  reply. 
“ I am  apt  to  believe,  you  are  not  tainted  with 
the  groffelt  vices.  But  I fear,  you  a little  too 
prefumptuoufly  boaft,  of  never  having  commit- 
ted wilful  fin.  If  you  would  be  faved,  you  mull 
acknowledge  your  being  utterly  corrupted  bv 
fin,  and  confequently  deferving  the  curfe  of 
God,  and  eternal  damnation.  As  to  your  hop- 
ing for  God’s  mercy,  through  the  merits  of  his 
Son,  I beg  leave  to  alk,  Do  you  believe  God 
has  a Son  ? That  his  Son  afiumed  our  nature,  in 
order  to  be  our  Saviour:  that  in  the  execution 
of  his  office  ; he  was  humbled  unto  death,  even 
the  death  upon  the  crofs,  and  that  hereby  he  has 
given  an  ample  fatisfaftiou  for  us,  and  recover- 
ed our  title  to  heaven  ? ’ He  anfwered,  “ I can- 
not now  avoid  a more  minute  defcription  of  the 
true  Kate  of  mv  foul.  Let  me  tell  you  doftor, 
I have  fome  knowledge  of  philofophy,  by  which 
I have  chofe  lor  myfelf  a way  of  falvation.  I 
have  always  endeavoured  to  live  a fober  life,  to 
the  uttermoft  of  my  power : not  doubting  but  the 
being  of  all  beings,  would  then  gracioufly  accept 
me.  In  this  way  I Hood  in  need  of  Chrift,  and 
therefore  did  not  believe  on  him.  But  if  I 
take  the  fcriptures  lobe  a divine  revelation,  this 
wav  of  mine  I perceive  is  not  the  right  one.  I 
mull  believe  in  Clirill,  and  through  him  come 
to  God.”  I replied,  “ You  fay,  if  you  take  the 
fcriptures  to  be  a divine  revelation  !”  He  fetch- 
Vol.  XXX.  M ed 


[ s64  ] 


ed  a deep  figh,  and  faid,  “ O God,  thou  wilt 
make  me  fay,  Baaufi  I take  the  fcriptures  to 
be  thy  word.”  I faid,  “ There  are  grounds  and 
reafons  enough  to  demonftrate  the  divine  origin 
of  Chriftianity,  as  I could  fhew  from  its  molt 
effential  principles,  were  not  the  period  of  ycur 
life  fo  fhort.  But  we  need  not  now  that  diffufive 
method.  Faith  being  the  gift  of  God.  A poor 
finner  tottering  on  the  brink  of  eternity,  has  not 
time  to  inquire  about  grounds  and  reafons.  Ra- 
ther betake  yourfelf  to  earneft  prayer  for  faith, 
which  if  you  do,  I doubt  not  but  God  will  give 
it  you.”  I had  no  fooner  fpoken  thefe  words, 
but  pulling  off  his  cap,  and  lifting  up  his  eyes 
and  hands,  he  cried  out,  “ O Almighty  God,  I 
am  a poor,  curfed  finner,  worthy  of  damnation. 
But  Lord  jefus,  eternal  Son  of  God,  thou 
diedit  for  my  fins  alfo.  It  is  through  thee  alone 
I can  be  faved.  O give  me  faith,  and  ftrength- 
en  that  faith.”  Being  extremely  weak,  he  was 
obliged  to  flop  here.  A little  after  he  afked, 
“ Is  faith  enough  for  falvation  ?”  “ Yes,  Sir, 
faid  I,  if  it  be  living  faith.”  Methinks,  faid  he, 
it  is  fo  already  ; and  it  will  be  more  fo  by  and 
by  : let  us  pray  for  it.”  Perceiving  he  was  very 
weak,  to  give  him  feme  reft,  I retired  into  the 
next  room.  But  he  foon  fent  to  call  me.  I 
found  him  praying,  and  Jefus  was  all  he  pra\  ed 
for.  I reminded  him  of  fome  fcriptures  treat- 
ing of  faith  in  Cbrift,  and  he  was  much  delight- 
ed with  them.  Indeed  he  was  quite  fwallowed 

up 


[ 25,5  ] 

up  by  the  grace  of  Jefus,  and  would  hear  of  no- 
thing but  Jefus  Chrift  and  him  crucified.  He 
cried  out,  “ I do  not  know  how  it  is  with  me. 

I never  in  my  life  felt  fuch  a change.  I have 
power  to  love  Jefus,  and  to  believe  in  him, 
whom  I fo  long  rejected,  O my  Jefus,  how 
merciful  art  thou  to  me.” 

About  noon  I ftept  home  ; but  he  fent  for  me 
dire&ly,  fo  that  1 could  fcarce  eat  my  dinner. 
We  were  both  filled  with  jov,  as  partakers  of 
the  lame  grace  which  is  in  Jefus  Chrift  : and  that 
in  fuch  a manner,  as  it  we  had  been  acquainted 
together  for  many  years.  Many  officers  of  the 
army  came  to  tee  him  continually,  to  all  of  whom 
he  talked  freely  of  Jefus,  of  the  grace  of  the  Fa- 
ther in  him,  and  of  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghoft 
through  lmn  : wondering  without  ceafing  at  his 
having  found  Jefus,  and  at  the  happy  change,  by 
which  all  things  on  this  fide  eternity,  were  be- 
come indifferent  to  him. 

In  the  afternoon  he  defired  to  partake  of  the 
Lord’s -flipper,  which  he  received  with  a melting, 
praifing,  rejoicing  heart.  All  the  reft  of  the  day 
he  continued  in  the  fame  ftate  of  foul.  Toward 
evening  he  defired,  that  if  his  end  fhould  ap- 
proach, I would  come  to  him,  which  I promifed. 
But  he  did  not  fend  for  me  till  the  next  morning, 
I was  told  by  his  valet,  that  he  flep t well  for  fome 
hours,  and  then  awaking,  prayed  for  a confider- 
able  time,  continually  mentioning  the  name  of 
our  Lord,  and  his  precious  blood,  and  that  he  had 
M 2 defired 


[ 266  ] 


defired  feveral  of  the  officers,  to  make  his  con- 
verfion  known  to  his  Court,  (that  of  the  king 
of  Poland.)  After  fome  difcourfe  I afked,  “ Has 
your  view  of  Chrift  and  his  redemption,  been 
neither  altered  not  obfcured  fince  yefferday  ?” 
He  anfwered,  “ Neither  altered,  nor  obfcured. 
I have  no  doubt,  not  even  a remote  one.  It  is  juft 
the  fame  with  me,  as  if  I had  always  thus  believ- 
ed and  never  doubted.  So  gracious  is  the  Lord 
Jefus  tome  a finner.” 

This  fecond  day  he  was  unwearied  in  prayer 
and  exercifes  of  faith.  Toward  evening  he  fent 
for  me  in  hafte.  When  I came,  I found  him  dy- 
ing and  in  a kind  of  delirium;  fo  I could  do  no 
more  than  give  him  now  and  then  a word  of 
comfort.  I prayed  afterwards  for  him  and  tliofe 
that  were  prefent,  fome  of  whom  were  of  high 
birth  and  rank.  I then  by  impofnion  of  hands,  as 
ufual,  gave  him  a bleffmg,  which  being  done,  he 
expired  immediately.  A Royal  prince  who  was 
there  (Prince  Xavier  of  Saxony)  could  not  for- 
bear weeping.  The  reft  ot  the  officers  bewailed 
the  lofs  ol  their  general,  yet  praifed  God  for 
having  ihewn  fuch  mercy  toward  him. 

I wrote  an  account  of  it  without  delav  to  his 
mother,  and  had  an  immediate  anfwer  : ft  e was  a 
lady  ol  feventy-two,  of  exemplarv  piety.  She 
praifed  God  for  his  mercy,  adding,  “ that  he  had 
now  anfwered  the  prayers,  which  (he  had  never 
ceafed  to  offer  on  his  behalf  for  eleven  years.’’ 

Sunday  t^th  (Eafter-day)  I preached  at  Ep- 

worth 


[ a67  ] 


worth  at  eight,  and  then  rode  to  Haxey  church, 
where  I was  much  refrefhed  by  the  decency  and 
ferioufnefs  of  the  congregation.  Between  one 
and  two  I began  preaching  : fo  large  a congrega- 
tion was  never  feen  here  before.  About  five  I 
preached  at  the  Market  place  in  Epworth.  I 
was  drawing  to  a conclufion  when  the  rain  be- 

O 

gan.  But  it  drove  away  only  a few  carelefs 
hearers',  the  bulk  of  the  people  did  not  ftir  till  I 
concluded. 

Wednefday  18.  I fet  out  for  Selby.  We 
were  in  hopes  the  roads  would  now  be  paffable. 
And  they  were  tolerable,  till  we  came  near  the 
town  ; but  here  the  late  flood,  had  carried  away 
the  bank  over  which  we  were  to  ride,  and  left 
a great  hole  in  its  place.  However,  we  made 
fhift  to  lead  our  horfes  over  a narrow  path, 
where  the  water  was  fordable.  The  congrega- 
tion at  Selby  obliged  me  to  (land  in  the  garden, 
though  the  norih  wind  was  exceeding  high.  At 
feven  in  the  evening  I preached  at  York. 

Thurlday  tg.  I vifited  two  prifoners  in  the 
Caftle,  which  is,  I fuppofe,  the  mofl  commodi- 
ous prifon  in  Europe.  Both  of  them  feemed  to  be 
much  convinced,  and  not  far  from  the  kingdom 
of  God.  At  fix  I pre  ached  in  the  [hell  of  the  new 
home,  to  a numerous  and  fenous  audience. 

Friday  20.  The  mailer  of  the  Inn  at  Tadcaf- 
ter,  offering  us  the  ufe  of  his  garden,  I preach- 
ed to  a well-behaved  congregation,  and  about 
five  found  Mr.  Grimfhaw,  and  many  of  our 
M g brethren 


[ 268  ] 

brethren  at  Leeds.  Saturday  21,  at  half  hour 
pad  ten,  we  reached  Stainland  chappel,  near 
Enland.  It  is  an  handiome  building,  near  the 
top  of  a mountain,  and  furrounded  with  moun- 
tains on  all  (ides.  It  was  filled  from  end  to  end. 
Mr.  Grimihaw  read  prayers,  and  I preached  on 
part  of  the  2d  lelfon.  In  the  room  where  I dtef- 
fed  myfelf  were  a young  man  and  his  filler,  both 
ill  ol  a fever.  I know  not  that  ever  they  heard 
the  preaching ; however  I defined  we  might  go 
to  prayers.  They  prefently  melted  into  tears. 
O may  God  preach  his  gofpel  to  their  hearts  ! 

I preached  at  Manchelier  in  the  evening, 
where  we  had  at  length  a quiet  audience. 
Wretched  magi  Urates,  who  by  refilling  to  fup- 
prefis,  encouraged  the  rioters,  had  long  occafion- 
ed  continual  tumults  here  ; but  fome  are  now  of 
a better  fpirit.  And  wherever  magiftrates  defire 
to  preferve  the  peace,  they  have  fiufficient  power 
to  do  it. 

Tuefday  24.  I rode  over  to  Maxfield.  Abund- 
ance of  people  ran  together,  but  wild  as  colts  un- 
tamed. Their  noife  quite  drowned  my  voice  at 
firlt  ; but  in  a while  they  were  tolerably  quiet. 
And  before  I had  done,  all  but  four  or  five  lub- 
berly men,  feemed  almoft  perfuaded  to  be 
Chriftians. 

Sunday  29.  I rode  to  Stockport,  defigning  to 
preach  at  one  o’clock.  But  we  were  at  a lofs 
for  a place.  We  fixt  at  length  on  a green  near  the 

town’s- 


[ 269  ] 

town’s-end  : and  we  had  a quiet  and  folemn  op- 
portunity. 

* In  my  return,  I called  to  fee  a girl,  about 
thirteen  years  of  age.  She  had  been  in  violent 
pain  all  over,  with  little  intermiffion,  for  near 
twenty  months.  After  I had  fpoke  a few  words, 
fhe  faid,  “ When  I faw  you  before,  I did  not 
know  the  Lord  : but  now  I know  him,  and  am 
known  of  him.  I am  his,  and  he  is  mine.”  I 
afked,  “ Do  you  never  repine  at  your  pain  ?” 
She  faid,  “ No  : I have  not  a murmuring  thought, 
I am  happy,  always  happy.  I would  not  change 
this  bed  of  affliftion  for  the  palace  of  king 
George.”  I afked,  “ Are  you  not  proud  of  this? 
Is  pride  taken  out  of  your  heart?”  She  anfwer- 

ed,  “ I do  not  know.  But  I fed  no  pride.  I 
fed  that  God  is  all.”  “ But  do  you  feel  no  fret- 
fulnefs  or  peevifhnefs  ?”  “ I cannot  tell  that  I 

do.  Pain  fometimes  makes  me  cry  out  when 
they  flir  me.  But  I do  not  fret  at  any  thing.” 
“ Do  you  find  no  felf-wil!  ?’’  “ Not  that  I know': 
I define  nothing  but  that  the  will  of  God  be 
done.”  “ Do  not  you  define  life  or  death  ?” 
“No;  I leave  all  to  him.  But,  if  it  was  his 
will  I fhould  be  glad  to  die.  The  world  is  full 
of  danger.  I fhould  be  glad  to  leave  it,  and  to 
be  with  Chrift. — O why  was  fhe  then  not  taken 
to  paradife  ? I fear,  fhe  has  now  no  religion  at 
all  ! 

Monday  30.  We  had  a numerous  congrega- 
tion at  Aflxm-bridge,  two  or  three  miles  from 
M 4 Northwich 


[ 2?0  ] 

Northwich.  Some  large  trees  fcreened  us  both 
from  the  fun  and  wind.  In  the  afternoon  I rode 
on  to  C heller.  It  was  well  the  wind  was  prettv 
high  ; for  the  fun  fhone  as  hot  as  it  ufes  to  do  in 
the  dog-days.  W ednefday, May  2.  I rode  over  to 
Mould  in  Ilintfhire,  about  twelve  miles  from 
Chefter.  The  fun  was  very  hot  and  the  wind 
very  cold.  But  as  the  place  they  had  chofe  for 
me,  was  expofed  both  to  the  fun  and  the  wind, 
the  one  balanced  the  other.  And  notwithfland- 
ing  the  Cheller  races  which  had  drawn  the  rich 
away,  and  the  market-day,  which  detained  many 
of  the  poor,  we  had  a multitude  of  people,  the 
ferious  part  of  whom  foon  influenced  the  refl : 
fo  that  all  but  two  or  three  remained  uncover- 
ed, and  kneeled  down  as  foon  as  I began  to 
pray. 

Thurfday  3.  We  croft  over  from  Chefter  to 
Liverpool.  The  congregations  here  were  exceed- 
ing large  ; but  many  of  them  feemed  to  be  like 
wild  afles  colts.  Yet  God  is  able  to  make  them 
wife  unto  falvation. 

Sunday  3.  I received  much  comfort  at  the 
Old  church  in  the  morning,  and  at  St.  Thomas’ 
in  the  afternoon.  It  was  as  if  both  the  fermons 
had  been  made  for  me.  I pity  thofe  who  can 
find  no  good  at  church  ! But  how  fhould  they, 
if  prejudice  come  between,  an  effectual  bar  to 
the  grace  of  God  ? 

Wednefday  9,  I rode  to  Downam-Green, 
near  Wigan,  a town  wicked  to  a proverb.  We 

had 


f 27*  ] 

had  a fpecimen  of  the  manners  of  its  inhabitants, 
in  the  behaviour  of  a man  that  met  us,  and  ac- 
cofted  us  with  fuch  language  as  would  have  be- 
come 3n  inhabitant  of  the  bottomlefs  pit.  One 
would  have  thought  from  their  looks,  that  a good 
part  of  the  congregation  was  of  the  fame  fpirit. 
But  in  a (hort  time  the  word  of  God  prevailed, 
and  all  their  fiercenefs  melted  away. 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Bolton,  and  on 
Friday,  11.  about  nine,  at  lower  Darwent,  a 
fmall  village  near  Blackburn.  At  Lancafter  we 
were  informed,  it  was  too  late  to  crofs  the  fands. 
However  we  refolved  to  make  the  trial.  We 
palled  the  feven-mile  fand  without  difficulty, 
and  reached  Fluckborough  about  funfet. 

* Saturday  12.  Setting  out  early,  we  came  to 
Bottle  ; about  twenty-four  meafured  miles  from 
Fluckborough,  foon  after  eight,  having  crofted 
the  Millam-Sand,  without  either  guide  or  dif- 
ficulty. Here  we  were  informed,  that  we  could 
not  pafs  at  Ravenglafs,  before  one  or  two 
o’clock  : whereas  had  we  gone  on,  (as  we  after- 
ward found)  we  might  have  palled  immediately. 
About  eleven  we  were  dire&ed  to  a Ford,  near 
Manchefter-hall,  which  they  find,  we  might 
crofs  at  noon.  When  we  came  thither,  they 
told  us,  we  could  not  crofs.  So  we  fat  flill  till 
about  one.  We  then  found,  we  could  have? 
croft  at  noon.  However  we  reached  White- 
haven before  night.  But  I have  taken  my 
leave  of  the  fand  road.  I believe,  it  is  ten  mea- 
M 5 fured 


[ 272  ] 

fured  miles  fhorter  than  the  other:  but  there 
are  four  fands  to  pafs,  fo  far  from  each  other, 
that  it  is  fcarce  pofiible  to  pafs  them  all  in  a day. 
Efpecially  as  you  have  all  the  way  to  do  with  a 
generation  of  liars,  who  detain  all  Grangers  as 
long  as  they  can,  either  for  their  own  gain  or 
their  neighbours.  I can  advife  no  flranger  to  go 
this  way  : he  may  go  round  by  Kendal  and  Kef- 
wick,  often  inlefs  time,  always  with  lefs  expence 
and  far  lefs  trial  of  his  patience. 

* Refle&ing  to-day  on  the  cafe  of  a poor  wo- 
man, who  had  a continual  pain  in  her  ftomach, 

I could  notbut  remark  the  inexcufable  negligence 
of  mod  phyficians  in  cafes  of  this  nature.  They 
prefcribe  drug  upon  drug,  without  knowing  a 
jot  of  the  matter,  concerning  the  root  of  the  dif- 
order.  And  without  knowing  this,  they  cannot 
cure,  though  they  can  murder  the  patient. 
Whence  came  this  woman’s  pain  ? (which  fhe 
would  never  have  told,  had  fire  never  been 
quefiioned  about  it :)  from  fretting  for  the  death 
of  her  foil.  And  what  availed  medicines,  while 
that  fretting  continued  ? Why  then  do  not  all 
phyficians  confider,  how  far  bodily  diforders  are 
caufed  or  influenced  by  the  mind  ? And  inthofe 
cafes,  which  are  utterly  out  of  their  fphere,  call 
in  the  afiifiance  of  a minifier,  as  minifters  when 
they  find  the  mind  difordered  by  the  body,  call 
in  the  afiifiance  of  a phyfician  ? But  why  are 
thefe  cafes  out  of  their  fphere  ? Becaufe  they 
know  not  God.  It  follows,  no  man  can  be  a tho- 
rough 


[ 273  ] 

rough  phyfician,  without  being  an  experienced 
Chriftiam 

Tuef.  15.  I rode  over  to  Lorton,  a little  vil- 
lage at  the  foot  of  a high  mountain.  Many  came 
from  a confiderable  diftance,  and  I believe  did 
not  repent  of  their  labour.  For  they  found  God 
to  be  a God  both  of  the  hills  and  valleys,  and  no 
where  more  prefent  than  in  the  mountains  of 
Cumberland. 

* Thurf.  17.  I enquired  into  a fignal  inflance 
of  providence.  When  a coal-pit  runs  far  under 
the  ground,  it  is  cuflomary  here  to  build  a parti- 
tion-wall, nearly  from  the  fhaft  to  within  three 
or  four  yards  of  the  end,  in  order  to  make  the 
air  circulate,  which  then  moves  down  one  fide 
of  the  wall,  turns  at  the  end,  and  then  moves 
brifkly  up  on  the  other  fide.  In  a pit  two  miles 
from  the  town,  which  ran  full  four  hundred 
yards  under  the  ground,  and  had  been  long  neg- 
le£led,  feveral  parts  of  this  wall  were  fallen  downi 
Four  men  were  fent  down  to  repair  it.  They 
were  about  three  hundred  yards  from  the  fhaft, 
when  the  foul  air  took  fire.  In  a moment  it  tore 
down  the  wall  from  end  to  end,  and  burning  on 
till  it  came  to  the  fhaft,  it  then  burft  and  went 
off  like  a large  cannon.  The  men  inflantly  fell 
on  their  faces,  or  they  would  have  been  burnt  to 
death  in  a few  moments.  One  of  them  who 
once  knew  the  love  of  God,  (Andrew  Englifh,) 
began  crying  aloud  for  mercy.  But  in  a very  ftiort 
M 6 time 


[ £74  ] 

time  his  breath  was  flopped.  The  other  three 
crept  on  their  hands  and  knees,  till  two  got  to 
the  fhaft  and  were  drawn  up;  but  one  of  them 
died  in  a few  minutes.  John  M’Combe  was 
drawn  up  next,  burnt  from  head  to  foot,  but  re- 
joicing and  praifing  God.  They  then  went 
down  for  Andrew,  whom  they  found  fenfelefs, 
the  very  circumflance  which  faved  his  life.  For 
lofmg  his  fenfes,  he  lay  flat  on  the  ground,  and 
the  greateft  part  of  the  fire  went  over  him : 
whereas  had  he  gone  forward  on  his  hands  and 
knees,  he  would  undoubtedly  have  been  burnt 
to  death.  But  life  or  death  was  welcome. 
For  God  had  reftored  the  light  of  his  counter 
nance. 

* Satur.  19.  One  was  {hewing  us  the  improve- 
ments, begun  by  Sir  William  Lowther.  He  had 
marked  out  places  for  new  walks,  and  for  tufts  of 
trees,  laid  out  a new  plan  for  his  gardens,  begun 
to  alter  the  houfe,  and  was  preparing  to  make 
a little  paradife  round  about  it.  But  death 
came  between.  And  how  little  lofs  was 
this,  if  it  removed  him  to  the  paradife  of 
God  ? 

Sund.  20.  I preached  at  eight  in  an  open 
place  at  The  Gins,  a village  on  one  fide  of  the 
town.  Many  were  there,  who  never  did,  and 
never  would  come  to  the  room.  O what  a 
victory  would  Satan  gain,  if  he  could  put 
an  end  to  the  field-preaching!  But  that,  I 

trufl, 


[ 275  ] 

truft,  he  never  will  : at  lead  not  till  my  head 
is  laid. 

After  preaching  again  at  two,  I took  my  leave 
of  Whitehaven,  and  rode  to  Cockermouth.  At 
fix  I preached  at  the  end  of  the  market -houfe. 
High  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  attended.  And  by 
far  the  greater  part  of  the  audience  feemed  to  be 
confcious,  that  God  was  there. 

Mond.  21.  I preached  at  ten  in  the  market- 
place at  Wigton,and  came  to  Solway-Frith,  juft 
as  the  water  was  fordable.  At  fome  times  it  is  fo, 
three  hours  in  twelve  ; at  other  times,  barely 
one. 

After  making  a fhort  bait  at  Rothwell,  we 
came  to  Dumfris  before  fix  o’clock.  Having  time 
to  fpare,  we  took  a walk  in  the  church-yard,  one 
of  the  pleafanteft  places  I ever  faw.  A fingle 
tomb  I obferved  there,  which  was  about  an  hun- 
dred and  thirty  years  old.  But  the  infcription  was 
very  hardly  legible. 

Quandoquidem  remanent  ipfis  quoqfata  Sepulchris ! 

So  foon  do  even  our  fepulchres  die  ! Strange, 
that  men  fhould  be  fo  careful  about  them ! But 
are  not  many  felf-condemned  therein  ? They 
fee  the  folly,  while  they  run  into  it.  So  poor 
Mr.  Prior,  fpeaking  of  his  own  tomb,  has 
thofe  melancholy  words,  “ For  this  laft  piece 
of  human  vanity , I bequeath  five  hundred 
pounds.” 


* Thurf. 


[ 276  ] 

*■  Tuef.  22.  We  rode  through  a pleafant 
country,  to  Thorny-hill,  near  which  is  the  grand 
feat  of  the  Duke  of  Queenfborough.  How  little 
did  the  late  Duke  imagine,  that  his  fon  would 
plow  up  his  park,  and  let  his  houfe  run  to 
ruin  ? But  let  it  go  1 In  a little  time  the 
earth  itfelf  and  all  the  works  of  it  fhall  be 
burnt  up. 

Hence  we  rode  through,  and  over  huge 
mountains,  green  to  the  very  top,  to  Lead-hills, 
a village  containing  five  hundred  families, 
who  have  had  no  minifler  for  thefe  four  years. 
So  in  Scotland,  the  poor  have  not  the  gojpel 
preached ! Who  fhall  anfwer  for  the  blood  of 
thefe  men  ? 

Early  in  the  evening  we  came  to  Lefmahagow, 
a village  not  fo  large  as  Lead-hills.  It  has  how- 
ever two  minifters.  Here  alfo  we  walked  down 
to  the  church-yard,  by  the  fide  of  which  a little, 
clear  river  runs,  near  the  foot  of  an  high  and  fleep 
mountain.  The  wood  which  covers  this  makes 
the  walks  that  run  on  its  fides,  pleafant  beyond 
imagination.  But  what  taffe  have  the  good  peo- 
ple of  the  town  for  this  ? As  much  as  the  ani- 
mals that  graze  on  the  river-bank. 

Wednef.  23.  We  took  horfe  foon  after  four, 
and  did  not  flop  before  we  came  to  Glafgow  r 
having  hardly  feen  a cloud  in  the  fky,  fince  we 
fet  out  from  Whitehaven. 

I preached  at  feven  in  the  poor- houfe  : and  at 
feven  in  the  morning,  Thurfday  24.  But  in  the 

evening 


[ 277  ] 

evening  we  were  obliged  to  be  abroad,  and  I ufed 
great  plainnefs  of  fpeech.  All  buffered  the  word 
of  exhortation  : fome  feemed  to  be  a little  af- 
fefted. 

Satur.  2 6.  I found  the  little  fociety  which  I 
had  joined  here  two  years  fince  had  foon  fplit 
in  pieces.  In  the  afternoon  I met  feverai  of  the 
members  of  the  praying  focieties  ; and  fhewed 
them  what  Chriffian  fellowfliip  was,  and  what 
need  they  had  of  it.  About  forty  of  them  met 
me  on  Sunday  27,  in  Mr.  Gillies’s  kirk,  imme- 
diately after  evening  fervice.  I left  them  deter- 
mined to  meet  Mr.  Gillies  weekly,  at  the  fame 
time  and  place.  If  this  be  done  ; I fhall  try  to 
fee  Glafgow  again.  If  not,  I can  employ  my  time 
better. 

At  feven  in  the  morning  we  had  a numerous 
congregation,  though  fmall  compared  to  that  in 
the  evening.  Yet  my  voice  was  fo  ftrengthened, 
that  I believe  all  could  hear.  I fpoke  very  plain 
on,  Ye  mufl  be  born  again.  Now  I am  clear  of 
the  blood  of  this  people.  I have  delivered  my 
own  foul. 

Mond.  28.  I rode  through  Edinburgh  to  Mufi. 
felbourgh,  and  preached  in  the  evening  to  a 
deeply  attentive  congregation.  Wednef.  30.  I 
rode  on  to  Dunbar,  and  at  fix  in  the  evening, 
preached  in  a large,  open  place,  (as  alfo  the  next 
day.)  Both  poor  and  rich  quietly  attended, 
though  mod  of  them  {hivering  with  cold:  for 

the 


[ 2/8  J 

the  weather  was  fo  changed  within  a few 
days,  that  it  feemed  more  like  December  than 
May. 

* Lodging  with  a fenfible  man,  I enquired  par- 
ticularly into  the  prefent  difcipline  ol  the  Scotch 
parifhes.  In  one  parifh  it  feems,  there  are  twelve 
ruling  elders  ; in  another  there  are  fourteen.  And 
what  are  thefe  ? Men  of  great  fenfe  and  deep 
experience  ?'  Neither  one,  nor  the  other.  But 
they  are  the  richji  men  in  the  parifh.  And  are 
the  richejl  of  courfe  the  befl  and  the  wifeji  men  ? 
Does  the  bible  teach  this  ? I fear  not.  What 
manner  of  governors  then  will  thefe  be  ? 
Why,  they  are  generally  juft  as  capable  of 
governing  a parifh,  as  of  commanding  an 
army. 

About  this  time  the  work  of  God  exceedingly 
increafed  under  the  Rev.  Mr.  Berridge,  near 
Everton.  I cannot  give  a clearer  view  of  this, 
than  by  tranfcribing  part  of  the  journal  of  an  eye 
witnefs. 

Sunday,  May  20.  Being  with  Mr.  B 11  at 

Everton,  I was  much  fatigued  and  did  not  rife. 
But  Mr.  B.  did,  and  obferved  feveral  fainting 
and  crying  out.  while  Mr.  B — e was  preach- 

ing. Afterward  at  church,  I heard  many  crv 
out,  efpecially  children,  whofe  agonies  were 
amazing:  one  of  the  eldeft,  a girl  ten  or  twelve 
years  old,  was  full  in  my  view,  in  violent  contor- 
fions  of  body,  and  weeping  aloud,  I think  incef- 

fantly 


[ 279  ] 

fantly  during  the  whole  fervice.  And  feveral 

much  younger  children  were  in  Mr.  B ll’s 

view,  agonizing  as  this  did.  The  church  was 
equally  crouded  in  the  afternoon,  the  windows 
being  filled  within  and  without,  and  even  the 
outfide  of  the  pulpit  to  the  very  top  ; fo  that  Mr. 

B e feemed  almoft  ftifled  by  their  breath. 

Yet  feeble  and  fickly  as  he  is,  he  was  continu- 
ally ftrengtbened,  and  his  voice  for  the  moll  part 
diliinguiihable,  in  the  midfl  of  all  the  outcries, 
I believe  there  were  prefent  three  times  more 
men  than  women,  a great  part  of  whom  came 
from  far  ; thirty  of  them  having  fel  out  at  two  in 
the  morning,  from  a place  thirteen  miles  off. 
The  text  was,  Having  a form  god  line/s',  but  deny- 
ing the  power  thereoj.  When  the  power  of  reli- 
gion began  to  be  fpoke  of,  the  prefence  of  God 
really  filled  the  place.  And  while  poor  Tinners 
felt  the  fentence  of  death  in  their  fouls,  what 
founds  of  diflrefs  did  I hear  ! The  greateft  num- 
ber of  them  who  cried  or  fell,  were  men:  but 
fome  women,  and  feveral  children,  felt  the  power 
of  the  fame  almighty  Spirit,  and  feemed  juft 
finking  into  hell.  This  occafioned  a mixture  of 
various  founds;  fome  fhrieking,  fome  roaring 
aloud.  The  moll  general  was  a loud  breathing, 
like  that  of  people  half  ftrangled  and  gafping  for 
life.  And  indeed  almoft  all  the  cries  were  like 
thofe  of  human  creatures,  dying  in  bitter  anguifh. 
Great  numbers  wept  without  any  noife:  others 

fell 


[ *8o  ] 

fell  down  as  dead:  fome  finking  in  filence ; 
fome  with  extreme  noife  and  violent  agitation. 

I flood  on  the  pew  feat,  as  did  a young  man  in 
the  oppofite  pew,  an  able-bodied,  frefh,  healthy 
countryman.  But  in  a moment,  while  he  feem- 
ed  to  think  of  nothing  lefs,  down  he  dropt  with 
a violence  inconceivable.  The  adjoining  pews 
feemed  fhook  with  his  fall  : I heard  afterward 
the  flamping  of  his  feet;  ready  to  break  the 
boards,  as  he  lay  in  flrong  convulfions,  at  the 
bottom  of  the  pew.  Among  feveral  that  were 
flruck  down  in  the  next  pew,  w~as  a girl,  who 
was  as  violently  feized  as  him.  When  he  fell, 
B- 11  and  I felt  our  fouls  thrilled  with  a mo- 

mentary dread  : as  when  one  man  is  killed 
by  a cannon-ball,  another  often  feels  the  wind 
of  it. 

Among  the  children  who  felt  the  arrows  of  the 
Almighty,  I faw  a flurdy  boy,  about  eight  years 
old,  who  roared  above  his  fellows,  and  feemed  in 
his  agony  to  flruggle  with  the  flrengthof  a grown 
man.  His  face  was  read  as  fcarlert  and  almofl  all 
on  whom  God  laid  his  hand,  turned  either  very 
red,  or  almoft  black.  When  I returned,  after  a 

little  walk,  to  Mr.  B e’s  houfe,  I found  it 

full  of  people.  He  was  fatigued,  but  faid,  he 
would  neverthelefs  give  them  a word  of  exhor- 
tation. I flayed  in  the  next  room,  and  faw  the 
girl  whom  I had  obferved  fo  particularly  dillrefl 
in  the  church,  lying  on  the  floor  as  one  dead, 

but 


[ »«»  J 

but  without  any  ghaftlinefs  in  her  face.  In  a few 
minutes  we  were  informed  of  a woman  filled 
with  peace  and  joy,  who  was  crying  out  juft  be- 
fore. She  had  come  thirteen  miles,  and  is  the 

fame  perfon,  who  dreamed  Mr.  B would 

come  to  her  village,  on  that  very  day,  whereon 
he  did  come,  though  without  either  knowing  the 
place  or  the  way  to  it.  She  was  convinced  at 
that  time.  Juft  as  we  heard  of  her  deliverance, 
the  girl  on  the  floor  began  to  ftir.  She  was  then 
fet  in  a chair : and  after  fighing  awhile,  fuddenly 
rofe  up,  rejoicing  in  God.  Her  face  was  co- 
vered with  the  mod  beaudful  fmile  I ever  faw. 
She  frequently  fell  on  her  knees,  but  was.  gene- 
rally running  to  and  fro,  (peaking  thefe  and  the 
like  words,  “ O,  what  can  Jefus  do  for  loft  fin- 
ners  ! He  has  forgiven  all  my  fins!  I am  in  hea- 
ven ! I am  in  heaven!  O how  he  loves  me! 
And  how  I love  him  ?”  Meantime  I faw  a thin, 
pale  girl,  weeping  with  forrow  lor  herfelf,  and 
joy  for  her  companion.  Quickly  the  fmiles  of 
heaven  came  likewife  on  her,  and  her  praifes 
joined  with  thofe  of  the  other.  I alfo  then 

laughed  with  extreme  joy  : fo  did  Mr.  B -11, 

(who  faid,  it  was  more  than  he  could  well  bear.) 
So  did  all  who  knew  the  Lord,  and  fome  of 
thofe  who  w'ere  waiting  for  falvation  : till  the 
cries  of  them  who  were  ftruck  with  the  arrows 
of  conviftion,  were  almoft  loft  in  the  founds  of 

J°7* 


Two 


[ 282  .] 

Two  or  three  well  dreft  young  women,  who 
feemed  carelefs  before,  now  felt  the  power  of 
God,  and  cried  out  with  a loud  and  bitter  cry.  Mr. 

B about  this  time  retired,  and  the  Duke  of 

M- , with  Mrs.  A 11  came  in.  They 

feemed  inclined  to  make  adiflurbance,  but  were 
reftrained,  and  in  a fhort  time  quietly  retired. 
We  continued  praifing  God  with  all  our  might : 

and  his  work  went  on  as  when  Mr.  B was 

exhorting.  I had  for  fome  time obferved  a young 
woman  ail  in  tear? ; but  now  her  countenance 
changed.  The  unfpeakable  joy  appeared  in  her 
face,  which  quick  as  lightning  was  filled  with 
fmiles.  and  became  of  a crimfon  colour.  About 
the  fame  time  John  Keeling  of  Potton,  fell 
into  an  agony.  But  he  grew  calm  in  about  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  though  without  a clear  fenfe 
of  pardon. 

Immediately  after,  a flranger  well  dreft,  who 
flood  facing  me,  fell  backward  to  the  wall ; then 
forward  on  his  knees,  wringing  his  hands  and 
roaring  like  a bull.  His  face  at  firft  turned  quite 
red,  then  almofi  black.  He  rofe,  and  ran  againfl 
the  wall,  till  Mr.  Keeling  and  another  held  him. 
Pie  fcreamed  out,  “ O what  fhall  I do,  what  fhall 
I do  ? O for  one  drop  of  the  blood  of  Chrtft  ! ’ 
As  he  fpoke,  God  fet  his  foul  at  liberty;  he  knew 
his  fins  were  blotted  out : and  the  rapture  he 
was  in,  feemed  too  great  for  human  nature 
to  bear.  He  had  come  forty  miles,  to  hear  Mr. 
B and  was  to  leave  him  the  next  morn- 


[ ] 

ing ; which  he  did  with  a glad  heart,  telling  all 
who  came  in  his  way,  what  God  had  done  for 
his  foul. 

I obferved  about  the  time  that  Mr.  Coe  (that 
was  his  name)  began  to  rejoice,  a girl,  eleven 
or  twelve  years  old,  exceeding  poorly  drefl,who 
appeared  to  be  as  deeply  wounded,  and  as  defir- 
ous  of  falvation  as  any.  But  1 loft  fight  of  her, 
till  I heard  the  joyful  found,  of  another  born  in 
Sion  : and  found  upon  enquiry,  it  was  her,  the 
poor,  difconfolate,  gypfy- looking  child.  And 
now  did  I fee  fuch  a fight,  as  I do  not  expeft 
again  on  this  fide  eternity.  The  faces  of  the 
three  jufiificd  children,  and  I think  of  all  the  be- 
lievers prefent,  did  really  ftiine : and  fuch  a 
beauty,  fuch  a look  of  extreme  happinefs,  and  at 
the  fame  lime  of  divine  love  and  fimplicity, 
did  1 never  fee  in  human  faces  till  now.  The 
newly  juftified  eagerly  embraced  one  another, 
weepingon  each  others  neck  lor  joy.  Then  they 
laluted  all  of  their  own  fex,  and  befought  both 
men  and  women  to  help  them  inpraifing  God. 

I have  mentioned  only  one  man,  two  women 
and  three  children  at  this  time  juftified  in  the 
houfe,  but  have  perhaps  omitted  fome.  And  it 
j is  probable,  there  was  more  than  one  juftified  at 
j the  church,  though  but  one  came  to  fpeak  of  it  ; 
.for  all  are  not  equally  free  to  glorify  God  in  the 
midft  ol  his  people.  I wifh  all  who  find  the  fame 

Ifalva  ion  with  Mr.  Coe,  were  as  ready  to  pro- 
j claim  redeeming  love ! 

I 


Thurfday 


[ *84  1 


Thurfday  24.  Mr.  B — 11  and  I went  to  hear 
Mr.  Hicks  at  Wreftlingworth,  four  miles  from 
Everton.  We  difcourfed  with  himfirft,  and  were 
glad  to  hear,  he  had  wholly  given  himfelf  up 
to  the  glorious  work  of  God,  and  that  the  pow’er 
of  the  higheft  fell  upon  his  hearers,  as  upon  Mr. 

B e’s.  While  he  was  preaching,  fifteen  or 

fixteen  perfons  felt  the  arrows  of  the  Lord  and 
dropt  down.  A few  of  thefe  cried  out  with  the 
utmoft  violence,  and  little  intermiftion,  for  fome 
hours  : while  the  reft  made  no  great  noife,  but 
continued  ftruggling,  as  in  the  pangs  of  death. 
I obferved  befides  thefe  one  little  girl  deeply 
convinced,  and  a boy,  nine  or  ten  years  old. 
Both  thefe,  and  feveral  others,  when  carried 
into  the  parfonage  houfe,  either  lay  as  dead,  or 
ftruggled  w>ith  ail  their  might.  But  in  a fhort 
time,  their  cries  increafed  bevond  meafure,  fo 
that  the  loudeft  finging  could  fcarce  be  heard. 
Some  at  Jaft  called  on  me  to  pray,  which  I did  : 
and  for  a time  all  were  calm.  But  the  florin  foon 

began  again.  Mr.  H s then  prayed,  and 

afterward  Mr.  B. — . But  ftill  tho’  fome  receiv- 
ed confolation,  others  remained  in  deep  for- 
row  of  heart. 

Upon  the  whole  I remark,  that  few  antient 
people  experience  any  thing  of  this  work  of 
God  ; and  fcarce  any  of  the  rich.  Thefe  gener- 
ally fhew  either  an  utter  contempt  of,  or  enmity 

to  it.  Indeed  fo  did  Mr.  H s himfelf  fome 

time  fince : Having  fo  deep  an  averfion  to  it, 

that 


C 2 85  ] 

that  he  denied  the  facrament  to  thofe  of  his 

parifli,  who  went  to  hear  Mr.  B e.  Neither 

of  thefe  gentlemen  have  much  eloquence,  but 
fecm  rather  weak  in  fpeech  : The  Lord  hereby 
more  clearly  Ihewing,  that  this  is  his  own  work. 
It  extends  into  Cambridge-fhire,  to  within  a 
mile  of  the  univerfity  ; and  about  as  far  into  Hun- 
tingdon-fhire  ; but  flouriflies  mod  of  all  in  the 
eaftern  and  northern  parts  of  Befordfhire. 

There  were  three  farmers,  in  three  feveral 
villages,  who  violently  fat  themfelves  to  oppofe 
it.  And  for  a time  they  kept  many  from  going 
to  hear.  But  all  three  died  in  about  a month. 
One  of  them  owned  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
was  upon  him,  and  befougbt  him  in  the  bitter- 
nefs  of  his  foul,  to  prolong  his  life,  vowing  to 
hear  Mr.  B.  himfelf.  But  the  Lord  would  not  be 
intreated. 

The  violent  ftruggling  of  many  in  the  above- 
mentioned  churches,  has  broke  feveral  pews  and 
benches.  Yet  it  is  common  for  people  to  re- 
main unaffefted  there,  and  afterward  drop  down 
in  their  way  home.  Some  have  been  found  ly- 
ing as  dead  in  the  road : others,  in  Mr.  B e’s 

garden;  not  being  able  to  walk  from  the  church 
to  his  houfe,  though  it  is  not  two  hundred 
yards. 

* I have  fince  received  a letter  from  Mr.  B.  an 
extra#  of  which  I fend  you. 

“ On  Sunday  fe’nnight,  a man  of  Wyberfley, 
a Nathanael  indeed,  was  fo  filled  with  the  love 

of 


[ 286  ] 


of  God  during  morning  prayer,  that  he  dropt 
down,  and  lay  as  one  dead  for  two  hours.  He 
had  been  fo  filled  with  love  all  the  week  before, 
that  be  was  often  for  a time  unable  to  work. 

“ On  Sunday  night  laff,  as  I was  fpeaking  in 
my  houfe,  there  was  a violent  outcry.  One  foul 
was  fet  at  liberty.  We  fung  near  an  hour,  and 
the  Lord  releafed  three  more  out  of  captivity. 

“ On  Monday  fe’nnight  Mr.  H ks  ac- 

companied me  to  Meldred.  On  the  way  we 
called  at  a farmer’s  houfe.  After  dinner  I went 
into  his  yard,  and  feeing  near  an  hundred  and 
fifty  people,  I called  for  a table,  and  preached, 
for  the  firft  time,  in  the  open  air.  Two  perfons 
were  feized  with  ftrong  conviftions.  fell  down, 
and  cried  out  muff  bitterly.  We  then  went  to 
Meldred,  where  I preached  in  afield,  to  about 
4000  people.  In  the  morning  at  five  Mr.  H — ks 
preached  in  the  fame  field,  to  about  a thoufand. 
And  now  the  prefence  of  the  Lord  was  wonder- 
fully among  us.  There  was  abundance  of  weep- 
ing and  flrong  crying.  And  I truft,  befide  many 
that  were  llightly  wounded,  near  thirty  received 
true  heart-felt  conviction.  At  ten  we  returned, 
and  called  again  at  the  farmer’s  houfe.  Seeing 
about  a dozen  people  in  the  brew-houfe,  1 fpoke 
a few  words.  Immediately  the  farmer’s  daugh- 
ter, dropt  down  in  firong  convictions.  Another 
alfo  was  miferably  torn  by  Satan  ; but  fet  at  liber- 
ty before  I had  done  prayer.  At  four  I preach- 
ed 


C 287  ] 

ed  In  my  own  houfe,  and  God  gave  the  fpirit  of 
adoption  to  another  mourner. 

“ On  Monday  laft  I went  to  Shelford,  four 
miles  from  Cambridge,  near  twenty  from  Ever- 
ton.  The  journey  made  me  quite  ill,  being  fo 
weary  with  riding,  that  I was  obliged  to  walk 
part  of  the  way.  When  I came  thither,  a table 
was  fet  for  me  on  the  Common  ; and  to  my 
great  furprize,  I found  near  ten  thoufand  peo- 
ple round  it,  among  whom  were  many  gownf- 
men  from  Cambridge.  I was  hardly  able  to 
iland  on  my  feet,  and  extremely  hoarfe  with  a 
cold.  When  I lifted  up  my  foot,  to  get  on  the 
table,  an  horrible  dread  overwhelmed  me.  But 
the  moment  I was  fixt  thereon,  I feemed  as  un- 
concerned as  a ffatue.  I gave  out  my  text,  (Gal. 
iii.  10,  11.)  and  made  a paufe,  to  think  of  fome- 
thing  pretty  to  fet  off  with  ; but  the  Lord  fo 
confounded  me,  (as  indeed  it  was  meet ; for  I 
was  feeking,  not  his  glory,  but  my  own)  that  I 
was  in  a perfefl  labyrinth,  and  found  if  I did 
not  begin  immediately,  I mufr  go  down  without 
fpeaking.  So  I broke  out  with  the  firft  word 
that  occurred,  not  knowing  whether  I fhou'd  be 
able  to  add  any  more.  Then  the  Lord  opened 
my  mouth,  enabling  me  to  fpeak  near  an  hour, 
without  any  kind  of  perplexity  ; and  fo  loud 
that  every  one  might  hear : the  audience  be- 
haved with  great  decency.  When  fermon  was 
over,  I found  my  fell'  fo  cool  and  eafy,  fo  chear- 
ful  in  fpirii.and  wonderfully  ftrengthened  in  bo- 
Vol.  XXX.  N . dy, 


[ 288  ] 

cly,  I went  into  an  houfe,  and  fpoke  again  near 
an  hour,  to  about  two  hundred  people.  In  the 
morning  I preached  again  to  about  a thoufand; 
Mr.  H — s engaged  to  preach  in  Orwell  field  on 
Tuefday  evening.  I gave  notice,  that  I defign- 
ed  to  preach  on  Monday  fe’nnight  at  Grand- 
chefter,  a mile  from  Cambridge. 

“ Mr.  H s and  I have  agreed  to  go  into 

Hertfordfhire ; afterwards  to  feparate,  and  go 
round  the  neighbourhood,  preaching  in  the 
fields,  wherever  a door  is  opened,  three  or  four 
days  in  every  week — 

Believe  me, 

Your  affe&ionate  fervant, 

J.  B. 

Friday,  June  1.  The  rain  began  when  we 
took  horfe,  and  attended  us  all  the  way  to  Ber- 
wick. When  I was  tolerably  dry,  I fent  to  the 
mayor,  who  readily  granted  the  ufe  of  the  Town- 
hall.  Here  I preached  about  feven  to  a drowfy 
congregation,  on  Why  will  ye  die , 0 houfe  of 
Jfrael?  And  again  a little  after  feven  in  the 
morning,  on  1 would  thou  v'.ert  either  hot  or  cold. 
In  the  evening  I preached  in  the  Court-houfe 
at  Alnwick,  to  a people  quite  of  another  fpirit : 
having  the  power  as  well  as  the  form  of  godhnefs, 
and  panting  after  the  whole  image  of  God. 

Whitfunday  g.  I preached  at  eight  in  the 
Court-houfe,  but  it  was  much  crouded  and  ex- 
ceeding hot.  So  in  the  afternoon  I went  to  the 

Crofs, 


[ 2*9  ] 

Crofs,  and  cried  aloud,  in  the  name  of  my  maf- 
ter,  If  any  man  thirjl%  let  him  come  unto  me  and 
dfink. 

Monday  4.  I preached  in  Placey  fquare  at 
one,  to  an  earned:,  loving  congregation,  and 
enquired  of  one  of  them,  James  Gillies,  con- 
cerning a report  I had  heard  the  day  before. 
He  informed  me,  that  “ when  he  was  a little 
child,  he  had  juft  learned  his  Chrift-crofs  row. 
But  this  he  foon  forgot.  Between  twenty  and 
thirty  he  was  deeply  convinced  of  fin  : at  which 
time  feeling  a ftrong  perfuafion  he  could  read, 
he  went  into  a neighbour’s  houfe  took  up  a bi- 
ble,  and  read  diftinftly,  which  he  has  done  ever 
fince.” 

After  preaching  1 rode  on  to  Newcaftle.  Cer- 
tainly if  I did  not  believe  there  was  another 
world,  I fhould  fpend  all  my  fummers  here,  as 
I know  no  place  in  Great-Britain,  comparable 
to  it  for  pleafantnefs.  But  I feek  another  coun- 
try, and  therefore  am  content  to  be  a wanderer 
upon  earth. 

Wednefday  6.  I preached  at  Gatefiiead-fell, 
to  a numerous  congregation.  In  earneftnefs  the 
colliers  of  Gatefhead  utterly  fliame  the  colliers 
of  Kingfwood.  Scarce  thirty  of  whom  think  it 
worth  while  to  hear  the  word  of  God  on  a 
week-day  ! Not  even  when  I preach.  And 
here  the  houfe  will  fcarce  contain  the  week-day 
congregation  of  a local  preacher  ! 

Satur.  9.  I rode  to  Sunderland,  and  preach- 
N 2 ed 


C 29°  ] 

ed  in  the  fhell  of  their  houfe.  The  people 
of  this  town  likewife  are  hungry  for  the  word, 
and  receive  it  with  all  gladnefs.  Sunday  10. 
The  houfe  contained  us  at  eight : but  at  one  I 
was  obliged  to  (land  in  the  great  ftreet,  and  de- 
clare to  an  attentive  multitude,  Ye  muflbe  born 
again.  In  the  evening  I preached  to  fome  thou- 
fands  atNewcallle,  near  the  Keelmen’s  hofpital ; 
if  haply  God  might  bring  back  fome  of  them 
who  ran  well  many  years  ago. 

Wednefday  13.  After  preaching  at  the  Fell, 

I rode  to  Chefter.  The  congregation  was  deeply 
ferious,  both  in  the  evening,  and  at  five  in  the 
morning.  Thence  we  croffed  the  country  to 
Newlands,  where  I was  met  bv  poor  John  Brown 
who  has  refrained  from  preaching,  till  he  is 
fallen  into  deep  defpair.  I preached,  on  I will 
heal  their  backjliding.  But  the  word  did  not 
reach  his  heart. 

I never  faw  near  fo  large  a congregation  at 
Sheephill,  as  we  had  at  fix  in  the  evening.  What 
is  wanting  in  this  whole  country  ? Only  more 
labourers. 

Satur.  16.  I rode  to  Widdrington,  and  preach- 
ed at  one  to  a congregation  gathered  from  all 
parts.  The  court-houfe  at  Alnwick  was  pretty 
well  filled  in  the  evening  : and  in  the  morning, 
Sunday.  17.  We  had  a found  ufeful  fermon  at 
church,  and  a ferious,  well-behaved  congrega- 
tion. I preached  in  the  market-place  about  five. 

And 


[ 29*  ] 

And  I truft  God  applied  the  word,  Ye  mujl  be 
born  again. 

Mondav  1 8,  Having  an  uneafy  horfe,  I was 
tired  enough  when  we  came  into  Morpeth.  But 
after  refting  a while,  I was  ftrengthened  to  preach 
Chrijl  crucified,  in  the  market-place,  to  fuch  a 
congregation  as  was  never  feen  there  before. 
And  a folemn  awe  feemed  to  fit  on  every  face, 
officers  and  gentlemen,  as  well  as  common  peo- 
ple. After  preaching  at  Placey,  in  the  evening, 

I rode  back  to  Newcaftle. 

Wednefday  20.  I endeavoured  to  compofe 
the  little  differences  which  had  much  hurt  the 
poor  people  at  Gatefhead-Fell.  O what  zeal, 
what  prudence  and  patience  are  requifite,  to  bear 
the  manners  of  an  untoward  people,  and  to 
train  them  up  in  Chriflian  difcipline,  ’till  they 
come  tc  the  full future  of  Chrijl ! 

Thurfday  21.  I preached  at  Nafferton  at  one. 
As  I was  riding  thence,  one  flopped  me  on  the 
road  and  faid,  “ Sir,  Do  not  you  remember, 
when  you  was  at  Pruddoe  two  years  fince,  you 
breakfafled  at  Thomas  Newton’s  ? I am  his  fifier. 
You  looked  upon  me,  as  you  was  going  out,  and 
faid,  “ Be  in  earned. ” I knew  not  then  what 
earneftnefs  meant,  nor  had  any  thought  about  it. 
But  the  words  funk  into  my  heart,  fo  that  I 
could  never  reft  any  more,  till  I fought  and 
found  Chrift.” 

Friday  22.  I rode  to  S k,  and  preached  to 

to  my  old  congregation  of  colliers,  on  Why  will 
N 3 ye 


[ 292  3 

ye  die , 0 houfe  of  Jfrael  ? After  preaching,  a l'er- 

vant  of  Mr.- came  and  faid,  “ Sir,  my  mafter 

difcharges  you  from  preaching  any  more  on  his 
ground  : not  out  of  any  difrefpeft  to  you  : 
but  he  will  fiand  by  the  church :”  “ Simple 
mafter  Shallow!”  As  Shakefpear  has  it:  wife 
Mafter  reftor,  his  counfellor  ! 

Saturday  23.  I fpoke  to  each  of  the  fociety  in 
Sunderland.  Moll  of  the  robbers,  commonly 
called  Smugglers,  have  left  us.  But  more  than 
twice  the  number  of  honeft  people  are  already 
come  in  their  place.  And  if  none  had  come,  yet 
fhould  I not  dare  to  keep  tbofewho  fteal  either 
from  the  king  or  fubjecL 

Sunday  24.  I preached  in  the  ftreet  at  eight: 
about  one  at  South->Shields,  and  at  five  in 
North-Shields.  The  greateft  part  of  them  feemed 
to  hear,  as  for  their  lives.  So  are  thefe  lions  alfo 
become  lambs.  O for  zealous,  aftive,  faithful 
labourers  ! How  white  ate  the  fields  unto  the  har- 
vejt ! 

On  Monday  and  Wednefday  evening  I 
preached  abroad,  near  the  Keelmen’s  hofpital,  to 
twice  the  people  we  fhould  have  had  at  the  houfe. 
What  marvel,  the  devil  does  not  love  field- 
preaching  ? neither  do  I : I love  a commodious 
room,  a foft  cufhion,  an  handfome  pulpit.  But 
where  is  my  zeal,  if  I do  not  trample  all  thefe  un- 
der foot,  in  order  to  fave  one  more  foul  ? 

Thurfday  28.  We  had  the  general  meeting  of 
the  ftewards,  by  who-m  I found  the  focieties  in 

this 


[ 293  3 

this  circuit,  ftill  contain  about  eighteen  hundred 
members.  I hope  not  many  of  thefe  will  be 
choaked  by  the  thorns  ! 

Friday  29.  About  Eleven  I fet  out  for  Swal- 
well,  in  a fair,  mild  morning.  Butin  half  an  hour 
the  rain  poured  down,  fo  that  in  a few  minutes 
I was  wet  from  head  to  foot.  And  'when  I 
came  thither,  where  to  preach  I knew  not  ; for 
the  houfe  would  not  contain  a third  of  the  peo- 
ple : juft  then  the  diffenting  minifler  fent,  to 
offer  me  the  ufe  of  his  meeting  houfe.  I went 
thither  without  delay.  There  was  a large  congre- 
gation, and  a blefling  in  the  midft  of  them. 

Saturday  30.  I preached  in  Winlington  at 
noon.  The  fun  was  very  hot,  and  fhone  full  upon 
my  head.  But  the  wind  was  very  high  and  very 
cold  ; fo  that  the  one  tempered  the  other,  while 
I was  declaring  the  grace  of  God,  to  a well-mean- 
ing  multitude,  who  know  little  as  yet,  but  are  wil- 
ling to  know  the  truth  as  it  isih  Jefus.  I preach- 
ed at  Sheephill  in  the  evening,  and  returned 
to  Newcaftleas  frelh  as  I was  in  the  morning. 

Sunday  July  1.  Between  eight  and  nine,  I 
preached  to  a quiet  multitude  in  Gatefhead.  At 
two  I preached  in  the  Fell,  to  thelargeft  congre- 
gation, which  had  ever  been  feen  there  : And 
in  the  evening,  near  the  Keel  men’s  hofpital,  to 
full  as  many  as  my  voice  would  /each.  It  was  a 
feaion  of  love  ; and  God  caufed  the  moun- 
tains to  flow  down  at  his  prefence. 

While  the  fociety  was  gathering,  I went  to  a 
N 4 young 


[ 291  ] 

youngwoman,  who  was  fome  days  fince  fuddenly 
ftruck  w ith  what  they  called  madnefs.  And  fo  it 
was;  but  a diabolical  madnefs ; as  plainly  ap- 
peared from  numerous  circumftances.  However 
after  we  had  been  at  prayer,  (he  fell  afleep,  and 
never  raged  or  blafphemed  after. 

Monday  2.  I rode  to  Durham,  and  went  at 
one  to  the  meadow  by  the  river-fide,  where  I 
preached  two  years  ago.  The  congregation  was 
now  larger  by  one  half ; but  the  fun  was  fo 
fcorching  hot  upon  my  head,  that  I was  fcarce 
able  to  fpeak.  I pauied  a little,  and  defired, 
God  wculd  provide  us  a covering,  if  it  was  for 
his  glory.  In  a moment  it  was  done:  a cloud 
covered  the  fun,  which  troubled  us  no  more. 
Ought  voluntary  humility  to  conceal  thefe  palpa- 
ble proois,  that  God  ltill  heareth  the  prayer  ? 

Between  two  and  three  we  took  horfe.  The 
fun  now  flione  again,  and  wdth  fo  intenfe  an 
heat,  that  I know  not  how  we  could  have  en- 
dured it,  but  that  the  wind  came  in  our  face, 
by  the  help  of  which  we  got  pretty  well  to  Har- 
tlepool. I fuppofe  we  had  all  the  town  with  us 
in  the  evening,  either  in  the  flreet  or  the  adjoin- 
ing houfes.  And  God  was  pleafed  to  touch  the 
hearts  of  many,  even  among  this  dull,  heavy, 
fleepy  people. 

Tuefday  3.  I wrrote  to  Dr.  Taylor  as  follows : 

Hartlepool,  July  3,  1759- 

Rev.  Sir, 

0 I elleem  you,  as  a perfon  of  uncommon 

fenfe 


[ 295  3 


fenfe  and  learning:  but  your  do&rine  I cannot 
efteem.  And  fome  time  fince  I believed  it  my 
duty,  to  fpeak  my  fentiments  at  large,  concern- 
ing your  doftrine  of  Original  Sin.  When  Mr. 
Newton  of  Liverpool  mentioned  this,  and  afked, 
Whether  you  defigned  to  anfwer,  you  faid, 
“ You  thought  not  ; for  it  would  only  be  a per- 

fonal  controversy , between  Jo,  W y and  Jo. 

T- r.”  How  gladly,  if  I durft,  would  I ac- 

cept of  this  difcharge,  from  fo  unequal  a con- 
teff  ? For  I am  thoroughly  fenfible,  humanly 
fpeaking,  it  is formica  contra  leonem.  How  gladly, 
were  it  indeed  no  other,  than  a perfonal contro- 
verfy  ? But  certainly,  it  is  not:  it  is  a contro- 
verfy  de  re , if  ever  there  was  one  in  the  world. 
Indeed,  concerning  a thing  of  the  higheft  im- 
portance ; nay,  all  the  things  that  concern  our 
eternal  peace.  It  is,  Chrijtianity  or  He.athenifm? 
For  take  away  the  fcriptural  doftrine  of  redemp- 
tion or  juftification,  and  that  of  the  new  birth, 
the  beginning  of  fanftification,  or  which  amounts 
to  the  fame,  explain  them  as  you  do,  fuitably  to 
your  doftrine  of  original  fin  ; and  what  is  Chrif- 
tianity  better  than  Heathenifm  ? Wherein  (fave 
in  redtiiying  fome  of  our  notions']  has  the  religion 
of  St.  Paul  any  pre-eminence  over  that  of  Bo- 
crates  or  Epiftetus  ? 

This  is  therefore  to  my  apprehenfion,  the  leaf! 
a perfonal  controverfy  of  any  in  the  world  : your 
perfon  and  mine,  are  out  of  the  queftion : the 
N 5 point  - 


[ ] 

point  is,  are  thofe  things  that  have  been  believed 
for  many  ages,  throughout  the  Chriftian  world, 
real,  folid  truths , or  monkijh  dreams  and  vain 
imaginations  ? 

But  farther,  it  is  certain,  between  you  and  me 
there  need  be  no  perfonal  controverfy  at  all.  For 
we  may  agree,  to  leave  each  other’s  perfon  and 
charaQer,  abfolutely  untouched,  while  we  fum 
up  and  anfwer  the  feveral  arguments  advanced, 
as  plainly  and  clofely  as  we  can. 

Either  I or  you  millake  the  whole  of  Chrif- 
tianity  from  the  beginning  to  the  end ! Either 
my  fcheme  or  your’s  is  as  contrary  to  the  fcrip- 
tural  as  the  Koran  is.  Is  it  mine  or  your’s  ? Your’s 
has  gone  through  all  England,  and  made  nu- 
merous converts.  I attack  it  from  end  to  end  ; 
let  all  England  judge,  Whether  it  can  be  de- 
fended, or  not  ? 

Earneftly  praying,  that  God  may  give 
you  and  me.  a right  underftanding  in  all 
things.” 

I am,  Rev.  Sir, 

Your  Jervant  for  Chri/i’s  fake, 

J.  w. 

Wednefday  4.  Mr.  Jones  preached  at  five,  I 
at  eight.  Toward  the  clofe  of  the  fermon,  a 
queer,  dirty,  clumfy  man,  I fuppofe  a country 
wit,  took  a great  deal  of  pains  to  difturb  the  con- 
gregation. When  I had  done,  fearing  he  might 
hurt  thofe  who  were  gathered  about  him,  I de- 

fired 


[ 297  ] 

fired  two  or  three  of  our  brethren  to  go  to  him, 
one  after  the  other,  and  not  fay  much  them- 
felves,  but  let  him  talk  till  he  was  weary.  They 
did  fo,  but  without  effeft,  as  his  fund  of  ribaldry 
feemed  inexhauftible.  W.  A.  then  tried  another 
way.  He  got  into  the  circle  clofe  to  him,  and 
liltening  a while,  faid,  “ That  is  pretty  : pray 
fay  it  over  again.”  “ What  are  you  deaf?”  “ No : 
but  for  the  entertainment  of  the  people.  Come  : 
we  are  all  attention.”  After  repeating  this  twice 
or  thrice,  the  wag  could  not  Hand  it,  but  with 
two  or  three  curfes  walked  clear  off. 

In  the  evening  I began  near  Stockton  market- 
place, as  ufual.  I had  hardly  finifhed  the  hymn, 
when  I obferved  the  people  in  great  confufion, 
which  was  occafioned  by  a lieutenant  of  a man 
of  war,  who  had  chofen  that  time  to  bring  his 
prefs-gang,  and  ordered  them  to  take  Jofeph 
Jones  and  William  Alwood.  Jofeph  Jones  tell- 
ing him,  “ Sir,  I belong  to  Mr.  Weffey,”  after  a 
few  words,  he  let  him  go : as  he  did  likewife 
William  Alwood,  after  a few  hours,  underftand- 
ing  he  was  a licenfed  preacher.  He  likewife 
feized  upon  a young  man  of  the  town.  But  the 
women  refcued  him  by  main  ftrength.  They  alfo 
broke  the  lieutenant’s  head,  and  fo  ftoned  both 
him  and  his  men,  that  they  ran  away  with  all 
fpeed.' 

Friday  6.  I rode  on  to  Yarm.  The  heat  of 
the  day  was  hardly  to  be  borne.  But  in  the  even- 
N6  ing 


[ *9»  ] 

ing  it  was  extreamly  pleafant.  And  the  whole 
congregation  were  deeply  ferious. 

At  one  I was  at  Hutton-Rudby,  fix  miles  fouth 
of  Yarn),  where  they  have  juft  built  a preaching- 
houfe.  But  it  would  not  contain  a fourth  of  the 
congregation,  and  what  place  to  chtife  I could 
not  tell,  no  fhade  being  at  hand,  and  the  fun  fhin- 
ag  near  as  hot  as  it  ufed  to  do  in  Georgia, 
binding  no  other  way,  1 flood  in  the  ftreet,  near 
an  houfe,  which  fheltered  fome  of  the  people. 
The  reft  feemed  not  to  know,  whether  it  was 
hot  or  cold  : God  fo  plenteoufly  refrefhed 
their  fouls.  Much  the  fame  congregation  was 
at  Potto  in  the  evening:  and  with  the  fameblef- 
fing. 

Having  preached  confiderably  longer  both  at 
noon  and  night  than  I am  accuftomed  to  do,  I 
was  fo  hoarfe  in  the  morning,  Sund.  8,  that  I 
knew  not  what  I fhould  do  to  go.  through  the 
work  of  the  day.  However  I began  it,  by 
preaching  on  the  green  at  Stokefley,  to  a multi- 
tude of  people.  Thence  I rode  to  Gifborough, 
at  the  foot  of  the  mountains.  The  fun  would 
have  been  unfupportable,  but  that  we  had  a ftrong 
wind  lull  in  our  face,  for  the  greateft  part  of  the 
day.  At  twelve  we  had  a lovely  congregation,  in 
a meadow  near  the  town,  who  drank  in  every 
word  that  was  fpoken,  as  the  thirfty  earth  the 
lhowers.  The  fixteen  miles,  fo  called,  from  hence 
to  Robinhood’s-bay,  took  us  between  five  and 
fix  hours  riding  : fo  tiiat  when  I came  thither,  I 

was 


[ 299  ] 

was  quite  exhaufted.  However  I went  to  the 
Key,  where  a large  congregation  was  waiting. 
And  all  behaved  well,  but  an  lronelt  tar,  who 
was  much  difturbed  at  my  faying,  “ No  man  is 
delivered  from  the  fear  of  death,  but  he  that  fears 
God.” 

Tuefday  10.  We  took  horfe  at  half  an  hour 
part  three,  and  rode  over  the  huge  mountains 
to  Scarborough.  I began  to  preach  near  the 
main  flreet  at  feven.  The  congregation  was 
large,  and  force  of  them  wild  enough.  But 
in  a fhort  time  all  were  quiet  and  flill. 
Nor  did  I hear  one  unkind  word  when  I had 
done. 

In  the  afternoon  I rode  to  York,  where  I 
thought  to  reft  a few  days,  being  almoft  worn  out. 
But  it  was  judged  quite  neceffary  I fhould  go  to 
Hull,  lell  the  little  flock  fhould  be  difcouraged. 
So  on  Friday  13,  I fet  out  early,  and  reached 
Pocklington  between  eight  and  nine.  The  laft 
time  I was  here,  they  rung  the  bells,  in  order  to 
drown  my  voice.  But  he  who  then  paid  the 
ringers  is  run  away.  So  I had  a quiet  and  ferious 
audience.  I had  a far  finer  congregation  at 
Hull.  So  for  once,  the  rich  have  the  gofipel 
preached  ! 

At  night  Charles  Delamotte  called  upon  me, 
and  feemed  to  be  the  fame  loving,  fimple  man 
flill.  I fhould  not  repent  my  journey  to  Hull, 
were  it  only  for  this  fhort  interview. 

Saturday  14.  I preached  at  eight  in  Mr.  Hil- 
ton’s 


[ 300  J 


ton’s  yard,  near  the  great  flreet  in  Beverley  ; and 
was  furprized  to  Tee  fo  quiet  and  civil  a congre- 
gation, where  we  expefted  nothing  lefs.  All 
the  men  were  uncovered,  and  the  whole  audi- 
ence was  attentive,  from  beginning  to  end : nor 
did  one  perfon  give  us  a rude  word,  while  we 
rode  from  one  end  of  the  town  to  the  other. 
This,  with  the  large  and  earned  congregation  at 
York  in  the  evening,  made  me  forget  all  my  la- 
bour. 

* Sunday  tj.  I began  reading  to  the  fociety  an 
account  of  the  late  work  ol  God  at  Everton. 
But  I could  not  get  through.  At  firfl  there  were 
only  filent  tears  on  every  fide.  But  it  was  not 
long,  before  feveral  w'ere  unable  to  refrain  from 
weeping  aloud.  And  quickly  a flout  young  man 
dropt  down,  and  roared  as  in  the  agonies  of. 
death.  I did  not  attempt  to  read  any  farther,  but 
began  wreflling  with  God  in  prayer.  We  conti- 
nued herein  till  near  nine  o’clock.  What  a day 
of  jubilee  was  this  ! 

Tuefday  17.  I left  York,  and  about  neon 
preached  at  Tadcafler.  Diflant  thunder  did 
not  lefTen  the  number,  but  increafed  the  feriouf- 
nefs  of  the  congregation,  who  appeared  in- 
tirely  different  from  thofe  I faw  here  two  years 
ago. 

At  feven  in  the  evening  I preached  to  an 
immenfe  congregation,  at  the  foot  of  an  high 
mountain  near  Otley.  Wednefday  18. 1 rode 

on 


[ 3°*  ] 

on  to  Mr.  Marfhal’s  at  Guifeley,  the  Capua  of 
Yorkfhire. 

Hie  nemus,  hie  gelidi  fontes,  hie  mollia  prata. 

’Tis  well,  God  is  here  : or  who  could  bear  it  ? 

Hence  we  rode  to  Kighley,  where  is  a lov- 
ing, earneft,  well-eftablifhed  people.  Here  many 
of  our  preachers  met  me,  and  many  of  our 
brethren  : and  God  was  with  us  in  all  our  affem- 
bles. 

Friday  20.  We  went  on  to  Coin,  (formerly,  I 
fuppofe,  a Roman  colony)  fituate  on  the  top  of 
an  high,  round  hill,  at  the  edge  of  Pendel-foreft. 
I preached  at  eleven  in  an  open  fpace,  not  far 
from  the  main  ftreet.  And  I have  feldom  feen  a 
more  attentive  or  decently  behaved  congrega- 
tion. How  is  the  feene  changed,  fince  the  drun- 
ken mob  of  this  town,  ufed  to  be  a terror  to  all 
the  country  ? 

We  rode  to  Broad-Clough  in  the  afternoon,  a 
lone  houfe  in  the  midft  of  the  Lancafhire  moun- 
tains. The  people  came  in  from  all  quarters,  and 
it  was  a feafon  of  great  refrelhment.  Among  the 

reft  was  Mr.  M r,  who  gave  us  an  account 

of  his  late  trials.  I wonder  the  butcher 
(Doflor  fo  called)  to  whom  he  was  com- 
mitted, did  not  murder  him.  He  took  true 
pains  fo  to  do.  But  his  chain  did  not  reach 
fo  far. 


* Saturday 


[ 302  ] 

* Saturday  21.  Mr.  Grimfhawled  us  to  Gawk- 
fham,  another  lone  houfe,  on  the  fide  of  an  enor- 
mous  mountain.  The  congregation  flood  and  fat, 
row  above  row,  in  the  fylvan  theatre.  I believe 
nothing  on  the  poftdiluvian  earth  can  be  more 
pleafant,  than  the  road  from  hence,  between 
huge,  fleep  mountains,  cloathed  with  wood  to 
the  top,  and  wafhed  at  the  bottom  by  a clear, 
winding  ftream.  At  four  I preached  to  a very 
large  congregation  at  Heptonftal),  and  thence 
rode  on  to  Haworth. 

Sunday  22.  At  ten  Mr.  Milner  read  prayers. 
But  the  church  would  not  near  contain  the  con- 
gregation. So  after  prayers,  I flood  on  a fcaffold 
clofe  to  the  church,  and  the  congregation  in 
the  church  yard.  The  communicants  alone 
filled  the  church.  In  the  afternoon  the  con- 
gregation was  nearly  doubled.  And  yet  moft  of 
thefe  were  not  curious  hearers,  but  men  fearing 
God. 

Mond.  23.  I preached  near  Huddersfield,  to 
the  wildeft  congregation  I have  feen  in  York- 
fhire.  Yet  they  were  reftrained  by  an  unfeen 
hand,  and  1 believe  fome  felt  the  fharpnefs  of  his 
word.  I preached  at  Halifax  in  the  evening : 
but  the  preaching-houfe  was  like  an  oven. 
Tuefday  24.  The  houfe  was  well  filled  at  five. 
About  feven  in  the  evening  I preached  at  Brad- 
ford, at  the  door  of  the  houfe,  as  it  could  not 
contain  one  half  of  the  congregation.  Wednef. 

25- 


[ 303  ] 

25*  I talked  with  raoft  of  thofe,  whom  Edward 
Hales  had  torn  from  their  brethren.  Juft  as  he 
was  coming  to  widen  the  breach,  it  pleafed  God 
to  take  him  to  himfelf.  The  wanderers  were  now 
willing  to  return,  and  I received  them  again,  I 
truft,  for  ever. 

Thurfday  26.  I preached  in  Gilderfam  at 
noon,  and  at  Morley  in  the  evening.  Aflame  is 
fuddenly  broke  out  here,  where  it  was  leaft  of  all 
expefted.  And  it  fpreads  wider  and  wider. 
When  God  will  work,  who  is  able  to  flay  his 
hand  ? 

Sund.  29.  I preached  about  eight  at  Birftal. 
The  congregation  covered  a great  part  of  the 
held,  and  my  voice  was  exceedingly  ftrengthen- 
ed,  fo  that  I believe  all  could  hear.  At  one  I in- 
forced  thofe  folemn  words  on  an  immenfe  mul- 
titude, This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  thee  the  only 
true  Gocl , and  JeJus  Chrifl  whom  thou  hajl 
Jent. 

I fhall  eafily  be  excufed  for  adding  here  a 
farther  account,  of  the  work  of  God  in  and  near 
Everton.  * “ On  Monday,  Julv  9. 1 fet  out,  and 
on  Wednefday  noon  reached  Potton,  where  I 
rejoiced  at  the  account  given  by  John  Keeling 
of  himfelf  and  others.  He  was  juftified,  it 
feems,  on  that  memorable  fabbath,  but  had  not  a 
clear  witnefs  of  it  till  ten  days  after : about  which 
time  his  After,  (who  was  on  that  day  in  great  dif- 
trefs)  was  alfo  fet  at  liberty.  I difcourfed  alfo 
with  Ann  Thorn,  who  told  me  of  much  heavi- 

nefs 


C 3°4  ] 

nefs  following  the  vifions  with  which  (he  had 
been  favoured  : hut  faid,  fhe  was  at  intervals  vi- 
fited  (till  with  fuch  overpowering  love  and  joy, 
efpecially  at  the  Lord’s  fupper,  that  fhe  often  lay 
in  a trance  for  many  hours.  She  is  twenty-one 
years  old.  We  were  foon  after  called  into  the 
garden,  where  Patty  Jenkins,  (one  of  the  fame 
age)  was  fo  overwhelmed  with  the  love  of  God, 
that  fhe  funk  down,  and  appeared  as  one  in  a 
pleafant  deep,  only  with  her  eyes  open.  Yet 
fhe  had  often  juft  ftrength  to  utter,  with  a low 
voice,  ejaculations  of  joy  and  praife:  but  no 
words  coming  up  to  what  fhe  felt,  fhe  frequently 
laughed  while  fhe  faw  his  glory.  This  is  quite 
unintelligible  to  many  : for  a ftranger  intermed- 
dleth  not  with  our  joy.  So  it  was  to  Mr. 
M — — , who  doubted  whether  God  or  the  devil, 
had  filled  her  with  love  and  praife.  O the  depth 

of  human  wifdom  ! Mr.  R the  mean  time 

was  filled  with  a folemn  awe.  I no  fooner  fat 
down  by  her,  than  the  Spirit  of  God  poured  the 
fame  bleffednefs  in'o  my  foul.  Her’s  continued 
till  the  time  we  were  to  fet  out  for  Cockin- 
Hatley.  Then  her  ftrength  was  reflored  in 
a moment,  and  we  walked  toge  her,  fixteen 
in  number,  fmging  to  the  Lord  as  we  went 
along. 

Mr.  Hickes  preached  an  excellent  fermon, 
on  the  Strait  gate.  The  next  morning.  Thurfday 
12,  he  gave  me  leave  to  take  an  extraft  from 

his 


[ 3 °5  1 

his  journal.  But  I had  only  time  to  write  the 
occurrences  of  one  morning,  as  follows. 

“ June  6,  1759.  I fpoke  this  morning  at  Or- 
well, on  Ifaiah  lv.  1.  One  who  had  been  before 
convinced  of  fin,  fell  down  in  a kind  ol  fit,  and 
broke  out,  in  great  anguifh  ol  foul,  calling  on  the 
Lord  Jefus  for  falvation.  He  wrought,  as  in  the 
agonies  of  death,  and  was  quite  bathed  in  fweat. 
He  beat  the  chair  againft  which  he  kneeled,  as 
one  whofe  foul  drew  nigh  unto  hell.  His  coun- 
tenance then  cleared  up  at  once,  we  hoped  he 
would  be  prefently  fet  at  liberty.  But  on  a hid- 
den he  was  more  diflrefl  than  ever,  being  in  the 
fharpeft  confh£i.  Every  rnufcle  of  his  body  was 
in  ftrong  agitation,  as  if  nature  was  juft  diffolv- 
ing.  I never  faw  any  convtilfion  fit  fo  violent; 
but  in  a moment  God  difpel led  the  cloud.  His 
face  was  again  covered  with  fmiles,  and  he  fpake, 
as  feeing  the  Lord  near  him.  He  cried  unto 
him,  and  the  Lord  hearing,  pronounced  him 
freely  forgiven.  At  that  inftant  he  clapped  his 
hands  and  cried  aloud,  “ Jefus  is  mine  ! He  is 
my  Saviour!”  His  foul  was  in  peace  ; neither 
did  he  find  the  leaft  bodily  pain  or  forenefs.  I 
afked,  “ For  what  would  you  under  go  this  again  ?” 
He  faid,  “ Not  for  all  the  world.  But  I would 
fuffer  more  rather  than  be  without  Chrift.  Yea, 
for  his  fake,  I would  fuffer  all  things.”  An  unwife 
man  doth  not  confder  this ; a fool  doth  not  under - 
jland  it." 


This 


C 3°6  ] 

This  morning  Ann  Simpfon,  aged  fixteen  or 
feventeen,  lay  near  an  hour  in  the  utmoft  dif- 
trefs,  fhrieking  out,  “Chrift!  Chnft !”  and  no 
other  word;  her  face  all  the  time  being  vio- 
lently diftorted.  I left  her  a while,  but  could 
fcarce  fit  down,  before  I heard  the  voice  of 
praife.  I went,  and  found  her  heavinefs  turned 
into  joy,  even  the  joyful  affurance  that  iur  fins 
were  pa/doned.  She  fpiang  by  me  to  a young 
woman,  who  lay  in  a kind  of  trance,  andclafped 
her  in  her  arms,  breathing  forth  praife  to  God. 
I retired  again,  but  had  not  been  long  fea.ed, 
e’er  fhe  came  in,  running  to  me  in  a tranfport  of 
praife.  I afked  her,  “ Why  fhe  cried  out  conti- 
nually, Chriil,  Chrift!'’  She  anfweted,  “ I 
thought  mvfelf  at  that  time  on  a little  illand,  and 
faw  Satan  in  a hideous  form,  juft  ready  to  devour 
me,  hell  all  round  open  to  receive  me,  and  my- 
felf  ready  to  drop  in,  while  no  help  appeared, 
nor  any  way  to  efcape.  But  juft  as  I was  drop- 
ping in  the  Lord  appeared,  between  me  and  the 
great  gulf ; and  would  not  let  me  fall  into  it.  As 
foon  as  I faw  him,  all  my  trouble  was  gone,  and 
all  the  pain  I felt  before.  And  ever  fince  I have 
been  light  and  joyful,  and  filled  with  the  love  of 
God.” 

So  far  Mr.  Hickes : who  told  me,  he  was  firll 
convinced  of  fin,  Auguft  1,  1758;  and  finding 
peace  in  about  fix  weeks,  firft  preached  the  gof- 
pel  on  September  17.  From  that  time  he  was  ac- 
counted a fool  and  a mad-man  ! About  two  thou- 

fand 


[ 3°7  1 

fand  fouls  feem  to  have  been  awakened  by  Mr. 
B.  and  him  within  this  twelvemonths. 

Friday  13.  Mr.  R , as  well  as  Mr.  M — , 
was  in  doubt,  concerning  the  work  of  God  here. 
But  this  morning  they  were  both  fully  convinced, 
while  Alice  Miller,  the  little  pale  girl,  jollified 
May  20,  (who  is  in  the  fixteenth)  and  Molly 
Raymund,  who  isin  the  twelfth  year  of  her  age, 
related  their  experience,  their  artlefs  confidence 
confirming  their  words.  We  walked  this  fore- 
noon toTadlow  in  Cambridgefhire,  to  hear  Mr. 
B.  bt*t  came  too  late  for  the  fermon.  However 
the  account  we  received  of  the  wonderful  works 
of  God,  in  this  and  the  neighbouring  places,  was 
matter  of  great  rejoicing  to  me,  as  are  all  mani- 
feftations  of  the  world  to  come. 

Saturday  14.  Mr.  B.  being  ill,  defired  me  to 
exhort  a few  people,  in  his  houfe  : which  the 
Lord  enabled  me  to  do,  with  fuch  eafe  and 
power,  that  I was  quite  amazed.  The  next 
morning  at  feven  his  fervant  Caleb  Price,  fpoke 
to  about  two  hundred  people.  The  Lord  was 
wonderfully  prefent : more  than  twenty  perfons 
feeling  the  arrows  of  conviftion.  Several  fell  to 
the  ground  : fome  of  whom  feemed  dead  ; others, 
in  the  agonies  of  death;  the  violence  of  their 
bodily  convulfions,  exceeding  all  defcription. 
There  was  alfo  great  crying  and  agonizing  in 
prayer,  mixt  with  deep  and  deadly  groans  on 
every  fide 

When  fermon  was  ended,  one  brought  good 

tidings 


i 


[ 3o8  ] 

tidings  to  Mr.  B.  from  Grandchefler  : that  God 
had  there  broken  down  feventeen  perfons  laft 
week  by  the  Tinging  of  hymns  only  : and  that  a 
child,  feven  years  old,  fees  many  vifions  and 
aflonifhes  the  neighbours,  with  her  innocent, 
awful  manner  of  declaring  them. 

While  Mr.  B.  preached  in  the  church, 
I flood  with  many  in  the  church-yard,  to 
make  room  for  thofe  who  came  from  far. 
Therefore  I Jaw  little,  but  heard  the  agonizing 
of  many,  panting  and  gafping  after  eternal  life. 
In  the  afternoon  Mr.  B.  was  conflrained  by  the 
multitude  of  people,  to  come  out  of  the  church 
and  preach  in  his  own  clofe.  Some  of  thofe  who 
were  here  pricked  to  the  heart,  wTere  affedled  in 
an  aflonifhing  manner.  The  firfl  man  I faw 
wounded,  would  have  dropped  : but  others  catch- 
ing him  in  their  arms,  did  indeed  prop  him  up, 
but  were  fo  far  from  keeping  him  hill,  that  he 
caufed  all  of  them  to  totter  and  tremble.  His  own 
fhaking  exceeded  that  of  a cloth  in  the  wind. 
It  feemed  as  if  the  Lord  came  upon  him  like  a 
giant,  taking  him  by  the  neck,  and  fhaking  all 
his  bones  in  pieces.  One  woman  tore  up  the 
ground  with  her  hands,  filling  them  with  duft 
and  with  the  hard  trodden  grafs  : on  which  I 
faw  her  lie,  with  he-r  hands  clinched,  as  one 
dead  when  the  multitude  difperfed.  Another 
roared  and  fcreamed  in  a more  dreadful  agony 
than  ever  I heard  before.  I omitted  the  rejoic- 
ing of  believers,  becaufe  of  their  number,  and 
tire  frequency  thereof : though  the  manner  wras 

fl range ; 


[ 3°9  1 

Grange  ; fome  of  them  being  quite  overpowered 
with  divine  love,  and  only  {hewing  enough  of 
natural  life  to  let  us  know,  they  were  overwhelm- 
ed with  joy  and  life  eternal.  Some  continued 
long  as  if  they  were  dead,  but  with  a calm  fweet- 
nefs  in  their  looks.  I faw  one,  who  lay  two  or 
three  hours  in  the  open  air,  and  being  then  car- 
jied  into  the  houfe,  continued  infenhble  ano- 
ther hour,  as  if  aflually  dead.  The  firft  fign  of 
life  Ihe  {hewed  was  a rapture  of  praife,  inter- 
mixt  with  a final!  joyous  laughter. 

Monday  16.  Mr.  B.  this  evening  preached  in 
his  houfe,  where  I obferved  Molly  Raymond 
leaning  all  the  while  as  if  afleep.  But  an  hour 
or  two  after  {he  defired  to  {peak  with  him.  I 
wondered,  Ihe  was  not  gone  home,  and  was 
concerned,  that  fo  little  a girl  fhould  have  fo  far 
to  go  in  the  dark  without  company.  Mr.  B. 
told  me,  neither  {he  nor  the  other  juftified 
children  were  atraid  of  any  thing. 

T uefday  17.  We  walked  toward  Harlfton, 
near  which  Mr.  B.  overtook  us.  He  was  great- 
ly fatigued  and  deje&ed,  and  faid,  “ I am  now 
fo  weak,  I mull  leave  off  field-preaching.”  Ne- 
verthelefs  he  caft  hirnfelt  on  the  Lord,  and  Good 
up  to  preach,  having  near  three  thoufand  hear- 
ers. He  was  very  weak  at  firft,  and  fcarce  able 
to  fpeak  : but  God  foon  performed  his  promife, 
imparting  new  ftrength  to  him,  and  caufing  him 
to  fpeak  with  mighty  power.  A great  fhaking 
was  among  the  dry  bones.  Inceflant  were  the 

cries. 


[ 3 10  ] 

cries,  groans,  wringing  of  hands,  and  pray- 
ers of  finners,  now  firfl  convinced  of  their 
deplorable  ftate.  After  preaching  he  was  lively 
and  ffrong,  fo  that  the  clofenefs  of  a crouded 
room,  neither  affe&ed  his  breath,  nor  hinder- 
ed his  rejoicing  over  two  children,  one  about 
eight,  the  other  about  fix  years  old,  who  were 
crying  aloud  to  God  for  mercy. 

Not  only  Harlfton,  but  Staplefordar.d  Triplow, 
to  which  Mr.  B.  was  now  going,  were  places  in 
which  he  had  never  preached  the  gofpel,  and 
probably  never  would  have  done,  had  it  not  been 
for  the  thundering  fermons  madeagainft  him, 
from  their  feveral  pulpits.  So  does  Satan  frequent- 
ly overfhoot  himfelf,  and  occalion  the  down- 
fall of  his  own  kingdom. 

I had  been  very  ill  the  preceeding  week. 
Wherefore  laft  night  I had  recourfe  to  God  in 
prayer  ; and  this  morning,  inllead  of  rifingwith 
difficulty  at  eight  or  nine,  as  I had  ufually  done, 

I rofe  with  eafe  at  five;  and  in  Head  of  lofing 
my  flrength  in  a mile  or  two,.  I walked  eighteen 
without  any  weaknefs  or  wearinefs. 

Wednef.  18.  We  called  at  the  hou  e,  where 
Mr.  B.  had  been  preaching  in  the  morning, 
and  found  feveral  there  rejoicing  in  God,  and 
feveral  mourning  after  him.  While  I praved 
with  them  many  crouded  into  the  houfe,  fome 
of  whom  burlt  into  a ftrange,  involuntary  laugh- 
ter, fo  that  my  voice  could  fcarce  be  heard,  and 
when  I ftrove  to  fpeak  louder  a fudden  hoarfe- 

nefs 


[ 3'*  I 

nefsfeized  me.  Then  the  laughter  increafed.  I 
perceived  it  was  from  Satan,  and  refolved  to  pray 
on.  Immediately  the  Lord  rebuked  him  : that 
laughter  was  at  an  end,  and  fo  was  my  hoarfenefs. 

A vehement  wreitling  with  God  ran  through  the 
whole  company,  whether  forrowful  or  rejoicing  : 
’Till  befide  the  three  young  women  of  the  houfe, 
one  young  man,  and  a gill  about  eleven  years 
old,  who  had  been  counted  one  of  the  wickedeft 
in  Harlilon,  were  exceedingly  bleft  with  the  con- 
folations  of  God. 

Among  thofe  under  conviction  was  an  elderly 
woman,  who  had  been  a fcoffer  at  the  gofpel, 
and  a keen  rtdiculer  of  all  that  cried  out : but 
{he  now  cried  louder  than  any  prefent.  Ano- 
ther I obferved,  who  had  known  the  Lord  above 
five  and  twenty  years.  When  Mr.  B.  firft 
brought  the  gofpel  to  her  ears,  fne  was  filled 
with  gladnefs : knowing,  this  was  the  fame  fal- 
vation,  which  God  had  long  ago  brought  to  her 
heart. 

We  walked  hence  to  the  middle  of  Shelford 
Moor:  and  feeing  no  perfon  but  a young  wo- 
man w ho  kept  (beep,  the  folitude  invited  us  to 
{top  and  fing  an  hymn  : the  found  whereof 
reached  her,  fne  came  up  flowdy,  weeping  as 
{lie  came,  and  then  flood  by  a brook  of  wrater, 
over  againfi  us,  with  the  tears  running  down  her 
cheeks  apace.  We  fung  another  hymn  for  this 
mourner  in  Sion,  and  wueltied  for  her  with 
God  in  prayer.  But  he  did  not  yet  comfort  her. 
Vol.  XXX.  O And 


[ 312  ] 

And  indeed  I have  obferved  of  the  people  in 
general  who  hear  Mr.  B.  their  conviftions  are 
not  only  deep  and  violent,  but  laft  a long  time. 
Wherefore  thofe  that  are  offended  at  them  who 
rejoice,  fhould  confider  how  terrible  a cup  they 
received  firft.  Now  they  are  all  light ; but  they 
well  remember  the  darknefs  and  mifery,  the 
wormwood  and  the  gall. 

We  met  Mr.  B.  at  Stapleford,  fivemiles  from 
Cambridge.  His  heart  was  particularly  fet  on 
this  people,  becaufe  he  was  curate  here  five  or 
fix  years ; but  never  preached  a gofpel  fermon 
among  them  till  this  evening.  About  1500  per- 
fons  met  in  a clofe  to  hear  him,  great  part  of 
whom  were  laughers  and  mockers.  The  work 
of  God  however  quickly  began  among  them  that 
were  ferious  : while  not  a few  endeavoured  to 
make  fport,  by  mimicking  the  geftures  of  them 
that  were  wounded.  Both  thefe  and  thofe  who 
rejoiced  in  God,  gave  great  offence  to  fome 
ftern-looking  men,  who  vehemently  demanded 
to  have  thofe  wretches  horfe-whipt  out  of  the 
clofe.  Need  we  wonder  at  this,  when  feveral 
of  his  own  people,  are  unwilling  to  let  God 
work  in  his  own  way  ? And  well  may  Satan  be 
enraged  at  the  cries  of  the  people,  and  the  pray- 
ers they  make  in  the  bitternefs  of  their  fouls  : 
feeing  we  know  thefe  are  the  chief  times  at 
which  Satan  is  caft  out. 

However  in  a while  many  of  the  fcoffers  were 
weary  and  went  away.  The  reft  continued  as 

infenfible 


[ 3*3  1 

infenfible  as  before.  I had  long  been  walking 
round  the  multitude,  feeling  a jealoufy  for  my 
God,  and  praying  him  to  make  the  place  of 
his  feet  glorious.  My  patience  at  laft  began 
to  fail,  and  I prayed,  “ O King  of  glory,  break 
fome  of  them  in  pieces  ; but  let  it  be  to  the  fav- 
ing  of  their  fouls.”  I had  but  juft  fpoke,  when 
I heard  a dteadful  noife,  on  the  farther  fide  of 
the  congregation,  and  turning  thither  faw  one 
Thomas  Skinner  coming  forward,  the  moll  hor- 
rible human  figure  I ever  faw.  His  large  wig 
and  hair  were  coal-black  : his  face  diftorted  be- 
yond all  defcription.  He  roared  inceflantly, 
throwing  and  clapping  his  hands  together  with 
his  whole  force.  Several  were  terrified,  and 
hailed  out  of  his  way.  I was  glad  to  hear  him, 
after  a while,  pray  aloud.  Not  a few  of  the 
triflersgrew  ferious  ; while  his  kindred  and  ac- 
quaintance. were  very  unwilling  to  believe  even 
their  own  eyes  and  ears.  They  would  fain 
have  got  him  away ; but  he  fell  to  the  earth 
crying,  “ My  burden  ! My  burden  ! I cannot 
bear  it!”  Some  of  his  brother  fcoffers  were  cal- 
ling for  horfe-whips,  till  they  faw  him  extended 
on  his  back  at  full  length.  They  then  faid,  he 
was  dead.  And  indeed  the  only  fign  of  life  was 
the  working  of  his  breaft,  and  the  diftortations 
of  his  face,  while  the  veins  of  his  neck  were 
fwelled,  as  if  ready  toburft.  He  was  juft  before 
the  chief  captain  of  Satan’s  forces : none  was  by 
nature  more  fitted  for  mockery.  None  could 
O 2 fwear 


[ 3H  ] 

fwear  more  heroically,  to  whip  out  of  the  clofe, 
all  who  were  affe&ed  by  the  preaching.  His  ago- 
nies lafted  fome  hours.  Then  his  body  and  foul 
were  eafed. 

When  Mr.  B.  had  refrefhed  himfelf  a little, 
he  returned  to  the  clofe,  and  bid  the  rnukitude 
take  warning  by  Skinne  , who  Hill  lay  roaring 
and  tormented  on  the  ground.  All  the  people 
were  now  deeply  ferrous : and  feveral  hundreds, 
inftead  of  going  when  Mr.  B.  difmift  them,  hayed 
in  Mr.  Jennings’s-yard.  Many  of  tbefe  efpeci- 
ally  men,  were  truly  broken  in  heart.  Mr.  B. 
talked  with  as  many  as  could  come  into  the 
houfe  : and  feeing  what  numbers  hood  hunger- 
ing without,  fent  me  word  to  pray  with  them. 
This  was  a grievous  crofs  : I knew'  it  was  the 
Lord’s  'will,  but  felt  fuch  weaknefs  of  body  and 
finking  of  fpirit,  and  was  w'ithal  fo  hoarfe,  that 
1 fuppofed  few  could  hear,  out  of  fome  hundreds 
who  flood  before  me.  However  I attempted  : and 
in  a moment  the  Lord  poured  upon  me  fuch  a 
fpirit  of  fupplication,  and  gave  me  fo  clear, 
flrong  an  utterance,  that  it  feemed  I was  another 
man  : a farther  infiance,  that  the  fervants  of 
God  are  not  fen:  a w’arfare,  on  their  own 
charge. 

No  fooner  had  I finiflied,  than  we  were  called 
iO  fee  John  Dennis,  aged  20  years,  who  lay  on  a 
table.  His  body  was  fliff  and  inotionlefs  as  a 
flatue  : his  very  neck  feemed  as  if  made  of 
iron.  He  was  looking  fi.edfafl.ly  up  to  heaven, 

and 


[ 3*5  ] 

and  praying  aloud  with  a melodious  voice.  His 
words  furprized  Mr.  B.  as  well  as  me:  who 
faid  to  the  alfembly,  “ You  need  no  better 
preacher:  none  can  tell  you  the  truths  of  the 
golpel  more  clearly.”  And  indeed  his  prayer 
unfolded  the  whole  Chriflian  fyflem,  with  the 
greatefl  accuracy.  When  he  came  out  of  the  fit, 
he  was  in  perfeft  health  ; but  declared,  he  knew 
not  a word  of  all  he  had  fpoken.  His  mother 
then  informed  us,  “ He  had  had  thefe  fits  for  two 
years,  at  lead  once  a day.  But  he  never  fpoke  in 
any  fit,  ’till  three  weeks  ago ; ever  fince  he 
prays  in  them  as  to  night,  but  is  himfelf  as  ignor- 
ant of  the  matter,  as  if  he  had  been  dead  all  the 
time.” 

It  was  late  when  I went  to  lodge  about  half  a 
mile  off,  where  I found  a young  woman  reading 
hymns,  and  the  power  of  the  Lord  falling  on  the 
hearers,  efpeci  .lly  one  young  man  : who  cried 
aloud  in  Rich  bitter  anguifh,  that  I foon  defired 
we  might  join  in  pra)  er.  This  was  the  feventh 
time  of  my  praying  in  public  that  day  : and 
had  I been  faithful,  I fhould  probably  have  pray- 
ed feven  more. 

Thurfday.  19.  I returned  to  Mr.  J gs’s, 

who  had  fet  out  at  four  in  the  morning,  to  hear 
Mr.  B.  at  Grandchefler.  He  came  foon  after  me, 
but  was  fcarce  able  to  fpeak.  I never  faw  a man 
fweat  in  Rich  a manner;  the  large  drops  feem- 
ing  fixt  all  over  his  face,  juft  like  beads  of 
glafs.  The  congregation  at  Grandchefler  this 

03 


morning 


[ 3>6  ] 

morning  confided  of  about  1000  performs,  among 
whom  the  Lord  was  wonderfully  prefent,  con- 
vincing a far  greater  number  now,  than  even  laft 

night.  Mr.  J gs  was  a mild,  good  natured 

pharifee,  who  never  had  been  awakened.  But  he 
was  now  thoroughly  covinced  of  his  loft  eftate, 
and  flood  for  a time  in  utter  defpair,  with  his 
mouth  wide  open,  his  eyes  flaring,  and  full  of 
huge  difmay.  When  he  found  power  to  fpeak, 
he  cried  out,  “ I thought  I had  led  a good  life  ! 

I thought  I was  not  fo  bad  as  others  ! But  I am 
the  vilefl  creature  upon  earth  ! I am  drop- 
ping into  hell  ! Now,  now  : this  very  mo- 
ment !”  He  then  faw  hell  open  to  receive  him, 
and  Satan  ready  to  caft  him  in.  But  it  was  not 
long  before  he  faw  the  Lord  Jefus,  and  knew  he 
had  accepted  him.  He  then  cried  aloud,  in  an 
unfpeakable  rapture,  “ I have  got  Chi  id  ! I have 
got  Chrifl  !”  For  two  hours  he  was  in  the  viftons 
of  God.  Then  the  joy,  though  not  the  peace, 
abated. 

I had  left  Mr.  J — — gs  but  a little  while,  when 
I heard  John  Dennis  loudly  praiftng  God-  I no 
fooner  kneeled  by  him,  than  the  confolations  of 
of  God  came  upon  me,  fo  that  1 trembled  and 
wept  much.  Nor  was  the  fpirit  poured  out  upon 
us  alone  : all  in  the  houfe  were  partakers  of  it. 
J.  D.  was  kneeling  when  his  fit  came.  We  laid 
him  on  the  ground,  where  he  foon  became  fiiff 
as  laft  night,  and  prayed  in  like  manner.  After- 
wards his  body  grew  flexible  by  degrees,  but  was 

convulfed. 


C 3 *7  ] 

convulfed  from  head  to  foot.  When  he  was  quite 
recovered,  he  faid  “ He  was  quite  refigned  to 
the  will  of  God,  who  gave  him  Inch  ftrength  in 
the.  inner  man,  that  he  did  not  find  any  of  thefe 
things  grievous,  neither  could  afk  to  be  delivered 
from  them.” 

I walked  from  Stapleford  with  twenty  per- 
fons,  to  hear  Mr.  B.  at  Triplow,  and  faw  many 
other  companions,  fome  before,  fome  behind, 
fome  on  either  hand,  going  the  fame  way. 
This  brought  to  my  mind  the  words  of  Zechariah. 
And  the  inhabitants  of  onecityjhouldgo  to  another , 
faying.  Let  us  go  fpeedily  to  pray  before  the  Lord ; 
and  to  feek  the  Lord  of  Llojls  : I will  go  alfo. 

Fifteen  hundred  or  two  thoufand  were  aflembl- 
ed  in  the  clofe  at  Triplow.  The  only  unpolilh- 
ed  part  of  the  audience,  were  a few  gentlemen 
on  horfeback.  Thev  were  much  offended  at  the 
cries  of  thofe  in  convi£lion,  but  much  more  at 
the  rejoicing  of  others,  even  to  laughter.  But 
they  were  not  able  to  look  them  in  the  face,  for 
half  a minute  together.  I looked  after  fervice  at 
every  ring  which  the  people  made  about  thofe 
that  fell  under  the  word.  Here  and  there  was  a 
place  with  only  one,  but  there  were  generally 
two  or  three  together:  and  on  one  fpot,  no  lefs 
than  feven,  who  lay  on  the  ground  as  if  (lain 
in  battle.  I foon  followed  Mr.  B.  to  the  houfe, 
and  found  both  it  and  the  orchard  filled  with  feri- 
ous  people;  to  whom  he  fpake  till  his  ftrength 
failed,  and  then  feeing  them  unwilling  to  depart, 
O 4 defired 


C 318  ] 

defired  me  to  difmifs  them  with  a prayer.  I felt 
great  rebalance  : but  fo  mightily,  when  I began, 
came  the  fpirit  upon  me,  that  I found  no  want 
of  utterance,  while  I was  praying  with  about 
200  perfons.  I thought  they  had  then  gone 
away  : but  perceived  an  hour  after,  moft  of 
them  were  hill  in  the  houfe  or  orchard  : fighs 
and  groans,  prayers,  tears,  and  joyful  praife,  be- 
ing intermixt  on  every  fide. 

Friday  20.  I was  wakeful  before  five  ; but 
conferring  with  flefh  and  blood,  1 flept  again. 
Mr.  B,  fent  for  me  at  feven.  But  I was  then 
fo  weak,  I could  not  go,  till  the  people  were 
difperfed.  Three  times  more  perfons  were 
flruck  with  conviOions  this  morning,  than  had 
been  lafl  night.  Mr.  B.  had  prayed  with  them 
till  near  fainting,  who  then  fent  for  me  to  come. 
And  who  know’s  w?hat  God  rmght  had  done 
even  by  me,  if  I had  not  been  indulging  my 
vile  body  ? I u'as  glad  to  fee  a woman,  fuppof- 
ed  the  chief  firmer  in  the  town,  now  rolling  on 
the  earthj  fcreaming  and  roaring  in  ftrong  con- 
viftions.  The  man  of  the  houfe  informed  us, 
of  her  having  had  nine  or  ten  children  by  whore- 
dom, and  that  being  at  lafi  married,  her  huf- 
band  uras  more  angry  with  her  for  hearing  the 
word,  than  he  would  probably  have  been  for 
committing  adultery.  Nor  was  her  mimfter 
difpleafed,  that  file  never  came  to  church,  but 
mightily  ftrove  to  prevent  both  her,  and  all  the 
finriers  of  his  parilh  from  going  to  hear  the  gof- 

peJ. 


C 3*9  1 

pel.  I obferved  alfo  a beggar  girl,  feven  or 
eight  years  old,  who  had  fcarce  any  cloaths  but 
a ragged  piece  of  old  rug.  She  too  had  felt 
the  word  of  God  as  a two-edged  fword,  and 
mourned  to  be  covered  with  Chriit’s  righteouf- 
nefs. 

From  Triplow  I walked  to  Orwell,  and  thence 
to  Everton,  in  weaknefs  of  body  and  heavinefs 
of  fpirit.  Mr.  B.  was  preaching  when  I 
came  in.  Here  God  again  refrefhed  my  foul.  I 
fhook  from  head  to  foot,  while  tears  of  joy 
ran  down  my  face,  and  my  diftrefs  was  at  an 
end,. 

Saturday  21.  I was  troubled  for  fome  of  our 
brethren,  who  began  to  doubt,  whether  this  was 
a work  of  God  or  of  the  devil  ? John  Keeling 
in  particular',  who  inftead  of  his  frank,  lively 
zeal,  and  happinefs  in  God,  was  now  filled  with 
gloomy  difcontent,  and  grown  dark,  fallen  and 
referved.  As  we  were  walking  together,  he  told 
me,  it  was  his  refolution,  to  “ keep  himfelf  to 
himfelf : to  let  them  who  firuggled  fo,  ftruggleas 
they  would,  and  leave  all  thofe  to  themfelves, 
whom  Satan  call  into  vifions  or  trances,  till  Sa- 
tan brought  them  out  again.”  “ But,  (he  added) 
I am  fo  uneafy,  I don’t  know  what  to  do  : and 
mod  of  our  people  begin  to  (him  one  another.’'- 
The  fnare  was  now  broken.  He  faw  thedelufion 
he  had  been  in,  andl  truft,  will  hereafter  fhunthe 
troy  biers  of  Ifrael. 

05. 


Sunday 


[ 320  ] 

Sunday  22.  The  church  was  quite  filled,  and 
hundreds  were  without.  And  now  the  arrows  of 
God  flew  abroad.  The  inexpreflible  groans,  the 
lamenting,  praying,  roaiing,  were  foloud,  almoft 
without  intermiflion,  that  we  who  flood  without 
could  fcarce  help  thinking,  all  in  the  church 
were  cut  to  the  heart.  But  upon  enquiry  we 
found,  about  two  hundred  perfons,  chiefly  men 
cried  aloud  for  mercy  : but  many  more  were 
aflefted,  perhaps  as  deeply,  though  in  a calmer 
way. 

I rejoiced  to  fee  many  from  Cambridgefhire, 
particularly  John  Dennis,  Thomas  Skinner,  and 
the  forrowful  young  woman  with  whom  we  had 
prayed  on  Shelford-moor.  Now  too  came  good 
news  from  feveral  parts,  efpecially  Grand- 
chefter ; where  ten  more  perfons  were  cut  to 
the  heart,  in  flinging  hymns  among  themfelves  : 
and  the  little  child  before-mentioned  continues 
to  aftonilh  all  the  neighbourhood.  A noted 
phyfician  came  fome  time  ago,  and  clofely 
examined  her.  The  refult  was,  he  confeft,  “ It 
was  no  diftemper  of  mind,  but  the  hand  of 
God.” 

I fought  for  Thomas  Skinner  after  morning 
fervice,  and  found  him  with  many  more  flinging 
hymns  under  a tree.  When  they  flopt  I afked, 
“ How  do  you  find  your  mind  now  ?”  Inflead  of 
fpeaking,  he  looked  upon  me  with  great  fteddi- 
nefs,  fetched  a deep  figh,  burft  out  into  tears  and 
prayers,  and  throwing  himfeif  along  on  the 

ground, 


[ 321  ] 

ground,  fell  into  more  and  more  agony,  till  he 
roared  aloud.  I told  him  how  great  a finner  I had 
been : but  the  more  I fpoke,  the  more  was  he 
diftreft.  Wherefore  John  Dennis  and  I went 
to  prayer  for  him : but  his  deliverance  was 
not  yet.  Make  him,  O Lord,  a greater 
champion  for  thy  truth,  than  ever  he  was 
againft  it. 

Mr.  B.  preached  in  his  clofe  this  afternoon, 
though  in  great  bodily  weaknefs.  But  when  he 
is  weakeft,  God  fo  ftrengthens  him,  that  it  is 
furprizing  to  what  a diftance  his  voice  reaches. 
I have  heard  Mr.  Whitefield  fpeak  as  loud : but 
not  with  fuch  a continued,  ftrong,  unbroken  te- 
nor. 

Monday  23.  Mr.  Keeling  and  I walked  to 
Bradford.  I was  relating  there,  how  God  had 
plucked  fuch  a brand  as  me  out  of  the  burning ; 
but  my  voice  was  quickly  flopt  by  rejoicing. 
And  I have  often  found,  that  nothing  I can  fay, 
makes  fo  much  impreffion  on  myfelf  or  others,  as 
thus  repeating  my  own  converfion. 

The  firft  time  I faw  Mr.  B.  was  June  2,  1758; 
Butlfcarce  thought  of  him  again  till  June  7,  as 
I was  walking  up  to  Luton-down.  There  an 
awful  fenfe  of  God’s  prefence  fell  upon  me,  and 
my  voice  grew  louder  and  louder,  in  proportion 
to  the  joy  of  my  foul,  with  a ftrong  impulfe,  to 
pray  for  the  fuccefs  of  Mr.  B.’s  labours.  And  fuch 
a forefight  did  the  Lord  give  me,  of  what  he  was 
bringing  to  pafs  through  his  miniflry,  that  I was 
O 6 quite 


[ 322  ] 

quite  overwhelmed  for  near  an  hour,  till  my  voice 
was  loll  and  only  tears  remained.  And  O ! how 
gracioufly  has  the  God  of  truth,  accomplifhed 
all  thofe  things ! With  what  delight  haft  thou 
fmce  caufed  me  to  walk  round  the  walls  of  thy 
Sion,  to  mark  well  her  bulwarks,  and  count  the 
towers  thereof?” 

Wednefday,  Auguft  1.  A few  of  us  fpoke 
freely  and  largely  to  a brother  who  had  been 
overtaken  in  a fault , and  endeavoured  to  refers 
himzz?  thefpirit  of  meelnefs.  And  we  were  much 
comforted  over  him  : having  great  hope,  that 
God  would  reftore  his  ufefulnefs  as  well  as  his 
llrengfh. 

Thurfday  2.  I rode  to  Sheffield,  and  preached 
at  one  to  a large  and  quiet  congregation.  I was 
afterward  defired  to  vifit  Mr.  Dodge,  curate  of 
the  new  church.  1 found  him  on  the  brink  of  eter- 
nity, rejoicing  in  God  his  Saviour.  * Thence  I 
went  on  to  Rotherham,  and  talked  with  five 
men  and  fix  women  (as  I had  done  with  many 
others  before  in  various  places)  who  believe 
they  are  faved from  fin.  And  this  fa I believe, 
that  they  rejoice  evermore,  pray  without  ceafng, 
and  in  every  thing  give  thanks  : I believe,  they 
feefnothing  but  love  now.  What  they  will  do,  I 
leave  to  God. 

Friday  3.  I preached  at  Gainfborougb,  in  Si# 
Nevil  Hickman’s  great  hall.  It  is  full  as  large  as 
the  Weaver’s-hall  in  Briftol.  At  two  it  was  filled 
with  a rude,  wild  multitude,  (a  few  of  a better 

fpirft 


[ 323  ] 

fpirit  excepted.)  Yet  all  but  two  or  three  gen- 
tlemen were  attentive,  while  I inforced  our 
Lord’s  words,  What  Jhall  it  profit  a man , ifi he 
fiiall  gain  the  uhole  world,  and  lofie  his  own  Joul? 
I was  walking  back  through  a gaping,  flaring 
croud,  when  Sir  Nevil  came  and  thanked  me  for 
my  fermon,  to  the  no  fmall  amazement  of  his 
neighbours,  who  fhrunk  back  as  if  they  had  feen 
a ghoft.  Thence  I rode  to  North-.Scarle,  the  laft 
village  in  Lincolnfhire,  ten  miles  fhort  of  New- 
ark. Here  a great  multitude  afTembled  from  va- 
rious parts,  mod  of  them  wholly  unacquainted 
with  the  ways  of  God  : indeed  to  fuch  a degree, 
that  though  I fpoke  as  plain  as  I could  on  the  firfl 
principles  of  religion,  yet  it  feemed  very  many 
underftood  me  no  more,  than  if  . I was  talking 
Greek.  O what  a condition  is  the  bulk  of  re- 
formed Chrifiians  in,  to  this  day  ! 

Saturday  4.  As  we  took  horfe,  the  rain  began, 
and  accompanied  us  till  we  alighted  in  the  even- 
ing. Sunday  5.  between  eight  and  nine,  I 
reached  Everton,  faint  and  weary  enough.  Dur- 
ing the  prayers,  as  alfo  during  the  fermon  and 
the  adminiftration  of  the  facrament.  a few  per- 
fons  cried  aloud.  But  it  was  not  from  borrow 
or  fear,  but  love  and  joy.  The  fame  I obferved 
in  feveral  parts  of  the  afternoon  fervice.  In  the 
evening  I preached  in  Mr.  Hickes’  church. 
Two  or  three  perfons  fell  to  the  ground, 
and  were  extremely  convulfed  ; but  none  cried 

out. 


f 324  ] 

out.  One  or  two  were  filled  with  flrong  confo- 
lation. 

* Monday  6.  I talked  largely  with  Ann  Thorn, 
and  two  others  who  had  been  feveral  times  in 
trances.  What  they  all  agreed  in  was,  1.  That 
when  they  went  away , as  they  termed  it,  it  was 
always  at  a time  they  were  fulled  of  the  love  of 
God  : 2.  That  it  came  upon  them  in  a moment, 
without  any  previous  notice,  and  took  away  all 
their  fenfes  andftrength  : 3.  That  there  werefome 
exceptions;  but  in  general  from  that  moment, 
they  were  in  another  world,  knowing  nothing  of 
what  was  done  or  faid,  by  all  that  were  round 
about  them. 

* About  five  in  the  afternoon,  I heard  them 
Tinging  hymns.  Soon  after  Mr.  B.  came  up, 
and  told  me,  Alice  Miller  (fifteen  years  old)  was 
fallen  into  a trance.  I went  down  immediately, 
and  found  her  fittingon  a flool  and  leaning  againft 
the  wall,  with  her  eyes  open  and  fixt  upward.  I 
made  a motion  as  if  going  to  flrike  ; but  they 
continued  immoveable.  Her  face  fhewed  an 
unfpeakable  mixture  of  reverence  and  love, 
while  filent  tears  dole  down  her  cheeks.  Her 
lips  were  a little  open,  and  fometimes  moved  ; 
but  not  enough  to  caufe  any  found.  I do  not 
know  whether  I everfaw  an  human  face  look  fo 
beautiful.  Sometimes  it  was  covered  with  a fmile, 
as  from  joy  mixing  with  love  and  reverence. 
But  the  tears  fell  Hill,  though  not  fo  faff.  Her 

pulfe 


[ 325  ] 

pulfe  was  quite  regular.  In  about  half  an  hour  I 
obferved  her  countenance  change,  into  the  form 
of  fear,  pity  and  difirefs.  Then  fire  burfi  into  a 
flood  of  tears,  and  cried  out,  “ Dear  Lord  ! 
They  will  ha  damned  ! They  will  be  all  damned!” 
But  in  about  five  minutes  her  fmiles  returned, 
and  only  love  and  joy  appeared  in  her  face. 
About  half  an  hour  after  fix,  I obferved  difirefs 
take  place  again  ; and  foon  after  fhe  wept  bitterly 
and  cried  out,  “ Dear  Lord,  they  will  go  to  hell! 
The  world  will  go  to  hell  !”  Soon  after  fire  faid, 
“ Cry  aloud  ! Spare  not  !”  And  in  a few  mo- 
ments her  look  was  compofed  again,  and  fpoke 
a mixture  of  reverence,  joy  and  love.  Then  fire 
faid  aloud,  “ Give  God  the  glory.”  About  feven 
her  fenfes  returned.  1 afked,  “ Where  have 
you  been  ?”  “ I have  been  with  my  Saviour.” 
“ In  heaven,  or  on  earth  ?”“  1 cannot  tell:  but  I 
was  in  glory  !”  “ Why  then  did  you  cry  ?’’  “ Not 
for  nryfelf : but  for  the  world ; for  I faw  they 
were  on  the  brink  of  hell.”  “ Whom  did  you  de- 
fire to  give  the  glory  to  God  ?”  “ Minifters  that 
cry  aloud  to  the  world.  Life  they  will  be  proud. 
And  then  God  will  leave  them,  and  they  will 
lofe  their  own  fouls.” 

* I preached  at  eight  on,  The  wicked  Jkall  be 
turned  into  hell , and  all  the  people  that  forget  God . 
The  whole  congregation  was  earneflly  attentive. 
But  not  above  one  or  two  cried  out.  And  I did 
not  obferve  any  that  fainted  away,  either  then  or 

in 


[ 326  ] 

in  die  morning.  I have  generally  obferved  more 
or  lefs  of  thefe  outward  fymptoms,  to  attend  the 
beginning  of  a general  work  of  God.  So  it  was 
in  New-England,  Scotland,  Holland,  Ireland,  and 
many  parts  of  England.  But  after  a time  they 
gradually  decreafe,  and  the  work  goes  on  more 
quietly  and  filently.  Thofe  whom  itpleafes  God 
to  employ  in  his  work,  ought  to  be  quite  paflive 
in  this  refpeft.  They  fhould  chuje  nothing  ; but 
leave  intirelyto  him,  all  the  circumflances  of  his 
own  work. 

Tuefday  7.  After  preaching  at  four  (becaufe  of 
theharveft,)  I took  horfe  and  rode  eaftly  to  Lon- 
don. Indeed  I wanted  a little  reft  ; having  rode 
in  feven  months,  above  four  and  twenty  hundred 
miles. 

Wednefday  8.  Our  conference  began,  the 
time  of  which  was  almoft  intirely  employed,  in 
examining,  whether  the  fpirit  and  lives  of  our 
preachers  were  fuitable  to  their  profeflion  ? On 
Saturday  in  the  afternoon  we  concluded. 
Great  was  the  unanimity  and  love  that  reigned 
among  us.  And  if  there  were  any  who  hoped 
or  feared  the  contrary,  they  were  happily  difap- 
pointed. 

* Sunday  12. 1 was  afraid  to  look  forwardto  the 
work  of  the  day,  knowing  my  ftrength  was  not 
fufficient  for  it.  But  God  looked  to  that;  for 
though  I was  exceeding  weak  at  Snowfields  in 
the  morning,  I was  ftronger  at  noon.  And  after 

preaching 


L 3 27  ] 


preaching  in  the  afternoon  in  the  fields,  and  meet- 
ing the  fociety,  I felt  no  weaknefs  at  all. 

* Monday  13.  I took  a little  ride  to  Croydon, 
one  of  the  feats  of  the  archbilhops  of  Canter- 
bury. Was  it  one  of  thefe  who  ordered  many 
years  ago  (for  the  characters  are  of  old  Handing) 
that  dreadful  infcription  to  be  placed,  juft  over 
the  communion-table  ? And  now  ye  priejls,  this 
commandment  is  for  )ou.  If  ye  will  not  hear,  and 
if  ye  will  not  lay  it  to  heart , to  give  glory  unto  my 
name , faith  the  Lord , I will  even  fend  a cufe 
among  you,  and  I will  curfe  your  blejfngs.  Yea. , I 
have  cur  fed  them  already  bccaufe  ye  do  not  lay  it  to 
heart.  Behold  1 will  corrupt  your  feed , 
and  fprcad  dung  upon  your  faces , even  the  dung 
of  your  flemn  feajls,  and  one  fhall  take  you  away 
with  it. 

The  archbifhop’s  palace  is  an  antient,  venera- 
ble pile,  and  the  gardens  are  extremely  pleafant. 
The  late  archhilhop  had  improved  them  at  a 
large  expence  : but  continual  illnefs  prevented 
his  enjoying  them,  till  after  four  vears  conftant 
pain,  lie  was  %_alleu  away,  one  may  hope  to  the 
garden  of  God. 

* I dined  at  Mr.  B.’s  in  Epfom,  whofe  houfe 
and  gardens  lie  in  what  was  once  a chalk- 
pit. It  is  the  molt  elegant  fpot  I ever 
faw  with  my  eyes  ; every  thing  within  doors 
and  without,  being  finifhed  in  the  moft  exqui- 
fite  tafte.  Surely  nothing  on  earth  can  be  more 

delightful 


[ 3*8  ] 

delightful.  O what  will  the  poffeflbr feel,  when 
he  cries  out, 

“ Mufti  thenleave  thee,  paradife?  Then  leave 

Thefe happy  fhades,  and  manfions  fitfor  gods?” 

Friday  17.  I fpent  an  hour  pleafantly  and 

profitably  at ’s.  How  gracious  is 

God  who  ftill  preferves  him  unconfumed  in  fire! 
How  plain,  that  with  God  all  things  are  pofli- 
ble  : he  can  draw  the  fling  either  of  wealth  or 
death ! 

* Sunday  19.  I preached  fn  the  afternoon  to 
an  huge  multitude  in  the  fields,  on,  Now  God 
commandeth  all  men  every  where  to  repent . Monday 
27.  I rode  to  Bedford,  and  about  fix,  preached 
on  St.  Peter’s  green.  None  of  the  numerous 
congregation  flood  with  their  heads  covered  ex- 
cept the  Germans.  Blefledbe  God,  that  / have 
not  fo  learned  Chrift!  If  they  know  no  better,  I 
cannot  help  it. 

* Tuefday  28.  I rode  on  to  Mr.  Berridge’s  at 
Everton,  and  in  the  evening  went  to  the  church, 
but  unufually  heavy  and  hardly  expe&ing  to  do 
any  good  there.  I preached  on  thofe  words  in 
the  fecond  leffon,  We  know  that  we  are  of  God. 
One  funk  down,  and  another,  and  another. 
Some  cried  aloud  in  agony  of  prayer.  I urould 
willingly  have  fpent  fome  time  in  prayer  with 
them.  But  my  voice  failed,  fo  that  I was  obliged 

te 


[ 329  ] 


to  conclude  the  fervice,  leaving  many  in  the 
church  crying  and  praying,  but  unable  either  to 
walk  or  dand.  One  young  man  and  one  young 
woman  were  brought  with  difficulty  to  Mr.  B.'s 
houfe,  and  continued  there  in  violent  agonies 
both  of  body  and  foul.  When  I came  into  the 
room,  the  woman  lay  quiet,  wreftling  with  God 
in  filentprayer.  But  even  the  bodily  convulfions 
of  the  young  man  were  amazing.  The  heavings 
of  his  bread  were  beyond  delcription  : I fuppofe, 
equal  to  the  throes  of  a woman  in  travel.  We 
called  upon  God,  to  relieve  his  foul  and  body. 
And  both  were  perfeftly  healed.  He  rejoiced  in 
God  with  joy  unfpeakable,  and  felt  no  pain,  or 
weaknefs,  or  wearinefs.  Prefently  after  the  wo- 
man alfo  was  delivered,  and  arofe  rejoicing  in 
God  her  Saviour. 

Wednefday  29.  I rode  to  Lakenheath,  and 
fpoke  exceeding  plain  to  an  honed,  drowzy 
people.  Thurfday  go,  I preached  at  the  taber- 
nacle in  Norwich,  to  a large,  rude,  noify  con- 
gregation. I took  knowledge  what  manner  of 
teachers  they  had  been  accudomed  to,  and  deter- 
mined to  mend  them  or  end  them.  Accordingly 
the  next  evening  after  fermon,  I reminded  them 
of  two  things;  the  one,  that  it  was  not  decent, 
to  begin  talking  aloud  as  foon  as  fervice  was 
ended,  and  hurrying  to  and  fro,  as  in  a bear- 
garden: the  other,  that  it  was  a bad  cudom,  to 
gather  into  knots  juft  after  fermon,  and  turn  a 
place  of  worihip  into  a coffee-houfe,  I there- 
fore 


[ 33°  ] 

fore  defired,  that  none  would  talk  under  that 
roof,  but  go  quietly  and  filemly  away-  And  on 
Sundav,  Sept.  2.  I had  the  pleafure  to  obferve, 
that  all  went  as  quietly  awa' , as  if  they  had  been 
accuHomed  to  it  for  many  years. 

Monday  3.  I met  the  fociety  at  five,  and  ex- 
plained the  nature  and  ufe  of  meeting  in  a clafs. 
Upon  enquiry  I found,  we  have  now  about  five 
hu  di  ed  members.  But  an  hundred  and  fifty  of 
thefe  do  not  pretend  to  meet  at  all.  Of  thofe 
therefore  1 make  no  account.  They  hang  on  but 
a fingle  thread. 

Tuefday  4.  I walked  to  Hemnal.  nine  miles 
from  Norwich,  and  preached  at  one  o’clock. 
The  ringleader  of  the  mob  came  with  bis  horn, 
as  ufual,  before  1 began.  But  one  quickly 
catched  and  threw  away  his  horn,  and  in  a 
few  minutes  he  was  deferted  bv  all  his  com- 
panions : who  were  ferioufly  and  deeply  atten- 
tive to  the  great  truth,  By  grace  )e  are  favei 
through  faith. 

* Sunday  9.  I met  the  fociety  at  feven,  and 
told  them  in  plain  terms,  that  they  were  the  moll 
ignorant,  felf-conceited,  felf willed,  fickle,  un- 
trafilable,  disorderly,  disjointed  fociety,  that 
I knew  in  the  three  kingdoms.  And  God 
applied  it  to  their  hearts  : fo  that  man  were 
profited,  hut  I do  not  find,  that  one  was  of- 
fended. 

* At  ten  we  had  another  happy  opportunity, 
and  many  ftubborn  hearts  were  melted  down. 

Juft 


[ 331  ] 

Juft  at  two  the  great  congregation  met,  and  the 
power  of  God  was  again  prefent  to  heal  : tho’ 
not  fo  eminently  as  at  five  while  I was  deferr- 
ing the  peace  that  pajjeth  all  under  [landing.  After 
preaching  I was  deftred  to  fpend  an  hour  with 
fome  whom  I fuppofed  to  be  of  our  own  fociety. 
But  I foon  found  my  millake  : 

Senjimmedios  delapfus  in  hojles. 

One  in  particular,  warmly  toli  me,  She  could 
/ not  like  mine  or  Mr.  Murlin's  doftrine  : it  al- 
i ways  threw  her  into  heavinefs.  But  in  dear 
! Mr.  Cudworth’s  fhe  could  find  comfort.”  I de- 

I fired,  we  might  pray.  God  quickly  anfwered 
for  himfelf.  Her  heart  was  broke  in  pieces. 
She  was  filled  with  love,  and  grief,  and  fhame  ; 
but  could  only  tell  it  by  her  eyes  and  her  tears. 

* About  this  time  I received  a remarkable  let- 
ter from  abroad,  an  extract  of  which  follows. 

Berlin,  Auguft  25,  1759. 
“ God  has  again  wrought  publickly  in  this 
place,  in  the  prefence  of  many  thoufand  people. 
A foldier  of  the  King’s-guard  was  fentenced  to 
be  hanged,  for  defertion  and  theft.  He  was  a 
ji  wretch  abandoned  to  all  manner  of  wickednefs, 

if  General  K was  much  concerned  for  his 

foul.  He  earneftly  defined  me,  to  take  the 
charge  of  it.  though  we  faw  no  profpefft  offuc- 
cefs.  I vifited  him  the  day  he  was  condemned, 

being 


C 332  ] 

being  Thurfday.  He  Teemed  quite  carelefs  and 
unconcerned.  I endeavoured,  to  convince  him 
of  fin  ; but  did  not  perceive  any  effect.  I beg- 
ged of  him,  not  to  deceive  his  own  foul,  but  to 
confider  the  condition  he  was  in.  On  Friday, 
this  be^an  to  fink  into  his  heart,  and  on  Satur- 
day,  much  more.  Perceiving  this,  I much  in- 
fifled  on  thofe  words,  This  is  a faithful  faying, 
and  worthy  of  all  acceptation , that  Chrijl  Jefus 
came  into  the  world  to  fave  fenners.  The  efle£l 
was  aftonifhing.  He  laid  hold  of  them  by  faith, 
and  not  only  his  burden  was  gone,  but  he  had 
fuel}  experience  of  the  love  of  Chrift,  as  it  is  im- 
poffible  to  defcribe.  His  peace,  triumph  and 
joy  increafing  every  hour,  till  the  night  before 
his  execution  : and  indeed  were  never  more  ob- 
fervable,  than  when  he  was  brought  out  of  pri- 
fon.  In  his  way  to  the  place  of  execution  he 
praifed  God,  for  dragging  him  as  it  were  with 
chains  to  heaven.  “ What,  faid  he,  will  God 
after  all  my  hellilh  aflions,  give  me  eternal  life 
into  the  bargain  ?”  The  efficacy  of  the  blood 
and  death  of  Chrift  being  made  known  to  him 
by  the  Holy  Ghoft,  he  fpoke  of  nothing  but 
his  wedding-day,  which  was  to  be  this  thir- 
teenth of  Auguft.  Every  one  that  looked  upon 
him  was  ftruck.  Officers  and  all  were  moved. 
Being  entered  into  the  ring,  I once  more  pray- 
ed with  him,  and  gave  him  the  laft  bleffing.  But 
the  very  inftant  he  was  to  be  turned  off.  Colo- 
nel H.  called  out,  “ Pardon  !”  I was  thunder- 

ftruck 


[ 333  ] 

flruck,  and  Mittelftadt  protefled,  it  was  to  Iiiin, 
like  a ball  (hot  through  his  body.  He  fainted 
away  for  fome  time.  Being  recovered,  his  firft 
words  were,  “ Why  was  I not  rather  hanged, 
or  even  crucified  than  pardoned?  Why  am  I 
thus  hopped  in  my  courfe?  I fhould  now  have 
been  with  Chrift !”  I was  myfelf  more  afraid  of 
him  now  than  ever.  But  the  grace  of  God  was 
flrong  in  his  foul.  And  ever  fince  it  has  con- 
tinued  the  fame.  Yefterday  I was  informed  by 
one  who  went  on  purpofe  to  enquire,  that  his 
whole  employ  during  his  confinement  (which  is 
to  continue  fix  months)  is  reading,  praying,  and 
comforting;  himfelf  with  the  blood  of  Chrift.” 

Monday  10.  We  took  horfe  at  half  hour  after 
four.  Before  eight  it  was  as  warm  as  it  is  ufual- 
ly  at  Midfummer.  And  from  ten  we  had  the 
fun  in  our  face,  all  the  way  to  Colchefter.  But 
we  had  the  wind  in  our  face  too,  or'  the  heat 
would  have  been  infupportable.  I was  in  a fe- 
ver from  the  moment  I came  into  the  houfe. 
But  it  did  not  hinder  me  from  preaching  on  the 
Green,  and  afterwards  meeting  the  fociety.  I 
then  lay  down  as  foon  as  poftible,  but  could  not 
fleep  a quarter  of  an  hour,  till  between  two  and 
three  in  the  morning.  I do  not  know,  that  I 
have  loft  a night’s  deep  before,  fick  or  well, 
fince  I was  fix  years  old.  But  it  is  all  one  : 
God  is  able  to  give  ftrength,  either  with  fleep 
or  without  it.  I rofe  at  my  ufual  time,  and 

preached 


[ 334  ] 

preached  at  five,  without  anv  faintnefs  or  drow- 
finefs. 

Thurfd.  13.  We  fet  out  between  four  and 
five  and  rode  to  Dunmow,  about  four  and  twenty- 
miles.  But  here  we  were  at  a full  flop.  None 
could  direft  us  any  farther.  So  we  were  to  crofs 
the  country  as  well  as  we  could.  But  whenever 
we  were  at  a lofs  (eight  or  ten  times)  we  met  fome 
one  to  help  us  out.  So  about  half  an  hour  paid 
one  w'e  were  come  within  fixteen  miles  of 
Sundon. 

An  honeft  blunderer  then  undertook  to 
direct  us  a nearer  way.  By  his  help  we  wandered 
up  and  down,  'till  our  fixteen  miles  grew  into  fix 
and  twenty.  However  we  got  to  Sundon  before 
feven,  where  a confiderable  number  of  people 
foon  met : to  whom  I explained,  (what  they 
deemed  to  knowr  very  little  of)  the  grace  of  our 
Loidjefus  Chtiji. 

Friday  14.  I returned  to  London,  Saturday, 
13,  Having  left  orders  for  the  immediate  repair- 
ing of  Wefi-fireet  chappel,  I went  to  fee  what 
they  bad  done,  and  faw  cattfe  to  praife  God  for 
this  alfo.  The  main  timbers  were  fo  rotten,  that 
in  many  places  one  might  thrufthis  fingers  into 
them.  So  that  probably,  had  we  delayed  'till 
fpring,  the  whole  building  mult  have  fallen  to 
the  ground. 

Monday  17.  I went  to  Canterbury.  Two 
hundred  foldiers,  I fuppofe,  and  a whole  row  of 
officers  attended  in  the  evening.  Their  num- 
ber 


[ 337  ] 

ber  was  increafed  the  next  evening,  and  all  be- 
haved as  men  fearing  God.  Wednefday  19.  I 
preached  at  Dover,  in  the  New-room,  which  is 
juft  finiflied.  Here  alfo  the  hearers  increafe, 
fome  of  whom  are  convinced,  and  others  com* 
forted  daily.  Thurfday  20.  I ftrongly  applied  at 
Canterbury,  to  the  foldiers  in  particular,  He  that 
hath  the  Son  hath  life,  and  he  that  hath  not  the 
Son  of  God  hath  not  life.  The  next  day  in  my 
return  to  London,  I read  Mr.  Huygen’s  “ Con- 
jeftures  on  the  planetary  world.”  He  furprized 
me.  I think,  he  clearly  proves,  that  the  moon 
is  not  habitable:  that  there  are  neither, 

“ Rivers  nor  mountains  on  her  fpotty  globe 

That  there  is  no  fea,  no  water  on  her  furface, 
nor  any  atmofphere.  And  hence  he  very  ra- 
tionally infers,  that  “ neither  are  any  of  the  fe- 
condary  planets  inhabited.”  And  who  can  prove 
that  the  primary  are  ? I know  the  earth  is.  Of 
the  reft  I know  nothing. 

* Sunday  23.  A vail  majority  of  the  immenfe 
congregation  in  Moorfields  were  deeply  ferious. 
One  luch  hour  might  convince  any  impartial 
man  of  the  expediency  of  field-preaching  P What 
building,  except  St.  Paul’s  chuich,  would  con- 
tain fuch  a congregation  3 And  if  it  would,  what 
human  voice  could  have  reached  them  there  ? 
By  repeated  obferva.ions  I find,  I can  com- 
mand thrice  the  number  in  the  open  air,  than  I 
Vol.  XXX.  P can 


C 338  ] 

can  under  a roof.  And  who  can  fay,  the  time 
for  field-preaching  is  over,  while,  1.  Greater 
numbers  than  ever  attend  : 2.  The  converting, 
as  well  as  convincing  power  of  God,  is  eminent- 
ly prefent  with  them  ? 

Monday  24.  I preached  about  eight  at  Brent- 
ford, and  in  the  evening  at  Bafingftoke,  to  a 
people  how  of  heart  and  dull  of  ur, demanding. 
Tuefday  25.  I pieached  in  the  new-houfe  at 
Whitchurch,  and  at  Salilbury  in  the  evening. 
The  new-room  there  is,  I think,  the  mod  com- 
pleat  in  England.  It  ftrikes  every  one  of  any 
tafte  that  fees  it  : not  with  any  fingle  part,  but 
an  inexpreffible  Jomething  in  the  whole. 

The  militia  from  Hampfhire  being  in  town,  a 
large  number  of  them  were  at  the  preaching.  But 
it  was  as  mufic  to  an  borfe  ; fuch  brutifh  behaviour 
have  1 feldom  feen.  The  next  evening,  they 
behaved,  if poffible  worfe  than  before.  However 
many  of  them,  1 believe,  were  llruck.  For  they 
came  again  in  the  morning,  and  then  appealed 
to  be  of  quite  another  fpirit,  earneflly  attending 
to  what  was  fpoken.  Thurfday  ay.  I had  ap- 
pointed to  preach  at  feven  in  the  evening  at 
Bradford.  But  when  I came,  I found  Mr.  Hart 
was  to  preach  at  fix.  So  I delayed  till  the 
church-fervice  was  ended  : that  there  might  not 
appear  (at  ieafl  on  my  part]  even  the  fliadow  of 
oppofition  between  us. 

Friday  28-  I reached  Briftol.  Sunday,  30. 
The  weather  being  fair  and  calm,  I preached  ;n 

the 


[ 359  ] 

the  new  fquare,  for  the  fate  of  many  people, 
who  do  not  chufe  to  come  to  the  room.  My 
text  was,  Him  that  cometh  unto  me,  I will  in  no  wife 
cajl  out.  I believe  many  found  defires  of  coming 
to  him.  O that  they  may  be  brought  to  good 
effedl ! 

Monday,  O&ober  1.  All  my  leifure  time,  dur- 
ing my  ftay  at  Briflol,  I employed  in  finifhing 
the  fourth  volume  of  difcourfes  ; probably  the 
laft  which  I lhall  publilh.  Monday  15.  I walked 
up  to  Knowle,  a mile  from  Briflol,  to  fee  the 
French  prifoners.  Above  eleven  hundred  of 
them,  we  were  informed  were  confined  in  that 
little  place  ; without  any  thing  to  lie  on,  but  a 
little  dirty  flraw,  or  any  thing  to  cover  them,  but 
a few  foul  thin  rags,  either  by  day  or  night,  fo 
that  they  died,  like  rotten  fheep.  Inasmuch 
affefted,  and  preached  in  the  evening,  on  Exod. 
xxiii.  9.  Thou  Jhalt  not  opprrfs  a jiranger  : f or 
ye  know  the  heart  of  a fir  anger,,  feeing  ye  were gran- 
gers m the  land  of  Egypt.  Eighteen  pounds  were 
contributed  immediatelv,  which  were  made  up 
four  and  twenty  the  next  day.  With  this  we 
bought  linen  and  woollen  cloth,  which  were 
made  up  into  firms,  waiflcoats  and  breeches. 
Some  Dozen  of  dockings  were  added;  all  which 
were  carefully  diflributed,  where  there  was  the 
great-eft  want.  Prefemly  after,  the  corporation  of 
Brifiol  fent  a large  quantity  of  mattreffes  and 
blankets.  And  it  was  not  long,  before  contribu- 
tions were  fet  on  foot,  at  London,  and  in  various 
P 2 parts 


[ 340  ] 

parts  of  the  kingdom  ; fo  that  I believe  from 
this  time  they  were  pretty  well  provided  with  all 
the  neceffaries  of  life. 

Monday  22.  I left  Briflol,  and  having  preach- 
ed at  Shepton,  Coleford,  Frome  3nd  Salif- 
bury  in  my  way,  on  Thurfday  25,  determined 
to  try,  if  I could  do  any  good  at  Andover.  The 
congregation  at  ten  in  the  morning  was  fmall ; 
in  the  evening  their  number  was  increafed,  and 
I think  fome  of  them  went  away,  crying  out, 
God  be  merciful  to  me  a firmer  ? 

Friday  26.  I rode  to  Bafmgftoke.  I was  ex- 
tremely tired  when  I came  in,  but  much  lefs  fo, 
after  preaching.  I then  fent  to  enquire,  if  there 
was  a vacant  place  in  any  of  the  coaches  which 
were  going  to  London  the  next  day  ? But  they 
were  all  full : and  I had  promifed  to  fend  back 
my  mare  to  Briftol.  The  only  way  that  remain- 
ed was,  to  take  Jofeph  Jones’s  horfe,  and  let  him 
ride  behind  one  of  the  coaches.  So  I ordered 
the  horfe  to  be  brought  foon  after  four  in 
the  morning,  and  was  waiting  for  the  coach, 
when  a polt-chaife  drove  by.  I rode  clofe  after 
it,  though  it  was  fo  dark,  I could  not  fee  my 
horfe ’s  head.  But  I could  hear , which  was 
enough.  About  day-break,  it  drove  away  : but 
then  I could  fee  the  road.  It  rained  without  in- 
termiflion,  from  the  time  I took  horfe,  till  I 
came  to  the  Foundery  : fo  that  I was  wet  through 
a great  part  of  the  day.  But  it  did  me  no  hurt 
at  all. 


Sunday 


[ 341  ] 

Sunday  28.  I found  the  antient  fpirit  in  the 
congregation,  both  at  Spittalfields  and  the  Foun- 
dery.  Tuefday  30.  I preached  at  DeptLrd,  and 
rejoiced  to  find  an  increafing  work  there  alfo. 
Wednefday  and  Thurfday,  I fpent  in  revifing 
and  perfecting  atreatife  on  Eleftricity.  friday, 
November  2.  I fpent  an  hour  with  that  miracle 
of  mercy  Mifs  ■ : a clear  proof,  that  God 

can,  even  without  external  means,  preferve  a 
bufh  ill  the  midft  of  the  fire, 

Sunday  4.  As  I was  applying  thofe  words. 
They  neither  marry , nor  are  given  in  marriage. 
For  neither  can  they  die  any  more;  for  they  are 
equal  to  angels.  The  power  of  God  fell  upon 
the  congregation,  in  a very  uncommon  man. 
ner.  How  feafonable  ! O how  does  God  fweet- 
en  whatever  crofs  we  bear  for  his  fake  ! 

Monday  12.  I talked  with  J D ■,  a 

gentleman’s  coachman,  an  uncommon  monu- 
ment of  mercy.  Laft  year  he  was  a violent  per- 
fecutor  of  the  truth,  and  of  his  wife  for  the  fake 
of  it.  But  the  fecond  or  third  time  he  heard  for 
himfelf,  he  was  throughly  convinced.  Soon  after 
he  entered  into  the  fociety  and  in  fix  weeks 
found  peace  with  God.  Yet  his  natural  tempers 
quickly  revived,  which  made  him  refllefs  after  a 
thorough  change.  In  fpring  this  refllefnefs  fo  in- 
creafed,  that  he  was  crying  to  God  day  and  night, 
’till  on  Sunday,  May  27.  he  was  utterly  broken 
in  pieces,  and  ready  to  caft  away  the  hope  of  it. 
But  juft  as  he  received  the  bread  in  the  Lord’s 
P 3 fupper, 


[ 342  ] 

flipper,  the  love  of  God  filled  his  heart.  And 
from  that  moment  he  had  no  doubt,  but  has  con- 
tinued always  rejoicing,  always  praying  and  praif- 
ing  God. 

Saturday  17.  I fpent  an  hour  agreeably  and 
profitably  with  lady  G — H — and  Sir  C — H — . 
’Tis  well  a few  cf  the  rich  and  noble  are  called. 

0 that  God  would  increale  their  number!  Bu1  I 
fhould  rejoice,  (were  it  the  willed  God)  il  it  weie 
done  by  the  n iniitry  of  others.  It  1 might  chufe, 

1 fhould  llili  iUs  I have  done  hitherto)  preach  the 
gojpel  to  the  poor. 

Monday  19.  I fpent  an  hour  with  Mr.  B. 
who  has  efcaped  from  Guadalupe,  as  with  the 
fit  in  of  his  teeth.  He  informed  me  that  *11  the 
water  they  had  in  the  voyage,  flunk  intoleiably: 
that  the  bifket  was  dl  of  maggots,  and  the  beef 
mere  carrion,  fo  that  none  ceuld  near  to  hand 
near  a caik  when  it  vvas  opened.  What  wonder 
that  the  poor  men  died  in  troops  ! Y.'ho  Iliali  an- 
fwer  for  their  blood  ? 

Tuefday  22.  I took  h rfe  between  fix  and 
feven,  in  one  of  the  celdeft  mornings  I ever  re- 
member. We  reached  St.  Alban's  without  much 
difficulty  ; but  then  the  roads  were  all  covered 
with  fnow.  However  there  was  a beaten  path, 
tho’  flippery  enough,  ’till  we  turned  into  the  by- 
road toSundon.  What  we  could  have  done  there 
I car.not  tell,  for  the  fnow  lay  deeper  and  deeper 
had  not  a waggon  gone  a while  before  11s,  and 

marked 


[ 343  1 

marked  the  way  for  fix  miles,  to  Mr.  Cole’s 
Gate. 

Friday  23.  The  roads  were  fo  extremely  flip- 
pery,  it  was  with  much  difficulty  we  reached 
Bedford.  We  had  a pretty  large  congregation  : 
but  the  flench  from  the  fwine  under  the  room 
was  fcarce  fupportable.  Was  ever  a preaching- 
place  over  a hog- fly  before  ? Surely  they  love 
the  gofpel,  who  come  to  hear  it  in  fuch  a place. 

Saturday  24.  We  rode  to  Everton  ; Mr.  Ber- 
ridge  being  gone  to  preach  before  the  univerfity 
at  Cambridge.  Many  people  came  to  his  houfe 
in  the  evening,  and  it  was  a feafon  of  great  re- 
freffiment. 

Sunday  25.  I was  a little  afraid,  my  ftrength 
would  not  fuffice,  > for  reading  prayers  and 
preaching,  and  adminiflring  the  Lord’s  fupper 
alone,  to  a large  number  of  communicants.  But 
all  was  well.  Mr.  Hickes  began  his  own  fervice 
early,  and  came  before  I had  ended  my  fermon. 
So  we  finifhed  the  whole  before  two,  and  I 
had  time  to  breathe,  before  the  evening  fervice. 

* In  the  afternoon  God  was  eminently  pre- 
fent  with  us,  though  rather  to  comfort  than 
convince.  But  I obferved  a remarkable  differ- 
ence fince  I was  here  before,  as  to  the  manner 
of  the  work.  None  now  were  in  trances,  none 
cried  out  : none  fell  down  or  were  convulfed. 
Only  fome  trembled  exceedingly  : a low  mur- 
mur was  heard  : and  many  were  refrefhed  with 
the  multitude  of  peace. 

P 4 


* The 


C 344  ] 

* The  danger  was  to  regard  extraordinary  cir- 
sumftances  too  much,  fuch  as  outcries,  convul- 
Cons,  vifions,  trances,  as  if  thefe  were  ejfential  to 
the  inward  work,  fo  that  it  could  not  goon  with- 
out them.  Perhaps  the  danger  is,  to  regard  them 
too  1 ttle  : to  condemn  them  altogether;  to  ima- 
gine, they  had  nothing  of  God  in  them,  and 
were  an  hindrance  to  his  work.  Whereas  the 
truth  is,  j.  God  fuddenlv  and  lirongly  convinced 
many  that  they  were  loft  Tinners  ; the  natural 
corifequence  whereoi  were  fudden  outcries,  and 
ffrong  bodily  convuifions  : 2.  To  ilrengthen  and 
encourage  them  that  believed,  and  to  make  his 
work  more  apparent,  he  favoured  Teveral  of  them 
with  divine  dreams,  others  with  t.  antes  and  vifi- 
ons. 3.  In  fome  of  thefe  inflances,  after  a time, 
nature  mixt  with  grace.  4.  Satan  likewife  mi- 
micked tins  work  oj  God,  in  order  to  difcredit 
the  whole  work.  And  yet  it  is  not  wife,  to 
give  up  this  part,  any  more  than  to  give  up 
the  whole.  At  firft  it  was  doubtleis  wholly  1.0m 
God.  It  is  partly  fo  at  this  day.  And  he 
will  enable  us  to  difcern,  how  far  in  every  cafe 
the  work  is  pure  and  where  it  mixes,  or  dege- 
nerates. 

* Let  us  even  fuppofe,  that  in  fome  few  cafes, 
there  wras  a mixture  of  dijjimulation  : that  per- 
fons  pretended  to  fee  or  feel  what  they  did  not, 
and  imitated  the  cries  or  convulfive  motions  of 
tliofe  who  were  really  overpowered,  by  the  Spi- 
rit 


C 345  ] 

rit  of  God.  Yet  even  this  fhould  not  make  us  ei- 
ther deny  or  undervalue  the  real  work  of  the 
Spirit.  The  fhadow  is  no  difparagement  of  the 
fubftance,  nor  the  counterfeit  of  the  real  dia- 
mond. 

* We  may  further  fuppofe,  that  Satan  will 
make  thefe  vifions  an  occajion  of  pride.  But 
what  can  be  inferred  from  hence  ? Nothing  but 
that  we  fhould  guard  again!!  it : that  we  fhould 
diligently  exhort  all,  to  be  little  in  their  own 
eyes,  knowing  that  nothing  avails  with  God  but 
humble  love.  But  Hill,  to  flight  or  cenfure  vifions 
in  general,  would  be  both  irrational  and  un- 
chriftian. 

Monday  26.  In  the  evening  I preached  in  Mr. 
Hickes’  church  at  Wrefllingworth,  and  at  ten 
the  next  morning.  Tl;e  people  were  deeply  at- 
tentive, but  none  were  fo  affefled  as  when  I was 
here  laft.  In  the  evening  Mr.  B.  returned  from 
preaching  before  the  univerfity.  In  the  mid!!  of 
the  fermon,  he  informed  me,  one  perfon  cried 
out  aloud;  but  was  filent  in  a few  moments. 
Several  dropped  down  but  made  no  noife  : and 
the  whole  congregation,  young  and  old,  behaved 
with  ferioufnefs.  God  is  ftrdng  as  well  as  wife. 
Who  knows  what  work  he  may  have  to  do  here 
alfo? 

* Wednefday  28. 1 returned  to  London,  and  on 
Thurfday,  the  29th,  the  day  appointed  for  a ge- 
neral thankfgiving,  I preached  again  in  the  chap- 
pel  near  the  feven  dials,  both  morning  and  af. 

P 5 ternoon. 


[ 346  ] 

ternoon.  I believe  the  oldeft  man  in  England  has 
not  feen  a thanldgiving  day  fo  obferved  before.  It 
had  the  folemnity  of  the  general  faft.  All  the 
Ihops  were  fhut  up.  The  people  in  the  flreets 
appeared,  one  and  all,  with  an  air  of  ferioufnefs. 
The  pravers,  leflbns,  and  whole  public  fervice, 
were  admirably  fuited  to  the  occafton.  The 
prayer  for  our  enemies,  in  particular,  was  ex- 
tremely {hiking  : perhaps  it  is  the  firft  infiance 
of  the  kind  in  Europe.  There  was  no  noife,  hur- 
ry, bonfires,  fire-works  in  the  evening  : and  no 
public  diverfions.  This  is  indeed  a Chrijlian 
holy-day,  a rejoicing  unto  the  Lord  l The  next 
day  came  the  news,  that  Sir  Edward  Hawke  had 
difperfed  the  French  fleet. 

Sunday,  December  9.  I had,  for  the  firft  time, 
a love-feaft  for  the  whole  fociety.  Wednefday 
12.  I began  reading  over  the  Greek  Teftament 
and  the  notes,  with  my  brother  and  feveral  others, 
carefully  comparing  the  tranflation  with  the  ori- 
ginal, and  corrediing  or  inlarging  the  notes,  as 
we  faw  occafton. 

The  fame  day  I fpent  part  of  the  afternoon  in 
the  Britifh  Mufeum.  There  is  a large  library,  a 
great  number  of  curious  manuferipts,  many  un- 
common monuments  of  antiquity,  and  the  whole 
collediion  of  {Fells,  butterflies,  beetles,  grafhop- 
pers,  &c.  which  the  indefatigable  Sir  Hans 
Sloane,  with  fuch  vaft  expence  and  labour,  pro- 
cured in  a life  of  fourfeore  years  ! 

Friday  14.  I was  at  a Chrijlian  wedding,  to 

which 


[ 347  ] 


which  were  invited  only  two  or  three  relations, 
and  five  clergymen,  who  fpent  part  of  the  after- 
noon, in  a manner  fuitable  to  the  folemn  occa- 
fion. 

* Wednefday  19.  I was  defired  to  read  over 
a chancery  bill.  The  occafion  of  it  was  this.  “ A. 
B.  tells  C.  D.  that  one  who  owed  him  thirty 
pounds  wanted  to  borrow  thirty  more,  and 
afked,  whether  he  thought  the  eighth  part  of 
fuch  a {hip,  then  at  fea,  was  fufficient  fecurity  ? 
He  faid,  he  thought  it  was.  On  this  A.  B.  lent 
the  money.  The  Ihip  came  home.  But  through 
various  accidents,  the  eighth  part  yielded  only 
twenty  pounds.  A.  B.  on  this  commenced  a 
fuit,  to  make  C.  D.  pay  him  the  refidue  of  his 
money.” 

This  worthy  fiory  is  told  in  no  lefs,  than  an 
hundred  and  ten  fheets  of  paper  ! C.  D. 

anfwers,  “ He  advifed  to  the  beff  of  his  judg- 
ment ; not  forefeeing  thofe  accidents,  whereby 
the  fhare  which  coft  two  hundred  pounds,  yielded 
no  more  than  twenty.”  This  anfwer  brought  on 
fifteen  flieets  of  exceptions,  all  which  a quarter 
of  a fheet  might  have  contained  ! I defired  the 
plaintiff  and  defendant  to  meet  me  the  next  day, 
both  of  whom  were  willing  to  hand  to  arbitra- 
tion. And  they  readily  agreed,  that  C.  D.  fhould 
pay  half  his  own  cofts,  and  A.  B.  the  reft  of  the 
expence. 

Friday  21.  I enquired  into  the  particulars  of  a 
P 6 very 


[ 34§  j 

very  remarkable  ftory.  A fhip  laden  with  wheat, 
and  having  no  other  ballafl,  about  one  in  the 
morning,  on  Sunday,  November  18,  the  wind 
blowing  hard,  fhifted  her  cargo,  and  in  half  an 
hour  funk.  Mr.  Auflin,  the  mate,  leaped  off 
her  fide,  as  fhe  funk,  and  being  an  excellent 
fwimmer,  kept  above  water,  till  he  faw  fome- 
thing  floating  toward  him,  which  proved  to  be 
the  capflern  of  the  lhip.  He  got  upon  it,  and  al- 
though wafhed  off  feveral  times  yet  ftill  reco- 
vered his  feat,  and  floated  all  day  and  all  the  fol- 
lowing night.  But  on  Monday  morning  he  wTas 
quite  exhaufted,  and  faint  almofl  to  death  with 
thirft,  having  fwallowed  abundance  of  falt- 
water.  In  this  extremity  he  faw  fome  apples 
floating  toward  him.  He  took  up  three,  ate 
them  and  was  much  flrengthened.  About  noon 
Admiral  Saunder’s  fleet  came  in  fight,  one  of 
vvhofe  fhips  faw  and  took  him  up.  He  could  not 
hand  ; but  being  blooded,  and  put  into  a warm 
bed,  and  fed  with  fmall  broth,  a fpoomul  or  two 
at  a time,  he  recovered  flrength  apace,  and  in  a 
few  days  was  as  well  as  ever. 

Saturday  22.  I went  to  Colchefler,  and  on 
Sunday  23.  preached  in  the  (hell  of  the  new 
houfe.  It  is  twelve  fquare,  and  is  the  bell  build- 
ing of  the  fize  for  the  voice  that  I know  in  Eng- 
land. Monday  24.  We  did  not  fet  out  till  after 
feven,  intending  to  lide  about  forty  miles. 
But  coming  to  Schole-Inn  before  three,  we 

pufhed 


L 349  J 

puGaed  on  and  before  feven  came  fafe  to  Nor- 
wich, 

Thurfday  27.  I began  vifiting  the  fociety,  and 
found  the  greater  part  much  changed  from  what 
they  were  a year  ago.  They  are  indeed  fewer 
in  number,  but  are  now  of  a teachable  fpirit, 
willing  to  be  advifed,  or  even  reproved.  And  if 
two  hundred  of  this  fpirit  remain,  they  are  worth 
all  our  labour. 

Tuefday,  January  1,  1760.  We  began  the  fer- 
vice  at  four  in  the  morning.  A great  number  at- 
tended, and  God  was  in  the  midft,  ftrengthening 
and  refrefhing  their  fouls.  Thurfday  3.  In  the 
evening,  while  I was  inforcing  thofe  awful  words 
of  the  prophet,  The  harvejl  is  paft,  the  Jiimmei  is 
ended , and  we  are  not  fated : a young  woman, 
who  had  contained  herfelf  as  long  as  fhe  could, 
funk  down  and  cried  aloud.  I found  this  was  a 
new  thing  in  Norwich.  The  women  about  her 
got  water  and  hartfhorn  in  abundance.  But  all 
would  not  do.  When  the  fervice  was  ended,  I 
afked  her,  “ What  do  you  want  ?”  She  immedi- 
ately replied,  “ Nothing  but  Chrift.”  And  indeed 
what  phyfician  befide  him,  is  able  to  heal  that 
ficknels  ? 

• Friday  4. 1 preached  about  one  at  Fornett,  to  a 
much  milder  people  than  I left  there : and  in 
the  evening  at  Kenningball,  where  the  Antino- 
mians  had  laboured  hard  in  the  devil’s  fervice. 

Yet 


[ 35°  3 


Yet  all  are  not  loft.  A few  are  ftill  left,  whozualk 
not  after  the ftefh,  but  after  the  Spirit.  Saturday  5. 
1 preached  in  the  evening  at  Colchefter,  and  on 
Sunday  6,  rode  to  Langham,  feven  miles  from 
thence,  in  fuch  a day  as  I have  feldom  known  : 
the  north-eaft  wind  was  fo  exceeding  keen,  and 
drove  the  ileet  full  in  our  face.  But  this  did  not 
difcourage  the  people,  who  flocked  from  all 
quarters.  And  thole  who  took  fuch  pains  to 
come,  w ere  not  fent  empty  away. 

* Monday  7.  1 returned  to  London,  and  fi- 
nifhed  on  the  road  the  celebrated  Telemachus. 
Certainly  it  is  wrote  with  admirable  fenfe.  But 
is  it  without  fault  ? is  there  not  abundantly  too 
much  machinery  ? Are  not  the  gods  (fuch  as 
they  are)  continually  introduced  without  why  or 
wherefore  ? And  is  not  the  work  fpun  out  too 
long?  Drawn  into  mere  French  wire?  Would 
not  twelve  books  have  contained  all  the  matter, 
much  better  than  four  and  twenty  ? 

Sunday  13.  I preached  again  in  Weft-ftreet 
chappel,  now  inlarged  and  throughly  repaired. 
When  I took  this  eighteen  \ ears  agor  I little 
thought  the  world  w’ould  have  borne  us 
till  now.  But  the  rtght-ha>id  of  the  Lord 
hath  the  pre-eminence.  Therefore  we  endure 
unto  this  day. 

Wednefday  16.  One  came  to  me,  as  fhe  faid, 
with  a meflage  from  the  Lord,  to  tell  rtie,  “ I was 
laying  up  treafures  on  earth,  taking  my  eafe,  and 
minding  only  my  eating  and  drinking.”  I told 


[ 35i  ] 

her,  “ God  knew  me  better.  And  if  he  had  fent 
her,  he  would  have  fent  her  with  a more  proper 
mefiage.” 

Friday  18.  I defired  thofe  who  believed  they 
were  faved  from  fin,  (fixteen  or  feventeen  in 
number,)  to  meet  me  at  noon,  to  whom  I gave 
fuch  cautions  and  inftru&ions  as  I judged  need- 
ful. Nor  did  any  of  thefe  pretend  to  be  above 
man’s  teaching,  but  received  it  with  all  thankful- 
nefs. 

Thurfday  24.  I rode  to  Brentford,  where  after 
a flop  of  ten  or  twelve  years,  the  work  of  God  is 
broke  out  afrefh.  I preached  in  a large  place 
newly  fitted  up.  It  was  fuppofed,  there  would  be 
much  dilturbance,  as  a confiderable  number  of 
rude,  boiftrous  people,  were  gathered  together 
for  that  purpofe.  But  God  over-ruled,  and  they 
all  calmly  and  filentlv  attended  to  his  word; 
Surely  the  times  and  Jeafons  of  fending  his  word 
effectual ly  to  any  place,  God  hath  referved  in  his 
own  power. 

Monday  28.  I began  vifiting  the  claffes  in 
London,  and  that  with  more  exaftnefs  than  ever 
before.  After  going  through  them,  I found  the 
fociety  now  contained  about  three  and  twenty 
hundred  and  fifty  members : few  of  whom  we 
could  difcern  to  be  triflers,  and  none  we  hope, 
live  in  any  wilful  fin. 

Tuefday,  February  5.  I baptized  a gentlewo- 
man at  the  Foundery,  and  the  peace  fhe  imme- 
diately 


[ 35 2 ] 

diately  found,  was  a frefh  proof,  that  the  outward 
fign  duly  received,  is  always_-accorapanied  with 
the  inward  grace.  'I  uefday  12.  After  preaching 
at  Deptford,  I rode  on  to  Welling,  where  I re- 
ceived (what  few  expected)  an  exceeding  com- 
fortable account,  of  the  death  of  Mr.  Mafon  of 
Bexley.  For  many  years  he  feemed  to  be  utterly 
fenfelefs  ; neither  juftified,  nor  even  convinced 
of  fin.  But  in  his  Jaft  ficknefs,  the  God  that 
heareth  prayer,  broke  in  upon  his  foul.  And  the 
nearer  death  came,  the  more  did  he  rejoice,  to 
the  alionifhment  of  all  that  faw  him. 

Saturday  16.  I fpent  an  hour  in  the  evening 

with  a little  company  at  Mr.  « ’s.  I have 

not  known  fo  folemn  an  hour  for  a long  feafon, 
nor  fo  profitable  to  my  own  foul.  Myfterious 
Providence  ! Why  am  I cut  off  from  thofe  op- 
portunities, which  of  all  others  I mofl  want  ? 
Efpecially  confidering  the  benefit  I might  im- 
part, as  well  as  that  which  I might  receive  : fee- 
ing they  hand  in  as  much  need  of  light,  as  I do 
of  heat. 

* About  this  time  we  had  a remarkable  ac- 
count from  Yorkfhire.  “ On  Friday  13.  about 
thirty  perfons  were  met  together  at  Otley  (a  town 
about  twelve  miles  flora  Leeds)  about  eight 
o’clock  in  the  evening,  in  order  (as  ufual)  to 
pray,  fing  hymns,  and  provoke  one  another  to 
love  and  good  works.  After  prayer  was  ended, 
when  they  proceeded  to  fpeak  of  the  feveral 
Hates  of  their  fouls,  forae  with  deep  figbs  and 

groans, 


[ 353  3 

groans,  complained  of  the  burden  they  felt,  for 
the  remains  of  in-dwelling  fin;  feeing  in  3 
clearer  light  than  ever  before,  the  neceffity  of  a 
deliverance  from  it. 

“ When  they  had  fpent  the  ufual  time  toge- 
ther, a few  went  to  their  own  houfes.  But  the 
reft  remained  upon  their  knees,  groaning  for  the 
great  and  precious  promifes  ol  God.  One  being 
defired  to  pray,  he  no  fooner  began  to  lilt  up  his 
voice  to  God,  than  the  Holy  Ghoft  made  ituer- 
ceffion  in  all  that  were  prefent,  with  groanings 
that  could  not  be  uttered.  At  length  the  travail  of 
their  fouls  burl!  out  into  loud  and  ardent  cties. 
They  had  no  doubt  of  the  favour  of  God,  but 
they  could  not  reft,  while  there  was  any  thing  in 
them  contrary  to  his  nature.  One  cried  out,  in 
an  exceeding  great  agony,  “ Lord,  deliver  me 
from  my  finful  nature,”  then  a fecond,  a third 
and  fourth.  And  while  the  perfon  who  prayed 
firft,  was  calling  upon  God  in  thofe  words, 
“ Thou  God  of  Abraham,  Ifaac  and  Jacob,  hear 
us  for  the  fake  of  thy  Son  Jefus,”  one  was  heard 
to  fay,  “ Bleffed  be  the  Lord  God  for  ever,  for 
he  hath  cleanfed  my  heart.  Praife  the  Lord,  O 
my  foul,  and  all  that  is  within  me  praife  his 
holy  name.”  Amother  faid,  “ I hold  thee  with  a 
trembling  hand,  but  will  not  let  thee  go:”  and 
in  a little  time  cried  out,  “ Praife  the  Lord  with 
me;  for  he  hath  cleanfed  my  heart  from  fin.” 
Another  cried,  “ I am  hanging  over  the  pit  of 

hell, 


[ 354  ] 

hell,  by  a (lender  thread  a fecond,  with  loud 
and  difmal  fhrieks,  “ 1 am  in  hell  : O fave  me, 
fave  me while  a third  (aid,  with  a far  different 
voice,  “ BlefTed  be  the  Lord,  for  he  hath  par- 
doned all  my  fins  ” Thus  they  continued  for 
the  (pace  of  two  hours,  fome  praifing  and  mag- 
nifying God,  fome  crying  to  him  for  pardon  or 
purity  of  heart,  with  the  greatefl  agony  of  fpi- 
rit.  Before  thev  parted,  three  believed  God  had 
fulfilled  his  word,  and  cleanfed  them  from  all  un~ 
righ’eoufnefs . 

“ The  next  evening  they  met  again.  And  the 
Lord  was  again  piefent  to  heal  the  broken  in 
heart.  One  received  remiffton  of  fins,  and  three 
more  believed  God  had  deorfed  them  from  all  fin. 
A nd  it  is  obfervable,  thefe  are  all  poor,  illiterate 
creatures,  of  all  others  mod  incapable  of  counter- 
feiting, and  mod  unlikely  to  attempt  it.  But 
when  his  word  goeth  forth,  it giveth  light  and  un- 
der  flan  ding  to  the  fimple.” 

Friday  29.  A great  number  of  us  waited  upon 
God,  at  five,  at  nine,  and  at  one,  with  faffing  and 
praver.  And  at  fix  in  the  evening  we  met  at  the 
church  in  Spittalfields,  to  renew  our  covenant 
with  God.  It  was  a bleffed  time.  The  windows 
of  heaven  w-ere  open,  and  the  fkies  poured  dowm 
righteoufnefs. 

Monday,  March  3.  I left  London.  It  rained 
great  part  of  the  day,  but  fo  gently,  that  we  were 
not  wet  through,  when  about  feven  we  came  to 
Towcefter.  One  perfon  we  found  here,  whofe 

foul 


C 355  ] 

foul  God  keeps  alive,  though  he  has  fcarce  an/ 
in  the  town  to  converfe  with.  Perhaps  he  is  an 
earn  elk  of  a people  that  fhall  he  born  here,  and 
Counted  to  the  Lord  for  a generation. 

Tuefday  4.  We  came  to  Birmingham, 
where  I rejoined  feveral  who  had  been  long 
feparated  from  their  brethren,  and  left  upwards 
of  fifty  refolved  to  Hand  together  in  the  good, 
old  path. 

In  the  evening  I preached  in  the  new  houfe 
at  Wednefbuiy.  Few  congregations  exceed 
th  s either  in  number  or  ferioufnefs.  At  five  in 
the  morning  the  congregation  far  exceeded 
the  morning-congregation  at  the  Founder/. 
Indeed  hunger  after  the  word  has  been  from 
the  beginning  the  difiinguifhing  mark  of  this 
people. 

Thurfdav  6.  I talked  largely  with  M — S— 
and  Eliz.  Lymore  : the  fubftance  of  what  M — 
S — faid  was  as  follows. 

* “ I was  born  April  8,  1736.  My  father  died 
when  I was  between  four  and  five,  my  mother, 
when  I was  about  eleven  years  old.  I had  little 
thought  about  religion,  and  feldom  fo  much  as 
went  to  church.  But  I had  even  then  many 
troubles,  which  made  me  fometimes  think  of 
God  and  cry  to  him  for  help.  When  I was 
about  feventeen,  I was  afked  one  Sunday  to  go 
and  fee  a pit,  which  was  on  fire  and  blazed  out. 
It  was  near  the  houfe  where  Mr.  James  Jones 


was 


r 356  j 

was  then  preaching  I was  {landing  near  the 
houfe,  when  my  b other  perfuaded  me  to  go 
in.  I liked  what  I heard  ; but  it  was  above  a 
year  before  I knew  mvfelf  to  be  a loft  Finn  :r. 
For  three  weeks  I was  in  deep  dif  efs,  which 
made  me  crv  to  God  day  and  night.  I had  com- 
fort once  or  twice,  but  I checked  it,  being  afraid 
of  deceiving  myfelf : ’Till  as  Mr  Johnfon  was 
preaching  one  morning  at  five  o’clock  in  Darlaf- 
ton,  my  foul  was  fo  filled  with  the  love  of  God, 
that  I had  much  ado  to  help  crying  out.  I could 
only  fay,  “ Why  me,  Lord,  why  me  f”  When 
1 came  home  I was  exceeding  weak,  having  alfo 
a great  pain  in  my  head:  but  all  was  fweet;  I 
did  not  wifh  it  to  be  otherwife.  I was  happy 
in  God  all  the  day  long : and  fo  I was  for  feveral 
days.  From  this  time  I never  committed  any 
known  fin,  nor  even  loft  the  love  of  God  : 
though  I found  abundance  of  temptations  and 
many  fevere  ft ruggles.  Yet  I was  more  than  con- 
queror over  all,  and  found  them  eafier  and 
eafier. 

About  Chriftmas  1758, 1 was  deeply  convinc- 
ed there  was  a greater  falvation  than  I had  at- 
tained. The  more  I faw  of  this,  and  the  more 
I prayed  for  it,  the  happier  I was.  And  my  de- 
fires  and  hopes  were  continuallv  encreafing,  for 
above  a year. 

On  January  30,  1760,  Mr  Fugill  talked  with 
one  who  thought  fite  had  received  that  bleffing. 
As  fhe  fpoke  my  heart  burned  within  me,  and 

my 


L 3 57  ] 

*ny  defire  was  inlarged  beyond  expreffion,  I faid 
to  him,  “ O fir,  when  fhall  I be  able  to  fay  as 
fhe  fays  ?”  He  anfwered  “ Perhaps  to  night.”  I 
faid,  “ Nay,  1 am  not  earneft  enough.”  He  re- 
plied, “ That  thought  may  keep  you  from  it.” 

I felt,  God  was  able  and  willing  to  give  it  them 
and  was  unfpeakably  happy.  In  the  evening  as  he 
was  preaching,  my  heart  was  full,  and  more 
and  more  fo,  till  I could  contain  no  more.  I 
Wanted  only  to  be  alone,  that  I might  pour  out 
my  foul  before  God  : and  when  I came  home 
I could  do  nothing  but  praife  and  give  him 
thanks.  From  that  moment  I have  felt  nothing 
but  love  in  mv  heart ; no  fin  of  any  kind.  And 
I truft  I fhall  never  fin  any  more  offend  God.  I 
never  find  any  more,  nor  any  more  offend  God. 
I never  find  anv  cloud  between  God  and  me:  I 
walk  in  the  light  continually.  I do  rejoice  ever- 
more, and  pray  without  ceajing,  I have  no  defire 
but  to  do  and  fuffer  the  will  of  God  : I aim  at 
nothing  but  to  pleafe  him.  I am  careful  for  no- 
thing, but  in  all  things  make  my  requefls  known 
to  him  with  thankfgiving.  And  I have  a con- 
tinual witnefs  in  myfelf,  that  whatever  I do,  I do 
it  to  his  glory.” 

Eliz.  Longmore  faid,  “ I was  born  in  1730. 
My  mother  died  in  childbed  of  me  ; my  father, 
when  I was  a year  or  two  old.  So  I was  brought 
up  by  the  parilh,  and  taught  nothing,  not  fo  much 
as  to  read.  About  eleven  years  old,  I was  put  cut 
parilh-’prentice,  to  a man  and  woman  who  ufed 

me 


[ 358  ] 

me  very  hardily.  I wanted  much  to  learn  to 
read  ; but  they  would  not  fpare  the  time,  I was 
about  fourteen,  when  I heard  Mr.  J.  W.  preach 
at  the  crofs  in  Wendelbury.  I immediately  be- 
lieved it  was  the  right  way,  and  begun  to  be  very 
uneafv.  I often  wifhed  I had  died  with  my  fa- 
ther or  mother,  fearing  I Ihould  never  be  faved. 
But  my  convi&ions  wore  away  by  degrees  : 
though  hill  I could  not  reft.  About  twenty  I was 
married.  My  hufband  had  fome  times  heard  the 
preaching,  but  not  lately.  Soon  after  he  began 
again,  going  with  me  conftantly.  I was  now 
more  and  more  convinced,  that  I was  a guilty, 
undone  (inner.  I cried  to  God  day  and  night, 
laving  down  my  work  many  times  in  a day. 
On  Holy-Thurfdav,  1756,  I was  fadly  afraid  of 
going  to  the  facrament.  However  I broke 
through  and  went.  At  the  Lord’s-table  I found 
fuch  a love  as  I cannot  exprefs.  As  foon  as  I 
came  back,  1 went  up  into  my  chamber,  and 
kneeled  down  to  prayer.  In  praying  I heard  a 
voice  faying,  Go  in  peace  : thy  [ins  are  forgiven 
thee.  My  foul  funk  into  noihing  before  God, 
and  was  filled  with  humble  love.  1 loved  God 
and  all  mankind,  and  thought  no  temptation, 
could  ever  (hake  me  more.  But  in  a lew  days, 
being  low  and  weak  in  body,  1 found  hard 
thoughts  of  God.  Yet  I could  not  give  up  my 
confidence,  that  mv  fins  were  forgiven  Nor  do 
I know,  thaf  I ever  committed  any  wilful  fin, 
after  I was  juftified.  About  a year  and  half  ago 

Mr. 


[ 359  ] 

Mr.  Fugill  came.  One  evening  while  he  was 
preaching,  I was  convinced  that  my  heart  was 
ftill  defperately  wicked,  and  needed  to  be  whol- 
ly renewed.  This  made  me  lometimes  afraid  to 
die,  left  I fhould  be  called  before  that  change 
was  wrought  But  I had  ftill  hope  at  the  bot- 
tom, and  never  could  doubt  but  that  God  was 
my  God.  In  the  mean  while  my  defire  to  be 
wholly  renewed,  increafed  continually.  And  I 
was  every  day  and  every  hour  praying  for  it, 
whatever  I was  about.  When  my  hopes  prevail- 
ed, I was  happy  : when  my  fears,  I was  quite 
caft  down-.  Being  convinced,  how  little  1 lov- 
ed God,  I was  grieved  and  aihamed  before  him. 

On  Friday,  January  25.  I took  no  food  till 
the  afternoon,  though  I had  a child  at  my  breaft. 
I was  much  tempted  to  think,  I fhould  never  at- 
tain, and  was  quite  uneafy.  But  the  next  morn- 
ing my  uneafinefs  was  gone,  and  1 calmly  waited 
for  what  I believed  God  would  foon  give.  In  the 
evening  I went  to  the  preaching  with  a full  ex- 
pectation, that  he  would  meet  me  there.  And 
fo  he  did.  As  foon  as  Mr.  Fugill  began  to  fpeak, 
I felt  my  foul  was  all  love  I was  fo  ftayed  on 
God  as  I never  felt  before,  and  knew  that  I lov- 
ed him  with  all  my  heart.  When  I came  home, 
I could  alk  lor  nothing : I could  only  give 
thanks.  And  the  witnefs,  that  God  had  faved 
me  from  all  my  fins,  grew  clearer  every  hour. 
On  Wednefday  this  was  ftronger  than  ever.  I 
have  never  fince  found  my  heart  wander  from 

God. 


[ 36o  ] 


God.  When  I havebufinefs  to  do,  I juft  take  a 
thought  and  do  it ; and  it  is  gone,  and  my  heart 
is  with  the  Lord.  I often  in  a day  bow  my 
knee  to  God  ; but  my  heart  prays  continually. 
He  is  never  out  of  my  thoughts  : I fee  him  al- 
ways ; although  moft,  at  preaching,  and  in  my 
band  and  clafs.  But  I do  not  only  fee  him  : I 
Jttl  him  too,  fo  as  I cannot  exprefs.  And  the 
more  I fee  and  ieel  of  God,  the  more  I feel,  I 
am  nothing.  When  I deep,  I deep  as  in  the 
arms  of  Jefus : and  when  1 wake,  my  foul  is 
full  of  praife,  and  it  is  as  if  all  ihe  angels  w'ere  in 
the  room  round  about  me  praiftng  God.  1 never 
find  any  heavinefs  or  coldnefs  : and  when  I 
mud: go  among  the  people  of  the  world,  God  is 
as  much  with  me  as  before,  and  I long  for  them, 
fo  as  no  tongue  can  tell.  I am  careful  of  every 
word  I fpeak,  and  every  look,  and  every’  thought. 
I fearch  my  heart  again  and  again  ; and  I can 
find  nothing  but  love  there.  Indeed  I know,  if 
God  left  me  a moment,  I fhould  fall  But  I 
truft,  he  will  never  leave  me  nor  forfake  me.” 

*1  obferve,  the  fpiritand  experience  of  thefe 
two,  run  exaftly  parallel.  Condant  Communi- 
on with  God  the  Father  and  the  Son,  fids  their 
hearts  with  humble  love.  Now  this  is  what  1 al- 
ways did,  and  do  now  mean  by  perjtEhon.  And 
this  1 believe  many  have  attained,  on  the  fame 
evidence  that  I believe  many'  are  juftified.  May 
God  increafe  their  number  a thoufand-fold  ! 

Friday  7.  I rode  over  to  Dudley,  formerly  a 

den 


[ 361  ] 


den  of  lions.  I was  conftrained  to  preach  abroad. 
But  no  one  opened  his  mouth,  unlefs  to  pray 
or  praife  God.  I believe  the  fteddy  behaviour 
of  the  fociety,  has  made  an  impreffion  on  moft 
of  the  town. 

Saturday  8.  I was  furprlzed  at  coming  into 
Wolverhampton,  which  is  what  Dudley  was,  to 
find  the  people  fo  ftill,  many  gaping  andltaring, 
but  none  fpeaking  an  uncivil  word.  Ay,  faid  a 
well-meaning  man,  “ we  fliall  not  find  them  fo 
civil  by  and  by.”  I wiflt  tliefe  croakers  would 
learn  to  hold  their  peace.  I defire  to  hear  no 
prophets  oj  evil . What  do  they  do,  but  weaken 
the  hands  both  of  preachers  and  people,  and 
transfufe  their  own  cowardice  into  others  ? 

But  this  prophet  of  evil  was  a falfe  prophet 
too.  For  neither  while  I was  preaching,  nor 
after  I had  done,  did  any  one  offer  the  leaf!  rude- 
tie fs  whatfoever.  And  we  rode  as  quietly  out 
of  the  town,  as  we  could  have  done  cut  of  Lon- 
don or  Brillol. 

Hence  we  went  on  to  Borflem,  near  New- 
caflle-under-Line,  a fcattered  town  on  the  top 
of  a bill,  inhabited  alinoft  intirely  by  potters,  a 
multitude  of  whom  alfembled  at  five  in  the  even- 
ing. Deep  attention  fat  oh  every  face,  though 
as  yet  accompanied  wiih  deep  ignorance.  But 
if  tne  heart  be  toward  God,  he  will,  in  due 
time,  inlighten  the  underftanding. 

Sunday  g.  I preached  at  eight  to  near  double 
the  number,  though  fcarce  half  as  many  as  came 
Vol.  XXX.  Q at 


[ 352  ] 

at  five  in  the  evening.  Some  of  thefe  feemed 
quite  innocent  of  thought.  Five  or  fix  were 
laughing  and  talking  till  1 had  near  done  : and 
one  of  them  threw  a clod  of  earth,  which  firuck 
me  on  the  fide  of  the  head.  But  it  neither 
difturbed  me,  nor  the  congregation. 

Monday  10.  About  nine  I preached  at  Bid- 
dulph,  about  eight  miles  north  of  Borflem.  The 
earneftnefs  of  the  whole  congregation,  well  re- 
warded me  for  my  labour.  Hence  we  had  an 
extremely  pleafant  walk  three  or  lour  miles,  to 
Congleton.  Here  we  were  accofled  in  a very 
different  manner,  almoft  as  foon  as  we  entered 
the  town,  which  caufed  fome  of  our  brethren  to 
apprehend,  we  Ihould  have  rough  treatment  be- 
fore we  got  out  of  it.  That  I left  to  God.  They 
had  procured  the  ufe  of  a meadow  adjoining  to 
the  preaching-houfe,  in  a window  of  which  they 
hadfixtakind  of  fcaffold.  Moll  of  the  congre- 
gation were  deeply  ferious  : fo  that  three  or 
four  who  took  much  pains  to  diflurb  them,  in- 
tirely  loft  their  labour. 

About  feven  in  the  evening  I preached  at 
Stockport,  where  more  and  more  hear  the  word 
of  God  and  keep  it.  In  the  morning  we  took 
liorfe  at  five,  but  could  find  none  to  tell  us  which 
was  the  road  to  Leeds.  So  we  rode  on  to  Mot- 
tram.  Following  the  direftions  we  received 
there,  we  rode  up  a mountain,  and  cur  path 
ended.  We  made  toward  a large  houfe,  and  the 
gentleman  fent  a fervant,  who  pointed  out  the 

way 


[ 3^3  1 

way  we  were  to  take.  But  foon  after,  it  divided  ; 
and  an  boned  man  bidding  us  keep  to  the  right, 
(meaning  the  left)  we  didfo,  ’till  we  came  to  the 
top  of  another  high  mountain,  among  feveralold 
done  quart ies.  Here  that  road  ended.  However 
we  went  drait  forward,  ’till  we  came  to  the  brow. 
With  great  difficulty  we  led  our  horfes  down, 
and  rode  up  a path  on  the  oppofite  mountain. 
But  at  the  top  this  likewife  ended.  Still  we 
thought  it  bed  to  pufh  forward.  But  my  horfe  was 
quickly  embogged.  After  he  had  thrown  me  on 
one  fide,  and  fcrambled  out  himfelf,  we  endea- 
voured to  walk  down  the  mountain  : but  fuch  a 
walk  I never  had  before,  for  deepnefs,  and  bogs, 
and  large  dones  intermixt.  That  we  got  to  the 
bottom  without  hurt  either  to  man  or  bead,  was 
little  lefs  than  a miracle.  But  we  were  dill  at  a 
lofs,  ’till  we  met  a fenfible  man,  who  diredled  us 
to  Saddle  vorth.  In  our  inn  here  we  found  one 
who  had  frequently  heard  me  preach  at  Bjailth 
in  Brecknockfhire.  I fear,  to  little  purpofe  ; for 
on  my  fpeaking  a few  words,  he  ran  away  in 
hade.  But  the  whole  family  feemed  to  fear  God. 
So  we  did  not  repent  of  our  clambering  up  and 
down  the  mountains. 

At  fix  we  reached  Leeds,  fufficiently  tired. 
But  I forgot  it  as  foon  as  I began  to  preach  : 
and  the  fpiiit  of  the  congregation  comforted  us 
over  all  our  labour. 

Wednefday  12.  Having  defired  that  as  many 
as  could  of  the  neighbouring  towns,  who  be- 
Q 2 lieved 


[ 3^4  ] 


lieved  they  were  faved  from  fin,  would  meet  me, 
I fpent  the  greateft  part  of  this  day,  in  examin- 
ing them  one  by  one.  The  teftimony  of  fome  I 
could  not  receive  : hut  concerning  the  far  great- 
eft  part,  it  is  plain  (unlefs  they  could  he  fup- 
pofed  to  tell  wilful  and  deliberate  lies)  1.  That 
they  feel  no  inward  fin,  and  to  the  bell  of  their 
knowledge,  commit  no  outward  fin  : 2.  1 haft 
they  jte.  and  love  God  every  moment,  and  pray , 
7ej0i.ee,  give  thanks  evermore.  3.  That  they  have 
conftantly  as  clear  a witnefs  from  God  o fane- 
tification  as  they  have  of  juftification.  Now  in 
this  I do  rejoice  and  will  rejoice,  call  it  what  you 
pleafe.  And  I would  to  God  thoufands  had  ex- 
perienced thus  much : let  them  afterward  experi- 
ence as  much  more  as  God  pleafes. 

Thurfday  13.  We  rode  over  the  mountains 
thro’  furious  wind  and  rain,  which  was  ready  to 
overthrow  both  man  and  heart.  However  in  the 
afternoon  we  came  well  to  Manehefter.  On 
Friday  the  14th  being  the  national  faft-dav,  we 
had  fervice  at  five,  at  feven,  and  at  five  in  the 
evening.  But  I did  not  obferve  here  any  thing, 
of  that  folemnity  with  which  the  public  fafls  are 
ohferved  in  London  I was  much  out  of  order 
on  Saturday,  and  not  well  on  Sunday.  However 
having  apoointed  topreach  in  Stockport  at  noon, 
I determined,  not  to  break  my  word.  As  it  rained 
our  friends  provided  a poft-chaife.  When  we 
were  gone  half  a mile  one  of  the  horfes  began  to 
kick  and  rear,  and  would  go  no  further.  So  we 

got 


[ 3 65  ] 

got  out  and  walked  on.  But  another  driver 
brought  the  chaife  after,  and  carried  me  to  Stock- 
port.  A large  congregation  was  waiting,  and  re- 
ceived the  word  with  all  readinefs  of  mind.  For 
fome  years  the  feed  feemed  to  be  here  fown  in 
vain  : but  at  length  it  yields  a good  increafe. 

On  the  following  days  I preached  in  feveral 
neighbouring  towns,  and  on  Wednefday  even- 
ing at  Liverpool.  Thurfday  20.  I had  a good 
deal  of  converfation  with  Mr.  N — n.  His  cafe 
is  very  peculiar.  Our  church  requires,  that 
clergymen  fhould  be  men  of  learning,  and  to 
this  end,  have  an  univerfity  education.  But 
how  many  have  an  univerfity- education,  and  yet 
no  learning  at  all  ? Yet  thefe  men  are  ordained  ! 
Meantime  one  of  eminent  learning,  as  well  as 
unblameable  behaviour,  cannot  be  ordained, 
“ becaufe  he  was  not  at  the  univerfity!”  What 
a mere  farce  is  this  ? Who  would  believe,  that 
any  Chnftian  bifhop  would  {loop  to  fo  poor  an 
evafion  ? 

Monday  24.  About  noon  I preached  at  War- 
rington. Many  of  the  beajls  of  the  people  weie 
prefent.  But  the  bridle  from  above  was  in  their 
teeth,  fo  that  theyr  made  not  the  lead  diflur- 
bance.  At  feven  in  the  evening  I preached  at 
Ghefter  ; but  I.was  fcarce  able  to  open  my  eyes. 
They  were  much  inflamed  before  I fet  out  ; 
and  the  inflammation  was  much  increafed,  by  rid- 
ing forty  miles,  with  a ftrong  and  cold  wind  ex- 
actly in  my  face.  But  in  the  evening  I applied  the 
O g eye- 


C 3««  ] 

eye-water  made  with  Lapis  Calaminaris , which 
removed  the  diforder  before  morning. 

Tuefday  25.  I rode  to  Mould  in  Flintfhire. 
The  wind  was  often  ready  to  bear  away  both 
man  and  horfe.  But  the  earnefl  ferious  congre- 
gation, rewarded  us  for  our  trouble.  Weanef- 
day  26.  About  nine  I preached  at  Little  Lee,  a 
mile  or  two  from  Northwich.  Many  of  the  con- 
gregation fcarce  ever  heard  a Methodifl  before- 
But  I trufl  they  did  not  hear  in  vain. 

Thurfday  27.  I rode  to  Liverpool,  in  order 
■to  embark  for  Dublin.  We  were  defired  to  be 
on  board  by  nitre  on  Saturday  morning.  But  the 
wind  falling  and  a fog  coming  on,  we  gained  a 
little  more  time-  So  we  had  one  more  folemn 
opportunity  in  the  evening.  Sunday  30.  The 
fogwasgone  and  the  wind  fair.  We  took  (hip 
about  nine,  and  got  ttndcr  fail  at  noon,  having 
only  eight  cabbin  paffengers,  feven  of  whom 
were  our  own  company.  So  we  prayed  and 
fung,  and  converfed  at  our  own  difcretion.  But 
a poor  woman  whom  we  permitted  to  come  into 
the  cabin,  gave  ns  fome  uneaftnefs.  She  had 
been  tapped  for  the  dropfy  in  the  infirmary,  but 
two  days  before.  When  I fpoke  to  her  con- 
cerning her  foul,  fire  gave  but  little  anfwer,  ap- 
pearing to  be  ferious  and  willing  to  hear,  but  to- 
tally uninflrufted.  She  would  eat  nothing,  but 
willingly  accepted  a difh  or  two  of  tea,  and  two 
or  three  glades  of  wine.  The  next  morning  Ihe 
was  extremely  refllefs,  continually  moving  from 

place 


[ 3 67  1 

place  to  place,  till  the  captain  put  a bed  for  h« 
in  the  foreeaflle,  on  which  fhe  lay  down  about 
eight  o’clock.  A little  after  fire  grew  light- 
headed and  began  fhrieking  dreadfully.  This 
ibe  continued  to  do,  till  about  noon,  and  then 
died.  At  night,  the  captain  and  all  the  bailors 
being  prefent,  we  committed  her  body  to  the 
deep.  Oil  Tuefday  noon.  April  x,  we  landed 
fafe  at  Dublin. 

I never  faw  more  numerous  or  more  ferious 
congregations  in  Ireland,  than  we  had  all  this 
week.  On  Eafter-day,  April  6.  I introduced 
our  Enghfh  cuftom,  beginning  the  fervice  at 
four  in  the  morning.  Monday  7.  I began  fpeak- 
ing  feverally  to  the  members  of  the  fociety,  and 
was  well-pleafed  to  find  fo  great  a number  of 
them  much  alive  to  God.  One  confequence 
of  this  is,  that  the  fociety  is  larger  than  it  has 
been  for  feveral  years.  And  no  wonder ; for 
where  the  real  power  of  God  is,  it  naturally 
fpreads  wider  and  wider: 

* Thurfday  10.  I was  fitting  with  a friend, 
when  poor  Mr.  Cook  came  in.  His  eyes,  his 
look,  his  hair  Jlanding 

“ Like  quills  upon  the  fretful  Porcupine,” 

his  tattered  gown,  his  whole  perfon,  as  well  as 
his  fpeech  immediately  bewrayed  him.  But  he 
is  quite  an  original,  and  has  fo  much  vivacity, 
with -touches  of  ftrong  fenfe,  that  I do  not  won- 
der 


[ 368  ] 

der  the  gentlemen  of  the  college,  as  he  told  me, 
have  given  him  an  apartment  there.  What  a 
nolle  fabric  lies  here  in  ruins  ! What  pity,  that 
when  he  firff  found  himfelf  a finner,  he  had  not 
one  to  fpeak  to  that  underflood  his  cafe,  and 
could  teach  him  the  only  method  of  cure  ! 

Sunday  13.  At  three  in  the  afternoon,  I 
preached  in  the  Barrack-fquare,  another  kind  of 
place  thanOrmandtown  -green.  No  mob  mull  fhew 
their  heads  here  ; for  the  foldiers  would  give 
them  no  quarter.  Tuefday  15.  I preached  there 
again.  But  onThurfday,  it  being  a rainy  day,  an 
offer  was  made  me  of  the  riding-houfe,  a very 
large  commodious  building,  defigned  by  Lord 
Cheflerfield  for  a church,  but  never  ufed  as  fuch 
till  now.  A troop  of  foldiers  was  exercifmg  there 
when  I came.  But  this  was  clear  gains.  For  the 
officers  forbad  any  of  them  to  go  away,  before 
the  fermon  was  ended. 

Friday  18.  I went  with  Mifs  F to  fee  the 

French  prifoners,  fent  from  Carrickfergus.  They 
were  furprized  at  hearing  as  good  French  fpoke 
in  Dublin,  as  they  could  have  heard  in  Paris  : and 
flill  more  at  being  exhorted  to  heart-religion,  to 
the  faith  that  zvorkcth  by  love. 

Sunday  20.  I appointed  thofe  of  the  fociety, 
who  defired  to  renew  their  covenant  with  God, 
which  I had  feveral  times  before  explained,  to 
meet  me  in  the  evening.  And  I believe  of  the 
five  hundred  and  twelve  members, hardly  twelve 
were  wanting. 


* Monday 


[ 569  ] 

* Monday  21.  In  riding  to  Rofmead,  I read 
Sir  John  Davies’  hiftorical  relations  concerning 
Ireland.  None  who  reads  thefe  can  wonder, 
that  fruitful  as  it  is,  it  was  always  fo  thinly  in- 
habited. For  he  makes  it  plain,  1.  1 hat  mur- 
der was  never  capital  among  the  native  Irifh. 
The  murderer  only  paid  a fmall  fine,  to  the 
chief  of  his  Sept.  2.  When  the  Enghfh  fettl- 
ed here,  Fill  the  Irifh  had  no  benefit  of  the 
Enghfh  laws.  They  could  not  fo  much  as  fue 
an  Englifhman.  So  the  Englilh,  beat,  plunder- 
ed,  yea,  murdered  them  at  pleafure-  Hence, 
3.  arofe  continual  wars  between  them,  for  three 
hundred  and  fifty  years  together.  And  hereby 
both  the  Enghlh  and  Irifh  natives,  were  kept 
few,  as  well  as  poor.  4=  When  they  were 
multiplied  during  a peace  of  forty  years,  from 
1600  to  1641,  the  general  mafTacre,  with  the 
enfuing  war,  again  thinned  their  numbers  : 
not  fo  few  as  a million  of  men,  women  and 
children,  being  deflroyed  in  four  years  time. 

5.  Great  numbers  have  ever  fince,  year  bv  year 
left  the  land  merely  for  want  of  employment. 

6.  The  gentry  are  continually  driving  away 
hundreds,  yea  thoufands  of  them  that  remain, 
by  throwing  fuch  quantities  of  arable  land  into 
pallure,  which  leaves  them  neither  bufinefs.  nor 
food.  This  it  is  that  now  difpeoples  many  pans 
of  Ireland,  of  Connaught  in  particular,  which, 
it  is  fuppofed,  has  fcarce  half  the  inhabitants 
at  this  day,  which  it  had  fourfccre  years  ago. 

Wednefday 


[ 370  7 

Wednefday  23.  I rode  to  Newry,  and 
preached  at  feven  in  the  evening  to  a numerous 
congregation.  Sunday  27.  We  had  a ufeful  fer- 
mon  at  church.  But  thev  told  me,  few  attended 
the  prayers  in  the  afternoon.  However  I refolved 
to  fet  them  the  example  : and  the  church  was 
as  full  as  in  the  forenoon.  Of  what  importance 
is  every  fl ep  we  tukej  Seeing  fo  many  are  ready 
to  follow  us ! 

Monday  28.  I rode  to  Rathfriland,  feven 
Irifh  miles  from  Newry,  a fmall  town  built  on 
the  top  of  a mountain,  furrounded  firfl  by  a 
deep  valley,  and  at  a fmall  diflance  by  higher 
mountains.  The  Prefbyterian  minifter  had 
wrote  to  the  Popifh  prieft,  “To  keep  his  peo- 
ple from  hearing.”  But  they  would  not  be  kept. 
Proteflants  and  Papifts  flocked  together  to 
the  meadow  where  I preached,  and  fat  on  the 
grafs,  Hill  as  night,  while  I exhorted  them,  to  Repent 
and  believe  the  gojpel.  * The  fame  attention 
appeared  in  the  whole  congregation  atTerryhu- 
gan  in  the  evening:  where  I fpent  a comfortable 
night  in  the  Prophet's  Chamber , nine  foot  long, 
feven  broadand  fix  high.  The  ceiling,  floor  and 
walls  were  all  of  the  fame  marble,  vulgarly  called, 
clay. 

Thurfday,  May  1.  I rode  to  Moyra.  Soon  af- 
ter twelve,  (landing  on  a tomb-flone,  near  the 
church,  I called  a confiderable  number  of  peo- 
ple, to  know  God,  and  Jefus  Chrijl  whom  he  hath 
Cent.  We  were  juft  oppofite  to  the  Earl  of 

Moyra’s 


[ 371  ] 

Moyra’s  houfe,  the  bed  finiflred  of  any  I have 
feen  in  Ireland.  It  ftands  on  a hill  with  a large 
avenue  in  front,  bounded  by  the  church  on  the 
oppofite  hill.  The  other  three  fides  are  covered 
by  orchards,  gardens  and  woods,  in  which  are 
walks  of  various  kinds. 

* General  Flaubert,  who  commanded  the 
French  troops  at  Carrickfergus,  was  juft  gone 
from  Lord  Moyra’s.  Major  Brajelon  was  now 
there,  a man  of  a fine  perfon  and  extremely  grace- 
ful behaviour.  Both  thefe  affirmed,  that  the 
French  were  all  picked  men,  out  of  the  king’s 
guards.  That  their  commiffion  was,  to  land  ei- 
ther at  Londonderry  or  Carrickfergus,  while 
Monfieur  Conflans  landed  in  the  fouth  : and  if 
they  did  not  do  this  within  three  months,  to  re- 
turn direftly  to  France. 

Friday  2.  In  the  evening,  and  morning  and 
evening  on  Saturday  I preached  at  Liffiurn.  The 
people  here  (as  Mr.  Bofton  faid)  are  “ all  ear 
but  who  can  find  a way  to  their  heart? 

Sunday  4.  After  preaching  to  a large  congre- 
gation at  feven,  I haftened  to  Cumber,  in  order 
to  be  at  church  in  time.  As  foon  as  fervice  was 
ended,  I began,  and  four  in  five  of  the  people 
behaved  well.  About  fix  in  the  evening  I preach- 
ed at  Newtown:  where  the  e is  ufually  the 
largeft  congregation  in  Ulfler.  But  what 
avails  the  hearing  ear , without  the  undajlanding 
heart  ? 


Monday 


[ 372  1 


Monday  5.  After  preaching  in  the  market- 
place at  BelfafI,  to  a people  who  care  for  none  of 
thefe  things,  we  rode  on,  with  a furious  ea(l  wind 
right  in  our  face  to  Carrickfergus,  where  I wil- 
lingly accepted  of  an  invitation  from  a merchant 
in  the  town,  Mr.  Cobham,  to  lodge  at  his  houfe: 
the  rather,  when  I underftood,  that  Mr.  Cayenac, 
the  French  lieutenant  general  was  flill  there. 
I now  received  a very  particular  account  of 
what  had  beeen  lately  tranfa&ed  here.  * Mrs. 
Cobham  faicl,  “ My  daughter  came  running  in 
and. fair],  “ Mamma,  there  are  three  India. men 
come  into  the  bay,  and  I fuppofe  my  brothers 
are  come  in  them,  (who  had  been  in  the  Eaft- 
Indies  for  fome  timed  An  hour  after  fhe  came  in 
again,  and  cried,  O mamma,  they  fay  they  are 
French-men.  And  they  are  landing  and  their 
nuns  slitter  in  the  fun.”  Air.  Cavenac  in- 

formed  me,  that  Mr.  Thurot  had  received,  a 
thoufand  men  out  of  the  king’s  guards,  with  or- 
ders to  land  in  the  north  of  Ireland,  at  the  fame 
time  that  Monfieur  Conflans  landed  in  the  fouth  : 
that  a fiorm  drove  him  up  to  Bergen  in  Norway, 
from  whence  he  could  not  get  out,  till  his  {Flips 
were  much  damaged,  and  his  provifions  con- 
fumed  ; nor  could  he  there  procure  a fupply  at 
any  price  : that  another  ftorm  drove  him  to  66 
degrees  north  latitude  ; from  whence  he  did  not 
get  back  to  Carrick-Bay,  till  all  on  board  were 
alinoft  famifbed,  having  only  an  ounce  of  bread 

per 


[ 373  ] 

per  man  daily : that  they  then  landed  merely  to 
procure  provifions.  I . afked,  <l  Is  it  true, 
that  you  had  a defign  to  burn  the  town  ? ’ 
He  cried  out,  “ Jefu,  Maria!”  We  never 
had  Inch  a thought  ! To  burn,  to  deftroy,  can- 
not enter  into  the  heart  or  head  of  a good  man.’ 

After  they  had  landed  (Mrs.  Cobham  and 
others  informed  me)  they  divided  into  two  bo- 
dies. One  of  thefe  marched  up  to  the  eaft  gate, 
the  other  to  the  north.  Twelve  foldiers  and  a 
corporal  were  there  on  the  wall,  who  fired  upon 
them  wh»n  they  came  near.  Immediately  Gene- 
ral FLubert  fell,  having  his  leg  broke  by  a 
mulket-ball.  The  next  in  command,  a young 
Marquis,  then  led  them  on.  When  the  Englifh 
had  fired  four  rounds,  having  no  more  ammuni- 
tion they  retired,  and  the  French  entered  the 
town,  and  at  the  market-place  met  thofe  who  had 
come  in  at  the  eaft»gate.  When  thev  had  joined 
they  marched  up  to  the  cafile,  (though  the  Eng- 
lifti  there,  who  were  an  hundred  and  fixty-two  in 
number,  kept  a conftant  fire,)  the  gate  of  which 
was  not  barred,  fo  that  the  Marquis  thruft  it 
open  and  went  in  Juft  then  he  was  fhot  dead. 
Mr.  Cavenac  immediately  took  his  place,  and 
drew  up  his  men  again.  The  Engliih  then  defired 
a parley,  and  articled  to  furmfh  them  with  pro- 
vifions in  fix  hours.  But  they  could  not  perform 
it,  there  being  little  in  the  town.  On  this  Mr. 
Cavenac  fent  for  Mr.  Cobham,  and  defired  him 
to  go  up  to  Belfaft.and  procure  them,  leaving  his 
wife  with  the  General,  as  an  hoftage  for  his  re- 
i turn. 


[ 374  3 

turn.  But  the  poor  Frenchmen  could  not  flay 
for  this.  At  the  time  prefixt  they  began  to  ferve 
themfelves  with  meat  and  drink : having  been 
in  fuch  want,  that  they  were  glad  to  eat  raw  oats 
to  fuftain  nature.  They  accordingly  took  all  the 
food  they  could  find,  with  fome  linen  and  wear- 
ing apparel.  But  they  neither  hurt  nor  affronted 
man,  woman  or  child,  nor  did  any  mifchief  for 
mifchiefs  fake:  though  they  were  fufficiently 
provoked  ; for  many  of  the  inhabitants  affronted 
them  without  fear  or  wit,  curfed  them  to  their 
face,  and  even  took  up  pokers  or  other  things  to 
ftrike  them. 

While  Mrs.  Cobham  was  with  the  General,  ^ 
little  plain  dreffed  man  came  in,  to  whom  they 
all  Ihewed  a particular  refpedl.  It  ftruck  into  her 
mind,  is  not  this  Mr.  Thurot  ? Which  was  foon 
confirmed-  She  faid  to  him,  “ Sir,  you  feem 
much  fatigued.  Will  you  ftep  to  my  houfe  and 
refrefh  yourfelf?”  He  readily  accepted  the  offer. 
She  prepared  a little  veal,  of  which  he  ate  mode- 
rately, and  drank  three  glaffes  of  fmall  warm 
punch : after  which  he  told  her,  “ I have  not 
taken  any  food  before,  nor  flept  for  eight  and 
forty  hours.”  She  afked,  “ Sir,  will  you  pleafe  to 
take  a little  reft  now?”  Obferving  he  ftarted, 
fine  added,  “ I will  anfwer,  life  for  life,  that  none 
{hall  hurt  you  under  my  roof.”  He  faid,  “ Ma- 
dam, I believe  you  : I accept  the  offer.”  He 
defired  that  two  of  his  men  might  lie  on  the  floor 
by  the  bed  fide,  flept  about  fix  hours,  and  then 
returning  her  many  thanks,  went  aboard  hisfhip. 

Five 


[ 375  ] 


Five  days  he  was  kept  in  the  bay  by  contrary 
winds.  When  he  failed,  he  took  the  mayor  of 
Carrick  and  another  gentleman,  as  hoftages  for 
•he  delivery  of  the  French  prifoners.  The  next 
morning  as  he  was  walking  the  deck,  he  fre- 
quently ftarted,  without  anv  vifible  caufe,  ftept 
fhort,  and  faid,  “ I fhall  die  to-day.”  A while 
after  he  faid  to  one  of  the  Englifh,  “ Sir,  I fee 
three  Ihips.  Pray  take  my  glafs,  and  tell  me 
freely,  what  you  think  they  are  ? He  looked 
fome  time  and  faid,  “ I think  they  are  Englilh, 
and  I guefs  they  are  about  forty  gun  (hips.”  He 
called  his  officers  and  faid,  “ Our  fhips  are  too 
-foul  to  fight  at  a diftance  : we  mud  board  them.” 
Accordingly  when  they  came  up,  after  a fhort 
fire,  he  ran  up  clofe  to  Captain  Elliot,  and  Cap. 
tain  Scordeck,  with  his  four  and  twenty  huffars, 
immediately  leapt  on  board.  Almoft  inftantly, 
nine  of  them  lay  dead;  on  which  he  was  fo  en- 
raged, that  he  rufhed  forward  with  his  fabre 
among  the  Englifh,  who  feized  his  arms  and  car- 
ried him  away.  Meantime,  his  men  that  were 
left,  retired  into  their  ow  n fhip.  Thurot  feeing 
this,  cried  out,  “ Why  fhould  we  throw  away 
the  lives  of  the  poor  men  ?”  And  ordered  to 
flrike  the  colours.  A man  going  up  to  do  this 
was  ffiot  dead ; as  was  likewife  a fecond. 
And  before  a third  could  do  it,  Mr.  Thu- 
rot himfelf  was  ffiot  through  the  heart.  So 
fell  a brave  man  : giving  yet  another  proof,  that 
there  is  no  counfel  or  ftrength  againjl  the  Lord. 

The  End  of  the  Thirtieth  Volume. 


THE 


CONTENTS 

Of  the  Thirtieth  Volume. 


Page 

An  extract  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’j 
journal,  from  Feb.  16,  1755,  to  June  16, 
1/58.  — — 3 

An  extraft  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’j 
journal,  from  June  17,  17,58,  to  May  5, 

1760.  — — 222 


Date  Due 

Demco  293-5 


