The  Acts  of  the  Apostles 


By  G.  CAMPBELL  MORGAN 

ADDRESSES  TO  PREACHERS 
The  Ministry  of  the  Word $1.50 

EXPOSITOR? 
The  Teaching  of  Christ.    Cloth     ...  .    $2.50 


The  Crises  of  the  Christ.    Popular  Edition 
The  Study  and  Teaching'of  the  English  Bible 
Cloth         ....".... 


$2.50 
-75 


The  Analyzed  Bible.     (Introductory)    . 

Vols.  I,  II,  III,  Introductory  Volumes.   (3  Volumes  in  i.) 

The  Analyzed  Bible.    Each if  1.25 

Vol.  IV,  The  Gospel  According  to  John. 
Vol.  V,  The  Book  of  Job. 
Vol.  VI,  Romans. 

Vol.  VII,  The  Prophecy  of  Isaiah  I. 
Vol.  VIII,  The  Prophecy  of  Isaiah  II. 
Vol.  IX,  Genesis. 
Vol.  X,  The  Gospel  of  Matthew. 
Living  Messages  of  the   Books  of  the  Bible. 
Now  Complete  in  Two  Volumes.     lamo,  cloth,  each, 
Vol.  I,  O.  T.— Genesis  to  Malachi.  Vol.  II,  N.  T.— 
Matthew  to  Revelation.     Each      .....    $3.00 
The  Parables  of  the  Kingdom.    Expositions  of 

Matt.  XIII $1.75 

The  Spirit  of  God.    Cloth $1.50 

A  First  Century  Message  to  Twentieth  Cen- 
tury Christians $1.25 

God's  Methods  With  Man.  In  Time— Past,  Pres- 
ent and  Future.    With  Colored  Chart   ....    $1.25 
Wherein  Have  We  Robbed  God  ?        .....       .75 

God's  Perfect  Will $1.00 

The  Ten  Commandments      ......        .75 

The  Hidden  Years  at  Nazareth 35 

The  Bible  in  Five  Years .35 

DEVOTIONAL 

"  Behold,  He  Cometh  ! "    Cloth 75 

Christian  Principles.    Cloth 75 

Mountains  and  Valleys  in  the  Ministry  of  Jesus. 

Boards 35 

The  Practice  of  Prayer.      Cloth 75 

The  Simple  Things  of  the  Christian  Life.     Cloth     .       .75 
The  True  Estimate  of  Life  and  How  to  Live. 

Cloth ,  $1.00 

The  Christ  of  To-Day.  What?  Whence?  Whither? 

Cloth 50 

The  Life  of  the  Christian.    Cloth 50 

Life  Problems 75 

Discipleship.     Cloth 75 

"  All  Things  New."  A  Message  to  New  Converts. 

Paper .15 


*      r    »  u 


/~VT?    TTT17 

OF  THE* 

•         • 


»    *         t          U     •    * 


•     »    f        t     * 


,/;"  By 

rf  CAMPBELL  MORGAN,  D.  D. 


NEW  YORK  CHICAGO 

Fleming     H.      Revell     Company 

LONDON  AND  EDINBURGH 


V    /'*/•'•         Copyrigh't,  i^4/ljy 

COMPANY 


...«* 


.•:    ;.    ."..•'::    :     .-'•.  ^ .'-.  '"'-M''': 

Vi   ,'. '.   *•"  •  •' '  •  •     '•      '"  «'  '•*  •'/  "'"."•.*  I  *  •  '  -• 


New  York:  158  Fifth  Avenue 
Chicago:  17  North  Wabash  Ave. 
London :  a  i  Paternoster  Square 
Edinburgh :  75  Princes  Street 


737602 


To  my  four  Sons, 

PERCIVAL  CAMPBELL  MORGAN 
KINGSLEY  JOHN  MORGAN 
FRANK  CROSSLEY  MORGAN 
HOWARD  MOODY  MORGAN 

Who  are  also  my  brethren  in  The  Ministry 
of  the  Word, 

I  DEDICATE  THIS  BOOK.- 

Praying  that  to  the  end,  their  work  may  be 
in  the  Apostolic  Succession  of  freedom  in  the 
bonds  of  the  Gospel,  so  wonderfully  re- 
vealed in  this  inspired  story  of  Beginnings 


FOREWORD 

I  DON'T  want  to  write  a  preface.     Yet  perhaps  it  is 
necessary.     At  any  rate  I  have  the  example  of  the 
Writer  of  the  Book  we  call  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles 
to  encourage  me.    He  revealed  his  subject:  The  Word; 
gave  the  sources  of  his  information;  Eyewitnesses  and 
Ministers;  described  his  method;  Accurate  tracing  of  the 
course  of  all  things,  Writing  them  in  order;  and  de- 
clared the  purpose;  that   of  giving  Certainty  to   The- 
ophilos — a  catachumen. 

My  book  is  concerned  with  the  one  thus  introduced, 
and  it  is  an  attempt  to  help  the  plain  man,  and  the 
teacher,  in  a  study  of  this  most  wonderful  writing.  I 
do  not  attempt  to  deal  with  what  generally  comes  under 
the  heading  of  "Introduction."  From  the  start  I  assume 
the  Lucan  authorship,  and  the  authenticity  of  the  his- 
tory. The  work  of  Sir  William  Ramsay  and  Harnack 
has  settled  that  problem  for  me.  I  recognize  also  that 
the  book  is  by  no  means  a  full  history  of  the  period  it 
covers,  but  that  it  is  rather  a  selection  of  incidents 
revealing  the  lines  and  tendencies,  the  principle  and  pas- 
sion, of  that  first  generation  of  Christianity  in  the  world. 
In  this  is  at  once  its  charm  and  its  value.  Each  new 
page  flames  with  some  surprise,  and  one  is  held  in  sus- 
pense to  the  end — and  then  left  to  dream  dreams  of  all 
that  has  not  been  recorded — and  of  all  that  followed 
after.  Nevertheless  every  story  reveals  principles  and 
laws,  operating  with  undeviating  regularity,  and  con- 
tributing the  secrets  of  the  amazing  spread  of  that  which 
had  seemed  threatened  with  extinction  at  Golgotha — but 
which  rose  into  power  on  the  Resurrection  morning,  and 
began  a  propagation  of  sweeping  victory  at  Pentecost. 

[5] 


FOREWORD 

My  work  is  that  of  Exposition  based  on  Exegesis.  It 
is  really  intended  as  a  handbook  to  the  reader  who 
desires  a  true  apprehension  of  the  spiritual  force  and 
method  of  these  first  years  of  Christianity  at  work  in 
human  history.  My  own  work  on  the  story  has  impressed 
me  with  the  glorious  regularity  of  the  irregular  in  the 
work  of  the  Church  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  a  power- 
ful argument  against  the  stereotyped  in  Christian  organ- 
ization and  method;  and  consequently  a  plea  for  room 
for  the  operation  of  that  Spirit,  who  like  the  wind — 
Bloweth  where  He  listeth. 

It  may  be  that  I  have  advanced  things  which  enter 
into  the  realm  of  ancient  controversies — or  which  raise 
new  questions.  If  this  is  so,  it  has  not  been  intentional 
— nor  with  desire.  Whenever  the  reader  is  conscious 
of  anything  of  this  kind,  let  appeal  be  made  from  me  to 
Luke,  and  so  to  the  mind  of  the  Lord.  I  have  desired 
only  to  make  plain  what  is  written,  and  that  in  order  to 
enable  all  who  are  also  called  to  the  great  fellowship 
and  service  of  witness,  to  understand  its  power  as  here 
revealed.  In  an  hour  unhappily  rife  with  strife,  and 
happily  alive  with  opportunity,  and  characterized  by 
earnest  desire  to  be  true  to  Christ,  my  hope  is  that  in 
a  return  to  a  study  of  the  beginnings  there  may  be  some- 
thing of  value. 

G.  C.  M. 

Athens,  Ga. 


[6] 


The  Acts  of  the  Apostles 


Acts  1 : 1-5 

THE  book  which  we  call  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  may 
be  said  to  complete  the  Pentateuch  of  New  Testament 
history.  Four  of  these  books  present  the  Person  of  our 
Lord ;  while  the  fifth  gives  the  first  page  of  the  history  of 
the  Church;  that  is,  the  story  of  the  first  activities  of 
Christ,  in  power,  in  the  history  of  the  race. 

The  story  of  these  first  things  in  the  life  of  the  Church 
has  a  fascination  from  which  there  is  no  escape.  How- 
ever it  may  be  read,  it  interests.  But  to  see  its  true 
character,  before  beginning  to  deal  with  it  in  detail,  we 
need  to  recognize  the  nature  of  the  book  as  a  whole,  and 
its  place  in  the  New  Testament  revelation. 

The  book  opens  with  a  reference  to  one  of  the  earlier 
books,  in  the  words, — "  The  former  treatise."  The  Lucan 
authorship  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  needs  no  argu- 
ment. We  take  that  as  fully  established,  both  by  the 
long-continued  opinion  of  the  Church,  and  by  the  con- 
clusions of  the  most  recent  scholarship.  Consequently 
we  may  take  it  for  granted  that  this  reference,  at  the 
commencement  of  the  book,  is  to  the  Gospel  which  bears 
Luke's  name. 

In  order  that  the  value  of  this  may  be  gained,  we  will 
read  the  prologue  to  Luke's  Gospel: 

"  Forasmuch  as  many  have  taken  in  hand  to  draw  up 
a  narrative  concerning  those  matters  which  have  been 
fulfilled  among  us,  even  as  they  delivered  them  unto  us, 
who  from  the  beginning  were  eye-witnesses  and 
ministers  of  the  Word^  it  seemed  good  to  me  also,  having 

[  7  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  1 : 1-5] 

traced  the  course  of  all  things  accurately  from  the  first, 
to  write  unto  thee  in  order,  most  excellent  Theophilus, 
that  thou  mightest  know  the  certainty  concerning  the 
things  wherein  thou  wast  instructed." 

We  then  take  up  the  book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles 
and  read,  "  The  former  treatise  I  made,  O  Theophilus." 
The  continuity  is  apparent  on  the  surface.  We  have  the 
same  writer,  Luke ;  the  same  reader,  Theophilus ;  the  same 
subject,  Jesus. 

Yet  perhaps  the  whole  of  that  does  not  appear  im- 
mediately. One  is  inclined  to  say ;  the  writer  is  the  same  ; 
the  reader  is  the  same;  but  is  the  subject  the  same? 

First  let  us  recognize  that  the  title  of  the  book  is  an 
unfortunate  one.  To  one  taking  up  the  book  for  the 
first  time,  that  title,  "  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles,"  would 
seem  to  suggest  that  in  the  book  we  should  find  a  chronicle 
of  all  the  doings  of  all  the  apostles.  We  know  that  this  is 
not  so.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  Greek  title  of  the  manu- 
script is  "Acts  of  Apostles."  That  is  more  indefinite, 
suggesting  only  that  it  records  some  acts  of  some  apostles, 
which  comes  far  nearer  the  truth.  Some  of  the  apostles 
are  never  named  beyond  their  inclusion  in  the  list  given 
before  the  account  of  the  Pentecostal  effusion.  Further, 
not  all  the  acts  of  any  one  apostle  are  recorded.  The 
book  as  history  is  merely  a  fragment,  and  in  some  senses 
a  disappointing  fragment;  but  the  incompleteness  of  the 
story  is  part  of  the  method  of  the  Spirit.  When  we  come 
to  its  last  sentences,  we  inevitably  put  it  down,  feeling 
that  there  are  a  hundred  questions  we  want  to  ask.  The 
last  picture  we  have  in  the  book  is  that  of  Paul  in  his 
own  hired  house  in  Rome,  receiving  all  that  came  to  him ; 
teaching  them  the  things  concerning  Jesus ;  and  preaching 
to  them  the  Kingdom  of  God.  Before  he  went  to  Rome 
he  wrote  to  the  Romans  that  he  hoped  to  go  on  by  them 
unto  Spain,  for  his  eyes  were  ever  fixed  on  regions  be- 
yond. We  should  like  to  know  if  he  ever  did  pass  on  to 

[8] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  I :  i-sl 

Spain;  yes,  and  more,  whether  the  feet  of  the  intrepid 
apostle  ever  actually  stood  on  the  soil  of  Britain.  These 
things  the  book  does  not  tell  us.  It  is  an  unfinished  frag- 
ment. 

Nevertheless  in  the  imperfect  nature  of  the  book  there 
is  a  perfect  system.  It  is  the  story  of  the  first  move- 
ments of  the  Christian  fact  in  the  world ;  revealing  prin- 
ciples, indicating  methods,  showing  failure;  and  all  in 
order  that  there  might  be  at  least  one  page  of  inspired 
Church  history,  which,  men  reading,  might  know  the  true 
meaning  and  mission  of  the  Church  in  the  history  of  the 
world. 

But  this  fact  that  the  book  is  the  first  page  of  Church 
history  is  not  a  final  or  perfect  definition  of  its  value. 
To  discover  what  its  supreme  value  is,  we  must  come 
back  once  more  to  the  initial  phrase,  in  which  we  shall 
find  the  key  which  unlocks  the  book : — "  The  former 
treatise  I  made,  O  Theophilus,  concerning  all  that  Jesus 
began  both  to  do  and  to  teach."  Observe  carefully  that 
word  began.  If  the  writer  had  written :  "  All  that  Jesus 
did  and  taught,"  the  suggestion  would  have  been  entirely 
different.  That  would  have  suggested  a  conception  of 
the  mission  of  the  Lord  in  the  world,  which  was  not  that 
of  the  writer  of  this  treatise ;  it  would  also  have  suggested 
a  conception  of  the  purpose  of  this  treatise,  which  was 
not  that  of  its  writer. 

The  words,  "  the  former  treatise,"  as  we  have  seen, 
take  us  back  to  the  Gospel  so  full  of  exquisite  beauty  in 
its  artistic  setting  forth  of  the  matchless  glory  of  the 
Person  of  Jesus  Christ ;  the  Gospel  which  pays  little  at- 
tention to  chronology,  but  groups  events  so  as  to  present 
the  perfect  Man,  perfected  through  processes,  and  per- 
fecting others  by  the  mystery  of  His  work.  With  that 
Gospel  in  our  minds,  we  take  up  the  new  treatise  by  the 
same  writer,  and  find  that  it  is  linked  to  this  Gospel. 

What  then  is  the  Gospel  of  Luke?  It  is  the  story  of 
the  birth  and  being;  of  the  childhood  and  confirmation; 

[9] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  1 : 1-5] 

of  the  attesting  and  anointing  of  Jesus.  It  gives  the  ac- 
count of  the  processes  of  teaching,  and  temptation,  and 
transfiguration  through  which  He  passed.  It  records  His 
descent  to  the  valley ;  His  going  to  the  Cross ;  His  resur- 
rection; and  His  ascension.  This  surely  is  the  story  of 
all  Jesus  did  and  taught.  No;  according  to  Luke:  it  is 
the  story  of  all  He  began  to  do  and  to  teach. 

The  same  writer  now  commences  a  second  treatise, 
and  the  inference  of  this  method  of  introduction  is,  that 
he  is  about  to  write  the  story  of  the  continuity  of  the 
doings  and  teachings  of  the  same  Person. 

When  we  gather  in  worship  to-day,  we  do  not  do  so 
in  memory  of  a  dead  leader;  but  in  the  real  presence  of 
a  living  Lord.  We  do  not  merely  think  of  One  Who  did 
and  taught,  in  the  dim  distance  of  times  of  which  we 
know  very  little.  We  are  not  following  One  of  Whom 
we  have  read  in  the  records.  That  is  not  the  truth  con- 
cerning Christianity.  We  gather  about  the  living  Christ, 
Whose  touch  has  still  its  ancient  power;  the  thrill  of 
communion  with  Whom  by  the  Spirit  is  the  flame  that 
inspires  us  to  new  endeavour;  the  inspiration  of  Whose 
love  within  our  heart,  draws  us  to  sacrificial  service  for 
men.  The  former  treatise  was  concerning  all  that  Jesus 
began  to  do  and  to  teach;  and  the  new  treatise  is  con- 
cerning the  things  He  continues  to  do  and  to  teach.  It  is 
not  final.  It  is  concerned  with  the  things  that  Christ  is 
still  doing  and  teaching;  and  in  the  Apocalypse,  the  last 
Unveiling,  we  come  to  dreams  and  revelations,  to  signs 
and  symbols  and  mysteries  revealing  the  things  He  is  yet 
to  do. 

We  have  seen  the  Christ  in  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  and 
John;  as  King  and  Servant;  as  Man  and  God;  the  face 
of  the  lion,  and  of  the  ox,  of  the  man,  and  of  the  eagle ; 
to  borrow  the  ancient  mystic  symbolism  of  the  East. 

We  see  Him  in  the  Acts  proceeding  to  kingly  empire  by 
the  royal  race  of  men  and  women,  who  look  upon  their 
girding  as  His  bond-slaves  as  being  a  greater  honour 

[    10] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  1 : 1-5] 

than  any  crowns  that  can  be  placed  upon  their  brows. 
We  see  Him  in  the  Acts  proceeding  through  processes, 
toward  the  making  of  men  and  women  conformed  to  the 
image  of  His  manhood,  and  made  partakers  of  the  Divine 
nature. 

But  the  story  is  not  completed.  The  last  picture  is  that 
of  an  Apostle  in  prison,  while  others  have  been  slain,  and 
others  persecuted.  The  victory  is  not  won ;  and  we  thank 
God  therefore  for  the  fact  that  there  is  another  book; 
and  in  it  the  story  of  a  great  Throne,  and  in  the  midst  of 
the  Throne  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain,  and  round  about 
the  Throne  four  living  creatures  with  the  faces  of  the  lion, 
and  the  ox,  and  the  man,  and  the  eagle ;  which  story  fore- 
tells His  ultimate  victory. 

When  we  come  to  the  study  of  this  book,  therefore, 
we  must  understand  that  it  is  not  a  merely  mechanical 
story  of  the  journeyings  of  Paul,  or  of  the  doings  of 
Peter.  It  is  intended  to  reveal  to  us  the  processes 
through  which  Christ  proceeds  in  new  power,  consequent 
upon  the  things  He  began  to  do  and  teach,  toward  the 
ultimate  and  final  victory,  which  we  see  symbolized  in 
the  mystic  language  of  Revelation. 

There  is  a  soliloquy  of  Jesus  contained  in  the  Gospel 
of  Luke,  and  in  no  other  (Luke  12:49,  5°)-  In  the 
midst  of  our  Lord's  teaching  of  the  crowd  He  seems 
suddenly  to  have  paused,  and  in  these  two  verses  we  have 
what  must  be  described  as  a  soliloquy. 

"  I  came  to  cast  fire  upon  the  earth ;  and  what  do  I  de- 
sire if  it  is  already  kindled  ?  But  I  have  a  baptism  to  be 
baptized  with ;  and  how  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accom- 
plished." Mark  the  strange  word  here,  the  arresting 
word,  "  How  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accomplished." 
This  is  Christ's  own  word;  it  is  something  He  said  of 
Himself,  in  the  midst  of  His  strenuous  life  and  ministry ; 
I  am  constrained ;  I  am  imprisoned ;  I  cannot  yet  do  My 
mightiest  work.  What  was  His  mightiest  work ?  "I 
came  to  cast  fire  upon  the  earth."  So  His  herald  had 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  i :  1-5] 

declared.  John's  voice  had  rung  out  over  the  mountains 
and  plains,  saying :  "  I  indeed  baptize  you  in  water  unto 
repentance,  but  He  that  cometh  after  me  is  mightier 
than  I,  Whose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy  to  bear :  He  shall 
baptize  you  in  the  Holy  Spirit  and  in  fire."  Christ 
uttered  the  same  thought  when  He  said,  "  I  came  to  cast 
fire."  That  was  the  purpose  of  His  coming,  but  He 
said :  I  cannot  cast  it  yet ;  I  am  straitened ;  I  have  a  bap- 
tism to  be  baptized  with;  and  I  cannot  realize  the  ful- 
filment of  My  mission  save  by  the  way  of  that  baptism — 
the  baptism  of  My  Passion  and  My  Cross.  That  is  the 
whole  story  of  the  Gospel. 

We  come  now  to  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  we  find 
the  same  Christ,  but  no  longer  straitened.  The  baptism 
is  accomplished,  the  whelming  is  over.  He  has  passed 
into  the  infinite  morning,  and  the  larger  life,  and  He  is 
about  to  scatter  the  fire.  He  could  not  cast  that  fire  until 
His  passion  was  accomplished.  On  that  side  of  the  Cross 
He  was  straitened;  but  on  this  side  He  is  no  longer 
straitened. 

Let  us  try  and  express  this  in  the  terms  of  the  ex- 
perience of  the  disciples. 

Jesus  said  to  His  disciples,  "  It  is  expedient " — and 
reverently  let  us  change  His  word  for  the  moment — "  It 
is  better  for  you  that  I  go  away ; "  better  that  My  hands 
should  not  rest  upon  your  head  again,  John ;  better  that 
you  should  not  be  able  to  lay  your  head  upon  this  bosom 
of  Mine,  and  feel  the  beating  of  My  heart;  for  if  I  go 
not  away,  the  Comforter,  the  Paraclete,  will  not  come. 

The  better  thing,  then,  is  the  presence  of  the  Christ, 
by  the  Spirit,  in  the  heart  and  life  of  the  disciples. 
Supposing,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  He  had  stayed 
in  the  world,  living  an  eternal  life  on  the  human  level 
merely,  and  in  physical  presence.  How  we  should  have 
been  straitened !  If  He  were  in  Judaea  He  could  not  be 
in  England.  If  He  were  in  London,  and  had  gathered 
with  His  people  in  one  place,  He  could  not  be  in  another. 

I    I* 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  1 : 1-5] 

But  now,  in  the  great  cathedral;  in  the  church;  in  the 
chapel;  in  the  Salvation  Army  citadel;  in  the  cottage; 
with  the  two  or  three  gathered  together,  everywhere  is 
the  Christ. 

He  came  again  and  was  not  straitened,  was  not  limited. 
The  geographical  limitations  were  ended,  and  the  spiritual 
presence  began.  Paul,  that  man  who  saw  so  clearly  into 
the  heart  of  the  Christian  fact,  wrote — and  we  now  begin 
to  understand  the  meaning  of  his  exulting  writing — 
"  Wherefore  we  henceforth  know  no  man  after  the  flesh ; 
even  though  we  have  known  Christ  after  the  flesh,  yet 
now  we  know  Him  so  no  more."  In  this  book  of  the 
Acts  then,  we  see  Christ  with  all  human  sympathy,  and 
Divine  power,  everywhere  present  by  the  Spirit,  begin- 
ning to  live  and  work,  not  in  Judaea  only,  but  also  in 
Samaria,  and  to  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth.  He  is 
seen,  being  completed  in  His  Body,  the  Church;  and  His 
Church  is  seen,  becoming  the  instrument  through  which 
the  Spirit  of  His  life  moves  forward  in  salvation,  and  to 
empire. 

We  might,  therefore,  call  this  book  which  we  are  study- 
ing, not  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  but  "  The  book  of  the 
continued  doing  and  teaching  of  the  living  Christ  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  through  His  Body  which  is  the  Church." 

The  study  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  will  have  a  two- 
fold effect  upon  us ; — it  will  fill  us  with  hope ;  it  will  fill 
us  with  shame.  We  shall  see  in  it,  how  the  Body  of  the 
Christ  was  indeed  the  instrument  of  His  victory.  Yet  we 
shall  see  Him  straitened  in  the  imperfection  of  the  Body 
which  is  His  Church. 

Before  this  risen  glorified  One  passed  out  of  human 
sight,  to  return  in  spiritual  power  at  Pentecost,  He  stood 
in  the  midst  of  a  group  of  disciples,  and  He  said  to  them : 
Ye  shall  be  My  witnesses; — My  evidences,  My  creden- 
tials, My  arguments; — in  Jerusalem,  in  Judaea,  in 
Samaria,  and  to  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth. 

Yet  now,  nearly  two  thousand  years  after2  we  have 

[  13  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  1:6-26] 

not  reached  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth.  We  need 
cast  no  reflection  on  past  centuries;  but  if  we  catch  the 
vision  of  this  Christ,  and  feel  the  tenderness  of  His 
yearning  heart,  and  are  brought  by  the  study  of  this  book 
under  the  compulsion  of  His  great  demand,  before  the 
generation  passes,  the  whole  earth  will  have  heard  the 
witness. 

There  is  failure  all  through  this  book,  but  there  is  yet 
gracious  victory  here  also.  As  we  read  it,  we  shall  find 
a  revelation  of  purpose  and  power ;  and  we  shall  find  the 
indication  of  the  perils  that  confront  us  as  the  members 
of  His  Body. 

Acts  1 : 6-26 

This  paragraph  serves  as  a  link  between  the  things  of 
the  "  former  treatise  of  Luke,"  and  those  of  his  new 
story.  Here  we  have  our  last  glimpse  of  the  disciples 
before  Pentecost;  and  our  last  vision  of  Jesus — to  use 
Paul's  descriptive  phrase,  "  after  the  flesh " — present 
among  His  disciples  in  bodily  form.  Surely  the  artistic 
hand  of  Luke  is  evident  in  the  placing  of  this  paragraph 
here. 

Here  we  see  the  Lord,  and  the  apostles;  and  yet  a 
larger  group,  consisting  of  "the  women,  and  Mary  the 
mother  of  Jesus,  and  His  brethren  " ;  gathered  together. 
As  we  look  at  this  group  we  recognize  that  the  picture  is 
intimately  related  to  all  that  we  have  seen  in  the  Gospel 
story.  This  is  the  same  Jesus,  Whose  birth  was  there 
recorded,  Whose  ministry  was  chronicled,  Whose  cruci- 
fixion was  described,  Whose  resurrection  was  declared, 
and  Who  was  finally  revealed  as  One  ascended  to  God. 
He  is  spoken  of  as  "  Jesus,"  as  the  "  Lord  Jesus."  It  is 
the  old  word,  the  old  title;  the  name  by  which  He  had 
been  called  in  the  days  of  His  life  at  Nazareth,  the  title 
by  which  His  disciples  had  addressed  Him  in  the  days 
of  His  public  ministry.  The  Person  is  very  familiar; 

14  j 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  1:6-26] 

coming  from  the  olden  days.  This  is  equally  true  of  the 
men  and  women  round  about  Him.  We  seem  to  know 
them  all. 

All  this  is  to  emphasize  the  statement,  that  this  para- 
graph constitutes  a  page  between  the  preface  and  the 
main  story  of  the  book.  Moreover  we  shall  never  again 
meet  Christ  through  all  the  story  as  we  meet  Him  here. 
We  shall  never  in  this  book  see  Him  again  in  the  same 
visible  and  material  relationship  to  these  men.  He  will 
be  absent.  No  more  the  walk  between  Jerusalem  and 
Jericho.  No  more  the  laying  of  the  hand  upon  the  chil- 
dren brought  to  Him.  No  more  the  actual  looking  of 
the  human  eye,  into  the  eye  of  some  decrepit  soul  needing 
help.  No  more  the  human  tone  of  the  voice  in  answer 
to  which  disease  flees.  We  shall  never  meet  Him  thus 
again.  Henceforth  know  we  not  Christ  "  after  the  flesh." 

But  we  shall  see  these  men  again ;  and  yet,  all  the  way 
through  the  book,  they  will  be  changed,  and  different; 
not  in  the  visible  externals ;  but  absolutely  changed  in  the 
hidden  facts  of  the  life.  A  new  light  will  shine  through 
the  same  eyes.  A  new  tone  will  come  into  the  same  voices. 
A  new  atmosphere  will  be  generated  by  the  same  pres- 
ences. Peter  will  be  the  same  man,  and  yet  absolutely 
changed.  All  the  old  impulsiveness  will  be  present,  and 
all  the  enthusiasm  and  the  fire  and  the  fervour  that  made 
him  fit  companion  of  the  sons  of  thunder,  Boanerges. 
But  there  will  be  something  else.  The  change  will  not  be 
that  which  denies  the  natural,  but  the  change  that  baptizes 
it  with  the  supernatural,  until  it  becomes  its  fitting  and 
magnificent  instrument. 

The  picture  of  Jesus  and  His  disciples  given  to  us  in 
this  paragraph,  serves  to  reveal,  first,  the  results  of  the 
things  He  began  to  do  and  to  teach;  and,  secondly,  the 
need  for  that  coming  of  the  Paraclete,  which  was  im- 
mediately to  follow.  As  we  look  at  the  picture  we  are 
first  amazed  at  the  wonderful  results  of  the  things  Jesus 
began  to  do  and  to  teach,  as  manifested  in  these  men ;  but 

[15] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  1 : 6-26] 

we  are  supremely  impressed  with  the  truth  of  what  the 
Lord  Himself  said  to  them  in  the  paschal  discourses  just 
preceding  His  Cross,  "  It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go 
away." 

We  will  divide  our  present  study  into  two  parts;  deal- 
ing first,  with  the  last  glimpse  of  the  disciples  before 
Pentecost;  and  secondly,  with  the  last  vision  of  Jesus 
after  the  flesh. 

I.  In  considering  the  last  glimpse  of  the  disciples  be- 
fore Pentecost,  let  us  carefully  notice  the  two  things 
already  indicated;  first,  the  wonderful  results  of  the 
things  He  began  to  do  and  to  teach;  and  secondly,  the 
necessity  revealed  for  the  coming  of  the  Paraclete. 

We  begin  then  with  the  results  of  the  things  Jesus  be- 
gan to  do  and  to  teach. 

We  have  first,  the  story  of  their  gathering  about  Him, 
of  His  final  commission,  and  of  His  departure.  Then 
we  have  the  story  of  their  going  back,  after  His  depar- 
ture, to  Jerusalem;  of  their  being  of  one  accord  in  one 
place,  steadfastly  given  to  prayer.  Finally  we  have  the 
story  of  Peter's  address  concerning  the  vacancy  in  the 
apostolate  created  by  the  death  of  Judas,  and  of  how 
they  proceeded  to  fill  the  vacancy  by  the  election  of 
Matthias. 

In  the  first  of  these  things  their  wonderful  confidence 
in  Him  is  revealed;  their  confidence  in  each  other  is 
revealed  in  the  second;  and  their  .confidence  in  the 
Scriptures  of  truth  is  revealed  in  the  third.  All  these 
were  the  direct  result  of  their  having  been  the  disciples 
of  Jesus  during  the  three  years  of  His  public  ministry. 
They  were  the  issue  of  the  things  He  had  said  to  them 
in  many  a  patient  discourse  by  the  way,  and  in  many  a 
long  and  lonely  walk;  of  the  things  He  had  wrought 
miraculously  among  the  sons  of  men ;  of  the  mystery  of 
the  Cross  and  of  the  wonder  of  the  Resurrection. 

We  are  impressed  supremely  with  their  confidence  in 
Him.  They  asked  Him :  "  Lord,  dost  Thou  at  this  time 

[  16  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  1:6-26] 

restore  the  kingdom  to  Israel  ? "  Let  us  forget  for  a 
moment  the  mistake  they  made ;  forget  the  narrowness  of 
their  outlook;  and  mark  their  quiet  confidence  in  Him, 
as  revealed  in  their  assumptions. 

They  assumed  His  Lordship,  addressing  Him  as  Lord. 
They  assumed  His  ability  to  bring  the  ancient  economy 
and  purpose  of  God  to  a  final  consummation.  They  were 
Hebrews.  They  had  grown  up  in  the  great  hope  of  the 
Hebrew  people.  For  long  years,  perchance  through  all 
the  early  years  of  their  lives,  it  had  been  a  very  faint 
hope ;  but  as  they  had  walked  with  Him,  and  talked  with 
Him  along  the  way — and  especially  in  those  final  dis- 
courses after  resurrection,  when,  as  Luke  has  told  us,  He 
opened  to  them  the  Scriptures,  and  gave  them  to  under- 
stand the  meaning  of  their  own  nationality  and  economy 
— they  had  come  to  see  the  larger  vision ;  the  kingdom 
restored  to  Israel ;  God's  ancient  purpose  fulfilled.  They 
believed  He  was  able  to  do  this.  But  a  little  while  ago 
they  had  questioned  His  ability,  when  at  Csesarea  Philippi 
they  said  in  effect :  That  be  far  from  Thee,  Lord ;  if  Thou 
dost  take  Thy  way  to  the  Cross,  Thou  wilt  be  defeated ; 
and  disaster  will  overtake  Thee  rather  than  victory! 
Two  of  them  on  the  way  to  Emmaus  had  said,  "  We 
hoped  that  it  was  He  Who  should  redeem  Israel."  "  We 
hoped  " — the  past  tense ;  for  hope  had  been  extinguished, 
and  their  confidence  had  failed. 

But  now  all  this  was  changed,  and  here  they  stood 
about  Him,  having  perfect  confidence  in  His  ability  to 
fulfil  their  highest  and  truest  hope — the  restoration  of 
the  kingdom  to  Israel;  to  establish  the  will  of  God,  to 
consummate  the  purposes  of  the  Most  High. 

We  are  next  impressed  by  their  confidence  in  each 
other.  When  they  were  come  together  into  the  one 
place,  Luke  tells  us,  they  were  of  one  mind.  Notice  the 
grouping  of  the  apostles  here.  It  would  be  unsafe  to 
build  a  doctrine  upon  this,  or  to  overemphasize  its  value, 
but  it  is  interesting  to  see  that  the  moment  we  get  into 

[  17 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  i :  6-26] 

not  reached  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth.  We  need 
cast  no  reflection  on  past  centuries;  but  if  we  catch  the 
vision  of  this  Christ,  and  feel  the  tenderness  of  His 
yearning  heart,  and  are  brought  by  the  study  of  this  book 
under  the  compulsion  of  His  great  demand,  before  the 
generation  passes,  the  whole  earth  will  have  heard  the 
witness. 

There  is  failure  all  through  this  book,  but  there  is  yet 
gracious  victory  here  also.  As  we  read  it,  we  shall  find 
a  revelation  of  purpose  and  power ;  and  we  shall  find  the 
indication  of  the  perils  that  confront  us  as  the  members 
of  His  Body. 

Acts  1 : 6-26 

This  paragraph  serves  as  a  link  between  the  things  of 
the  "  former  treatise  of  Luke,"  and  those  of  his  new 
story.  Here  we  have  our  last  glimpse  of  the  disciples 
before  Pentecost;  and  our  last  vision  of  Jesus — to  use 
Paul's  descriptive  phrase,  "  after  the  flesh " — present 
among  His  disciples  in  bodily  form.  Surely  the  artistic 
hand  of  Luke  is  evident  in  the  placing  of  this  paragraph 
here. 

Here  we  see  the  Lord,  and  the  apostles;  and  yet  a 
larger  group,  consisting  of  "  the  women,  and  Mary  the 
mother  of  Jesus,  and  His  brethren  " ;  gathered  together. 
As  we  look  at  this  group  we  recognize  that  the  picture  is 
intimately  related  to  all  that  we  have  seen  in  the  Gospel 
story.  This  is  the  same  Jesus,  Whose  birth  was  there 
recorded,  Whose  ministry  was  chronicled,  Whose  cruci- 
fixion was  described,  Whose  resurrection  was  declared, 
and  Who  was  finally  revealed  as  One  ascended  to  God. 
He  is  spoken  of  as  "  Jesus,"  as  the  "  Lord  Jesus."  It  is 
the  old  word,  the  old  title;  the  name  by  which  He  had 
been  called  in  the  days  of  His  life  at  Nazareth,  the  title 
by  which  His  disciples  had  addressed  Him  in  the  days 
of  His  public  ministry.  The  Person  is  very  familiar; 

[  14  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  1:6-26] 

coming  from  the  olden  days.  This  is  equally  true  of  the 
men  and  women  round  about  Him.  We  seem  to  know 
them  all. 

All  this  is  to  emphasize  the  statement,  that  this  para- 
graph constitutes  a  page  between  the  preface  and  the 
main  story  of  the  book.  Moreover  we  shall  never  again 
meet  Christ  through  all  the  story  as  we  meet  Him  here. 
We  shall  never  in  this  book  see  Him  again  in  the  same 
visible  and  material  relationship  to  these  men.  He  will 
be  absent.  No  more  the  walk  between  Jerusalem  and 
Jericho.  No  more  the  laying  of  the  hand  upon  the  chil- 
dren brought  to  Him.  No  more  the  actual  looking  of 
the  human  eye,  into  the  eye  of  some  decrepit  soul  needing 
help.  No  more  the  human  tone  of  the  voice  in  answer 
to  which  disease  flees.  We  shall  never  meet  Him  thus 
again.  Henceforth  know  we  not  Christ  "  after  the  flesh." 

But  we  shall  see  these  men  again ;  and  yet,  all  the  way 
through  the  book,  they  will  be  changed,  and  different; 
not  in  the  visible  externals ;  but  absolutely  changed  in  the 
hidden  facts  of  the  life.  A  new  light  will  shine  through 
the  same  eyes.  A  new  tone  will  come  into  the  same  voices. 
A  new  atmosphere  will  be  generated  by  the  same  pres- 
ences. Peter  will  be  the  same  man,  and  yet  absolutely 
changed.  All  the  old  impulsiveness  will  be  present,  and 
all  the  enthusiasm  and  the  fire  and  the  fervour  that  made 
him  fit  companion  of  the  sons  of  thunder,  Boanerges. 
But  there  will  be  something  else.  The  change  will  not  be 
that  which  denies  the  natural,  but  the  change  that  baptizes 
it  with  the  supernatural,  until  it  becomes  its  fitting  and 
magnificent  instrument. 

The  picture  of  Jesus  and  His  disciples  given  to  us  in 
this  paragraph,  serves  to  reveal,  first,  the  results  of  the 
things  He  began  to  do  and  to  teach;  and,  secondly,  the 
need  for  that  coming  of  the  Paraclete,  which  was  im- 
mediately to  follow.  As  we  look  at  the  picture  we  are 
first  amazed  at  the  wonderful  results  of  the  things  Jesus 
began  to  do  and  to  teach,  as  manifested  in  these  men ;  but 

[  IS  1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  i :  6-26] 

we  are  supremely  impressed  with  the  truth  of  what  the 
Lord  Himself  said  to  them  in  the  paschal  discourses  just 
preceding  His  Cross,  "  It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go 
away." 

We  will  divide  our  present  study  into  two  parts ;  deal- 
ing first,  with  the  last  glimpse  of  the  disciples  before 
Pentecost;  and  secondly,  with  the  last  vision  of  Jesus 
after  the  flesh. 

I.  In  considering  the  last  glimpse  of  the  disciples  be- 
fore Pentecost,  let  us  carefully  notice  the  two  things 
already  indicated;  first,  the  wonderful  results  of  the 
things  He  began  to  do  and  to  teach;  and  secondly,  the 
necessity  revealed  for  the  coming  of  the  Paraclete. 

We  begin  then  with  the  results  of  the  things  Jesus  be- 
gan to  do  and  to  teach. 

We  have  first,  the  story  of  their  gathering  about  Him, 
of  His  final  commission,  and  of  His  departure.  Then 
we  have  the  story  of  their  going  back,  after  His  depar- 
ture, to  Jerusalem;  of  their  being  of  one  accord  in  one 
place,  steadfastly  given  to  prayer.  Finally  we  have  the 
story  of  Peter's  address  concerning  the  vacancy  in  the 
apostolate  created  by  the  death  of  Judas,  and  of  how 
they  proceeded  to  fill  the  vacancy  by  the  election  of 
Matthias. 

In  the  first  of  these  things  their  wonderful  confidence 
in  Him  is  revealed;  their  confidence  in  each  other  is 
revealed  in  the  second;  and  their  .confidence  in  the 
Scriptures  of  truth  is  revealed  in  the  third.  All  these 
were  the  direct  result  of  their  having  been  the  disciples 
of  Jesus  during  the  three  years  of  His  public  ministry. 
They  were  the  issue  of  the  things  He  had  said  to  them 
in  many  a  patient  discourse  by  the  way,  and  in  many  a 
long  and  lonely  walk;  of  the  things  He  had  wrought 
miraculously  among  the  sons  of  men;  of  the  mystery  of 
the  Cross  and  of  the  wonder  of  the  Resurrection. 

We  are  impressed  supremely  with  their  confidence  in 
Him.  They  asked  Him :  "  Lord,  dost  Thou  at  this  time 

[  16  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  1:6-26] 

restore  the  kingdom  to  Israel  ? "  Let  us  forget  for  a 
moment  the  mistake  they  made ;  forget  the  narrowness  of 
their  outlook;  and  mark  their  quiet  confidence  in  Him, 
as  revealed  in  their  assumptions. 

They  assumed  His  Lordship,  addressing  Him  as  Lord. 
They  assumed  His  ability  to  bring  the  ancient  economy 
and  purpose  of  God  to  a  final  consummation.  They  were 
Hebrews.  They  had  grown  up  in  the  great  hope  of  the 
Hebrew  people.  For  long  years,  perchance  through  all 
the  early  years  of  their  lives,  it  had  been  a  very  faint 
hope ;  but  as  they  had  walked  with  Him,  and  talked  with 
Him  along  the  way — and  especially  in  those  final  dis- 
courses after  resurrection,  when,  as  Luke  has  told  us,  He 
opened  to  them  the  Scriptures,  and  gave  them  to  under- 
stand the  meaning  of  their  own  nationality  and  economy 
— they  had  come  to  see  the  larger  vision;  the  kingdom 
restored  to  Israel ;  God's  ancient  purpose  fulfilled.  They 
believed  He  was  able  to  do  this.  But  a  little  while  ago 
they  had  questioned  His  ability,  when  at  Csesarea  Philippi 
they  said  in  effect :  That  be  far  from  Thee,  Lord ;  if  Thou 
dost  take  Thy  way  to  the  Cross,  Thou  wilt  be  defeated ; 
and  disaster  will  overtake  Thee  rather  than  victory! 
Two  of  them  on  the  way  to  Emmaus  had  said,  "  We 
hoped  that  it  was  He  Who  should  redeem  Israel."  "  We 
hoped  " — the  past  tense ;  for  hope  had  been  extinguished, 
and  their  confidence  had  failed. 

But  now  all  this  was  changed,  and  here  they  stood 
about  Him,  having  perfect  confidence  in  His  ability  to 
fulfil  their  highest  and  truest  hope — the  restoration  of 
the  kingdom  to  Israel;  to  establish  the  will  of  God,  to 
consummate  the  purposes  of  the  Most  High. 

We  are  next  impressed  by  their  confidence  in  each 
other.  When  they  were  come  together  into  the  one 
place,  Luke  tells  us,  they  were  of  one  mind.  Notice  the 
grouping  of  the  apostles  here.  It  would  be  unsafe  to 
build  a  doctrine  upon  this,  or  to  overemphasize  its  value, 
but  it  is  interesting  to  see  that  the  moment  we  get  into 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  1:6-26] 

the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  the  grouping  of  these  men  is 
changed. 

Peter  and  John.  That  is  new.  It  always  used  to  be 
Peter  and  James  and  John.  Now,  "  Peter  and  John  and 
James  and  Andrew  " ;  that  is  the  first  group.  There  were 
only  three  in  the  olden  days,  and  we  speak  of  them  as 
the  men  of  special  privilege,  taken  to  special  places  of 
vision.  Perhaps,  after  all,  Peter,  James,  and  John  needed 
more  especial  care  because  of  the  weakness  of  their 
boanergic  temperament.  When  Luke  groups  them  in 
the  Acts  he  brings  Andrew  in,  the  man  who  never  seems 
to  have  occupied  a  place  of  privilege,  of  whom  we  know 
nothing  at  all,  save  that  he  called  Peter.  Now  Luke  puts 
him  in  with  the  first  three,  and  thus  associates  the  or- 
dinary and  outside  man  with  those  more  notable. 

Then  again,  Peter  and  John  were  never  agreed  in  the 
Gospel  story.  They  never  understood  each  other.  Peter 
was  the  practical  man,  John  was  the  poet.  Peter  was 
,  always  doing,  John  was  always  dreaming.  When  you 
get  to  the  last  chapter  of  John,  John  is  still  troubling 
Peter,  so  that  he  says  to  the  Lord :  "  Lord,  and  what 
shall  this  man  do  ?  "  In  the  new  grouping,  they  have 
gone  into  partnership;  the  doer  and  the  dreamer;  the 
practical  man  and  the  poet.  Then  James  and  Andrew, 
the  courteous  and  the  curious.  Next  Philip  and  Thomas. 
Philip  the  reserved  man,  who  believed  everything,  and 
was  willing  to  be  on  the  edge  of  the  crowd  and  bring 
strangers  to  Jesus.  Thomas,  the  sceptic,  who  demanded 
proof,  or  he  would  believe  nothing.  Then  Bartholomew 
and  Matthew;  Nathanael,  the  guileless  worshipper;  and 
Matthew  the  publican,  the  astute  tax-gatherer.  Then 
three,  "  James  the  son  of  Alphaeus,  and  Simon  the  Zealot, 
and  Judas  the  son  of  James."  No  one  knows  anything 
about  the  first  two,  and  Judas  is  only  known  as  one  who 
asked  a  question  in  the  upper  room  (John  14:  22). 

Is  not  all  this  at  least  suggestive?  Does  it  not  seem 
to  say  to  us  that  the  Cross  and  the  Resurrection  brought 

1 18 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  1:6-26] 

men  into  an  affinity  that  cancelled  all  merely  tempera- 
mental discords? 

"  And  certain  women,  and  Mary  the  mother  of  Jesus." 
That  is  the  last  glimpse  of  the  highly  favoured  Virgin 
Mother.  "And  His  brethren."  They  were  never  with 
Him  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  but  they  are  gathered  now 
in  the  one  accord.  Confidence  in  each  other  is  the  basis 
of  a  new  fellowship. 

>•  And  once  again,  observe  their  confidence  in  the  Scrip- 
tures. Peter  now  commenced  to  interpret  the  present 
by  the  Scriptures  of  the  past.  He  made  quotation  from 
two  of  the  great  Psalms  (79  and  109)  and  distinctly,  and 
without  any  hesitation,  said  that  David  wrote  these  things 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  concerning  Judas.  If  we  read  Psalm 
79  or  109,  without  the  illumination  of  this  interpretation, 
we  should  never  dream  that  there  was  a  reference  in 
them  to  Judas,  or  that  there  was  a  reference  in  them  to 
the  Messiah.  The  great  Messianic  psalms  are  indeed 
Messianic  psalms;  but  the  writers  did  not  understand 
the  full  richness  of  their  Messianic  values.  David  was 
referring  to  one  of  his  own  enemies;  but  Peter  deliber- 
ately and  quietly  quotes  the  old  and  familiar  passage, 
and  says  that  finally  it  had  reference  to  Judas  and  to 
Jesus.  One  of  the  last  things  that  Luke  tells  us  in  his 
Gospel  story  is  of  how  Jesus  walked  and  talked  with  the 
disciples,  and  opened  to  them  all  the  Scriptures,  beginning 
from  Moses;  of  how  He  spoke  to  this  selfsame  group 
just  before  leaving  them,  and  taught  them  that  it  be- 
hoved Him  to  suffer,  that  all  things  written  in  the  Scrip- 
tures should  be  fulfilled ;  naming  the  three  great  divisions, 
Moses,  and  the  prophets,  and  the  psalms.  Peter  was  a 
Hebrew  brought  up  on  the  very  Scriptures  which  he 
was  quoting,  familiar  with  their  letter,  undoubtedly;  but 
now  he  read  them  with  a  new  understanding.  He  had 
seen  a  new  light  in  them. 

Thus  we  see  gathered  about  Jesus  a  group  of  men  with 
perfect  confidence  in  their  Lord ;  with  joyful  confidence 

[•  19  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  1:6-26] 

in  each  other;  with  an  absolute  confidence  in  the  value 
of  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament.  These  things 
all  resulted  from  the  things  He  began  to  do  and  to  teach. 

But  now  let  us  briefly  notice  the  incompleteness  mani- 
fested, which  necessitated  the  coming  of  the  Paraclete. 

The  first  fact  observable  is  that  of  their  ignorance  of 
Christ's  purpose.  "  Dost  Thou  at  this  time  restore  the 
kingdom  to  Israel  ?  "  Christ  rebuked,  not  their  concep1- 
tion  that  the  kingdom  is  to  be  restored  to  Israel 
— for  that  He  never  rebuked — but  their  desire  to 
know  when  it  would  take  place.  "  It  is  not  for 
you  to  know  times  or  seasons,  which  the  Father 
hath  set  within  His  own  authority."  A  popular  in- 
terpretation of  this  is  that  Christ  said  to  them :  "  There 
is  to  be  no  restoration  of  the  kingdom  to  Israel."  Christ 
did  not  say  so.  What  He  did  say  was :  It  is  not  for  you 
to  know  the  times  or  seasons.  You  have  other  work  to 
do.  "  Ye  shall  receive  power  when  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
come  upon  you :  and  ye  shall  be  My  witnesses." 

These  men  did  not  understand  that.  They  loved  Him, 
they  were  loyal  to  Him,  they  loved  each  other,  they  loved 
their  own  Scriptures,  they  had  come  to  a  new  apprecia- 
tion of  them;  but  they  were  not  ready  for  their  work, 
because  they  had  not  seen  what  it  would  be.  They  had 
no  conception  of  this  new  spiritual  mission  to  which  they 
were  called.  They  did  not  understand  the  method  by 
which  God  was  about  to  work  toward  the  ultimate  con- 
summation. They  had  heard  Him,  had  seen  Him,  had 
come  to  love  Him,  and  believe  in  Him ;  but  they  were 
absolutely  ignorant  of  the  next  step  in  the  programme 
of  God;  and  they  never  did  understand  it  until  Pente- 
cost, and  the  consequent  interpretation  by  the  Spirit  of 
all  the  things  that  Jesus  had  said. 

In  the  next  place  notice  their  consequent  inability  to 
execute  His  commission.  He  had  said  to  them  that  they 
were  to  be  witnesses.  But  here  they  were  in  the  upper 
room;  of  one  accord;  steadfast  in  prayer;  happy  in  their 

[20] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  1:6-26] 

mutual  comradeships ;  constant  in  their  loyalty ;  but  quite 
unable  to  witness.  They  could  do  nothing  to  bear  testi- 
mony to  Him  until  after  Pentecost. 

And  again — this  is  a  debated  point  in  interpretation — 
but  my  own  conviction  is  that  we  have  a  revelation  of 
their  inefficiency  for  organization;  that  the  election  of 
Matthias  was  wrong.  Their  idea  of  what  was  necessary 
as  a  witness  to  the  resurrection  was  wrong.  They  said 
that  a  witness  must  have  been  with  them  from  the  bap- 
tism of  John.  They  thought  a  witness  must  be  one  who 
had  seen  Jesus  prior  to  His  ascension.  As  a  matter  of 
fact  the  most  powerful  incentive  to  witness  was  the  see- 
ing of  Christ  after  resurrection,  as  when  He  arrested 
Saul  of  Tarsus  on  his  way  to  Damascus.  So  their  prin- 
ciple of  selection  was  wrong.  Their  method  of  selection 
was  also  wrong.  The  method  of  casting  lots  was  no 
longer  necessary.  Thus  we  have  the  wrong  appointment 
of  Matthias.  He  was  a  good  man,  but  the  wrong  man 
for  this  position,  and  he  passed  out  of  sight;  and  when 
presently  we  come  to  the  final  glory  of  the  city  of  God, 
we  see  twelve  foundation  stones,  and  twelve  apostles' 
names,  and  I  am  not  prepared  to  omit  Paul  from  the 
twelve,  believing  that  he  was  God's  man  for  the  filling 
of  the  gap. 

These  men  were  perfectly  sincere,  proceeding  on  the 
lines  of  revealed  truth,  but  they  were  ignorant  of  God's 
next  method;  unable  to  bear  their  witness;  unable  to 
organize  themselves  for  the  doing  of  the  work;  and 
consequently  needing  the  coming  of  the  Paraclete. 

II.  In  conclusion,  let  us  look  at  this  last  vision  of 
Jesus  "  after  the  flesh."  His  last  teaching  was  a  correc- 
tion ;  a  promise ;  and  a  commission.  He  corrected  them. 
He  did  not  deny  their  hope  that  the  kingdom  should  be 
restored  to  Israel.  He  only  rebuked  their  curiosity,  and 
in  that  last  word  He  taught  His  disciples  and  His  Church 
that  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  times  and  the 
seasons  of  Israel;  nothing  to  do  with  dates  and  days 

[21    ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  1 : 6-26] 

and  calendars  and  predictions.  What,  then,  are  they  to 
do?  First  they  are  to  recognize  that  for  the  doing  of 
that  to  which  He  calls  them,  they  need  power :  "  Ye  shall 
receive  power  after  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  come  upon 
you."  Then  follows  the  commission.  He  gathered  the 
whole  earth  into  His  declaration  of  purpose.  Beginning 
in  Jerusalem,  passing  out  through  Judaea  and  Samaria, 
and  at  last  reaching  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth,  they 
were  to  be  witnesses. 

The  last  doing  of  Jesus  after  the  flesh  was  that  of 
vanishing.  The  last  act  was  that  of  disappearing.  As 
they  looked  upon  Him,  He  was  received  up,  and  so  He 
vanished  out  of  their  sight.  He  did  not  go  away;  He 
went  out  of  sight  as  to  bodily  presence.  We  are  perfectly 
correct  in  using  the  word  up — He  was  received  up — 
that  is,  on  to  the  higher  level  of  life;  the  life  that  is 
higher  than  the  merely  material,  and  manifest,  and  local- 
ized, and  limited.  The  man  Jesus  vanished  from  sight, 
but  the  Christ  did  not  depart.  He  had  said,  "  Lo,  I  am 
with  you  always,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  age." 

The  body  in  which  He  began  to  do  and  to  teach  passed 
out  of  their  sight.  It  did  not  cease  to  be,  but  for  their 
sakes  it  vanished  to  make  way  for  the  body  in  which 
He  would  continue  to  do  and  to  teach,  which  is  His 
Church,  "  the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all."  The 
days  of  limited  service  were  over,  the  days  of  unlimited 
service  were  about  to  begin.  The  body  of  earthly  service 
passed  out  of  sight,  and  the  new  body  was  there,  not 
having  come  to  birth  and  might,  but  waiting  for  the 
Pentecostal  effusion. 

The  Man  of  Nazareth  is  still  a  man  in  God's  universe. 
The  terms  up  or  down,  far  or  near,  we  shall  have  to 
cancel  when  presently  we  drop  this  robe  of  flesh,  and 
pass  into  the  light  and  into  the  glory;  but  the  Man  of 
Nazareth  will  forever  be  the  central  point  of  manifesta- 
tion, as  He  was  in  the  world.  The  Christ  of  God,  the 
Son  of  God,  the  Saviour,  Who  wrought  out  into  visibility, 

[22   ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  1:6-26] 

through  His  body,  the  infinite  facts  of  the  Divine  Being 
and  of  human  redemption,  was  still  near  to  His  disciples, 
but  they  must  be  trained  to  faith,  and  not  to  sight. 
Therefore  He  vanished.  The  last  vision  is  that  of  the 
vanishing,  but  not  that  of  departing,  not  of  going1  away. 

One  other  word.  We  see  these  men  looking,  gazing 
toward  heaven.  The  cloud  had  enwrapped  Him,  and  He 
had  gone,  and  yet  they  were  gazing.  Then  there  stood 
by  them  two  men.  We  nearly  always  say  angels,  but  the 
Bible  says  "  Men."  Perhaps  they  were  Moses  and  Elijah, 
the  men  who  appeared  on  the  mount  of  transfiguration. 
Two  men  stood  by  them.  They  had  lost  one  Man,  the 
One  was  gone,  but  two  were  there.  These  two  said,  "  Ye 
men  of  Galilee,  why  stand  ye  looking  into  heaven?  This 
Jesus  shall  so  come  in  like  manner."  The  form  that  you 
have  loved  to  look  upon  will  yet  be  seen  of  your  eyes. 
For  to-day,  He  is  out  of  sight ;  but  He  is  not  away  from 
you. 

He  had  passed  out  of  sight,  but  He  knew  how  their 
hearts  would  break;  He  knew  how  difficult  it  would  be 
to  realize  Him  when  He  was  gone ;  and  so  He  sent  them 
a  message  out  of  the  unseen.  Two  other  men  bore  that 
message.  What  a  startling  thing  it  was !  One  Man  had 
gone,  but  there  were  two.  So  they  knew  that  the  One 
was  not  lost.  In  a  moment  the  two  were  also  gonet 
What  had  the  disciples  learned  ?  That  they  knew  nothing 
about  that  which  was  around  them,  save  that  at  any 
moment  the  One  might  appear  again. 

We  do  not  understand  it,  but  the  fragrance  of  it  is  all 
about  us,  and  whereas  we  worship  the  mystic,  and  the 
eternal,  and  the  unseen  Christ,  we  still  work  in  comrade- 
ship with  the  Man  of  Nazareth. 

"  Warm,  sweet,  tender,  even  yet 

A  present  help  is  He ; 
And  faith  has  still  its  Olivet, 
And  love  its  Galilee." 

[23  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 1-4] 

Acts  2: 1-4 

This  paragraph  contains  the  story  of  the  formation  of 
the  Christian  Church.  It  is  so  familiar  that  probably 
all  could  recite  it.  Therefore  we  need  do  no  more  than 
glance  at  its  details  by  way  of  introduction,  and  then 
pass  to  the  consideration  of  some  of  the  spiritual  sig- 
nificances of  this  wonderful  event. 

The  time  was  the  day  of  Pentecost,  fifty  days  after 
Passover.  The  persons  assembled,  described  as  "  they," 
were  those  named  in  the  previous  chapter — the  eleven 
apostles,  also  Matthias,  certain  women,  the  virgin  mother, 
and  the  brothers  of  Jesus.  The  actual  place  of  their 
assembly  is  not  named.  Undoubtedly  it  was  in  the  Tem- 
ple. (Compare  Luke  24:  52,  53  ;  Acts  1 : 14;  Acts  2:1; 
Acts  2:  46.)  1  Upon  this  company  of  units,  united  by  a 
common  love  for,  and  loyalty  to,  the  departed  Jesus, 
there  came  the  mystic  mystery  of  the  baptism  of  the 
Spirit.  Two  symbols  were  given — one  appealing  to  hear- 
ing, and  the  other  to  seeing.  The  symbol  of  sound — 
"  a  rushing  mighty  wind " ;  the  symbol  of  sight — 
"  tongues  ...  of  fire,"  a  plurality  and  a  unity,  the 
tongues  were  many;  but  the  fire  was  One. 

These  were  but  symbols,  of  no  value  save  as  signs  for 
the  moment.  It  is  necessary  to  observe  that  fact,  because 
there  is  always  a  hunger  in  the  carnal  heart  for  signs. 
These  signs  were  material;  to-day  we  do  not  need  them; 
they  were  needed  at  the  commencement. 

That  which  is  of  supreme  importance  is  the  experience 
described  in  the  words :  "  They  were  all  filled  with  the 
Holy  Spirit."  The  Spirit  was  unseen  and  unheard.  The 
wind  was  but  Christ's  chosen  symbol  of  that  Spirit,  and 
was  not  the  Spirit;  they  did  not  hear  the  coming  of  the 
Spirit;  they  heard  the  sound  as  of  the  "  rushing  mighty 
wind  " ;  and  thus,  the  symbol  which  their  Lord  had  used 
when  He  said  to  Nicodemus,  "  The  wind  bloweth  where 

1  See  Philip  Mauro's  conclusive  booklet,  "  Where  did  the  Holy 
Spirit  descend  at  Pentecost?" 

[24] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 1-4] 

it  will,  and  thou  hearest  the  voice  thereof,  but  knowest 
not  whence  it  cometh,  and  whither  it  goeth:  so  is  every 
one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit,"  would  remind  them  of 
His  teaching1,  and  emphasize  the  presence  of  the  Spirit. 
The  Spirit  is  not  fire,  and  did  not  come  in  the  fire  they 
saw.  That  was  the  symbol  granted;  but  never  granted 
since,  because  unnecessary.  The  abiding  fact  was  that 
of  the  Spirit  filling  these  waiting  souls. 

Then  a  new  day  dawned  in  human  history,  a  new  de- 
parture was  initiated  in  the  economy  of  God.  Taking 
the  Bible  as  the  history  of  God's  dealings  with  men,  there 
had  never  been  anything  like  this  before,  though  every- 
thing had  looked  toward  it,  waited  for  it,  and  hoped  for 
it. 

When  Peter  preached  his  first  great  sermon  in  the 
power  of  the  Pentecostal  effusion,  he  interpreted  its 
meaning  by  citing  the  ancient  prophecy  of  Joel.  Through 
all  the  Old  Testament  Scripture;  in  the  types,  and 
shadows,  and  whisperings;  in  the  gleams  of  light,  the 
songs  of  hope,  and  the  visions  of  coming  things ;  this  is 
the  event  toward  which  men  were  looking.  When  Peter 
began  to  interpret  the  things  in  the  midst  of  which  he  and 
the  disciples  found  themselves,  he  said,  "This  is  that 
which  hath  been  spoken  through  the  prophet."  Up  to 
this  time  there  had  been  expectation,  without  realization. 

Not  that  the  Spirit  had  been  wholly  absent  from  hu- 
man affairs.  The  restoration  of  creation  came  by  the 
ministry  of  the  Spirit,  brooding  upon  chaos,  and  pro- 
ducing cosmos.  The  Spirit  is  referred  to  over  and  over 
again  in  the  study  of  the  Old  Testament,  as  clothing 
men  with  Himself;  clothing  Himself  with  men;  coming 
in  power  upon  individuals  for  the  doing  of  mighty  deeds ; 
coming  with  sweet  gentleness  in  the  inspiration  of  art,  in 
order  that  men  might  work  cunningly  in  gold  and  silver 
and  other  things  for  the  temple  of  God. 

But  such  a  day  as  this  had  never  dawned.  This  was 
the  beginning  of  a  new  departure  in  the  economy  of  God; 

1 25 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 1-4] 

not  a  new  departure  rendered  necessary  by  the  failure; 
of  the  past,  but  a  new  departure  rendered  necessary  by 
the  accomplishments  of  the  past.  Everything  in  the 
economy  of  God  had  been  preparatory  to  this.  This 
never  could  have  been  until  this  hour.  But  the  hour  had 
come;  everything  was  accomplished;  all  the  preparatory 
work  was  over,  and  there  broke  upon  human  history  a 
new  dawning;  there  began  a  new  economy  in  the  enter- 
prises of  God. 

In  order  to  an  understanding  of  all  that  is  to  follow 
in  the  book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  in  order  to 
an  understanding  of  all  our  own  life  and  service,  it  is 
necessary  for  us  to  consider  two  matters;  first,  the  new 
facts  following  Pentecost;  and,  secondly,  the  limitations 
of  the  Pentecostal  age. 

We  will  tabulate  the  new  facts  following  Pentecost, 
and  consider  them  under  three  headings;  the  new  facts 
as  to  the  Christ;  the  new  facts  as  to  the  Church;  the 
new  facts  as  to  the  world. 

In  order  to  recognize  the  new  facts  as  to  the  Christ, 
we  must  remind  ourselves  of  the  things  prior  to  Pente- 
cost concerning  Him.  These  we  may  very  briefly  sum- 
marize as  the  facts  of  the  Incarnation,  and  the  Decease. 
We  use  that  word  "  decease  "  as  it  is  used  in  the  Gospel 
stories.  One  would  much  prefer  to  use  our  form  of  the 
Greek  word,  the  Exodus. 

The  Incarnation ; — the  fact  of  His  coming,  the  mystery 
of  His  birth,  His  being,  and  His  presence  in  human 
history; — was  an  accomplished  fact  before  Pentecost. 
So  also  was  the  Exodus,  which  included  the  Cross,  the 
Resurrection,  and  the  Ascension. 

In  the  Gospel  of  John,  our  Lord  Himself  is  reported 
as  expressing  the  whole  fact  of  His  mission  in  these 
words,  "  I  came  out  from  the  Father,  and  am  come  into 
the  world:  again,  I  leave  the  world,  and  go  unto  the 
Father."  "  I  came  out  from  the  Father  and  am  come 
into  the  world  " ;  that  is  Incarnation.  "  Again  I  leave 

[26] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 1-4] 

the  world  and  go  unto  the  Father  " ;  that  is  a  simple  state- 
ment, thrilling  with  meaning,  including  in  itself  the  mys- 
tery of  His  Cross,  the  victory  of  His  Resurrection,  and 
the  glory  of  His  Ascension ;  or  briefly  the  Exodus.  These 
things  were  all  accomplished  before  Pentecost.  The 
value  of  Incarnation  is  that  of  revelation;  the  value  of 
the  Exodus  is  that  of  redemption.  He  came  to  reveal; 
He  came  to  redeem.  He  revealed  by  the  Incarnation. 
He  redeemed  by  the  Exodus. 

The  Incarnation  was  revelation.  Let  us  take  another 
word  instead  of  revelation — exhibition.  We  associate 
the  word  with  spectacular  displays.  Then  let  us  take  yet 
another  word.  It  is  a  word  which  is  coming  into  use  for 
the  same  purpose,  borrowed  from  the  French — exposi- 
tion. 

What  then  is  an  exhibition?  It  is  the  gathering  to- 
gether in  one  place,  the  focussing,  of  certain  things  from 
the  far  distances,  in  order  that  men  may  see  and  under- 
stand. What  is  an  exposition  ?  It  is  expository  work,  a 
method  of  revealing,  a  method  of  showing,  a  method  by 
which  men  are  brought  face  to  face  with  things  they 
would  not  otherwise  understand.  Perhaps  the  best  il- 
lustration is  found  by  going  back  to  the  first  Exhibition 
of  1851,  where  the  purpose,  primarily,  was  not  com- 
mercial as  it  now  is ;  but  that  of  the  revelation  of  truths 
concerning  other  peoples,  in  order  to  produce  unity  of 
heart  in  the  world. 

Before  Pentecost  there  was  Exposition.  Jesus  was 
Himself  the  great  Expositor;  the  Exhibition  of  God  to 
men ;  also  of  heaven,  of  truth,  and  of  all  spiritual  verities. 
That  is  not  to  say  that  the  world  had  seen,  or  that  the 
disciples  had  seen.  One  would  be  prepared  to  say  they 
had  neither  seen  nor  understood.  But  there  was  the 
Exhibition,  the  Exposition,  the  Revelation  in  Christ,  of 
all  essential  truth. 

We  have  seen  exhibitions,  and  have  never  seen  them. 
We  have  passed  by  the  grounds,  and  have  said  to  our 

[27  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 1-4] 

friends :  I  saw  the  exhibition.  But  we  never  entered  it. 
Or  we  have  entered  the  gates,  and  have  spent  a  few  brief 
hours  there ;  but  we  never  saw  it ;  we  saw  parts  of  it. 

God  gave  an  Exposition  of  Himself  in  human  history 
by  the  way  of  the  Incarnation,  and  men  did  not  see  it. 
This  was  before  Pentecost. 

So  also  with  the  Exodus — the  going  out,  the  return 
to  the  Father  by  the  Cross,  by  the  Resurrection,  by  the 
Ascension.  These  things  were  all  accomplished  before 
Pentecost.  Thus  before  Pentecost  the  Christ  had  re- 
vealed and  redeemed. 

The  new  things  which  came  with  Pentecost  were  those 
of  the  administration  of  redemption  in  the  actual  lives 
of  men;  and  the  multiplication  of  the  revelation  through 
the  lives  in  which  redemption  was  administered. 

On  the  day  of  Pentecost,  Christ  by  the  coming  of  His 
Holy  Spirit,  was  able  to  make  over  to  trusting  souls  the 
actual  value  of  His  Cross,  so  that  when  the  Spirit  filled 
them,  they  were  crucified  with  Him,  because  He  Himself 
in  them  administered  the  value  of  His  Cross.  In  that 
moment  He  was  able  to  make  over  to  them  the  virtue  of 
His  Resurrection,  so  that  they  began  to  live  a  life  they 
could  not  live  until  the  Spirit  thus  came  to  administer 
the  power  of  His  Resurrection.  In  that  moment  He  won 
in  them  the  victory  of  His  Ascension,  so  that  they  began 
to  love — to  use  Paul's  radiant  phrase — "  the  things 
above/' 

Thus  Christ  found  by  the  coming  of  the  Spirit  the  new 
and  enlarged  opportunity  for  which  He  had  prepared  by 
His  own  advent.  This  takes  us  back  again  to  the  open- 
ing phrase  of  the  book,  "  The  former  treatise  I  made 
.  .  .  concerning  all  that  Jesus  began  both  to  do  and 
to  teach."  Now,  by  the  Spirit,  Christ,  the  Revealer  and 
Redeemer,  came  to  administer  redemption  in  the  actual 
experience  of  human  souls,  and  so  to  multiply  the  reve- 
lation by  the  souls  transformed  into  His  own  likeness. 

At  this  point,   questions  naturally  arise.     Were  not 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 1-4] 

these  men  born  again  before  Pentecost?  Was  not  Abra- 
ham born  again?  Were  not  the  men  of  the  old  economy 
born  again  ?  The  answer  to  that  enquiry  is,  Abraham,  and 
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  the  Prophets,  and  the  men  of  the 
old  economy,  were  brought  into  true  relationship  with 
God  upon  the  basis  of  their  faith  in  Him.  Their  faith 
in  Him  received  a  reward,  because  of  His  faith  in  Him- 
self, and  in  the  coming  of  the  Christ.  These  men  in 
their  essential  spiritual  life  were  renewed,  were  born 
again,  if  you  will.  There  is  no  objection  to  the  word 
itself.  That  they  received  divine  life  there  can  be  no 
doubt. 

But  here  upon  the  day  of  Pentecost,  that  which  hap- 
pened was  not  merely  the  renewal  of  the  life  of  these 
men;  it  was  the  imparting  to  them  of  a  new  germ  of 
life,  a  new  principle  of  life,  something  they  had  never 
had  before,  that  Abraham  never  had;  there  was  given 
to  them  the  life  of  the  Christ,  the  Incarnate  One ;  so  that 
there  came  to  these  men  that  which  made  them  one  with 
Him  and  with  each  other,  and  constituted  their  member- 
ship in  the  Church  of  the  first-born. 

Thus  our  first  consideration  merges  into  the  second, 
and  we  may  now  speak  of  the  new  facts  as  to  the  Church. 
It  is  well  that  we  remind  ourselves  that  the  word  Church 
is  in  some  senses  an  unfortunate  one.  The  word  Church 
is  not  true  translation.  It  is  a  useful  word,  and  one 
would  not  suggest  that  it  be  altered.  But  let  us  remember 
what  it  really  means.  This  word  Church  which  has 
passed  into  common  speech,  is  a  word,  the  root  meaning 
of  which  is  simply  the  Lord's.  The  Greek  word  Ecclesia 
means  an  assembly.  The  word  Church  is  a  beautiful 
word  applied  to  the  Assembly,  but  it  is  not  translation, 
it  has  not  caught  the  meaning  of  the  word  of  which  it  is 
supposed  to  be  a  translation.  The  word  so  translated  is 
used  in  three  relationships  in  the  New  Testament.  We 
read  of  "  The  assembly  in  the  wilderness,"  which  is 
translated,  "The  Church  in  the  wilderness."  We  read 

[29] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 1-4] 

of  "The  assembly  of  God,"  which  is  translated,  "The 
Church  of  God/'  and  we  read  once  of  "  The  Assembly  " 
in  a  heathen  town,  which  is  so  translated. 

The  word  assembly  in  every  instance  refers  to  a  select 
and  gathered-out  company,  having  certain  qualifications, 
and  being  committed  to  certain  work.  The  men  who  con- 
stituted the  town  assembly  in  a  Greek  city  were  all  free 
men.  To  them  was  committed  the  welfare  of  others. 
They  constituted  a  governing  body,  consisting  of  free 
men.  That  was  the  Greek  use  of  the  word. 

The  Hebrew  use  of  the  word  had  reference  to  the 
Hebrew  nation  as  the  peculiar  people  of  God.  Christ 
thus  took  hold  of  a  word  in  common  use  when  He  said 
"  My  Ecclesia."  The  Hebrew  understood  it ;  it  meant 
one  thing  to  him.  The  Greek  understood  it;  it  meant 
another  thing  to  him.  Gather  the  principles  out  of  the 
Hebrew  and  Greek  uses  of  the  word,  and  combine  them, 
and  we  find  exactly  what  Christ  meant  when  He  said — 
My  Assembly.  He  referred  to  His  called-out  ones,  who, 
fulfilling  certain  qualifications,  are  committed  to  certain 
work.  In  that  sense  the  Christian  Assembly  did  not  exist 
prior  to  Pentecost.  Pentecost  created  the  Assembly. 

Now  let  us  glance  at  the  previous  conditions  as  we  see 
them  in  the  story  of  the  Passover  Feast  (Luke  22: 1-34), 
because  there  we  see  the  same  men  as  we  now  see  at  the 
Pentecostal  Feast. 

They  were  disciples ;  that  is  they  were  loyal  to  Him  as 
Master  and  Teacher.  They  were  comrades ;  that  is  they 
were  willing  to  stand  by  Him  as  far  as  they  were  able, 
as  He  Himself  said,  through  all  the  process  of  His  trial. 
They  were  servants ;  that  is  they  were  willing  to  run  on 
His  errands  and  deliver  His  message.  All  these  things 
were  they,  before  Pentecost. 

Then  what  was  new  as  the  result  of  the  coming  of  the 
Spirit?  Comprehensively,  by  that  whelming  of  the 
Spirit,  these  men,  disciples,  friends,  servants — outside  the 
actuality  of  His  life  though  loving  and  loyal — were  made 

[30] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 1-4] 

actually,  though  mystically,  one  with  Him  in  the  very 
fact  of  His  own  life.  They  were  made  sharers  of  the 
life  of  the  Christ.  They  had  never  been  that  before. 
They  were  sentimentally  one  with  Him,  and  that  word  is 
not  used  in  an  objectionable  sense.  They  were  emo- 
tionally one  with  Him,  agreeing  with  His  ideals,  conse- 
crating themselves  to  Him,  yet  separate  from  Him,  as  all 
men  had  been  separate  from  all  teachers,  and  are  still, 
except  in  this  one  case.  Buddha,  rare  and  wonderful 
soul,  was  never  able  to  communicate  his  actual  life  to  his 
disciples.  Confucius,  great  and  remarkable  ethical 
teacher,  was  never  able  to  communicate  dynamic  to  the 
men  who  learned  his  ethic.  Neither  has  any  other  teacher 
been  able  to  do  this  in  the  history  of  the  world.  Prior  to 
Pentecost  the  disciples  were  disciples,  standing  away,  yet 
very  near — I  would  not  undervalue  the  nearness  of  those 
days — but  they  were  not  one  with  Him. 

When  the  Spirit  came,  His  actual  life  passed  into 
their  lives,  and  from  that  moment  they  were  able  to  say 
what  Paul  himself  expressed  so  graphically  in  the  fa- 
miliar language  of  the  Galatian  letter,  "  I  have  been 
crucified  with  Christ;  and  it  is  no  longer  I  that  live,  but 
Christ  liveth  in  me :  and  that  life  which  I  now  live  in  the 
flesh  I  live  in  faith,  the  faith  which  is  in  the  Son  of  God, 
Who  loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  up  for  me." 

What  did  it  do  for  them?  Did  it  change  the  old  re- 
lationships ?  By  no  means ;  it  fulfilled  them.  They  were 
still  disciples,  but  they  had  a  new  vision.  Not  a  new 
vision  coming  upon  them  from  the  outside,  but  a  new 
vision  coming  from  the  actual  shining  in  them  of  His 
life,  so  that  they  began  to  see  as  He  sees.  That  is  the 
mystery,  the  marvel,  and  the  majesty,  of  Christianity. 
It  is  when  I  see  something,  not  which  Christ  interprets  to 
me  as  from  without ; — many  men  see  from  without,  and 
are  reverent; — but  when  through  these  poor  dim  eyes 
of  mine  the  light  of  His  own  vision  illuminates  all  that 
is  without,  then  I  know  what  Pentecost  means.  In  half 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 1-4] 

an  hour  after  Pentecost  they  knew  more  about  Jesus 
Christ  than  they  had  ever  known  before.  Peter,  the 
impetuous  man  to  the  end — for  the  Spirit  never  alters  a 
man's  natural  temperament — became  the  Apostle  who 
proclaimed  the  Cross  in  Jerusalem,  and  gloried  in  it,  be- 
cause Christ  looked  through  his  eyes,  and  spoke  with 
his  tongue.  That  is  the  great  mystery. 

Did  these  men  cease  to  be  the  friends  of  Jesus  ?  Surely 
not.  They  were  still  His  comrades,  not  comrades  stand- 
ing by  His  side  merely,  but  comrades  by  identity  of  life. 
He  was  in  them.  He  suffered,  and  their  suffering  was 
His  suffering.  He  rejoiced,  and  their  rejoicing  was  His 
joy.  He  fought,  and  their  fighting  was  His  fighting. 
That  was  the  great  change. 

Were  they  no  longer  His  servants?  Surely  His  serv- 
ants, but  no  longer  sent  from  Him,  but  the  very  instru- 
ments of  His  own  going.  Their  hands  became  His  hands 
to  touch  men  tenderly;  their  feet,  His  feet  to  run  on 
swift  errands  of  God's  love;  their  eyes  His  eyes,  to  flame 
with  His  tenderness ;  themselves  part  of  Himself. 

This  is  mysticism.  Christianity  is  mysticism.  But  if  it 
be  mysticism,  it  is  fact.  It  is  not  scientific,  it  is  not  hon- 
est, to  deny  the  mysticism,  until  you  can  otherwise  ac- 
count for  the  fact.  Take  the  men,  the  fact  of  them- 
selves, the  changed  outlook,  the  changed  behaviour,  the 
moral  regeneration,  the  moral  passion,  the  uplifting 
fervour,  and  account  for  it  in  any  other  way. 

As  to  the  world.  In  the  past  there  had  been,  as  John 
beautifully  puts  it,  the  unapprehended  Light — the  Light 
never  extinguished,  always  shining  somewhere,  and  in 
measure  in  every  man.  In  the  Incarnation,  the  Light 
had  come  into  the  world.  But  now  after  Pentecost 
there  was  a  new  conviction  for  the  world.  "  He,  when 
He  is  come,  will  convict  the  world  in  respect  of  sin,  and 
of  righteousness  and  of  judgment."  The  Spirit  of  truth 
came  to  create  the  Assembly;  and  the  world's  conviction 
of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment^  is  to  be  ac- 

[32] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 1-4-] 

tomplished  by  the  Spirit,  through  the  Church.  Thus 
there  came  to  the  world  this  new  conviction.  The  quality 
of  the  conviction  was  new;  the  weight  of  the  conviction 
was  new;  the  result  of  the  conviction  was  new. 

There  came  also  a  new  constraint  by  the  Church;  the 
constraint  of  His  love  shed  abroad  in  the  heart  of  the 
Assembly,  and  ultimately  in  the  hearts  of  men  outside, 
luring  them ;  the  constraint  of  the  Church's  light  shining 
in  the  dark  places,  revealing  sin,  and  indicating  the  way 
to  holiness;  the  constraint  of  the  Church's  life  poured 
out  in  sacrifice.  The  Church  has  won  Christ's  victories 
by  sacrifice,  and  in  no  other  way.  It  is  never  until  she  is 
wounded  that  she  wins.  It  is  by  weariness  and  death 
and  suffering  that  she  has  cooperation  with  Christ. 
Wherever,  in  the  distant  places  of  the  Mission  field,  in 
slum  or  suburb,  the  body  of  the  Christ  suffers,  the  life  of 
the  Christ  is  communicated  to  the  world.  By  this  way  of 
Pentecost  there  came  the  dawning  of  a  new  day  for  the 
world ;  a  day  of  new  conviction  and  constraint. 

What  then  are  the  limits  of  the  Pentecostal  age  ?  First 
of  all  as  to  Christ  Himself.  His  resources  are  limitless. 
While  He  was  still  in  the  world  He  said,  "  How  am  I 
straitened."  He  can  say  so  no  longer.  In  Himself  there 
is  the  ultimate  and  final  and  perfect  revelation,  and  to 
borrow  that  exquisite  phrase  of  the  Old  Testament,  there 
is  also  "  plenteous  redemption."  His  resources  are  limit- 
less for  the  doing  of  His  work. 

But  Christ  is  limited  in  His  Body  which  is  the  Church. 
If  the  Assembly  in  those  early  days  had  been  absolutely 
perfect  in  its  loyalty,  He  was  still  limited.  He  cannot 
win  the  ultimate  victory  but  through  the  perfecting  of 
His  Body.  He  was  limited,  therefore,  through  all  those 
ages  in  His  Body,  the  Church,  for  which  in  some  senses 
no  blame  is  to  be  attached  to  her,  nor  to  any;  it  is  part 
of  a  Divine  process. 

In  other  senses,  great  blame  is  to  be  attached  to  her. 
He  cannot  reach  China  save  through  her.  He  cannot 

[33] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 1-4] 

accomplish  the  purpose  of  His  Word  in  Africa  save 
through  His  Body.  It  is  an  appalling  truth,  a  mystery; 
one  cannot  pretend  to  understand,  but  it  is  God's  method. 
Not  by  angels  can  He  preach  the  reconciling  Word,  but 
through  His  Body,  the  Church;  and  the  whole  process 
of  God  to  final  victory  is  halted,  in  some  respects  neces- 
sarily, and  properly,  and  rightly ;  in  many  respects  unnec- 
essarily, improperly  and  wrongly  through  His  Body,  the 
Church. 

That  thought  naturally  merges  into  the  next — the  limi- 
tations of  the  Pentecostal  age  as  to  the  Church.  Here 
again,  we  must  begin  as  we  began  before — the  Church's 
resources  are  limitless.  But  the  Church  is  limited,  first, 
in  the  necessity  for  growth.  The  Church  is  not  even 
until  this  age  a  perfect  instrument,  because  she  has  not 
grown  to  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  her  fulness  in 
Christ.  That  is  a  proper  limitation.  In  the  hurried  fret- 
fulness  of  our  brief  life  we  would  fain  hurry  these  things ; 
but  in  calmer  moments,  when  we  rise  into  the  conscious- 
ness of  the  eternity  of  God,  we  know  that  it  is  vulgarity 
that  hurries,  and  so  does  poor  work.  The  processes  of 
God  are  necessarily  slow  to  human  thinking;  but  they 
move  with  absolute  certainty  to  the  ultimate  goal. 

The  Church  is  limited  in  the  Pentecostal  age  when  she 
grieves  the  Holy  Spirit,  when  she  quenches  the  Spirit. 
These  are  two  significant  words,  "  Grieve  " — having  to 
do  with  the  matter  of  the  Church's  life ;  "  Quench  " — 
having  to  do  with  the  matter  of  the  Church's  service. 
How  often  has  the  Church  grieved  the  Spirit,  quenched 
the  Spirit,  and  so  limited  herself !  This  is  the  appalling 
thing,  the  thing  that  brings  heartbreak ! 

As  to  the  world,  what  shall  we  say  concerning  limita- 
tion ?  Again  we  begin  where  we  have  begun  in  each  case 
—the  world  has  limitless  resources  in  Christ.  There  is 
nothing  the  world  needs  that  is  not  found  in  Him. 
Everything  needed,  of  social  well-being,  and  political 
emancipation ;  everything  that  makes  for  the  uplifting  of 

I  34  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 1-4]' 

the  race,  is  in  Christ.  Limitless  resources  are  in  the 
world's  Redeemer. 

But  the  world  is  limited  in  the  Church's  failure.  That 
is  not  the  world's  fault.  If  there  be  blood-guiltiness,  it 
is  upon  the  Church. 

But  finally  the  world  is  limited  in  its  own  resistance,, 
That  is  the  third  word  in  the  Bible  marking  the  forms  in 
which  the  work  of  the  Spirit  may  be  hindered.  "  Resist," 
is  a  word  not  spoken  to  the  Church,  but  to  those  outside. 
Men  can  resist. 

There  has  been  no  lessening  of  the  resources.  It  is 
such  a  commonplace  thing  to  say,  and  we  all  agree;  but 
does  the  Church  really  believe  it?  Have  we  not  some 
kind  of  subconscious  heresy  in  our  minds  that  Pentecost 
is  passed,  and  that  Pentecostal  power  has  weakened  in 
the  process  of  the  centuries  ?  It  is  not  so.  The  resources 
are  as  limitless  now  as  they  were  in  the  dawning  of  that 
great  day.  The  question  for  our  hearts  should  be:  Is 
Christ  limited  in  us?  If  only  by  the  necessity  of  our 
feebleness  and  our  growth,  we  need  have  no  anxiety, 
because  God's  processes  always  seem  slow.  But  if  He 
is  limited  because  we  grieve  or  quench  the  Spirit,  then 
it  is  necessary  that  judgment  should  begin  at  the  House 
of  God.  We  must  repent,  renounce,  return. 

We  need  waste  no  time  in  talking  about  a  revival  in 
the  world  until  there  is  a  revival  in  the  Church.  It  is 
when,  within  this  mystic  Assembly  of  the  Christ,  He  is 
unlimited,  allowed  full  sway  by  the  indwelling  Spirit, 
that  the  light  will  flame  upon  the  darkness  without,  and 
the  great  victory  will  come. 

Is  the  world  limited  in  us?  If  so,  it  is  because  the 
Christ  is  limited  in  us.  "  They  were  all  filled  with  the 
Holy  Spirit."  Are  we?  And  if  not,  why  not?  Let  us 
leave  the  questions,  as  such,  for  our  individual  heart- 
searching. 


[35  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 5-13] 

Acts  2: 5-13 

With  this  paragraph  begins  the  story  of  the  Church 
witnessing.  In  obedience  to  her  Lord's  command  she 
began  in  Jerusalem.  The  story  of  this  witness  in  Jeru- 
salem is  that  of  the  first  things;  and  this  lends  charm 
and  value  to  the  study.  We  have  in  sequence:  the  first 
impression  produced  in  Jerusalem;  the  first  message  de- 
livered in  the  power  of  the  Pentecostal  effusion;  the  first 
opposition  raised  to  the  infant  Church;  the  first  attempt 
to  realize  the  communism  of  the  Christian  Church;  the 
first  fearful  and  fiery  discipline  by  which  the  Church 
was  made  pure ;  the  first  outbreak  of  persecution  against 
the  Church;  the  first  Church  organization  in  the  setting 
apart  of  the  deacons;  and  the  first  Christian  martyr. 

As  we  study  these,  we  shall  discover  the  lines  of 
Church  life,  and  Church  service,  according  to  the  will 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  Who  came  to  interpret  the  things 
of  Christ,  and  realize  them,  in  the  Church,  and  through 
the  Church  in  the  world. 

Our  present  study  is  concerned  with  the  first  im- 
pressions produced  by  the  witnessing  Church.  Let  us 
follow  two  lines  of  consideration.  First,  the  impressive 
facts ;  and  secondly,  the  impressions  made.  The  supreme 
matter  in  this  study  is  not  that  of  the  facts,  but  that  of 
the  impressions.  We  have  often  been  in  danger,  in 
reading  this  story  of  the  Pentecostal  effusion,  of  laying 
an  undue  emphasis  upon  the  manifestations,  to  the  for- 
getfulness  of  the  impressions  made. 

I.     Let  us  first  notice  the  impressive  facts. 

Of  these  the  first-named  is  that  of  "  a  sound  as  of 
the  rushing  of  a  mighty  wind."  Concerning  this,  Luke 
says :  "  Now  there  were  dwelling  at  Jerusalem  Jews,  de- 
vout men,  from  every  nation  under  heaven.  And  when 
this  sound  was  heard,  the  multitude  came  together." 

There  is  no  question  whatever  that  this  is  a  far  more 
helpful  translation  than  that  which  reads,  "when  this 
was  noised  abroad."  To  read  it  thus  would  seem  to 

[36] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2:5-13] 

suggest  that  the  multitude  was  gathered  together  when 
they  heard  about  these  people  speaking  with  tongues ;  but 
that  certainly  is  not  the  meaning  of  this  statement.  The 
Greek  word  here  translated  sound  is  never  used  for  a 
rumour  or  a  report.  It  is  always  used  of  some  sound 
that  arrests  attention.  The  reference  here  undoubtedly 
is  to  the  rushing  mighty  wind,  which  was  heard  through- 
out the  whole  city  of  Jerusalem.  It  was  a  startling  sound, 
as  of  a  hurricane. 

Luke  describes  it  as  coming  "  from  heaven."  It  was 
a  descending  hurricane,  settling  upon,  and  centring  at, 
one  place,  the  Temple  where  these  men  were  assembled. 
Jerusalem  heard  it.  It  was  this  sound  of  a  mighty  rush- 
ing wind,  marvellous,  mysterious,  that  brought  the  multi- 
tude together.  That  was  the  first  impressive  fact ;  some- 
thing outside  the  ordinary,  something  supernatural. 

But  a  still  more  impressive  fact  of  that  day  to  Jeru- 
salem was  that  of  the  crowd  of  disciples.  Jerusalem 
saw  and  heard  a  company  of  about  one  hundred  and 
twenty  men  and  women  all  "  speaking " — probably  all 
singing,  or  chanting — "  the  mighty  works  of  God."  This 
was  the  common  subject  of  the  ancient  psalmody  of  the 
Hebrew  people.  This  was  the  subject  of  Peter  and  this 
gathered  company  of  men  and  women.  But  that  did  not 
arrest  attention.  That  would  not  have  startled  any  Jew- 
ish multitude.  It  was  not  the  singing,  it  was  not  the 
things  of  which  they  sang,  but  it  was  that  they,  the 
gathered  Parthians,  and  Medes,  and  Elamites,  and  the 
dwellers  in  Mesopotamia,  heard  with  absolute  distinct- 
ness and  accuracy  all  they  were  singing,  in  their  own 
tongue.  In  many  tongues  and  dialects,  with  perfect  dis- 
tinctness, this  chanting,  this  ecstatic  utterance  of  the 
newly  baptized  company  of  disciples,  broke  upon  the 
astonished  and  listening  ear  of  that  assembled  multitude. 
"  They  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  began 
to  speak  with  other  tongues,  as  the  Spirit  gave  them 
utterance." 

[37 1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 5-13] 

All  the  references  in  Acts,  Corinthians,  and  Ephesians, 
show  that  the  exercise  of  tongues  consisted  of  ecstatic 
utterance.  These  people  were  not  preaching,  they  were 
praising;  they  were  not  indulging  in  set  discourse,  they 
were  pouring  out  the  rapture  that  filled  their  souls.  In 
the  filling  of  the  Spirit  there  had  come  to  them  a  new 
vision  of  their  Lord;  and  a  new  consciousness  of  His 
life  throbbing  through  their  lives.  They  realized  that  all 
the  hopes  and  aspirations  of  the  past  were  being  fulfilled. 
They  knew  that  the  river  of  God  had  come  by  the  way 
of  the  altar,  and  that  they  were  in  the  full  flood  tide  of 
its  healing  and  life-giving  waters.  They  were  praising 
God  for  His  mighty  works. 

Did  they  know  they  were  speaking  in  other  tongues? 
One  cannot  be  at  all  sure  that  they  did.  Were  they 
familiar  with  the  tongues  in  which  they  were  speaking? 
Probably  not.  They  praised  with  a  new  inspiration,  they 
poured  out  their  songs,  and  lo,  Parthians,  Medes,  and 
Elamites,  sojourners  from  Rome,  people  from  Meso- 
potamia, men  of  all  dialects,  listened ;  and  they  heard  the 
songs  in  their  own  language,  with  perfect  accuracy  and 
distinctness.  The  Resurrection  was  the  first  note,  in  their 
singing,  as  it  came  to  be  the  first  note  in  apostolic  preach- 
ing. One  could  almost  wish  that  one  could  have  listened 
to  that  first  chanting  of  the  Church,  in  which  the  singers 
set  forth  the  mighty  works  of  God. 

II.  We  may  now  consider  the  impressions  made  upon 
Jerusalem.  "  They  were  all  amazed,  and  were  perplexed, 
saying  one  to  another,  What  meaneth  this?  But  others 
mocking  said,  They  are  filled  with  new  wine."  In  that 
one  statement  we  have  a  record  of  the  first  impression 
made  by  the  Church  in  Jerusalem.  It  was  a  threefold 
impression.  First,  amazement;  secondly,  perplexity; 
thirdly,  criticism. 

What  was  this  amazement  ?  It  was  mental  arrest ;  not 
yet  illumination.  They  did  not  know  the  meaning  of 
what  they  heard  and  saw ;  but  they  wondered.  Out  of 

[38] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2:5-13] 

wonder  worship  is  barn.  Where  wonder  ceases  worship 
ceases.  Wonder  is  not  worship,  but  it  is  the  first  move- 
ment toward  worship.  For  the  moment,  Jerusalem  was 
compelled  to  turn  from  other  interests,  to  attend  to  this 
matter.  It  was  only  a  beginning,  but  it  was  a  beginning. 
For  a  brief  hour  or  two  at  least,  men  left  the  schools,  and 
the  disputations,  and  the  quarrellings,  forgot  their  dif- 
ferences, and  united  in  common  amazement  in  the  pres- 
ence of  something  in  their  midst  for  which  they  could 
not  account.  The  amazement  was  mental  arrest,  a  com- 
pulsion laid  upon  the  men  of  a  city,  to  turn  from  all  other 
matters,  in  wonder. 

As  they  observed,  and  as  they  listened,  they  were  not 
only  amazed,  they  were  perplexed.  If  amazement  is 
mental  arrest,  perplexity  is  mental  defeat;  not  yet  il- 
lumination. The  amazement  meant  that  they  did  not 
know.  The  perplexity  meant  that  they  knew  they  did 
not  know.  There  is  no  moment  more  hopeful  to  an  in- 
tellectual soul  than  that  in  which  it  comes  to  the  point 
of  known  ignorance.  That  is  the  opportunity  for  dis- 
covery. 

Men  amazed,  arrested,  compelled  to  drop  other  mat- 
ters to  look  and  listen ;  men  finding  that  when  they  look 
they  cannot  see  everything,  that  when  they  hear  they 
have  missed  some  note,  and  are  in  the  presence  of  a 
mystery  they  cannot  fathom ;  are  driven  to  enquire.  That 
is  an  advance  upon  amazement. 

Perplexity  was  followed  by  criticism.  Criticism,  is 
mental  activity.  These  men,  amazed,  perplexed,  were 
compelled  to  come  to  some  conclusion.  They  first  stated 
the  problem  to  be  discussed :  "  What  meaneth  this  ?  " 
Some  of  them  arrived  at  a  conclusion :  "  They  are  filled 
with  new  wine,"  which  meant  that  they  were  drunk. 
They  were  much  nearer  the  mark  than  appears  at  first 
sight.  They  had  first  been  arrested,  compelled  to  turn 
from  other  things  to  consider.  They  then  were  perplexed, 
defeated;  they  could  not  understand.  Then  the  mind 

[  39  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 5-13] 

had  become  active.  What  is  this?  Look  and  listen. 
Look  at  the  glory  in  the  eyes.  Listen  to  the  abandonment 
in  the  voice.  Mark  the  pulsating  passion  of  these  peo- 
ple. To  some  of  them  there  could  be  but  one  explana- 
tion. They  were  drunk! 

They  were  nearer  the  truth  than  they  knew,  but  they 
were  exactly  as  far  from  it  as  hell  is  from  heaven.  What 
they  said  was  a  fair  conclusion.  Carefully  observe 
Peter's  answer :  "  These  are  not  drunken,  as  ye  suppose  " 
— that  is,  in  the  way  you  think.  Compare  this  with 
Paul's  injunction  in  Ephesians  5:18.  The  one  is  a  false 
and  destructive  method  of  attempting  to  realize  life  in 
its  fulness.  The  other  is  the  true  and  effective  method. 

What  is  the  relation  of  this  story  to  the  era  in  the  midst 
of  which  we  are  living? 

First  of  all  we  must  remember  that  these  signs  of  the 
day  of  Pentecost  were  initial,  and  produced  no  final  re- 
sult. The  gift  of  tongues  exercised  in  the  midst  of  the 
multitudes,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  multitude,  and 
probably  to  the  astonishment  of  the  disciples  also,  brought 
nothing  to  a  conclusion.  It  did  not  produce  conviction, 
either  of  sin,  or  concerning  Christ.  It  needed  prophecy 
to  complete  it.  It  created  the  opportunity  for  prophecy. 
Directly  it  had  produced  the  impressions  referred  to, 
of  amazement,  and  perplexity,  and  criticism,  Peter 
prophesied.  Mark  the  relationship  between  tongues  and 
prophecy,  and  see  the  perfect  harmony  of  this  revelation 
with  what  Paul  taught,  when  he  said,  "  I  had  rather  speak 
five  words  with  my  understanding,  that  I  might  instruct 
others  also,  than  ten  thousand  words  in  a  tongue." 
Prophecy  is  the  final  method  for  bringing  conviction,  and 
accomplishing  the  will  of  God. 

All  this  was  initial;  and  it  was  incomplete.  It  was 
necessary  as  a  sign,  to  arrest  the  attention  of  Jerusalem. 
With  the  development  of  the  spiritual  fact,  the  necessity 
for  signs  passed  away.  In  this  connection  it  is  well  to 
remember  Christ's  attitude  toward  signs.  Men  have  al- 

[40] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 5-13] 

ways  sought  them.  Evil  and  adulterous  generations  are 
forever  saying,  Show  us  a  sign;  and  the  Christ  is  for- 
evermore  saying,  There  shall  be  no  sign  given  unto  you. 
The  sign  is  the  occasional  thing,  the  thing  better  done 
without.  Christ  said  to  His  own  disciples,  "  Believe  Me." 
That  was  His  great  appeal.  "  Or  else,"  He  continued — 
if  you  cannot  do  that,  if  that  is  too  large  a  thing,  and 
too  high  a  thing,  and  too  noble  a  thing  at  first — "  believe 
Me  for  the  very  works'  sake."  The  signs  were  evidences, 
made  necessary  in  order  to  arrest  attention,  but  they 
never  produced  conviction.  That  comes  through  prophe- 
sying in  the  power  of  the  Spirit.  At  the  beginning  there 
must  be  the  mighty  sound  out  of  heaven;  this  arresting 
thunder  of  a  great  wind;  these  strange  and  wonderful 
and  yet  distinct  ecstatic  utterances  in  all  tongues;  but 
these  can  accomplish  nothing  beyond  arousing  attention. 
They  were  Divine,  directly  and  positively ;  but  they  were 
transient,  never  repeated  because  never  needed. 

What  then  are  the  abiding  values  of  this  story?  The 
Spirit-filled  Church  always  presents  to  the  world  super- 
natural phenomena,  producing  amazement,  perplexity, 
criticism.  These  phenomena  vary  according  to  the  needs 
of  the  time.  In  the  book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles 
they  changed  immediately.  We  shall  find  as  we  go 
through  the  book,  that  wherever  the  messengers  of  Christ 
came — the  Spirit-filled  witnesses — something  happened, 
something  that  startled  men,  something  that  produced 
exactly  the  same  results  as  were  produced  at  first  by  the 
Pentecostal  tongues.  Presently  it  was  a  lame  man  healed. 
Again  it  was  the  shaking  of  a  prison,  and  the  releasing 
of  Apostles.  Presently  it  was  the  privileges  of  the  new 
fellowship — men  desired  to  join  the  new  fellowship  who 
had  not  submitted  to  the  one  Lord.  Again  it  was  the 
death  of  a  man.  Stephen  was  bruised  and  battered,  and 
made  bloody  with  stones.  Look  at  his  face !  There  shone 
the  light  that  never  was  on  land  or  sea.  It  was  super- 
natural dying.  There  was  one  fine,  scholarly,  clean,  sin- 

41 1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2:5-13] 

cere,  young  Pharisee  saw  that  face,  and  never  lost  its" 
effect.  He  was  amazed,  he  was  perplexed,  he  was  crit- 
ical; and  then  he  was  converted.  Presently  it  was  the 
apostolic  work  in  Samaria,  and  Simon  Magus  wanting 
to  buy  a  partnership  with  Peter  and  John.  Again  it  was 
Paul's  conversion,  and  its  effect  upon  Festus,  upon  Felix, 
upon  Agrippa. 

Amazement,  perplexity,  criticism;  these  were  the  ef- 
fects produced  by  the  tongues.  God  has  many  methods 
of  producing  these  effects;  but  the  real  value  of  the 
method  which  startles,  is  always  that  of  the  effect  it  pro- 
duces, and  of  the  opportunity  it  creates  for  prophesying. 

If  these  impressions  are  not  produced,  it  is  because 
the  Church  is  not  Spirit-filled.  Is  the  Church  of  God 
amazing  the  city,  perplexing  the  city,  making  the  city 
criticize  ?  The  trouble  too  often  is  that  the  world  is  not 
at  all  amazed,  not  at  all  perplexed,  not  at  all  critical; 
because  there  is  nothing  to  amaze,  to  perplex,  to  criticize. 
The  work  of  the  Church  is  to  be  Spirit-filled,  and  amaze 
the  city,  and  perplex  the  city,  and  make  the  city  listen. 
Are  we  doing  it  ?  Thank  God  yes,  sometimes ! 

With  much  truth  it  may  be  added  that  there  is  only 
one  criticism  that  is  worth  anything;  the  criticism  of  the 
world  that  is  of  value  is  that  criticism  in  which  it  says 
that  the  Church  is  drunk!  Has  any  one  ever  charged 
you  with  being  drunk  with  your  Christianity?  O  God, 
how  seldom  men  have  thought  us  drunk.  We  lack  the 
flashing  eye,  and  the  pulsating  song,  and  the  tremendous 
enthusiasm  of  an  overwhelming  conviction.  That  is 
what  the  city  needs  to  produce  the  amazement,  the  per- 
plexity, and  the  criticism  which  create  the  opportunity 
for  prophesying. 

Our  responsibility  is  not  that  of  endeavouring  to  re- 
produce past  phenomena.  One  need  not  be  at  all  anx- 
ious to  hear  men  talking  in  other  tongues,  who  have  been 
too  lazy  to  learn  them.  There  is  a  whole  philosophy 
in  that  passing  remark.  The  Church  had  not  had  time 

[42] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 :  14-47] 

to  learn  the  languages  then,  and  so  spiritual  equipment 
was  provided  to  meet  the  need  of  the  mixed  multitudes. 
A  minister  in  New  York  once  said  in  my  hearing  that 
New  York  presented  a  grave  problem  because  all  nations 
and  languages  are  found  there.  But  surely  that  is  a 
Pentecostal  opportunity.  We  have  not  the  gift  of 
tongues,  but  we  have  time  to  learn  the  languages.  God 
never  makes  up  by  miraculous  intervention  what  man 
lacks  through  laziness. 

The  Church's  responsibility  is  that  her  members  be 
so  Spirit-filled  that  the  Spirit  may  be  able  to  produce  the 
new  phenomena  required  to  startle  this  age.  The  Church 
has  been  far  more  anxious  about  emperors,  and  states, 
and  wealth,  and  theologies,  and  organizations,  than  about 
the  Spirit,  It  is  the  Church  Spirit-filled  which  makes  the 
city  amazed,  perplexed,  critical.  That  is  the  Church's 
opportunity  for  preaching.  What  is  the  use  of  Peter 
preaching  when  the  world  is  not  amazed?  The  psychic 
moment  for  preaching  comes  when  the  city  is  amazed, 
perplexed  and  critical,  as  the  result  of  the  living  testimony 
of  the  Spirit-filled  Church.  Then  upon  the  astonished 
ear  of  the  amazed  people  the  Word  will  fall  as  thunder 
and  as  benediction,  and  results  will  be  produced.  Our 
responsibility  then  is  only  that  of  seeing  to  it  that  we 
are  filled  with  the  Spirit. 

Acts  2 : 14-47 

In  this  paragraph  we  have  the  account  of  the  first 
Pentecostal  message,  and  of  the  results  following  its 
delivery.  The  passage  is  full  of  importance;  both  in  its 
revelation  of  the  true  method  and  subject  matter  of 
preaching;  and  in  the  picture  it  presents  of  the  things 
that  follow  such  preaching.  In  our  present  study  we  take 
a  general  survey  of  the  whole;  considering  the  message 
as  to  its  method  and  its  matter;  and  glancing  at  the  re- 
sults, both  immediate  and  continuous;  postponing  the 
actual  things  said  in  the  power  of  the  outpoured  Spirit 

[43  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2:14-47] 

to  this  amazed,  perplexed,  and  critical  audience  gathered 
together  in  Jerusalem. 

I.  Let  us  first  of  all  notice  the  method  of  this  dis- 
course, in  which  so  far  as  principles  are  concerned,  we 
have  a  revelation  of  what  preaching  ought  to  be. 

We  will  notice  first,  the  matters  which  may  be  de- 
scribed as  physical;  secondly,  the  mental;  finally  and 
supremely,  the  spiritual. 

The  first  of  these  need  not  detain  us  long.  They  are 
all  contained  in  the  statement :  "  Peter,  standing  up  with 
the  eleven,  lifted  up  his  voice,  and  spake  forth  unto 
them." 

That  is  a  perfect  and  final  lesson  in  elocution  for  every 
man  called  to  preach.  "  Standing  up  with  the  eleven." 
This  in  itself  was  a  new  method.  It  was  not  the  method 
of  the  Rabbis.  Jesus  had  significantly  said  to  His  dis- 
ciples, before  leaving  them,  that  they  were  not  to  be 
called  Rabbi.  They  were  no  longer  to  be  teachers  merely, 
they  were  to  be  heralds.  Teachers  sat;  heralds  stood. 

It  is  quite  unnecessary  to  make  any  comment  upon 
the  next  phrase — "  He  lifted  up  his  voice."  If  three 
thousand  are  to  hear,  it  is  no  use  speaking  for  thirty  to 
hear.  The  voice  must  reach  the  listener  who  is  furthest 
away. 

The  next  phrase  is  equally  important.  "  He  spake 
forth/'  The  Greek  word  means  that  he  enunciated 
clearly;  there  was  a  correct  articulation,  so  that  every 
man  in  the  crowd  could  understand.  This  particular 
word  occurs  on  two  other  occasions.  The  first  is  in  the 
second  chapter  when  it  is  said  that  they  spake  with  other 
tongues  "  as  the  Spirit  gave  them  utterance."  The  other 
case  is  when  Paul,  standing  before  Agrippa  pleading  his 
cause,  replied  to  the  interruption  of  Festus  by  saying, 
"  I  am  not  mad,  most  excellent  Festus,  but  speak  forth 
words  of  truth  and  soberness."  In  each  case  the  idea  is 
that  of  clear  enunciation.  Thus  the  first  Christian 
preacher  stood  up  as  a  herald ;  lifted  up  his  voice  so  that 

[  44  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 14-47] 

the  whole  multitude  might  hear;  and  articulated  with 
perfect  distinctness. 

Finally,  and  by  no  means  of  least  importance  is  the 
declaration  that  he  "  spake  forth  unto  them." 

Preaching  too  often  to-day  is  preaching  before  people, 
rather  than  preaching  to  them;  and  there  is  all  the  dif- 
ference in  the  world  between  the  two  methods. 

It  is  not  very  long  ago  that  in  a  ministerial  conference 
I  heard  a  minister  say  that  years  ago  the  work  of  the 
Christian  preacher  was  that  of  a  combat,  in  which  he 
wrestled  with  souls,  and  compelled  them  to  obedience; 
and  he  lamented  that  the  days  had  passed.  He  was  right 
in  his  regret,  if  he  was  right  in  his  conclusion  that  such 
days  had  passed.  That  is  the  work  of  the  Christian 
preacher;  even  though  he  have  ability  to  instruct  in- 
tellectually; even  though  he  be  able  to  move  emotion- 
ally; if  his  preaching  end  with  the  intellect,  or  with  the 
emotion,  then  his  preaching  is  a  disastrous  failure. 

We  pass  now  to  consider  the  mental  method  of  this 
preaching.  Notice  in  the  first  place  that  Peter  recognized 
their  right  to  enquire.  This  will  be  made  perfectly  clear 
by  observing  a  simple  word  and  its  place  in  this  narra- 
tive. I  refer  to  the  word  this.  "  Be  this  known  unto 
you  "  (verse  14).  "  This  is  that  which  hath  been  spoken 
through  the  prophet  Joel  "  (verse  16) .  "  He  hath  poured 
forth  this"  (verse  33). 

The  assembled  crowd  when  they  became  critical  said, 
"  What  meaneth  this? "  In  their  use  of  the  word  "  this'' 
was  included  all  they  saw  and  heard;  the  things  that 
amazed  and  perplexed  them;  the  sound  of  the  wind; 
the  strange,  and  to  them,  grotesque  vision  of  a  com- 
pany of  people  hilarious,  ecstatic,  praising,  singing;  and 
then  that  strange  and  compelling  wonder,  that  as  these 
people  sang  or  praised,  all  those  gathered  about  them, 
understood  them  in  their  own  tongues,  Parthians  and 
Medes,  and  Elamites,  and  so  on. 

Now  said  the  crowd,  "  What  meaneth  this?  " 

[45] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 14-47] 

When  Peter  commenced  his  address  he  said,  "  Ye  men 
of  Judaea,  and  all  ye  that  dwell  at  Jerusalem,  be  this 
known  unto-  you  " ;  by  which  he  meant,  I  am  about  to 
explain  this;  I  am  about  to  answer  your  enquiry.  He 
then  contradicted  their  foolish  attempt  to  answer  their 
own  question.  Some  of  them  had  said :  "  These  men  are 
filled  with  new  wine."  Peter  answered,  "  These  are  not 
drunken  as  ye  suppose,  seeing  it  is  but  the  third  hour 
of  the  day."  The  third  hour  of  the  day  was  the  hour  of 
sacrifice,  and  men  neither  ate  nor  drank  until  that  hour. 
Having  replied  to  this  false  suggestion,  he  proceeded  to 
explain  that  which  had  perplexed  them :  "  This  is  that 
which  hath  been  spoken  by  the  prophet  Joel."  In  these 
words  he  related  the  things  seen,  to  the  ancient  predic- 
tions. 

He  then  traced  the  history  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  end- 
ing with  the  declaration,  "  He  hath  poured  forth  this." 

The  whole  message  proceeded  upon  the  assumption  of 
the  right  of  the  multitude  to  ask  an  explanation.  "  What 
meaneth  this  ? "  was  an  honest  and  proper  question. 
"  These  men  are  filled  with  new  wine,"  was  a  blundering 
attempt  to  get  at  the  truth.  Peter  was  not  angry  with 
them.  He  was  neither  angry  with  them  for  their  mis- 
take, nor  for  their  attempt  to  discover.  He  said,  "  Be 
this  known  unto  you."  Listen,  I  will  explain ;  this  is  not 
so  strange  as  you  think ;  "  this  is  that  which  hath  been 
spoken  through  the  prophet  Joel,"  your  own  prophet ;  and 
moreover  Jesus  of  Nazareth  Whom  you  all  know,  "  He 
hath  shed  forth  this."  The  first  note  of  the  mental  mood 
of  the  Christian  preacher  must  be  that  of  his  recognition 
of  the  right  of  men  to  enquire,  and  a  willingness  on  his 
part  to  answer  their  enquiry. 

But  again,  the  apostle  made  his  appeal  to  the  things 
they  knew.  This  we  have  already  seen,  but  it  is  of  spe- 
cial importance,  and  so  we  return  to  it.  He  began  his 
explanation  of  the  things  they  did  not  know,  by  taking 
them  back  to  the  things  with  which  they  were  familiar. 

[46] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 :  14-47] 

This  is  that  of  which  your  own  prophet  wrote.  This  is 
the  outcome  of  the  life  and  death  and  resurrection  of 
the  Man  Jesus,  Whom  you  know. 

This  is  the  true  art  of  preaching,  whether  it  be  in 
London,  or  Bombay ;  whether  it  be  in  the  heart  of  Africa, 
or  in  the  midst  of  the  wealthiest  civilization,  matters 
nothing.  At  Athens,  quote  your  Greek  poets;  make  the 
barbarians  at  Lycaonia  put  Jupiter  and  Mercury  into 
contrast  with  Jehovah.  Begin  with  the  things  men  know. 

The  Christian  preacher  must  always  recognize  that 
there  is  a  light  that  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into 
the  world ;  that  God  has  never  left  humanity  utterly  with- 
out witness.  Therefore  the  true  preacher  and  the  true 
missionary  begin  with  the  things  known,  and  show  their 
relationship  to  the  Christ. 

Observe  in  the  next  place,  that  there  was  in  this  ad- 
dress an  orderly  statement  of  truth.  We  will  only  refer 
to  it,  now,  for  we  shall  examine  it  more  carefully  in 
future  studies.  Beginning  with  the  words,  "  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,"  the  whole  truth  concerning  Christ  was  de- 
clared in  orderly  sequence. 

The  final  fact  to  be  noticed  in  the  mental  method  of 
the  sermon  is  that  the  ultimate  proclamation  was  that  of 
the  Lordship  of  Christ.  "Let  all  the  house  of  Israel^ 
therefore  know  assuredly,  that  God  hath  made  Him 
both  Lord  and  Christ,  this  Jesus  Whom  ye  crucified." 

Such  was  the  mental  method  of  the  sermon — recogniz- 
ing their  right  to  enquire;  appealing  to  the  things  they 
knew;  making  an  orderly  statement  of  truth;  and, 
finally,  appealing  by  the  proclamation  of  the  Lordship  of 
Christ. 

The  spiritual  method  is  of  supreme  importance,  yet  it 
perhaps  needs  the  least  exposition  because  it  is  so  patent. 
We  observe,  first,  Peter's  ready  obedience  to  the  Spirit. 
Christ  had  said  to  him,  and  to  the  rest,  not  above  two 
weeks  before,  "  When  the  Holy  Spirit  is  come  upon  you 
...  ye  shall  be  My  witnesses."  The  Spirit  came,  and 

[47] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 14-47] 

immediately  the  spiritual  method  of  preaching  was  that 
of  quick  and  ready  and  direct  obedience  to  the  Spirit, 
seizing  the  opportunity  created  by  the  amazement,  per- 
plexity, and  criticism  of  the  crowd,  and  declaring  His 
message. 

But  notice  also,  the  conviction  of  this  preacher.  It  was 
the  conviction  of  clear  vision,  resulting  from  the  illumina- 
tion of  the  Spirit.  Not  once  in  all  the  course  of  that  first 
sermon  do  we  find  such  phrases  as:  In  all  probability; 
or  It  is  reasonable  to  suppose.  There  is  not  a  nebulous 
statement  in  this  message  from  beginning  to  end.  It  is 
positive,  convinced,  courteous  declaration. 

The  courage  of  the  preacher  is  equally  patent.  The 
crowds  were  amazed,  perplexed,  critical;  but  all  the 
rulers  were  opposed  to  the  Nazarene  heresy,  and  he  began 
by  naming  Nazareth.  Peter  now  confronted  the  great 
mass  of  the  people  gathered  from  Judaea  and  from  far 
and  near,  and  he  said  boldly :  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  a  man 
approved  of  God  unto  you  .  .  .  God  hath  made  Him 
both  Lord  and  Christ,  this  Jesus  Whom  ye  crucified."  It 
was  the  courage  of  spiritual  conviction,  resulting  from 
the  illumination  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

The  mental  orderliness  of  statement,  to  which  we  have 
referred,  was  the  result  of  spiritual  illumination.  To 
every  man  who  heard,  a  double  witness  was  borne;  the 
witness  of  the  man,  and  the  witness  of  the  constraining 
Spirit  of  God.  When  the  Sadducean  opposition  began, 
the  rulers  said  to  him:  How  dare  you  preach  when  we 
have  forbidden  ?  Carefully  notice  his  answer,  "  We  must 
obey  God  rather  than  men.  .  .  .  We  are  witnesses 
of  these  things ;  and  so  is  the  Holy  Spirit." 

The  last  spiritual  note  Is  that  of  victory.  This  was 
manifested  finally  in  the  multitude  who  believed ;  but  its 
first  manifestation  was  in  the  preacher.  The  Spirit  of 
God,  Who  had  come  with  the  sound  and  symbol  of  the 
wind  and  the  fire,  turned  this  cringing,  fearful  man  of 
seven  weeks  ago,  into  a  prophet,  an  apostle,  an  evangelist 

[48] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2:14-47] 

of  the  new  age,  and  made  him  victorious  in  the  delivery 
of  his  first  message. 

II.  Lastly  let  us  briefly  notice  the  matter  of  the  ser- 
mon. Peter  commenced  with  the  Old  Testament  Scrip- 
tures; and  there  is  evident  a  fine  sense  of  fitness  in  his 
selection  of  the  passage  from  Joel;  Joel  who  was  either 
the  earliest  or  the  latest  of  the  prophets,  and  whose  mes- 
sage concerning  the  Spirit  is  more  clear  than  any  other 
of  the  ancient  prophecies.  This  is  the  message  Peter 
chose.  Of  that  message  he  quoted  part  which  was  ful- 
filled immediately ;  part  which  is  being  fulfilled  now ;  and 
part  which  is  yet  to  be  fulfilled.  The  day  of  the  Lord 
has  not  come,  and  the  signs  of  its  coming  are  not  yet. 
He  quoted  all  the  prophecy,  because  he  knew  that  with 
the  descent  of  the  Spirit  consequent  upon  the  exaltation 
of  the  Christ,  the  movement  had  commenced,  though  it 
would  take  millenniums  to  work  itself  out  to  finality. 

He  then  proceeded  to  declare  the  things  of  Christ.  We 
will  only  name  them. 

The  fact  of  Jesus :  "  Jesus  a  man." 

The  perfection  of  His  manhood,  and  the  work  of  His 
ministry :  "  approved  of  God  unto  you,  by  mighty  works 
and  wonders  and  signs." 

The  Death  of  Jesus :  "  Him  being  delivered  up  by  the 
determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God,  ye  by 
the  hand  of  lawless  men  did  crucify  and  slay." 

The  Resurrection  of  Jesus :  "  It  was  not  possible  that 
He  should  be  holden  of  it." 

His  exaltation  and  reception  of  the  Spirit:  He  is  ex- 
alted, He  is  glorified,  He  has  received  from  the  Father 
the  gift  of  the  Spirit. 

His  activity:  "He  hath  poured  forth  this." 

The  results  were  immediate  and  continuous.  The  im- 
mediate were  those  of  conviction  and  enquiry;  instruc- 
tion and  exhortation ;  obedience  and  addition.  Men  said, 
"  What  shall  we  do  ? "  Peter  answered  them  immediately, 
and  led  them  forward. 

[49] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2:16-21]  '• 

The  continuous  results  were  those  of  the  new  or- 
dinances; the  new  fellowship;  the  new  experience;  and 
the  growth ;  to  all  of  which  we  shall  return. 

From  this  general  survey  we  can  only  gather  broad 
applications.  As  to  the  Christian  message,  we  learn  that 
it  is  wholly  a  proclamation  of  what  God  has  to  say  to 
men.  The  Word  written — Joel's  prophecy;  the  Word 
living — Jesus  of  Nazareth;  but  always  what  God  has  to 
say  to  men.  The  business  of  the  Christian  preacher  is  to 
tell  men  what  God  has  to  say  to  them.  The  business  of 
the  preacher  is  not  to  speculate,  or  to  attempt  to  evolve 
from  the  appearances  of  the  hour  some  underlying  truth. 
He  is  to  come  to  the  age  saying  to  it,  "Thus  saith 
Jehovah." 

This  address  reveals  the  further  fact  that  the  preacher 
deals  with  the  spiritual,  and  produces  spiritual  results. 
He  does  not  begin  at  the  circumference  of  things,  but  at 
the  centre.  But  he  affects  the  uttermost  circumference, 
by  beginning  at  the  centre.  He  says  to  individual  men, 
Crown  the  Christ  Who  is  at  the  right  hand  of  God ;  and 
then  from  that  central  point  readjust  all  your  life,  correct 
everything. 

Finally  we  learn  from  this  study  that  the  Christian 
messenger  must  know  by  experience,  or  he  cannot  preach  ; 
that  he  must  be  filled  with  the  Spirit  if  there  are  to  be 
any  results  from  his  preaching;  and  that  he  must  be 
wise,  for  "  he  that  winneth  souls  is  wise." 

Acts  2: 16-21 

The  brief  and  incomplete  statement,  " This  is  that" 
constitutes  a  key  to  this  passage,  in  which  we  have  the 
first  movement  in  Peter's  answer  to  the  enquiry  of  the 
amazed,  perplexed,  and  critical  multitude — "  What  mean- 
eth  this  ?  "  Recognizing  their  right  to  enquire,  and  tak- 
ing advantage  of  the  opportunity  which  that  enquiry  af- 
forded him,  the  apostle  first  took  them  back  to  the 
prophetic  writings  with  which,  they  were  familiar,  and 

so 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2: 16-21] 

reminded  them  that  in  these  prophecies  these  things  were 
foretold — "  This  is  that  which  hath  been  spoken  through 
the  prophet  Joel." 

The  similarity  between  the  manifestations  predicted, 
and  those  being  witnessed,  was  marked ;  and  so  Peter  was 
able  to  remind  them  of  the  predicted  cause—"  I  will  pour 
forth  of  My  Spirit  upon  all  flesh  " ;  and  thus  to  claim 
H  that,  as  explaining  what  was  passing  around  them,  rather 
than  the  filling  of  new  wine,  as  some  of  them  had  sug- 
gested. "What  meaneth  this?"  said  they;  and  some  of 
them  mocking  made  a  guess:  These  men  are  drunken — 
"filled  with  new  wine." 

This  relation  between  the  Pentecostal  effusion  and  the 
ancient  prophecy  is  of  interest  to  us  also.  Taking  the 
brief  phrase,  "  This  is  that "  as  text,  these  are  our  di- 
visions :  first,  "  That " ;  secondly,  "  This."  We  will  look 
back  to  the  ancient  prophecy;  and  then  we  will  observe 
the  fulfilment  of  it  in  its  first  manifestation,  and  in  its 
suggestiveness  as  to  the  age  of  the  Spirit. 

I.  In  considering  this  prophecy  which  Peter  quoted 
upon  the  day  of  Pentecost  we  will  first  take  a  broad 
survey  of  the  whole  book,  considering  the  context  as 
well  as  the  text. 

It  is  difficult  to  place  the  prophecy  of  Joel  with  his- 
toric accuracy,  but  we  may  say  with  practical  certainty 
that  he  was  either  the  earliest,  or  nearly  the  last  of  the 
prophets.  He  makes  no  reference  to  Cyrus,  to  the  As- 
syrians, or  to  the  Chaldeans.  He  but  mentions  Tyre, 
Zidon,  and  Philistia.  He  makes  no  reference  throughout 
the  whole  of  his  message  to  idolatry,  or  to  corruption. 
He  refers  throughout  the  whole  of  the  prophecy  to  the 
Temple  services  as  being  maintained.  He  is  quite  silent 
as  to  kings  or  princes,  but  constantly  refers  to  leaders 
and  to  priests.  He  has  none  of  the  scorn  for  sacrifice 
which  marks  the  writings  of  other  prophets ;  on  the  con- 
trary he  mourns  that  through  the  locust  plague  there 
are  no  offerings  to  bring  to  the  Temple.  A  number  of 

si  i 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2: 16-21] 

passages  found  in  the  prophecy  of  Joel  are  also  found  in 
other  books;  which  suggests  that  he  quoted  from  them, 
or  they  from  him.  It  is  agreed  that  the  prophecy  could 
not  have  been  uttered  during  the  period  covered  by  the 
prophets  from  Amos  to  Zechariah.  It  must  have  been 
earlier  or  later.  This  particular  reference  to  the  work 
of  the  Spirit,  which  is  so  peculiarly  clear,  concise,  definite, 
positive;  was  either  one  of  the  earliest  or  one  of  the 
latest,  and  was  in  itself  inclusive.  Ezekiel  said  much 
concerning  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  under  dif- 
ferent figures;  Isaiah  made  clear  reference  to  the  com- 
ing of  the  Spirit ;  but  in  all  the  ancient  writings  there  is 
no  passage  quite  as  precise,  as  definite,  as  positive,  as 
this  paragraph  which  Peter  selected  for  quotation  upon 
the  day  of  Pentecost.  Either  it  was  the  earliest  utter- 
ance of  prophecy,  concerning  the  dispensation  of  the 
Spirit,  which  served  as  inspiration  to  those  which  fol- 
lowed; or  else  it  was  the  last,  gathering  up  into  clear 
statement  all  the  things  that  had  been  said. 

But  now,  what  is  the  burden  of  the  whole  prophecy 
of  Joel?  Joel  was  first  of  all  impressed  by  a  plague  of 
locusts,  which  had  swept  over  the  country,  devastating 
everything.  The  men  of  the  time  were  conscious  of  the 
calamity,  but  were  not  connecting  it  with  their  relation- 
ship to  the  throne  of  God.  Just  as  to-day  some  plague, 
some  catastrophe,  some  war,  will  occupy  the  thought  of 
men,  they  will  be  deeply  interested  in  it;  but  will  fail  to 
climb  the  heights,  and  interpret  the  events  of  the  hour 
in  their  relation  to  the  throne  of  God. 

This  however  is  precisely  what  Joel  did.  His  prophecy 
was  based  upon  the  actual  locust  plague.  He  first  called 
the  people  to  contemplation.  He  made  his  appeal  to  the 
old  men;  he  made  his  appeal  to  memory;  he  made  his 
appeal  to  the  drunkards ;  he  made  his  appeal  to  the  young. 
He  called  all  to  contemplation,  and  then  declared  that  this 
visitation  of  the  locust  plague  was  an  activity  of  the  day 
of  the  Lord,  that  God  was  proceeding  in  judgment  against 

[52 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 16-21] 

them  on  account  of  their  sin.    He  next  called  them  to 
humiliation,  as  well  as  to  contemplation. 

When  he  had  observed  the  things  in  the  midst  of  which 
he  lived,  and  interpreted  their  meaning  to  his  age;  he 
predicted  another  judgment,  and  used  the  past  as  illus- 
trating that  which  was  imminent,  employing  the  locusts 
v  as  symbolic  of  the  armies  coming  upon  them  in  battle 
and  judgment. 

In  both  these  connections  he  indicated  the  Divine  judg- 
ment, and  announced  the  Divine  grace.  He  told  the 
people  that  if  they  would  repent  and  humble  themselves 
before  God,  He  would  spare  them.  So  far,  the  prophecy  . 
seems  to  be  of  little  interest  to  us.  But  now,  the  prophet 
said,  "And  it  shall  come  to  pass  afterward."  Verse 
twenty-eight  of  chapter  two  in  our  Bible,  is  verse  one  of 
chapter  three  in  the  Hebrew  Bible.  Those  who  rear- 
ranged these  chapter  divisions  thought  they  knew  better 
than  the  Hebrews.  They  did  not.  Our  arrangement  at 
least  seems  to  suggest  that  what  now  followed  was  to 
take  place  immediately.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  word 
"  afterward "  shows  that  the  prophet  now  climbed  a 
little  higher,  and  looked  into  the  distances,  and  from 
that  moment  to  the  end,  was  uttering  a  prophecy  of 
things  that  he  saw  far  away.  As  he  thus  looked  far 
ahead  he  saw  a  movement  remarkable,  strange,  different 
from  anything  that  had  been  seen  in  the  history  of  his 
own  people :  "  I  will  pour  out  My  Spirit  upon  all  flesh." 

The  prophet  had  risen  above  his  own  times,  above  the 
immediate  future,  and  he  saw,  what  he  described  in  the 
words,  "  I  will  pour  out  My  Spirit  upon  all  flesh ;  and 
your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy;  your  old 
men  shall  dream  dreams,  your  young  men  shall  see  vi- 
sions, and  also  upon  the  servants  and  upon  the  handmaids 
in  those  days,  will  I  pour  out  My  Spirit." 

In  these  words  every  prejudice  of  the  Hebrew  was 
attacked.  The  Spirit  was  not  to  be  poured  upon  the 
Hebrew  nation  only,  but  "  upon  all  flesh,"  The  right  to 

[  53] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2: 16-21] 

prophesy  was  not  to  be  the  peculiar  privilege  of  priests, 
or  Levites,  or  men,  but  "  your  sons  and  your  daughters 
shall  prophesy."  It  was  not  to  be  the  peculiar  privilege 
of  sons  and  daughters,  but  servants  and  handmaids 
were  to  be  among  the  prophets.  There  was  to  be  an 
effusion  of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon  all  the  race.  There 
was  to  be  an  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  of  God  that  should 
give  men  and  women  the  power  of  prophesying.  There 
was  to  be  a  bestowment  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  should 
sweep  out  caste,  and  give  slaves  the  high  honour  of  pro- 
claiming the  spiritual  mysteries. 

What  more  did  he  see?  "And  I  will  show  wonders 
in  the  heavens,  and  in  the  earth,  blood,  and  fire,  and  pil- 
lars of  smoke.  The  sun  shall  be  turned  into  darkness, 
and  the  moon  into  blood,  before  the  great  and  terrible 
day  of  Jehovah  cometh.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that 
whosoever  shall  call  on  the  name  of  Jehovah  shall  be 
delivered;  for  in  Mount  Zion  and  in  Jerusalem  there 
shall  be  those  that  escape,  as  Jehovah  hath  said,  and 
among  the  remnant  those  whom  Jehovah  doth  call.  For, 
behold,  in  those  days,  and  in  that  time,  when  I  shall  bring 
again  the  captivity  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  I  will  gather 
all  nations." 

Now  the  prophet  saw  far  beyond  the  Pentecostal  ef- 
fusion. He  was  still  looking  on,  and  in  his  vision,  century 
merged  into  century,  and  age  lay  beyond  age,  in  strange 
and  wonderful  perspective.  Looking  to  the  final  things, 
he  saw  that  God  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Judah 
and  Jerusalem ;  will  gather  Israel  from  its  scattered  posi- 
tion o'er  all  the  world,  and  will  bring  it  back  to  the  place 
of  privilege  and  power  and  responsibility.  This,  God  has 
never  done  yet.  That  prophecy  is  not  fulfilled. 

To  summarize.  Joel  stood  in  local  circumstances,  and 
saw  the  locust  plague  as  an  act  of  God;  and  so  inter- 
preted it  to  his  age.  He  then  rose  to  a  higher  height  of 
vision,  and  saw  that  the  outcome  of  their  sin  must  be  a 
new  judgment,  and  declared  that  it  was  coming.  He  then 

[  54  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2:16-21] 

climbed  still  higher,  and  saw  the  age  of  the  Spirit  poured 
upon  all  flesh;  the  age  when  sons  and  daughters  and 
bondservants  and  bondmaidens  prophesy;  the  age  when 
the  old  men  dream  dreams,  and  young  men  see  visions. 
Then  he  said,  before  the  day  of  the  Lord  come,  there 
shall  be  signs  on  the  earth  and  in  the  heavens,  blood,  and 
fire,  and  pillars  of  smoke;  and  during  that  day  of  signs, 
whoever  calls  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  delivered. 

In  Joel's  prophecy  then  we  have  a  description  of  the 
whole  dispensation  of  the  Spirit;  its  commencement — 
"I  will  pour  out  My  Spirit  upon  all  flesh;"  its  char- 
acteristics— "  Your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  proph- 
esy, your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams,  your  young  men 
shall  see  visions,  and  also  upon  the  servants  and  upon 
the  handmaids  in  those  days  will  I  pour  out  My  Spirit " ; 
its  consummation — before  the  great  day  of  the  Lord 
come — "  I  will  shew  wonders  in  the  heavens." 

Thus,  according  to  this  prophecy,  the  dispensation  of 
the  Spirit  is  not  measured.  There  is  no  time  given.  It 
opens  with  the  pouring  out  of  the  Spirit  upon  all  flesh. 
Its  characteristics  are  those  of  prophecy  and  vision.  It 
will  end  with  supernatural  signs. 

When  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  the  multitudes  amazed, 
perplexed,  critical,  enquired,  "  What  meaneth  this? " 
Peter  answered,  "  This  is  that  which  hath  been  spoken 
by  the  prophet  Joel." 

According  to  this  ancient  prophecy,  upon  which  the 
apostle  of  the  new  economy  set  his  seal,  what  do  we 
mean  when  we  speak  of  the  Day  of  Pentecost  ?  The  Day 
of  Pentecost  historically,  was  the  day  upon  which  the 
Spirit  was  poured  upon  all  flesh.  The  day  of  Pentecost 
dispensationally,  is  that  whole  period  following,  during 
which  the  true  characteristics  are  those  of  prophecy,  and 
of  dreams  and  visions.  The  Day  of  Pentecost  finally,  is 
that  period  when,  before  the  final  acts  begin,  super- 
natural signs  will  indicate  the  end  of  the  period,  and  the 
approach  of  God's  new  and  last  method  with  the  world. 

tss  I 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2: 16-21] 

Where  then  are  we  placed  now  ?  The  dawn  has  passed 
away.  The  day  is  proceeding.  The  darkness  has  not 
yet  come.  Dawn :  "  I  will  pour  forth  of  My  Spirit  upon 
all  flesh."  Day :  "  Your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall 
prophesy,  and  your  young  men  shall  see  visions,  and 
your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams,  yea,  and  on  My  serv- 
ants and  on  My  handmaidens  in  those  days  will  I  pour 
forth  of  My  Spirit;  and  they  shall  prophesy."  Darkness: 
"  The  great  and  notable  day  .  .  .  the  sun  turned  into 
darkness,  and  the  moon  into  blood."  That  has  not  yet 
come. 

This  prophetic  teaching  should  make  us  cease  speaking 
of  the  day  of  Pentecost  as  though  it  were  passed.  This 
is  the  day  of  Pentecost.  The  dawn  has  passed,  but  who 
regrets  the  dawn  when  the  sun  has  climbed  to>  the 
heavens  ?  Sometimes  we  think  that  it  is  westering ;  that 
the  shadows  are  already  about  us.  It  would  seem  that 
we  are  approaching  the  end  of  this  dispensation  of  grace ; 
but  there  is  no  sorrow  in  our  heart,  there  is  no  regret. 
We  do  not  believe  that  this  dispensation  is  the  last  ac- 
tivity of  God  for  the  world.  Our  hope  is  also  in  the 
movements  that  lie  beyond  it;  in  the  fact  that  He  will 
gather  Judah  to  Jerusalem,  and  Israel  to  Himself,  and 
in  other  ways  proceed  to  the  accomplishment  of  His 
purpose.  The  whole  subject  is  not  for  consideration  now, 
but  what  it  is  important  to  remember  is  that  this  very 
age  in  which  we  live  and  serve,  is  part  of  God's  plan, 
but  not  the  whole  of  it.  It  is'  an  integral  part  of  the 
whole.  God  has  never  been  trying  experiments  with 
humanity.  He  has  been  moving  surely,  certainly  on,  and 
this  age  in  which  we  live  and  serve  is  part  of  a  larger 
whole.  We  need  not  sigh  for  the  dawn;  we  thank  God 
for  it,  and  the  story  of  its  breaking  always  fascinates  us. 
We  need  not  waste  time  looking  for  the  ending  of  the 
age ;  for  ere  it  come  there  will  be  supernatural  signs  that 
herald  its  approach. 

In  concluding  this  study,  let  us  glance  at  the  charac- 

[  56] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 16-21] 

teristics  of  this  day  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  the  Day  of  the 
Spirit  poured  forth.  The  Spirit  has  been  associated  with 
all  human  history.  We  begin  our  Bible  with  the  Spirit : 
"  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth. 
And  the  earth  was  waste  and  void;  and  darkness  was 
upon  the  face  of  the  deep;  and  the  Spirit  of  God  moved 
upon  the  face  of  the  waters."  All  the  way  through  we 
find  the  Spirit — clothing  Himself  with  a  man,  clothing  • 
a  man  with  Himself,  inspiring  men  to  be  cunning  workers 
in  gold  and  silver  for  the  making  of  the  Tabernacle.  In 
all  the  past  the  Spirit  is  discovered,  coming,  departing; 
visiting,  retiring.  As,  over  the  original  chaos  He  brooded 
for  the  production  of  the  new  cosmos,  so  over  the  pro- 
cessional chaos,  He  was  ever  brooding,  until  there  came 
the  Word  made  flesh,  conceived  in  the  womb  of  the  virgin 
by  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  day  of  Pentecost  was  not  the 
day  when  the  Spirit  of  God  began.  It  was  the  day  in 
which  the  Spirit  was  "poured  forth/'  It  was  the  day 
of  a  definite  and  specific  beginning.  The  Spirit  of  God 
was  to  be  no  longer  a  Visitor,  dwelling  with  lonely  men 
and  individual  souls,  but  poured  out  in  all  fulness. 

But  again,  the  Spirit  was  "  poured  forth  upon  all  flesh." 
Take  the  Old  Testament,  and  observe  the  recurrence  of 
the  phrase  "  all  flesh."  It  is  sometimes  used — once  in 
Daniel,  and  notably  in  other  of  the  prophetic  writings — 
in  reference  to  all  animal  life  from  the  lowest  to  the 
highest;  but  where  it  is  used  evidently  of  human  beings, 
it  always  refers  to  all  human  beings.  The  phrase  "  all 
flesh  "  is  never  used  in  the  Old  Testament  of  one  nation, 
not  even  of  the  Hebrew  nation.  It  is  never  used  in  any 
smaller  application  than  to  the  whole  of  humanity.  The 
Spirit  was  poured  upon  all  flesh.  That  is,  there  is  a 
sense  in  which  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  the  Spirit  of  God 
came  into  relationship  with  the  whole  of  humanity.  Con- 
cerning the  Christ,  through  Whom  the  Spirit  was  poured 
upon  all  flesh,  it  is  written :  "  In  the  beginning  was  the 
Word,  and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was 

[57] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2: 16-21] 

God.  .  .  .  And  the  Word  became  flesh."  Now  that 
is  not  merely  a  description  of  the  individuality  of  the 
Man  of  Nazareth;  it  is  the  generic  term,  showing  that 
He  came  into  contact  with  the  whole  race.  When  He 
became  flesh,  He  took  not  on  Him  the  nature  of  angels ; 
He  laid  hold  upon  human  nature.  When  He  became 
flesh,  He  became  a  member,  not  merely  of  the  Hebrew 
race,  but  of  the  human  race.  Presently,  when  His  work 
as  representative  of  the  race  was  accomplished,  and  He 
had  ascended  on  high,  the  Spirit  was  poured  upon  that 
whole  race  into  union  with  which  He  had  come^  when 
He  was  made  flesh. 

The  Spirit  is  upon  all  flesh  for  clearly  defined  purposes. 
He  is  on  all  flesh  to  convict  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  of 
judgment.  He  is  in  the  human  race  as  the  power  that 
hinders  evil,  and  He  will  hinder  until  He  be  taken  out  of 
the  way. 

The  characteristics  of  the  Day  of  the  outpoured  Spirit 
are  those  of  visions,  dreams,  and  prophesying. 

What  is  a  vision?  Something  seen  by  a  watcher. 
What  is  a  dream  ?  Something  seen  by  a  sleeper.  Visions 
are  for  the  young  men,  who  should  be  watching.  Dreams 
are  for  the  old  men,  who  should  be  resting. 

The  New  Testament  prophet  is  a  witness  in  speech, 
and  the  prophets  are  to  be  men  and  women,  bond  and 
free.  This  Spirit  came  to  scorch  and  burn  and  destroy 
the  false  divisions  which  existed;  He  came  to  recognize 
humanity,  irrespective  of  caste  or  sex;  sons  and  daugh- 
ters, bondslaves  and  bondmaidens. 

What  are  the  things  we  need  to  fear  supremely  ?  First, 
silence.  If  we  cannot  speak — not  necessarily  to  a  crowd 
— for  our  Master,  wherever  the  opportunity  is  given,  then 
we  should  be  afraid.  The  Spirit  was  poured  out  to  give 
us  power  to  prophesy.  Let  us  be  very  afraid  of  silence. 

We  need  also  to  fear  if  there  is  an  absence  of  visions 
and  dreams.  If  we  have  no  dreams  and  no  visions,  why 
not?  It  is  because  we  are  not  responsive  to  the  Spirit. 

[  581 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2:22-36] 

I£  we  do  not  do  this,  it  is  not  merely  that  we  fail.  We 
limit  God;  for  the  marvellous  and  matchless  mystery  of 
the  Pentecostal  age  is  this  —  that  while  the  Spirit  is  on 
all  flesh,  He  waits  for  a  partner,  and  the  partner  must  be 
a  man,  a  woman,  a  child.  God  bring  us  into  fellowship 
that  we  may  give  His  message  and  hasten  the  Kingdom. 


Acts  2 

The  more  carefully  this  first  message  delivered  in  the 
power  of  the  outpoured  Spirit  is  pondered,  the  more 
wonderful  does  it  appear.  We  have  considered  the  first 
section,  summarized  in  the  words,  "  This  is  that."  We 
may  now  proceed  to  the  study  of  the  second  section 
summarized  in  the  words,  "  He  hath  poured  forth  this." 
In  this  section  there  are  three  things  of  preeminent  im- 
portance. 

Peter  first  traced  the  process  which  culminated  in 
Pentecost,  beginning  with  the  words,  "  Jesus  of  Naza- 
reth "  ;  and  ending  with  the  words,  "  He  hath  poured 
forth  this." 

In  reading  the  section  we  notice  how  much  of  it,  in 
some  senses,  is  in  parenthesis.  At  verse  twenty-five,  with 
the  words,  "  For  David  saith  concerning  Him,"  we  are 
conscious  of  the  fact  that  Peter  departed  for  the  time 
being,  from  the  main  line  of  his  statement,  as  he  quoted 
from  the  Psalms,  and  proceeded  to  make  application  of 
what  he  quoted.  At  verse  thirty-two  he  practically  re- 
peated what  he  had  already  said  in  verse  twenty-four, 
"  Whom  God  raised  up,"  in  the  words,  "  This  Jesus  did 
God  raise  up."  The  whole  of  that  paragraph  then  (verses 
twenty-five  to  thirty-two)  is  in  parentheses.  I  do  not 
suggest  that  it  is  unimportant,  but  rather  supremely  im- 
portant, showing  that  the  apostle  was  dealing  with  what 
we  may  speak  of  as  the  pivotal  fact  in  the  mission  of 
Jesus.  This,  indeed,  is  the  second  thing  of  value  in  this 
part  of  the  discourse. 

Then  finally,  having  traced  the  process  that  culminated 

[59  J 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 22-36] 

in  Pentecost,  and  having  parenthetically  taken  time  to 
deal  with  the  pivotal  fact  of  the  Resurrection,  he  made  the 
Pentecostal  proclamation,  Jesus  is  Lord,  and  Christ. 

Our  present  meditation  is  concerned  with  the  process 
which  culminated  in  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  on  the 
day  of  Pentecost.  The  apostle  distinctly  indicated  seven 
stages  in  the  process. 

He  began  by  naming  the  Person,  perfectly  familiar  in 
this  way  at  least,  to  the  crowds  that  were  round  about 
him:  "Jesus  of  Nazareth." 

He  next  said  that  this  Man,  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  had 
been  demonstrated  as  a  perfect  Man  in  their  midst ; — "  a 
Man  approved  of  God  unto  you  by  mighty  works  and 
wonders  and  signs,  which  God  did  by  Him  in  the  midst 
of  you,  even  as  ye  yourselves  know." 

He  then  referred  to  the  death  of  this  Person  in  terms 
full  of  significance :  "  Him,  being  delivered  up  by  the 
determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God,  ye  by 
the  hand  of  lawless  men  did  crucify  and  slay." 

He  then  declared  that  this  selfsame  Person  was  raised 
from  the  dead:  "Whom  God  raised  up,  having  loosed 
the  pangs  of  death;  because  it  was  not  possible  that  He 
should  be  holden  of  it." 

He  then  affirmed  that  the  Person  so  raised  from  the 
dead  was  exalted :  "  Being  therefore  by  the  right  hand 
of  God  exalted." 

He  then  announced  that  the  Person  so  exalted  had 
received  in  some  peculiar  and  special  manner  the  ful- 
filment of  the  ancient  promise  of  Jehovah :  "  Having 
received  of  the  Father  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit." 

He  finally  declared  that  this  selfsame  Person  poured 
forth  the  Spirit :  "  He  hath  poured  forth  this,  which  ye 
see  and  hear." 

To  more  briefly  summarize  the  stages :  The  apostle 
spoke  of  the  Person;  His  demonstrated  perfection;  His 
death;  His  resurrection;  His  exaltation;  His  reception 
of  the  Spirit ;  His  bestowal  of  the  Spirit. 

1 60 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 22-36] 

Of  these,  the  central  fact  is  that  of  resurrection.  Three 
precede  it :  The  being  and  Person  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  ; 
His  perfection;  His  death  by  the  way  of  the  Cross. 
Three  follow  it:  His  exaltation  to  the  right  hand  of 
power;  His  reception  of  the  Spirit;  His  pouring  forth 
of  that  Spirit  upon  the  waiting  disciples.  Thus,  at  the 
heart  of  the  mission  of  Jesus  is  the  fact  of  the  Resurrec- 
tion. 

Now  let  us  consider  these  seven  stages.  We  will  at- 
tempt to  do  so  by  dealing  with  each  of  the  sentences. 

Peter  commenced  by  the  use  of  a  phrase  which  was 
familiar  to  the  men  who  listened,  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth." 
He  thus  designated  the  Person,  upon  Whom  he  would 
fix  attention.  In  doing  so  he  appealed  to  the  knowledge 
of  his  hearers.  The  fame  of  Jesus  had  spread  far  and 
wide.  Very  many  had  seen  Him.  Multitudes  of  those 
who  had  never  seen  Him  had  yet  heard  of  Him.  He 
had  become  widely  known  by  this  peculiar  designation, 
"  Jesus  of  Nazareth."  So  far  as  our  records  reveal, 
Philip  first  made  use  of  it.  When  speaking  to  Nathanael 
he  said,  "  We  have  found  Him,  of  Whom  Moses  in  the 
Law,  and  the  Prophets  wrote,  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the 
Son  of  Joseph."  This  designation  arrested  the  attention 
and  aroused  the  criticism  of  Nathanael  who  said,  "  Can 
any  good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth?"  Presently  a 
demon-possessed  man  looked  into  the  face  of  Jesus  and 
said,  "What  have  we  to  do  with  Thee,  Thou  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  ?  "  Later  on  in  His  ministry,  as  He  entered 
Jerusalem,  on  what  we  speak  of  as  the  triumphal  occa- 
sion, the  multitudes  said,  "  Who  is  this  ?  "  The  Galilean 
crowd  in  triumph  answered,  "  This  is  the  prophet  Jesus, 
from  Nazareth  of  Galilee."  When,  on  the  dark  betrayal 
night,  the  soldiers  came  to  arrest  Him,  He  said  to  them, 
"  Whom  seek  ye  ?  "  and  they  replied,  "  Jesus  of  Naza- 
reth." When  Peter  was  warming  himself  at  the  fire  built 
in  the  outer  court,  a  servant  maid  looked  at  him,  and 
said,  "Thou  also  wast  with  the  Nazarene  Jesus." 

[61  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 22-36] 

Pilate  the  Roman  Procurator  commanded  to  be  written, 
and  affixed  to  the  cross,  this  designation  of  the  Crucified 
— "Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  King  of  the  Jews."  At  the 
Resurrection,  the  angel  said  to  the  waiting  and  weeping 
women :  "  Ye  seek  Jesus  the  Nazarene,  Who  hath  been 
crucified."  Two  men  were  walking  to  Emmaus  when  a 
stranger  joined  them,  and  asked  them  why  they  looked 
so  sad;  and  they  said  to  Him,  "  Dost  Thou  alone  sojourn 
in  Jerusalem  and  not  know  the  things  that  are  come  to 
pass  in  these  days  ?  "  "  What  things  ?  "  said  He.  "  They 
said  unto  Him,  The  things  concerning  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
Who  was  a  prophet  mighty  in  deed  and  word  before 
God  and  all  the  people."  These  instances  are  only  given 
to  emphasize  what  seems  of  importance  here,  the  fact 
namely,  that  He  was  known  as  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 

Peter  took  hold  of  that  peculiar  designation,  which 
would  appeal  to  his  hearers,  because  they  were  perfectly 
familiar  with  it,  and  in  view  of  the  things  he  was  about 
to  declare,  commenced  by  reference  to  the  actual  Per- 
sonality with  which  these  men  were  familiar,  either  by 
sight  or  hearing — "  Jesus  of  Nazareth."  He  thus  re- 
minded them  of  the  fact  of  His  humanity. 

The  effusion  of  the  Spirit  upon  human  life,  with  all 
that  has  followed,  is  related  to  the  humanity  of  Jesus 
Christ,  to  the  absolute  fact  of  His  presence  in  the  world, 
as  a  Man  of  our  manhood,  a  member  of  the  human  race. 
In  that  first  descriptive  phrase  then,  we  immediately  feel 
ourselves  close  to  Him,  and  there  can  be  no  question  that 
it  was  the  intention  of  Peter  to  emphasize  that  relation- 
ship. 

This  designation  of  the  Person  was  immediately  fol- 
lowed by  the  words :  "  A  Man  approved  of  God  unto  you 
by  mighty  works,  and  wonders,  and  signs,  which  God  did 
by  Him  in  the  midst  of  you,  even  as  ye  yourselves  know." 
We  must  very  carefully  note  the  plain,  first  meaning  of 
this  statement.  The  apostle  did  not  by  these  words  intend 
to  declare  that  the  Man  of  Nazareth  was  pleasing  to  God. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 22-36] 

We  are  a  little  apt  to  read  the  word  "approved"  as 
though  it  meant  that.  Let  us  change  the  word,  and  in- 
stead of  "  A  Man  approved  of  God  unto  you,"  let  us 
read,  "  A  Man  demonstrated  of  God  unto  you." 

Peter's  declaration  was  that  the  Man  of  Nazareth  was 
proved  to  them  by  mighty  works,  and  wonders  and  signs. 
The  question  that  arises  is,  what  was  proved  by  these 
things?  In  order  to  answer  that,  we  must  give  careful 
attention  to  the  whole  statement.  Let  us  begin  with  the 
method  of  the  demonstration,  or  proof.  It  was  that  of 
mighty  works,  and  wonders,  and  signs.  The  first  word, 
"powers,"  or  "  mighty  works,"  indicates  the  exercise  of  a 
power.  The  next  word,  "  wonders,"  indicates  the  effect 
produced  by  the  power  upon  the  mind  of  other  people. 
The  last  word,  "  signs,"  indicates  the  value  of  the  power 
and  of  the  wonder  it  produced. 

Peter  declared  that  these  were  works  of  God;  that 
they  were  things  which  "  God  did  by  Him  in  the  midst 
of  you."  If  for  a  moment  the  statement  seems  as  though 
it  were  robbing  Jesus  of  some  dignity,  let  us  remember 
what  He  Himself  said,  "  I  do  nothing  of  Myself ;  I  work 
the  works  of  Him  that  sent  Me."  The  works  which  be- 
came wonders,  and  were  signs,  were  wrought  by  God,  but 
they  were  wrought  by  God  through  Him.  This  Man  of 
Nazareth  was  the  Instrument  through  Whom  God 
wrought.  The  Man  of  Nazareth  was  a  fitting  and  per- 
fect instrument  of  God;  was  a  Being  absolutely  at  the 
disposal  of  God,  through  Whom  God  could  exercise  His 
powers,  produce  His  wonders,  give  His  signs.  What 
then  did  this  prove  concerning  Him?  It  was  not  the 
demonstration  of  Deity;  it  was  rather  the  demonstration 
of  His  perfect  realization  of  the  Divine  ideal  in  His 
human  life,  so  that  He  was  an  instrument  absolutely 
fitted  to  the  use  of  God,  one  through  Whom  God  could 
work.  That  is  the  difference  between  Jesus  and  our- 
selves, on  the  level  of  humanity.  We  are  men;  so  was 
He.  We  are  imperfect;  He  was  perfect.  God  cannot 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 22-36] 

through  us  do  all  His  work.  Jesus  was  so  absolutely 
perfect  as  an  instrument,  that  through  Him  God  could 
work  in  such  a  way  as  to  produce  wonder  in  the  minds 
of  sinning  men,  and  to  give  signs  to  them  of  the  things 
He  would  have  them  know.  This  second  movement  of 
the  apostle's  interpretation  of  the  process  that  led  to 
Pentecost  reveals  Jesus  as  a  perfect  Man,  and  a  sinless 
Man. 

Then  the  apostle  passed  to  the  next  step  in  the  process. 
Still  emphasizing  the  identity  of  the  Person  by  the  in- 
troductory pronoun  he  said:  "Him,  being  delivered  up 
by  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God, 
ye  by  the  hand  of  lawless  men  did  crucify  and  slay."  In 
that  statement  we  find  the  whole  mystery  of  the  Cross. 
In  it  the  apostle  recognized  the  Divine  side,  and  the  hu- 
man side  in  that  Cross.  We  are  nineteen  centuries  away 
from  it.  The  men  who  listened  to  him  were  not  more 
than  seven  or  eight  weeks  away  from  it.  They  remem- 
bered it;  that  rough,  cruel,  bloody,  Roman  gibbet.  They 
knew  what  crucifixion  meant.  When  he  referred  to  it 
he  did  not  begin  with  the  brutality  of  it ;  he  did  not  begin 
with  the  dastardliness  of  it;  he  began  from  the  heights 
and  from  the  infinite  distances :  "  Him  being  delivered 
up  by  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of 
God."  That  is  the  aspect  of  the  Cross  to  which  man 
clings  in  the  hour  when  he  knows  himself  a  sinner.  We 
are  not  saved  by  the  murder  of  a  Man.  We  are  saved 
by  the  death  of  the  One  Who  was  delivered  up  by  the 
determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God.  It  was  a 
murder ;  a  vile  murder ;  but  it  was  more,  infinitely  more. 
It  was  something  that  took  place  "  by  the  determinate 
counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God."  The  Greek  word 
translated  "  determinate  "  here,  is  the  word  from  which 
we  derive  our  word  "  horizon."  The  phrase  "  deter- 
minate counsel,"  suggests  the  plan  of  God,  that  which 
was  within  the  boundaries  of  His  purpose.  The  death 
of  Jesus,  said  Peter  in  effect  upon  the  day  of  Pentecost, 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 22-36] 

was  not  an  accident,  not  something  brought  about  by  men. 
It  was  the  working  out,  in  human  history,  and  into  visi- 
bility, of  an  eternal  purpose  and  plan  and  power. 

But  there  was  a  human  side  to  it,  and  Peter  brought 
all  the  guilty  face  to  face  with  the  Cross.  Carefully  no- 
tice his  recognition  of  the  two  human  agencies;  "ye" 
and  " lawless  men''  The  "  ye  "  referred  to  the  men  of 
Israel  whom  he  was  addressing ;  the  "  lawless  men,"  that 
is  men  without  law,  referred  to  Gentiles,  the  procurator, 
and  the  soldiers.  All  were  involved,  the  Israelites,  and 
the  Gentiles.  So  the  human  element  is  seen.  When  that 
Cross  was  lifted,  and  that  One  was  nailed  to  it ;  men  under 
the  law,  violated  law;  men  without  law,  seared  their 
consciences.  On  the  human  side  His  death  was  caused 
by  sin,  dastardly,  grievous,  final;  beyond  which  there  is 
no  sin.  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  Man  demonstrated  per- 
fect, sinless,  was  delivered  by  the  counsel  of  God,  and 
executed  by  the  crime  of  men. 

Peter  immediately  continued,  and  again  insisted  upon 
the  identity  of  the  Person  by  the  first  word  of  his  state- 
ment :  "  Whom  God  raised  up."  That  was  the  central 
fact.  We  will  not  pause  there  now,  but  leaving  the 
statement  in  its  simple  sublimity,  will  return  in  our  next 
study  to  its  exposition  by  the  Psalms  which  the  apostle 
quoted.  It  is  of  special  importance  at  this  point  how- 
ever that  we  emphasize  the  identity  of  the  Person.  It 
is  the  same  Person  from  beginning  to  end:  Jesus  of 
Nazareth;  a  Man  demonstrated;  Him  delivered;  Whom 
God  raised.  If  the  identity  be  denied  here,  then  there 
is  no  meaning  in  this  message,  and  the  whole  superstruc- 
ture of  Christianity  has  been  erected  upon  an  imaginary 
foundation,  indeed  upon  a  lie,  which  is  absurd. 

The  next  stage  in  the  process  the  apostle  described  in 
the  words :  "  Being  therefore  by  the  right  hand  of  God 
exalted."  This  was  a  reference  to  the  Ascension. 

A  glance  to  verse  thirty-four  will  give  us  the  inter- 
pretation of  the  word  "  exalted."  There  we  have  a 

[65 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 22-36] 

quotation  from  David :  "  The  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord, 
sit  thou  on  my  right  hand."  This  is  one  of  the  occasions 
in  which  it  would  be  a  good  thing  to  retain  the  Hebrew 
form — "Jehovah  saith  to  Adonai."  If  we  turn  to  the 
Psalm  (one  hundred  and  ten)  we  see  the  meaning  of 
the  statement.  That  this  Psalm  is  Messianic,  all  Hebrew 
commentators  and  Christian  interpreters  are  agreed.  In 
it  we  see  the  Messiah  crowned  and  enthroned;  and  so 
winning  His  ultimate  victories.  That  is  the  meaning  here 
of  the  declaration  that  God  exalted  Him.  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,  demonstrated  perfect,  crucified,  raised,  was 
exalted  to  the  place  of  power  and  authority,  to  the  centre 
of  the  universe  of  God ;  and  His  exaltation  was  in  order 
to  His  final  victory — "  Till  I  make  Thine  enemies  Thy 
footstool." 

The  next  phrase  of  the  apostle,  in  language  which  is 
full  of  mystery,  reveals  to  us  what  took  place  at  that 
centre  of  the  universe.  Here  all  earthly  language  fails. 
We  speak  of  location  and  place,  and  we  must  do  so  in 
order  to  follow  the  process,  and  yet  it  is  difficult  to  fol- 
low. Peter  declared  that  being  thus  exalted,  as  David 
had  foretold,  to  the  right  hand  of  power,  to  wait  until  His 
enemies  are  the  footstool  of  His  feet,  "  He  received  of 
the  Father  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit."  This  ex- 
pression "  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit "  takes  our 
minds  back  to  the  things  which  our  Lord  Himself  had 
said  before  He  left  them :  "  Behold  I  send  forth  the  prom- 
ise of  My  Father  upon  you."  What,  then,  was  the  prom- 
ise of  the  Father?  Let  us  glance  back  at  the  ancient 
writings.  God  had  said  by  Isaiah — "  I  will  pour  out  My 
Spirit."  He  had  said  by  Joel — "And  it  shall  come  to 
pass  afterward,  that  I  will  pour  My  Spirit  upon  all  flesh." 
He  had  said  by  Jesus  Himself — "  I  will  inquire  of  the 
Father  and  He  shall  give  you  another  Comforter."  Now, 
said  Peter,  this  Man  of  Nazareth,  perfect,  crucified, 
raised,  exalted,  received  the  promise  of  the  Father;  that 
is,  He  received  the  Spirit  for  all  flesh ;  the  Spirit  for  the 

[66] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 22-36] 

new  age.  Thus  Peter  described  poetically  and  yet  ac- 
tually, the  fact  that,  when  there  came  into  that  centre  of 
the  universe  the  crucified  and  risen  Man  of  Nazareth, 
God  fulfilled  the  ancient  promise  and  gave  Him,  not  for 
Himself,  but  as  a  deposit  for  all  flesh,  the  fulness  of  the 
Spirit ;  "  He  received  the  promise  of  the  Father." 

One  can  never  read  this  without  attempting  to  witness 
the  august  and  glorious  event,  without  in  imagination 
observing  the  coming  of  the  Man  of  Nazareth  to  the  high 
and  exalted  place  of  His  glory.  He  was  the  first  Man 
to  enter  into  the  perfect  light  of  heaven,  in  the  right  of 
His  own  holiness.  Heaven  had  never  before  received 
such  a  Man.  Abel  had  passed  home  by  faith  and  pro- 
phetic sacrifice ;  and  all  the  long  line  of  the  spirits  of  the 
just  men  made  perfect  were  there  upon  the  basis  of  the 
mercy  of  God.  But  on  that  Ascension  Day  there  came 
into  heaven  a  Man  Who  asked  no  mercy.  Pure,  spotless, 
victorious,  He  came  into  the  light  of  heaven,  and  caused 
no  shadow  there. 

But,  as  we  look  at  Him,  we  wonder,  and  we  say :  How 
is  it  that  the  perfect  is  wounded?  What  mean  these 
wound-prints  in  hands,  and  feet,  and  side?  Tell  me  ye 
angel  spirits!  There  is  but  one  answer,  and  it  is  the 
answer  that  comes  welling  up  out  of  our  ransomed 
nature ;  "  He  loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me."  To 
the  wounded  Man,  Who  had  won  the  victory  for  the  lost 
race,  God  gave  the  Spirit,  and  gave  it  Him  for  the  race, 
which  He  had  redeemed. 

Then  Peter  ended  his  story  of  the  great  procession, 
and  declared  its  consummation.  Here  again  the  identity 
of  the  Person  is  emphasized  by  the  first  word :  "  He  hath 
poured  forth  this."  Do  not  think  of  a  vapourized  pres- 
ence, a  lost  individuality — "  He  hath  poured  forth  this." 
All  the  vision,  and  the  ecstasy,  the  light  and  the  power, 
which  had  astonished  Jerusalem,  had  come  through 
Jesus  of  Nazareth. 

Finally  observe  that  the  great  argument  of  Peter's 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 24-32] 

declaration  is,  that  the  whole  mission  of  Jesus  was  of 
God.  God  demonstrated  His  perfection;  God  delivered 
Him  to  death;  God  raised  Him  from  the  dead;  God  ex- 
alted Him  to  the  throne;  God  gave  Him  the  Spirit. 
Thus  the  statement  is  a  revelation  of  the  victory  of  grace 
over  sin.  Men  acted  to  a  certain  point.  They  watched 
Jesus  and  listened  to  Him.  Then  they  crucified  Him. 
In  that  they  had  done  the  worst  thing.  In  that  act,  sin 
finally  expressed  itself.  Grace  operated  all  through.  It 
gave  Jesus  to  human  life.  It  delivered  Him  to  death. 
Then  it  continued,  when  sin  had  ended.  God  raised  Him, 
He  exalted  Him,  He  gave  Him  the  Spirit.  Sin  and 
grace  are  seen  in  dire  conflict  in  the  Cross.  The  victory 
is  with  grace,  not  with  sin. 

The  very  spear  that  pierced  His  side, 
Drew  forth  the  blood  to  save. 

By  that  poured-out  Spirit,  the  declaration  is  uttered 
to  all  the  ages  of  the  triumph  of  the  grace  of  God. 

Acts  2 : 24-32 

This  paragraph  is  an  exposition,  in  the  apostolic 
preaching,  of  the  central  fact  concerning  Jesus  of  Naz- 
areth, that,  namely,  of  His  Resurrection.  The  state- 
ment concerning  the  resurrection  stands  at  the  centre 
of  the  whole  movement  of  this  discourse.  Three 
facts  precede  it; — the  manhood,  the  perfection,  and  the 
death  of  Jesus;  three  facts  follow  it; — His  exaltation, 
His  reception  of  the  Spirit,  His  bestowal  of  the  Spirit 
upon  the  assembled  disciples.  The  former  three  culmi- 
nated in  the  resurrection.  The  latter  three  resulted  from 
the  resurrection. 

Let  us  first  notice  briefly,  but  carefully,  the  structure 
of  this  particular  paragraph.  It  consists  of  three  parts ; 
— a  declaration;  an  affirmation;  and  an  explanation. 
The  declaration ; — "  God  raised  Him  " ;  the  affirmation ; 
— "  It  was  not  possible  that  He  should  be  holden  of  it "; 
the  explanation  is  found  in  the  Psalm  quotations. 

[68] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 24-32] 

The  declaration  is  simple  and  explicit.  The  affirma- 
tion which  follows  it  is  bold  and  defiant.  In  reading  it 
the  emphasis  should  be  placed  on  the  pronouns :  "  It  was 
not  possible  that  He  should  be  holden  of  it"  The  He 
refers  to  that  one  Person,  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  demon- 
strated perfect,  crucified  by  the  determinate  counsel  and 
foreknowledge  of  God.  Of  Him  the  apostle  said:  "It 
was  not  possible  that  He  should  be  holden  of  it"  The 
simple  meaning  of  that  affirmation  is  that  God  was  bound 
to  raise  Him  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case. 

This  affirmation  he  then  explained  by  quoting  one  of 
the  Psalms: 


(C 


For  David  saith  concerning  Him, 

I  beheld  the  Lord  always  before  My  face; 

For  He  is  on  My  right  hand,  that  I  should  not  be 
moved  ; 

Therefore  My  heart  was  glad,  and  My  tongue  rejoiced; 

Moreover  My  flesh  also  shall  dwell  in  hope ; 

Because  Thou  wilt  not  leave  My  soul  unto  Hades, 

Neither  wilt  Thou  give  Thy  Holy  One  to  see  corrup- 
tion. 

Thou  madest  known  unto  Me  the  ways  of  life; 

Thou  shalt  make  Me  full  of  gladness  with  Thy  counte- 


nance." 


Then  followed  the  defence  of  his  use  of  the  Psalm. 
It  was  quite  within  the  bounds  of  possibility  that  some- 
body listening  to  him  might  have  said,  What  right  have 
you  to  make  use  of  that  language  as  applicable  to  Christ  ? 
Peter  therefore  declared  that  all  that  was  suggested  by 
the  Psalm  was  not  fulfilled  in  the  experience  of  David, 
for  "  he  both  died  and  was  buried,  and  his  tomb  is  with 
us  unto  this  day."  Peter  interpreted  the  Psalm  as  proph- 
esying the  Resurrection;  he  understood  that  the  writer 
of  it  was  referring  to  some  one  who  should  pass  into 
death,  triumph  over  it,  and  emerge  from  it.  David  did 
no  such  thing ;  he  died  and  was  buried,  and  his  sepulchre 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 24-32] 

was  with  them  unto  that  day.  He  declared — and  let  us 
carefully  remember  that  he  was  speaking  under  the  in- 
spiration of  the  new  baptism  of  the  Spirit  which  he  had 
received — that  when  David  wrote  that,  he  wrote  as  a 
prophet  more  than  as  a  Psalmist :  "  Knowing  that  God 
had  sworn  with  an  oath  to  him,  that  of  the  fruit  of  his 
loins  he  would  set  one  upon  his  throne ;  he  foreseeing  this, 
spake  of  the  resurrection  of  the  Messiah." 

The  affirmation — "  It  was  not  possible  that  He  should 
be  holden  of  it " — was  both  bold  and  defiant.  The  bold- 
ness was  born  of  the  confidence  that  God  cannot  violate 
eternal  principles.  The  defiance  was  born  of  the  as- 
surance that  death  had  been  conquered  in  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Jesus. 

The  explanation  was  a  radiant  revelation  of  the  evi- 
dence for  resurrection,  as  contained  in  the  necessity  of 
the  case.  We  often  defend  the  truth  of  the  resurrection 
by  historical  evidence,  and  there  is  ample  proof  along 
that  line,  for  if  the  testimony  of  these  men  is  not  to  be 
accepted,  then  there  is  no  testimony  upon  which  we  can 
depend  concerning  anything  in  the  history  of  mankind. 
Peter's  evidence  here,  however,  was  not  that  he  had  seen 
the  risen  Christ,  although  he  came  back  to  that  when 
presently  he  said,  "  Whereof  we  are  witnesses."  The 
line  of  his  argument  here  is  that  if  the  things  he  had 
already  declared  concerning  Jesus  were  true,  then  the 
resurrection  was  absolutely  necessary,  or  else  God  was 
violating  eternal  principles.  If  this  Jesus  of  Nazareth 
was  indeed  demonstrated  by  the  works,  wonders,  and 
signs,  perfectly  sinless ;  then,  though  He  died,  death  could 
not  hold  Him.  It  is  as  though  Peter  had  said:  An 
understanding  of  Him  and  an  understanding  of  it,  will 
demonstrate  the  fact  that  there  could  be  no  final  relation- 
ship between  Him  and  it;  that  His  passing  into  "  it  "  was 
a  necessary,  and  a  voluntary  act,  but  that,  even  though 
He  passed  into  "  it,"  it  could  not  fasten  upon  Him,  and 
hold  Him.  It  held  David.  David  foresaw  a  victory; 

[  70] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 24-32] 

David  sang  a  song  of  great  confidence ;  David  was  filled 
with  hope ;  nevertheless  he  died,  and  was  buried,  and  his 
sepulchre  is  with  us  unto  this  day;  but  this  Jesus  was 
other  than  David ;  other  than  any  other  man ;  and  it  was 
impossible  that  He  should  be  holden  of  it.  Peter's 
reason  for  this  affirmation  is  revealed  in  the  quotation 
which  he  made  from  the  Psalm.  Let  us  then  first  of  all 
examine  the  quotation  itself.  There  are  three  parts  to 
it. 

There  is  first  a  description  of  life : 

"  I  beheld  the  Lord  always  before  My  face ; 

For  He  is  on  My  right  hand,  that  I  should  not  be 
moved : 

Therefore  My  heart  was  glad,  and  My  tongue  re- 
joiced." 

Immediately  following  it,  is  a  description  of  death,  in 
which  an  attitude  toward  death  is  assumed  that  can  be 
postulated  of  no  human  being,  except  this  One: 

"  Moreover  My  flesh  shall  also  encamp  in  hope  j 
Because  Thou  wilt  not  leave  My  soul  unto  Hades, 
Neither  wilt  Thou  give  Thy  Holy  One  to  see  corrup- 
tion." 

Then,  after  life  and  after  death,  is  a  description  of  the 
resurrection : 

"  Thou  madest  known  unto  Me  the  ways  of  life ; 
Thou  shalt  make  Me  full  of  gladness  with  Thy  counte- 
nance." 

Cause  and  effect  are  set  in  relation  to  each  other  in  this 
Psalm  quotation.  Let  us  trace  the  effect  to  the  cause. 
We  begin  with  the  effect,  which  was  that  of  resurrection. 
That  resurrection  resulted  from  the  peculiar  nature  of 
death.  The  way  of  life  was  made  open  to  One  Who, 
laying  down  flesh  in  hope,  was  certain  that  His  soul 
could  not  be  left  in  Hades,  nor  His  flesh  see  corruption. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 24-32] 

The  peculiar  nature  of  that  death,  which  issued  in  resur- 
rection, resulted  from  the  peculiarity  of  life,  the  life 
which  could  say: 

"  I  beheld  the  Lord  always  before  My  face ; 
For  He  is  on  My  right  hand,  that  I  should  not  be 

moved. 

Therefore  My  heart  was  glad,  and  My  tongue  re- 
joiced." 

Let  us  take  the  same  line  of  thought,  tracing  it  in  the 
other  direction,  and  observing  the  sequence.  The  life 
described  was  such  that  in  death  encamped  in  hope ;  such 
death  made  resurrection  necessary  in  order  to  the  mainte- 
nance of  eternal  order. 

Let  us  now  confine  ourselves  to  the  reasons  for  the 
resurrection,  as  here  set  forth.  In  the  words  of  the 
Psalm  describing  the  life  and  death,  there  is  revealed  a 
threefold  victory  over  sin ;  first  the  victory  over  the  pos- 
sibility of  originating  evil, — "  I  beheld  the  Lord  always 
before  My  face  " ;  secondly,  the  victory  over  evil  as  sug- 
gested from  without, — "  For  He  is  on  My  right  hand 
that  I  should  not  be  moved  " ;  and  finally,  the  victory 
over  evil  as  responsibility  assumed : 

"  Therefore  My  heart  was  glad,  and  My  tongue  re- 
joiced : 

Moreover  My  flesh  also  shall  encamp  in  hope; 

Because  Thou  wilt  not  leave  My  soul  unto  Hades ; 

Neither  wilt  Thou  give  Thy  Holy  One  to  see  corrup- 
tion." 

Victory  over  the  possibility  of  originating  evil  is 
claimed  in  the  words,  "  I  beheld  the  Lord  always  before 
my  face."  Whenever  we  think  of  this  Man  of  Nazareth 
we  must  remember  His  unique  and  lonely  personality. 
He  was  very  God  and  very  man.  Therefore  He  was 
other  than  either,  because  He  was  both.  Other  than 
man,  because  God  as  well  as  man.  Other  than  God,  be- 

[72 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 24-32] 

cause  man  as  well  as  God.  So  that  when  this  Man  of  Naz- 
areth, very  man  and  very  God,  came  into  our  human  life, 
there  came  into  the  universe  of  God  a  new  Being,  a  new 
creation.  In  His  coming  the  first  movement  was  that 
He  took  the  form  of  a  servant.  In  that  great  word  in 
the  Philippian  letter,  in  which  Paul  was  describing  that 
descent  from  heights  that  we  cannot  see,  to  depths  that 
we  know  experimentally,  he  declared  that  He,  being  in 
the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not  a  prize  to  be  snatched  at, 
this  equality  with  God,  but  emptied  Himself  and  took 
upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant.  That  statement  is  fol- 
lowed by  the  words,  "  Being  made  in  the  likeness  of 
men."  The  first  fact  then  that  we  have  to  consider 
when  we  see  this  new  Being  in  the  universe  of  God,  is 
that  He  was  a  Servant,  on  the  plane  of  angel  relationship, 
though  not  of  angel  nature.  "  He  took  not  on  Him  the 
nature  of  angels,"  but  He  stood  on  their  plane  of  relation- 
ship to  God.  It  was  a  descent  from  sovereignty  to  sub- 
jectivity. This  is  a  mystery  that  cannot  be  fully  ex- 
plained ;  it  transcends  all  human  experience,  but  we  dwell 
upon  it  in  order  that  we  may  see  the  meaning  of  this 
first  phase  of  victory. 

As  we  look  upon  this  Man  of  Nazareth  Who  is  very 
God  and  very  Man,  standing  in  relation  to  the  eternal 
God  as  Servant,  we  see  at  once  that  a  new  possibility  is 
created  of  the  origination  of  evil.  Jude  declared  of  the 
angels  that  fell,  that  "they  kept  not  their  own  princi- 
pality, but  left  their  proper  habitation."  There  is  a  dif- 
ference between  the  sin  of  angels  and  that  of  Adam. 
Man  did  not  originate  evil  by  his  own  volition;  he  re- 
sponded to  temptation  from  without.  The  mystery  of 
evil  in  the  universe  is  older  than  the  history  of  man. 
The  story  of  the  fall  of  the  angels  is  that  they  kept  not 
their  habitation.  That  is  not  an  account  of  punishment ; 
it  is  an  account  of  sin.  When  Isaiah  sang  the  song  of 
the  fall  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  he  interpreted  the 
mystery  of  evil.  Lucifer,  son  of  the  morning,  left  his 

[  73  ) 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 24-32] 

own  orbit  when  he  said,  "  I  will  ascend  into  heaven. 
...  I  will  be  like  the  Most  High."  Then  he  left  his 
proper  habitation,  so  losing  his  principality,  and  falling. 
That,  so  far  as  we  know  from  revelation,  was  the  origina- 
tion of  evil. 

When  the  Son  of  God  came  into  a  new  sphere  of  ex- 
istence, for  the  purpose  of  carrying  out  the  eternal  coun- 
sels of  God,  an  opportunity  was  created  for  a  new  origi- 
nation of  evil.  For  the  servants  of  God  a  habitation  is 
ordained  by  God ;  and  the  law  of  maintaining  their  habita- 
tion, of  moving  in  their  orbit,  is  that  of  always  keeping 
Him  before  their  face  as  King.  In  the  case  of  Lucifer 
and  those  angels  who  followed  him  there  came  a  moment 
when  they  chose  to  exercise  their  will  outside  of  relation- 
ship to  the  command  of  God.  In  that  moment  there  was 
a  beginning  of  evil,  not  by  suggestion  as  from  without, 
but  by  the  action  of  the  will  in  independence,  instead  of 
in  dependence,  upon  God. 

That  conception  of  the  possibility  of  choosing  evil,  not 
in  answer  to .  allurement  from  without,  but  by  original 
action,  is  involved  in  this  word :  "  I  beheld  the  Lord 
always  before  My  face."  It  is  as  though  this  One  had 
said:  I  never  indulged  in  independent  or  self-caused 
action ;  I  never  left  My  proper  habitation ;  and  so  I  have 
reserved  My  principality.  I  took  upon  Me  the  form  of 
a  Servant,  and  having  taken  the  form  of  a  Servant,  I 
never  rebelled  against  the  service,  or  chose  My  own 
method  of  life — "  I  beheld  the  Lord  always  before  My 
face."  By  the  very  mystery  and  uniqueness  of  His 
Being,  this  Person  might  have  been  a  centre  from  which 
evil  should  originate  and  spread  out  in  ever-increasing 
circles ;  but  He  says :  "  I  beheld  the  Lord  always  before 
My  face  " ;  I  kept  My  first  habitation ;  I  held  My  original 
principality ;  I  never  broke  from  My  allegiance  to  the  God 
Whose  Servant  I  became  in  the  mystery  of  My  being. 
That  is  the  story  of  the  Being  Who  passed  into  death. 
He  was  One  Who  could  say,  "  I  beheld  the  Lord  always 

[74] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 24-32] 

before  My  face  " ;  One  Who  did  not  originate  evil.    That 
was  the  first  phase  of  His  victory  over  evil. 

Let  us  pass  to  the  next  declaration :  "  For  He  is  on  My 
right  hand,  that  I  should  not  be  moved."  The  difference 
is  apparent.  The  first  declaration  may  thus  be  expressed, 
"/  have  not  moved."  The  second  declaration  may  thus 
be  expressed,  "  /  have  not  been  moved."  I  have  not 
moved  by  My  own  volition,  choosing  to  act  as  apart  from 
Divine  movement;  and  I  have  not  allowed  any  outside 
attack  to  overcome  that  allegiance.  This  brings  us  to 
the  consideration  of  the  position  of  Jesus  in  the  world,  to 
the  fact  of  His  Manhood.  He  came  into  a  world  where 
the  force  of  evil  was  already  in  existence,  and  active. 
He  stood  through  all  the  years  of  His  human  life  be- 
tween two  arguments,  the  argument  of  right,  and  the  ar- 
gument of  wrong,  just  where  we  stand ;  He  stood  between 
two  forces,  the  force  that  forevermore  was  drawing 
Him  towards  the  Throne,  and  that  which  was  drawing 
Him  from  the  Throne.  Between  these  two  arguments, 
these  two  forces,  He,  in  common  with  all  humanity,  was 
called  upon  to  choose.  Angels  fell  by  their  own  volition 
and  choice.  Man  fell  because  standing  between  these 
two  arguments,  he  listened  and  yielded  to  the  one  of  re- 
bellion. Jesus  stood  in  both  places.  With  regard  to  the 
first  He  said,  "  I  set  the  Lord  always  before  My  face." 
With  regard  to  the  second  He  said,  "  Because  He  is  on 
My  right  hand,  that  I  should  not  be  moved.  Therefore 
My  heart  was  glad,  and  My  tongue  rejoiced  " ;  which 
means,  being  expressed  in  other  language:  I  found  the 
way  of  pure  happiness,  because  I  recognized  His  near- 
ness to  Me,  and  made  Him  My  defence  against  all  the 
assaults  of  the  evil  one.  He  gained  His  victory  over  the 
temptations  that  assailed  Him  from  without,  by  constant 
cooperation  with  the  God  Who  was  at  His  right  hand. 
As  the  Servant  of  God,  on  the  angelic  plane  of  relation- 
ship, He  set  the  Lord  before  Him,  and  never  left  His 
habitation.  As  the  Man  on  the  human  plane  of  relation- 

[75  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 24-32] 

ship,  He  recognized  God  on  His  right  hand,  and  availing 
Himself  of  His  strength,  was  never  moved  by  the  forces 
that  were  against  Him.  Thus  He  gained  a  victory  over 
the  possibility  of  originating  evil;  and  over  evil  as  sug- 
gested from  without.  Thus  a  double  victory  over  sin 
was  gained  in  the  life  of  this  Man. 

We  now  come  to  the  third  phase  of  His  victory,  that 
gained  through  the  mystery  of  His  death.  If  we  could 
but  free  our  minds  from  matters  with  which  we  are 
familiar  in  this  story  of  Jesus,  we  should  never  read  of 
His  death  without  being  startled.  Here  was  One  Who, 
as  Servant,  had  not  left  His  habitation:  Who,  as  Man, 
had  won  His  victory  of  purity  and  holiness  by  coopera- 
tion with  God;  in  Whom  therefore  there  was  no  reason 
for  death.  We  see  Him  passing  to  death.  But  now 
carefully  observe  His  attitude  toward  death.  Out  of 
the  midst  of  this  life  of  victory,  this  double  victory  over 
evil  in  life,  He  looked  at  death,  and  He  said :  "  My  flesh 
shall  rest  in  hope."  He  looked  to  that  which  lay  beyond 
death,  and  He  said,  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave  My  soul  unto 
Hades,  neither  wilt  Thou  give  Thy  Holy  One  to  see  cor- 
ruption." As  a  Servant  He  had  won  victory  on  the  first 
plane ;  He  had  not  originated  evil.  As  man  He  had  won 
victory  on  the  second  plane ;  He  had  overcome  evil  in  its 
assaults  from  without.  He  now  said :  I  am  going  into 
death,  but  death  cannot  hold  Me.  Death  is  the  wage  of 
sin.  Death  is  that  which  has  resulted  from  the  fact  of 
rebellion  against  God.  I  am  going  into  it,  but  it  cannot 
hold  Me; 

"  Thou  wilt  not  leave  My  soul  unto  Hades, 
Neither  wilt  Thou  give  Thy  Holy  One  to  see  corrup- 
tion." 

This  was  His  claim  to  victory  over  evil,  as  responsi- 
bility assumed.  Why  passed  He  into  death,  this  Man  of 
perfect  life  ?  The  explanation  can  only  be  gathered  from 
all  the  teaching  of  the  New  Testament.  It  is  hinted  at 
in  this  very  discourse  when  the  apostle  said :  "  Him 

[76] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2:24-32] 

being  delivered  up  by  the  determinate  counsel  and  fore- 
knowledge of  God."  The  meaning  of  it  had  been  sug- 
gested by  our  Lord  Himself  ere  He  departed,  when  He 
said :  "  No  man  taketh  My  life  away  from  Me,  but  I  lay 
it  down  of  Myself.  I  have  power  to  lay  it  down,  and  I 
have  power  to  take  it  again."  The  reason  why  He  laid 
it  down  is  declared  in  the  selfsame  discourse,  in  these 
words,  "  I  am  the  Good  Shepherd ;  the  Good  Shepherd 
layeth  down  His  life  for  the  sheep."  The  meaning  of 
that  death  is  declared  by  all  the  writers  of  the  New 
Testament.  "  Who  His  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  His 
body  upon  the  tree."  "  God  commendeth  His  own  love 
toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died 
for  us."  This  Man  of  perfect  victory  went  down  to 
death  because  He  had  assumed  the  responsibility  of  sin 
not  His  own.  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world." 

It  is  sometimes  said  that  it  is  difficult  to  understand 
how  one  Person  could  take  such  responsibility.  There 
is  no  difficulty  if  we  remember  Who  the  Person  was  Who 
took  the  responsibility.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that 
He  was  more  than  man  or  servant ;  Who  in  the  midst  of 
His  Manhood's  days  could  say,  "  I  and  My  Father  are 
One  " ;  "  I  do  nothing  of  Myself,  but  the  things  of  the 
Father " ;  "  My  Father  worketh  and  I  work."  This  is 
the  One  Who  went  down  to  death,  and  so  into  the  grave. 

Did  He  never  rise  ?  Was  the  stone  never  rolled  away  ? 
Did  He  never  come  back,  the  Man  of  Nazareth?  Then 
of  all  men  we  are  the  most  miserable.  Then  is  our 
preaching  vain,  and  our  faith  is  vain  also.  But  more  is 
involved.  If  the  story  of  the  perfect  life  be  true,  God 
has  violated  eternal  principles  in  allowing  death  to  hold 
One  in  Whom  there  was  no  place  for  death.  That  is 
what  Peter  meant  when  he  said :  "  It  was  not  possible 
that  He  should  be  holden  of  it"  God  raised  Him  up; 
and  the  raising  was  proof  finally  of  victory,  over  the 
possibility  of  orginating  evil,  over  evil  as  suggested,  and 

[  77] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 34-36] 

over  evil  as  responsibility  assumed.  "  It  was  impossible 
that  He  should  be  holden  of  it."  We  accept  that  dictum; 
we  accept  the  witness  of  the  actual  fact  of  the  Resurrec- 
tion; and  so  we  know  that  He  Who  took  the  responsi- 
bility of  human  guilt  has  been  able  to  accomplish  His 
purpose ;  He  has  turned  His  vision  into  victory,  and  His 
victory  into  virtue. 

We  never  stood  on  the  angel  plane,  and  so  never  could 
have  originated  evil  as  could  they ;  but  we  have  stood  as 
men  upon  the  human  plane,  and  we  have  listened  to  the 
voice  of  the  tempter,  and  we  have  yielded ;  our  record  is 
spoilt,  we  have  failed,  we  are  broken.  But  this  Man 
Who  never  failed,  took  the  awful,  and  the  mysterious  and 
incomprehensible  responsibility  of  our  failure,  and  went 
down  into  death,  and  sang  as  He  went :  "  My  flesh  shall 
rest  in  hope."  From  death  He  emerged,  His  soul  de- 
livered from  Hades,  His  flesh  never  having  seen  corrup- 
tion, and  by  that  resurrection  we  know  that  the  value  of 
His  dying  is  at  our  disposal.  If  Christ  won  this  three- 
fold victory,  death  could  not  hold  Him.  If  Christ  rose, 
He  did  so  because  He  had  won.  Therefore  the  central 
verity  of  the  Christian  faith,  and  the  central  note  of 
Christian  preaching  is  the  Resurrection.  This  explains 
the  meaning  of  the  Cross ;  and  must  issue  in  the  exalta- 
tion and  the  coming  of  the  King. 

Acts  2:34-36 

We  come  now  to  the  final  words  of  the  apostolic  dis- 
course; words  to  which  all  the  rest  have  led  up;  words 
which  constitute  the  Pentecostal  proclamation. 

Peter  had  commenced  by  saying,  "Be  this  known  unto 
you/'  He  had  continued  by  explaining  that  all  they  saw 
was  in  fulfilment  of  their  ancient  prophecies :  "  This  is 
that  which  hath  been  spoken  by  the  prophet  Joel " ;  and 
that  all  had  come  to  pass  as  the  result  of  the  ministry  of 
Jesus. 

He  now  passed  from  explanation  to  application.    He 

[78] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 34-36] 

had  completed  his  argument,  and  was  seeking  a  verdict. 
His  last  words  were :  "  Let  all  the  house  of  Israel  there- 
fore know  assuredly,  that  God  hath  made  Him  both  Lord 
and  Christ,  this  Jesus  Whom  ye  crucified."  This  procla- 
mation was  preceded  by  an  arresting  illustration : 

"  For  David  ascended  not  into  the  heavens :  but  he 
saith  himself, 

The  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  Thou  on  my 

right  hand, 
Till  I   make  Thine  enemies  the   footstool  of 

Thy  feet." 

In  our  examination  of  this  final  movement  in  the 
apostolic  discourse  we  will  take  first  the  proclamation, 
and  then  return  to  the  illustration. 

The  last  note  of  the  proclamation  took  the  men  who 
were  listening  back  to  the  apostle's  first  reference  to  the 
Person.  He  had  commenced  on  the  level  of  their  knowl- 
edge, and  in  the  region  of  their  contempt,  with  the  words : 
"  Jesus  of  Nazareth."  Then  he  had  led  them  on  to  state- 
ments concerning  Christ  which  had  challenged  their  be- 
lief, and  which  had  probably  raised  many  questions  in  their 
minds.  With  stately  argument,  and  scriptural  demon- 
stration, he  had  proceeded  from  point  to  point ; — A  Man 
approved  of  God;  a  Man  crucified,  not  by  accident  nor 
by  blunder,  but  by  the  determinate  counsel  of  high 
heaven;  a  Man  raised  from  among  the  dead  in  spite  of 
all  their  Saddticean  unbelief;  a  Man  lifted  high  and 
placed  at  the  right  hand  of  God  in  glory ;  a  Man  receiving 
there  in  mystic  manner  the  gift  long  promised  to  the 
nation,  of  the  outpoured  Spirit;  a  Man  pouring  out  this 
gift.  As  they  had  followed  and  wondered,  perhaps  they 
had  lost  sight  of  the  Man  of  Nazareth,  and  forgot  the 
villainy  of  their  own  crucifixion  of  Him,  in  the  strange 
things  that  were  being  said  to  them.  So  the  apostle 
finally  brought  them  back  face  to  face  with  the  same 
Person,  in  the  words,  "  This  Jesus  Whom  ye  crucified." 

[79] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2:34-36] 

This  is  a  matter  of  great  importance,  as  it  serves  to  em- 
phasize the  identity  of  the  Person.  If  these  men  were 
inclined  to  think  that  perhaps  the  apostle's  conception  of 
Jesus  was  changing,  and  that  as  he  ascended  the  heights 
and  saw  the  light  of  the  heavenly,  he  was  forgetful  him- 
self of  the  Person  to  Whom  he  had  been  attached ;  they 
found  that  he  brought  them  back  again  very  definitely  to 
that  same  Person ;  "  This  Jesus  Whom  ye  crucified." 

The  proclamation,  by  claiming  that  this  Jesus  had  been 
made  by  God,  both  Lord  and  Christ,  emphasized  the 
central  doctrine  of  the  Resurrection.  The  One  at  the 
right  hand  of  power,  the  One  elevated  by  God  to  Lord- 
ship, and  manifested  as  the  anointed  Christ,  fulfilling  all 
the  promises  and  purposes  of  the  past;  this  One  is  the 
actual  One  Who  was  crucified,  and  therefore  must  be  the 
One  Who  had  been  raised. 

The  actual  proclamation  was  that  "  God  hath  made  Him 
both  Lord  and  Christ."  A  natural  reading  of  this  word 
of  the  apostle  makes  it  plain  that  he  intended  to  declare 
that  in  the  fact  of  resurrection,  and  in  the  fact  of  ascen- 
sion, and  in  all  those  mysteries  which  are  so  difficult  to 
speak  of  in  the  language  of  time  and  sense,  God  did 
definitely  put  Him  in  the  place  indicated  by  the  twofold 
designation,  "  Lord  and  Christ."  The  word  "  made " 
here,  is  a  very  common  one,  but  it  is  a  word  that  is  always 
indicative  of  a  single  act ;  it  indicates  a  crisis ;  it  indicates 
the  fact  that  now,  the  process  being  ended,  the  consum- 
mation had  been  reached.  "  God  hath  made  Him." 

The  intention  of  the  apostle's  declaration  was  not  that 
of  signifying  the  perpetual  Lordship  of  Christ,  though 
that  also  was  included.  There  is  a  sense  in  which 
through  all  the  years  of  public  ministry  He  was  God's 
anointed  One,  speaking  the  word  of  authority ;  both  Lord 
and  Christ.  Here,  however,  the  apostle  indicated  the  fact 
that  at  a  crisis,  definitely,  positively,  God  did  by  one  act, 
make  Him  both  Lord  and  Christ.  In  the  eternal  counsel 
and  purpose  of  God,  the  Son  of  God  was  the  Saviour 

[80] 


iTHE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2:34-36] 

before  sin  was  committed,  for  the  Lamb  was  slain  in  that 
eternal  counsel  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  But 
now  this  fact  had  become  part  of  human  history,  as  well 
as  part  of  a  divine  purpose. 

This  was,  and  is  the  Pentecostal  proclamation.  God 
hath  made  him  Lord.  The  word  Lord  indicates  His 
personal  supremacy.  He  hath  made  Him  Christ.  The 
word  Christ  indicates  His  relative  supremacy. 

God  hath  made  Him  Lord ;  that  is,  hath  vindicated  His 
Lordship ;  hath  declared  in  the  sight  of  heaven,  and  earth, 
and  hell,  the  fact  that  He  is  Lord  by  an  inherent  superi- 
ority. That  fact  was  ratified  by  God  in  His  resurrection, 
and  in  His  ascension.  When  one  speaks  of  the  inherent 
supremacy  of  Jesus  Christ,  one  refers  to  the  fact  that  He 
is  Lord, — whether  we  will  or  not, — by  virtue  of  what  He 
is.  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  Lord.  He  is  facile  princeps 
among  the  sons  of  men,  incomparable  in  ideals  and  reali- 
zations, in  ethical  purposes,  in  moral  achievement,  in 
grace,  and  grandeur,  and  beauty  of  character.  Whether 
we  submit  to  Him  or  not,  is  another  matter.  Whether 
we  choose  to  have  other  lords  reigning  over  us,  is  not 
now  the  question. 

There  is  none  other  to  compare  with  Him.  No  other 
ideal  has  broken  upon  the  imagination  of  man  that  comes 
into  comparison  with  the  supernal  and  superlative  love- 
liness and  light  of  the  strange  picture  that  the  four 
Gospels  give  us  of  the  man  called  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 

This  Lordship  God  has  recognized  and  ratified.  He 
has  lifted  out  of  the  human  race  this  Man  Who  is  of  it, 
and  He  has  put  Him  in  the  place  of  Lordship.  In  His 
humanity  Jesus  fulfilled,  not  merely  the  hope  and  aspira- 
tion of  humanity,  but  the  will  and  intention  of  Deity. 
"  Let  us  make  man  in  our  own  image  "  was  the  ancient 
and  eternal  counsel.  Behold  this  Man  in  Jesus.  God 

4  *t 

hath  made  Him  Lord. 

But,  thank  God,  there  is  another  word.  He  hath  made 
Him  Lord  and  Christ.  We  must  interpret  the  word 

[•81  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2:34-36] 

Christ  by  the  Old  Testament.  We  must  go  back  to  its 
ritual  and  its  ceremony,  to  its  hopes,  its  aspirations,  its 
increasing  light,  to  its  sob,  and  its  sigh,  and  its  singing, 
if  we  would  know  what  the  word  Christ  means.  When 
we  know  it  all,  we  do  not  fully  know  what  Christ  means. 
We  need  the  New  Testament  also  to  tell  us  what  Christ 
means.  For  first  values  we  need  the  Old  Testament. 
The  word  itself  emerges  in  a  very  dark  day  in  Israel's 
history.  In  the  day  of  the  Judges,  when  chaos  was 
everywhere,  one  woman  in  answer  to  faith  was  given  a 
child,  Samuel;  and  she  sang  a  song.  It  was  her  own 
song.  Probably  Hannah  did  not  know  the  value  of  her 
song  in  its  wider  application,  but  it  was  an  interpretation 
of  the  Divine  method  in  that  dark  age.  That  song  ended 
with  the  words  "  His  anointed  " ;  and  the  Septuagint,  the 
Greek  version  of  the  Scriptures,  translates  it  "  His 
Christ."  There  the  great  idea  first  appears.  According 
to  that  song  the  Christ  was  the  King  Who  was  to  come. 
We  move  on  through  the  history  to  those  days  of  clearer 
vision,  the  days  of  the  prophets,  and  we  find  that  the 
Anointed  was  seen  as  anointed  to  loose  the  captive,  to 
open  the  prison  door,  to  bind  up  the  broken-hearted,  to 
preach  the  acceptable  year  of  our  Lord,  and  the  day  of 
vengeance  of  our  God.  There  we  see  the  Anointed 
supreme  in  a  great  and  glorious  sovereignty ;  but  we  also 
see  the  Anointed  bowed  and  broken  beneath  a  weight 
of  sorrows,  and  we  hear  the  Seer  sing  of  Him,  "  He  was 
wounded  for  our  transgressions,  He  was  bruised  for  our 
iniquities ;  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  Him." 
Now  said  Peter,  He  hath  made  Him — this  Jesus — the 
Anointed.  He  it  is  Who  has  fulfilled  the  hope,  realized 
the  aspiration,  provided  the  Atonement,  made  possible  the 
restoration. 

This  final  declaration  of  Peter  must  be  interpreted  by 
all  his  previous  argument.  We  must  go  over  those  seven 
movements  again  if  we  would  understand  the  ultimate 
meaning  of  His  Lordship  and  Messiahship.  Who  is  this 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 34-36] 

that  God  makes  Lord  and  Christ?  Jesus  of  Nazareth; 
a  Man  approved  of  God ;  delivered  to  death ;  raised  from 
the  dead;  ascended  to  the  right  hand;  Receiver  of  the 
fulness  of  the  Holy  Spirit;  Communicator  of  that  ful- 
ness to  the  waiting  souls  on  earth.  All  these  things  are 
necessary,  for  an  interpretation  of  the  royalty  of  Jesus, 
and  of  the  virtues  and  values  of  His  saviourhood. 

Let  us  take  those  seven  matters  once  again,  and  refer 
to  them  in  other  terms,  attempting  to  deduce  from  the 
historic  facts  their  moral  and  spiritual  values.  He  hath 
made  Him  Lord  and  Christ ;  crowned  humanity,  is  at  the 
centre  of  the  universe;  vindicated  holiness,  holds  the 
sceptre ;  sacrifice,  as  the  principle  of  deliverance,  is  upon 
the  Throne;  ultimate  victory,  as  demonstrated  by  resur- 
rection is  there,  and  all  the  fight  is  the  skirmishing 
of  administration; — spiritually  Armageddon  is  already 
fought  and  won;  it  is  not  open  to  debate  as  to  whether 
God  or  the  devil  is  going  to  win;  the  victory  is  won; — 
He  received  the  promise  of  the  Father,  and  so  established 
fellowship  between  God  and  humanity. 

Yes,  but  more;  He,  pouring  forth  this  gift  upon  frail 
and  fainting  men  and  women,  their  paralyzed  lives  were 
remade. 

So  the  moral  and  spiritual  values  of  the  Lordship  of 
Christ  are  these — A  crowned  humanity,  holiness,  sacri- 
fice, victory,  fellowship,  and  power.  "  Let  all  the  house 
of  Israel  therefore  know  assuredly,  that  God  hath  made 
Him  both  Lord  and  Christ." 

Now  let  us  turn  back  to  Peter's  illustration.  Speaking 
to  these  men,  familiar  with  the  ancient  Scriptures,  he 
said,  "  David  ascended  not  into  the  heavens."  That 
takes  us  back  to  what  he  had  already  said  concerning 
David  when  arguing  for  Resurrection — "  Brethren,  I 
may  say  unto  you  freely  of  the  patriarch  David,  that  he 
both  died  and  was  buried,  and  his  tomb  is  with  us  unto 
this  day."  Exactly  the  same  thought  is  now  expressed 
with  regard  to  ascension  and  to  crowning. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2:34-36] 

In  this  statement  we  have  a  clear  revelation  of  what 
Peter  meant  by  ascension.  If  ascension  was  merely  the 
passing  of  the  spirit  out  from  material  limitation  into  the 
larger  life  that  lay  beyond,  then  David  did  ascend  into 
the  heavens.  But  if  ascension  meant  the  coming  out  of 
death  of  the  body  of  the  person  that  passed  into  it,  and 
the  passing  of  that  same  body  into  the  heavens,  then 
David  did  not  ascend,  for,  as  the  apostle  says,  "  His  tomb 
is  with  us  unto  this  day/'  Peter  now  made  a  quotation 
from  the  Psalms,  and  said  it  was  from  a  Psalm  which 
David  wrote.  In  our  Bibles  it  is  Psalm  no.  One 
wonders  whether  Peter  would  ever  have  quoted  that 
Psalm  in  this  connection  if  he  had  not  heard  Jesus  Him- 
self do  so  (Matt.  22:44). 

Reference  to  this  Psalm  will  show  that  it  is  peculiarly 
a  Psalm  of  the  Messiah.  It  falls  into  two  parts.  In  the 
first  four  verses  the  Messiah-King  is  presented  in  His 
relation  to  Jehovah.  In  the  last  verses  the  same  King  is 
presented  in  His  own  might,  and  in  the  ultimate  victory 
of  His  judgment.  In  the  first  four  verses  the  Psalmist 
sang  of  the  King;  Who  is  seen  in  relation  to  Jehovah, 
appointed  and  strengthened  by  Jehovah,  surrounded  by 
His  people ;  and  the  King  is  Priest ; 

"  Thou  art  a  priest  forever, 
After  the  order  of  Melchizedek." 

In  the  closing  part  of  the  Psalm  this  selfsame  King  is 
seen  in  His  might  and  victory,  proceeding  through  judg- 
ment to  the  ultimate  establishment  of  His  Kingdom. 
This  is  the  Psalm  that  Peter  quoted  in  exposition  or 
illustration  of  the  claim  he  made  for  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 
All  that  the  Psalmist  saw  in  dim  and  distant  vision  from 
some  mountain  height,  and  expressed  in  song,  is  fulfilled 
in  the  Christ.  The  Christ  is  the  One  appointed  and 
strengthened  by  Jehovah.  The  Christ  is  the  One  Who 
gathers  His  people  around  Him,  the  people  that  become 
willing  in  the  day  of  His  power,  the  people  who  are  as 

1 84 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2:34-36] 

dew  issuing  from  the  womb  of  the  morning,  in  freshness 
and  beauty,  and  strength.  That  is  the  vision  Peter  had 
in  mind  as  he  declared  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  Per- 
son Whom  they  crucified,  was  thus  appointed  of  God. 

But  let  us  turn  to  our  Lord's  quotation  of  this  selfsame 
passage,  as  it  is  found  in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew. 

"  Now  while  the  Pharisees  were  gathered  together, 
Jesus  asked  them  a  question,  saying,  What  think  ye  of  the 
Christ?  Whose  Son  is  He?  They  say  unto  Him,  The 
Son  of  David.  He  saith  unto  them,  How  then  doth 
David  in  the  Spirit  call  Him  Lord,  saying, 

The  Lord  said  unto  My  Lord, 

Sit  Thou  on  My  right  hand, 

Till  I  put  Thine  enemies  underneath  Thy  feet? 

If  David  then  calleth  Him  Lord,  How  is  He  His  Son? 
And  no  one  was  able  to  answer  Him  a  word." 

Let  us  observe  the  relation  of  that  question  of  Christ 
to  what  had  gone  before.  His  enemies  had  asked  Him 
three  questions;  and  He  asked  one.  Every  one  they 
asked,  He  answered;  the  one  He  asked,  they  could  not 
answer.  Their  first  was  a  political  question.  It  was 
asked  by  a  coalition  of  Pharisees  and  Herodians.  It  was 
concerned  with  the  paying  of  tribute.  The  second  ques- 
tion was  a  theological  one.  It  was  asked  by  Sadducees, 
and  had  to  do  with  resurrection  in  which  they  did  not 
believe.  The  last  was  an  ethical  question.  It  was  asked 
by  a  lawyer,  a  sincere  man,  and  yet  for  the  moment  in  all 
probability  a  tool  and  mouthpiece  of  the  rest,  as  to  which 
was  the  greatest  commandment. 

Jesus  answered  particularly  and  in  detail  every  one  of 
them.  To  the  question  about  tribute,  He  said :  "  Render 
therefore  unto  Caesar  the  things  that  are  Caesar's;  and 
unto  God  the  things  that  are  God's  " ;  to  the  question 
about  resurrection,  "  In  the  resurrection  they  neither 
marry  nor  are  given  in  marriage.  .  .  .  God  is  not  the 
God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living ; "  to  the  question  about 

[85  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2 : 34-36] 

law,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy 
heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind,  thou 
shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  He  then  explained 
how  He  had  been  able  to  answer,  by  drawing  attention 
to  Himself,  and  setting  up  the  claims  of  an  absolute 
supremacy  in  every  department.  "  The  Lord  said  unto 
My  Lord."  Whose  son  is  that?  David's.  Then  how 
does  David  call  his  Son  his  Lord?  They  gave  Him  no 
answer.  We  know  the  answer.  David's  Son  is  David's 
Lord,  because  David's  Son,  of  David's  nature,  is  also  of 
other  nature  than  David's  nature. 

Interpreting  the  quotation  then  by  Christ's  own  use  of 
it,  the  Lordship  of  Jesus  is  that  of  His  final  authority  in 
matters  political,  theological,  ethical.  He  is  still  the 
supreme  authority  in  all  national  and  international  mat- 
ters. He  is  moreover  Lord  in  an  everlasting  dominion, 
dealing  with  the  whole  life,  that  which  lies  beyond  the 
present,  finally  cancelling  death  in  His  Lordship.  He  is 
Lord  to-day,  ruling  this  life,  giving  us  the  laws  of  con- 
duct for  time,  and  earthly  conditions.  Death  has  become 
a  mere  transition,  for  we  are  in  His  empire  now,  and  shall 
forever  be. 

The  quotation  shows  that  the  appointment  is  also  to 
restful  dominion. 

"  The  Lord  said  unto  My  Lord,  Sit  Thou  on  My  right 
hand."  The  right  hand  is  the  place  of  power  and  the 
place  of  peace.  There  is  no  panic  in  the  nature  of  God, 
and  there  is  no  need  for  it  in  those  who  know  Him. 

But  observe  finally  that  the  appointment  has  its  limits : 

"  Till  I  make  Thine  enemies  the  footstool  of  Thy  feet." 
Not  while  I  make  Thine  enemies  the  footstool  of  Thy 
feet.  That  is  not  the  word;  it  is  not  that  God  has  put 
Him  there  as  Lord  and  Christ  while  He  carries  on  a 
process  of  getting  His  Kingdom  ready  for  Him.  God 
has  not  yet  begun  to  make  His  foes  the  footstool  of  His 
feet.  The  doing  of  that  lies  beyond  the  present  age. 

To  quote  another  passage :  "  He  shall  not  cry,  nor  lift 

[86] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2:37-47] 

up  His  voice,  nor  cause  it  to  be  heard  in  the  street.  A 
bruised  reed  will  He  not  break,  and  a  dimly  burning  wick 
will  He  not  quench ;  He  will  bring  forth  justice  in  truth." 
When  He  sends  forth  judgment  to  victory  He  will  break 
the  bruised  reed  and  quench  the  smoking  flax,  and  will 
win  His  last  victory  over  finally  rebellious  hearts  by  the 
processes  of  judgment. 

That  day  has  not  come.  When  is  it  coming?  We 
know  not.  God  has  given  us  no  calendar.  We  do  not 
ask  to  know.  Our  comfort  is  that  He  sits  at  the  right 
hand  now,  the  Lord  and  the  Christ. 

That  is  the  Pentecostal  message ;  that  is  the  all-inclusive 
witness  of  the  Spirit  to-day;  and  therefore  it  is  the  all- 
inclusive  witness,  of  the  Church ;  that  alone  for  which  the 
Church  can  claim  Pentecostal  power.  Our  business — 
may  God  grant  that  it  may  be  more  than  our  business, 
our  passion  it  ought  to  be, — to  make  Him  Lord  and 
Christ,  Whom  God  hath  made  Lord  and  Christ,  in  our 
own  lives,  in  our  homes,  in  our  cities,,  in  the  wide  wide 
world. 

Acts  2:37-47 

In  the  Hebrew  Economy  Pentecost  was  described  as 
the  "  Feast  of  harvest,  the  first  fruits  of  thy  labours." 
The  spiritual  suggestiveness  of  the  feast  was  fulfilled  in 
the  Christian  dispensation  on  this  occasion. 

We  have  followed  the  course  of  Peter's  sermon.  Now 
we  consider 'the  results  of  the  preaching  of  that  sermon. 
The  story  is  contained  in  these  verses.  The  immediate 
results  are  chronicled  in  the  first  five  (37-41)  ;  and  the 
continuous  results  in  the  remainder  of  the  paragraph 
(vv.  42-47)- 

The  immediate  results  were:  First,  conviction  and 
enquiry;  secondly,  instruction  and  exhortation;  and 
finally,  obedience,  and  the  addition  of  those  who  received 
the  Spirit. 

When  they  heard  the  message  of  the  apostle  they  were 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2 : 37-47] 

pricked  in  their  heart,  and  said :  "  Brethren,  what  shall 
we  do  ? "  This  enquiry  immediately  followed  Peter's 
final  proclamation  concerning  the  Lordship  of  Jesus.  In 
making  that  proclamation  he  did  so  in  such  a  manner  as 
to  urge  upon  these  people  the  sin  of  the  death  of  Jesus — 
"  God  hath  made  Him  both  Lord  and  Christ,  this  Jesus 
Whom  ye  crucified/'  Two  thoughts  were  thus  borne  in 
upon  the  mind  of  the  people  that  listened ; — first,  the  fact 
of  the  Lordship  of  Jesus ;  and  secondly,  the  fact  of  their 
sin  in  the  light  of  that  Lordship.  Conviction  of  these 
two  things  produced  the  immediate  enquiry,  "  Brethren, 
what  shall  we  do  ?  " 

The  preaching  which  is  to  produce  conviction  in  the 
minds  of  men  concerning  their  need  must  be  that  which 
presents  the  Lordship  of  Christ.  It  was  the  fact  of  the 
absolute  supremacy  of  Jesus,  that  produced  in  the  minds 
of  these  men  the  sense  of  their  own  sin.  We  are  often 
being  told  that  men  to-day  lack-  the  sense  of  sin  that 
characterized  the  thinking  and  conviction  of  our  fathers. 
That  is  probably  true.  One  of  the  greatest  difficulties  of 
the  hour  is  that  men  are  not  conscious  of  sin.  Among 
the  reasons  for  this  may  be  the  fact  that  we  have  too  often 
brought  men  to  the  Mosaic  Law,  and  too  little  to  the 
pure  majesty  and  lonely  splendour  of  the  Lordship  of 
Christ.  There  are  men  to-day  who  never  tremble  though 
they  recite  the  Decalogue  with  great  regularity;  but  we 
have  yet  to  meet  the  man  who  can  be  brought  face  to  face 
with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  He  is  presented  to  us  in 
these  Gospel  stories,  who  can  stand  in  the  presence  of 
His  inherent  Lordship,  and  of  that  Lordship  which  He 
won  by  the  process  of  His  work  of  redemption,  without 
coming  to  the  conviction  of  sin.  If  we  are  to  measure 
our  life  by  the  standards  of  any  law,  including  the  He- 
brew law,  we  may  know  little  of  trembling ;  but  when  we 
stand  in  the  presence  of  this  Lord — first  in  the  presence 
of  the  light,  the  holiness,  and  the  splendour  of  His  char- 
acter ;  and  then  in  the  presence  of  that  ineffable  mystery; 

[88] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2:37-47] 

of  His  Passion,  in  which  Love  has  wrought  itself  out 
into  visibility — then  we  shall  place  our  hand  upon  our  lip 
and  cry  Unclean !  It  was  when  Peter  traced  the  story  of 
this  Man  of  Nazareth,  crowned  Lord  of  all,  God's  eternal 
Type,  as  well  as  God's  perfect  Redeemer,  that  these  men 
cried  out  in  the  consciousness  of  their  own  sin. 

This  conviction  was  produced  by  the  double  witness, 
that  of  a  man,  and  that  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  To  attempt 
to  produce  this  conviction  by  the  preaching  of  Christ  in 
one's  own  strength,  would  be  to  utterly  fail.  And  it  is 
also  true  that  the  Spirit  is  dependent  upon  the  witness  of 
man.  Where  these  two  are  united  in  witness,  then  these 
results  follow. 

Then  followed  the  apostle's  instruction  and  exhorta- 
tion. His  instruction  as  to  sin  was  expressed  in  the 
words :  "  Repent  ye,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of  you  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  unto  the  remission  of 
your  sins."  His  instruction  as  to  the  Lordship  of  Christ, 
in  the  words :  "  And  ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Spirit."  There  must  be  on  the  part  of  those  who  raise 
this  enquiry,  a  turning  from  sin,  and  faith,  which  is 
symbolized  by  baptism ;  but  there  must  also  be  the  recep- 
tion of  the  Spirit,  in  order  that  they  may  know  the 
Lordship  of  Christ  and  obey  that  Lordship.  His  en- 
couragement was  expressed  in  words  which  declared  that 
the  ancient  promise  was  made  to  them,  and  to  their  chil- 
dren, and  to  all  such  as  God  should  call.  Moreover  he 
warned  them  to  save  themselves  from  the  untoward  gen- 
eration. 

Now  observe  carefully  what  is  written  about  that  which 
followed  immediately :  "  They  that  received  his  word 
were  baptized;  and  there  were  added  .  .  .  about 
three  thousand  souls."  The  use  of  that  word  "  added  " 
here,  is  an  interesting  and  valuable  one  to  observe.  The 
old  Version  read  that  they  "  were  added  to  the  Church/' 
The  phrase  "  to  the  Church  "  has  been  omitted,  and  the 
italized  words  "  Unto  them  "  substituted.  As  an  actual 

[89] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  2:37-47] 

fact  neither  phrase  is  in  the  text.  Presently,  it  is  again 
written,  "The  Lord  added  to  them,"  and  here  also  the 
words  "  to  them  "  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  text.  The 
statements  respectively  are,  "  There  were  added,  .  .  . 
three  thousand  souls  " ;  and,  again,  "  The  Lord  added 
.  .  .  those  that  were  being  saved."  In  each  case  the 
real  intention  is  that  of  showing  the  growth  of  the 
Church.  The  word  translated  "  added  "  literally  means 
to  place  forward;  that  is,  the  placing  of  certain  things 
next  to  things  already  in  existence,  for  the  increase  of 
that  which  is  already  in  existence.  Secondarily,  these 
people  were  added  to  the  one  hundred  and  twenty,  added 
to  the  company  of  the  disciples ;  but  primarily,  they  were 
added  to  the  Lord.  In  that  hour  when  the  Holy  Spirit 
fell  upon  the  hundred  and  twenty,  the  hundred  and 
twenty  were  added  to  the  Lord,  made  members  of  His 
Body,  His  flesh  and  His  bones;  in  the  deep  and  mystic 
sense  of  the  New  Testament  teaching,  they  began  to  share 
the  common  life  of  the  Christ  of  God.  Here  also  on 
this  day  of  Pentecost  these  people  convinced,  obedient, 
were  added  to  the  Lord,  and  in  their  addition  they  gained 
all  the  values  of  His  death,  and  the  virtues  of  His  life. 
In  their  addition  to  Him,  He  gained  the  enlarged  instru- 
ment through  which  to  proclaim  His  message,  and  to  do 
His  work  in  the  world. 

So  the  first  results  of  the  Pentecostal  sermon  are  seen. 
Conviction  and  enquiry  produced  not  by  the  eloquence 
of  the  preacher,  not  by  his  logical  argument,  but  by  his 
declaration  of  truth  concerning  Jesus  in  the  power  of  the 
Spirit;  and  by  the  Spirit's  demonstration  of  the  truth 
declared,  in  the  mind  and  heart  of  those  who  listened. 

Conviction  and  enquiry  were  immediately  followed  by 
instruction  and  exhortation  on  the  part  of  the  apostle 
and  the  other  apostles  who  were  with  him.  Obedience, 
by  turning  to  Christ  as  Lord,  and  repentance  in  the  pres- 
ence of  sin,  was  followed  by  the  reception  of  the  Spirit, 
and  the  adding  of  these  souls  to  the  Lord.  So  the  Church 

[90] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2:37-47] 

grew,  the  instrument  through  which  our  Master  was  able 
to  deliver  His  message,  and  carry  on  His  work. 

Now  let  us  glance  at  the  continuous  results.  There 
were  unquestionably  un tabulated  results  of  that  first  ser- 
mon in  the.  power  of  Pentecost.  There  were  gathered 
together  at  the  Feast  devout  men  from  every  nation 
under  heaven.  In  that  company  of  three  thousand,  who 
heard,  and  were  convinced,  who  enquired,  and  obeyed, 
who  received  the  Spirit,  and  were  added  to  the  Lord, 
were  people  from  the  whole  known  and  civilized  world. 
As  they  returned  to  their  lands  and  homes,  they  went  as 
members  of  the  mystic  body  of  Christ,  sharing  His  life. 
In  the  places  to  which  they  went,  Christ  found  His  op- 
portunity through  them. 

There  are  two  instances  at  least  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  that  reveal  the  truth  of  this.  The  most  con- 
spicuous perhaps  is  that  of  the  Church  in  Rome.  Paul 
wrote  his  letter  to  the  saints  in  Rome.  Desiring  to  see 
them,  and  being  prevented,  he  sent  them  a  letter. 
Whence  came  the  Church  there?  We  have  no  story  of 
the  visit  of  an  apostle.  "  Sojourners  from  Rome  "  heard 
that  Pentecostal  sermon.  "  Sojourners  from  Rome  "  be- 
came obedient  to  the  message,  and  went  back,  and  so  in 
all  likelihood  the  infant  Church  was  founded.  When 
Saul  of  Tarsus  was  stricken  by  the  roadside  it  was  to  the 
Church  in  Damascus  that  he  was  going.  Believers  were 
gathered  together  in  that  city.  Whence  came  they?  We 
have  no  account  of  an  apostolic  visitation.  Most  prob- 
ably as  a  result  of  this  first  sermon,  men  had  gone  back 
to  Damascus,  and  so  the  Church  had  been  formed.  How 
far  the  results  went  no  man  can  ever  tell.  The  sermon 
was  preached  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  concerning 
Christ.  Immediate  results  followed,  but  all  the  results 
of  such  preaching  can  never  be  tabulated.  The  scattered 
people,  going  here,  there,  and  everywhere,  carried  the 
evangel,  carried  more  than  the  evangel, — they  carried  the 
power  of  the  Christ-life  by  the  Spirit. 

91  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2:37-47] 

But  there  were  other  clearly  manifest  results.  The 
picture  of  the  new  society,  the  Christian  Church,  is  full 
of  interest.  Notice  its  ordinances.  "  They  continued 
stedfastly  in  the  apostles'  teaching,  and  fellowship,  in 
the  breaking  of  bread  and  the  prayers."  These  are  four 
ordinances  of  Christian  fellowship.  Baptism  is  not  an 
ordinance  of  Christian  fellowship ;  it  is  the  ordinance  that 
indicates  the  entrance  upon  fellowship.  The  four  or- 
dinances to  be  constantly  observed  in  Christian  fellow- 
ship are:  the  apostles'  teaching,  the  fellowship,  the 
breaking  of  bread,  and  the  prayers.  These  are  not  the 
ordinances  of  Christian  service,  but  of  Christian  fellow- 
ship. Service  lies  beyond  them.  They  form  the  method 
of  equipment  for  service,  and  are  the  ordinances  for 
conserving  the  life  of  the  members  of  the  Church.  With 
the  subject  of  the  apostles'  teaching  we  need  not  tarry 
now.  Suffice  it  to  say  it  is  preserved  for  us  in  the  New 
Testament.  The  ordinance  of  fellowship,  we  have  too 
much  neglected.  Are  we  not  tempted  to  read  these  two 
words  "  teaching  "  and  "  fellowship  "  together,  as  though 
they  indicated  but  one  fact?  Or  are  we  not  inclined  to 
think  of  fellowship  as  merely  the  sentimental  oneness 
of  people,  who  were  listening  to  apostolic  doctrine  ?  But 
that  surely  is  not  the  meaning  of  the  word  here.  The 
use  of  the  word  fellowship  here  indicates  certain  definite 
habits  of  the  Saints  in  their  assembling  together.  I  be- 
lieve that  one  of  the  secrets  of  the  success  of  the  Method- 
ist Church  has  been  its  Class  Meeting.  In  that  meeting 
they  have  had  at  any  rate  something  of  the  realization 
of  Christian  fellowship.  Dr.  Dale  of  Birmingham  once 
said  to  me,  "  If  I  could  graft  the  Methodist  Class  Meet- 
ing on  to  our  Congregational  Church  life,  I  would  do  it 
to-morrow,  and  make  attendance  upon  it  obligatory."  It 
has  become  very  difficult  for  Christian  people  to  talk 
of  the  things  of  Christ  to  each  other.  They  meet  together 
in  ordinary  life,  and  they  talk  of  everything  except  the 
deepest  things  of  their  spiritual  life ;  and  that  not  because 

92 1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2:37-47] 

they  have  not  deep  experience,  not  because  they  are  un- 
familiar with  the  things  of  God  and  His  Kingdom,  but 
because  they  have  never  learned  how  to  help  each  other 
in  mutual  converse  concerning  them.  Those  early  Chris- 
tians talked  together  of  the  things  of  their  spiritual  life, 
and  there  is  no  surer  way  to  conserve  and  strengthen 
Christian  life  than  that  of  such  fellowship.  The  Old 
Testament  has  a  gracious  illustration  of  it  in  its  last 
book.  In  those  days  of  formalism  against  which  Malachi 
thundered:  "Then  they  that  feared  Jehovah  spake  one 
with  another."  That  was  not  a  Prayer  meeting,  that  was 
a  fellowship  meeting. 

Then  there  was  the  breaking  of  the  bread ;  that  is,  the 
gathering  together  as  members  of  one  family,  around  the 
one  table,  in  obedience  to  the  Lord's  command,  to  take 
the  emblems  of  bread  and  the  fruit  of  the  vine,  in  mem- 
ory of  Him,  and  in  proclamation  of  His  death  upon  the 
Cross. 

Finally  there  was  the  ordinance  of  "  prayers,"  that  is 
of  systematic,  definite,  positive  praying,  not  as  individ- 
uals only,  but  in  connection  with  one  another. 

The  effect  produced  by  this  company  of  people  who 
continued  steadfastly  in  the  apostles'  teaching,  in  fellow- 
ship, in  the  breaking  of  bread,  and  in  the  prayers,  was 
that  "  fear  came  upon  every  soul."  The  outside  multi- 
tudes were  conscious  of  fear  in  the  presence  of  this 
strange  new  society  existing  in  the  midst  of  their  life. 

The  fellowship  in  spiritual  things  had  its  outcome  in 
other  fellowship; — the  fellowship  of  goods,  fellowship  in 
worship — they  continued  in  the  temple  worshipping;  fel- 
lowship in  home  life — from  house  to  house  they  passed 
in  social  inter-relationship,  eating  "  with  gladness  and 
singleness  of  heart."  They  did  all  this,  "  praising  God  " 
— and  mark  this  well — "  having  favour  with  all  the  peo- 
ple." The  persecution  of  the  early  Christians  never 
originated  with  the  people,  but  always  with  the  rulers, 
the  priests. 

[93  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  2:37-47] 

"  Having  favour  with  all  the  people."  If  we  fail  there, 
if  the  Church  is  not  in  that  attitude  now,  what  are  we  to 
do?  Are  we  to  leave  the  Church  and  criticize  it?  A 
thousand  times  No !  Rather  let  us  face  the  fact  of  our 
failure,  repent,  do  the  first  works,  realize  the  Christian 
fellowship,  and  so  begin  to  win  back  the  favour  we  have 
lost.  Have  we  lost  favour  with  the  people  ?  To-day  it  is 
being  admitted  on  every  hand  that  the  Church,  as  such, 
has  ceased  to  have  favour  with  the  masses  of  the  people. 
If  so,  why  is  it?  Fundamentally  she  has  failed  to  realize 
her  own  corporate  life  and  to  reveal  the  life  of  the  Christ 
of  God.  She  has  turned  to  other  lords  and  other  masters, 
and  has  adopted  other  methods  than  the  methods  of  the 
Christ  Himself. 

The  Church  of  Christ — take  a  local  Church  as  indi- 
cating the  great  and  ideal  application — a  local  Church, 
so  at  the  disposal  of  the  Spirit  as  that  the  Spirit  through 
the  Church  can  flash  and  flame  upon  the  outside  world, 
so  as  to  amaze,  perplex,  and  raise  an  enquiry;  a  local 
Church,  one  within  its  own  borders  in  fellowship  with 
Christ,  and  testifying  to  Christ  is  invariably  a  Church  in 
favour  with  the  people.  Not  that  we  should  seek  the 
patronage  of  the  multitude,  but  that  we  are  so  to  reveal 
Christ  as  to  be  centres  of  attraction  to  the  multitude.  The 
moment  we  depart  from  Him,  we  lose  the  crowd.  The 
Church  of  Christ,  where  the  Christ  Himself  is  the  su- 
preme revelation  made, — not  only  through  the  individual 
lives  of  its  members,  but  in  its  corporate  capacity, — 
where  the  compassion  of  Christ  and  the  life  of  Christ  are 
manifest  in  the  mutual  inter-relationship  of  the  souls 
forming  the  Christian  Church,  is  the  Church  to  which 
the  wQd.ry  and  woebegone  will  turn.  That  is  the  truly 
influential  Church.  How  we  have  degraded  'that  word 
influential.  We  call  a  Church  influential  now  because  of 
the  kind  of  people  that  attend  it,  because  of  the  money 
which  it  raises  for  philanthropic  objects.  There  was  a 
Church  in  the  olden  days  that  said :  "  I  am  rich,  and 

[94] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  3 :  r-io] 

have  gotten  riches,  and  have  need  of  nothing/'  and  the 
Master  walking  amid  the  golden  candlesticks  said: 
"  Thou  .  .  .  knowest  not  that  thou  art  the  wretched 
one  and  miserable  and  poor  and  blind  and  naked."  So 
He  would  say  to-day  to  many  Churches  which  we  de- 
scribe as  influential.  The  influential  Church  is  the  com- 
pany of  loyal  souls  who  "  continue  steadfastly  in  the 
apostles'  teaching  and  fellowship,  and  in  the  breaking 
of  bread  and  the  prayers,"  who  eat  their  meat  with  glad- 
ness and  singleness  of  heart,  who  manifest  in  their  in- 
dividual lives  and  corporate  capacity  the  strength,  the 
beauty,  the  glory,  the  compassion  of  the  Christ. 
Wherever  there  is  such  a  Church  you  will  find  the  Church 
that  has  favour  with  the  people. 

The  lessons  of  this  study  for  the  worker,  and  espe- 
cially for  those  in  the  ministry  are  patent.  First,  preach 
for  a  verdict.  That  is  what  Peter  did.  Secondly,  when 
you  have  preached,  take  time  to  gather  your  results. 
Thirdly,  having  gathered  them,  set  them  in  order. 

Finally  let  us  remember  for  our  encouragement  that 
all  the  results  of  our  teaching  and  preaching,  if  we  are  at 
the  disposal  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  can  never  be  tabulated. 
If  we  can  tabulate  the  results  of  preaching,  then  the 
preaching  is  a  comparative  failure.  But  it  is  not  so  with 
any  man  who  will  but  bring  himself,  with  his  ignorance 
or  knowledge,  with  his  weakness  or  strength,  with  his 
halting  or  eloquence,  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  for  the  declara- 
tion of  this  evangel.  Rome  will  feel  its  power,  Damascus 
will  feel  the  effect  of  it.  The  far  distant  places  of  the 
world  will  be  the  places  where  the  last  ripples  of  the  water 
touch  the  shore,  and  he  will  never  know  till  the  Day 
break.  Cast  thy  bread  upon  the  waters,  for  after  many 
days  thou  shalt  find  it. 

Acts  3: 1-10 

We  have  dealt  with  the  first  impression  produced  by 
the  Church,  and  have  considered  the  first  sermon  preached 

[95 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  3 :  i-io] 

in  the  light  and  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  We  now  com-> 
mence  the  section  dealing  with  the  first  opposition 
(3-4:31).  The  cause  of  this  opposition  was  that  of  a 
miracle  wrought,  the  preaching  of  the  resurrection  which 
resulted,  and  the  consequent  hatred  of  the  Sadducees, 
who  were  rationalists  in  religion.  The  effect  of  the  op- 
position was  that  Peter  bore  a  new  testimony,  the  priests 
indulged  in  a  new  threatening,  and  the  Church  received 
a  new  filling  of  power. 

Our  present  meditation  is  concerned  with  the  miracle. 
This  is  the  first  miracle  recorded  in  the  book  of  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles.  As  time  passed  on  there  was  a  gradual 
decrease  in  physical  miracles,  and  a  corresponding  in- 
crease in  spiritual  wonders.  Our  Lord  never  set  any 
great  value  upon  the  physical  miracles  He  wrought,  as 
arguments  or  credentials,  either  for  His  Divinity  or  His 
mission.  He  distinctly  said  to  His  own  disciples,  "  Be- 
lieve Me  ...  or  else  believe  Me  for  the  very  works' 
sake."  His  supreme  evidence  was  Himself.  His  su- 
preme argument  was  Himself.  But  in  the  midst  of  that 
unbelieving  and  superstitious  and  materialistic  age,  it  was 
necessary  that  there  should  be  material  manifestations  of 
power  to  arrest  the  attention.  In  proportion  as  the 
Church  emerged  into  all  her  spiritual  glory,  she  ceased 
to  see  the  material  miracles  which  were  necessary  in  the 
earthly  ministry  of  Christ.  They  were  rendered  un- 
necessary in  view  of  the  wider  and  more  spacious  work 
of  spiritual  testimony  and  power.  In  that  fact  is  revealed 
the  meaning  of  Christ's  word  to  His  disciples,  "  Greater 
works  than  these  shall  ye  do ;  because  I  go  unto  the  Fa- 
ther." By  that  word  He  did  not  mean  that  they  would 
work  more  wonderful  miracles  in  the  material  realm,  for 
they  did  not  do  so.  He  meant  rather  that  the  miracle 
wrought  in  the  material  is  never  so  marvellous  as  the 
miracle  wrought  in  the  spiritual  realm.  When  He  passed 
to  the  Father  they  were  to  work  greater  works — the 
wonders  in  the  spiritual  realm. 

1 96 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  3 :  i-io] 

Yet  the  story  of  this  miracle  is  very  interesting,  and 
there  is  no  doubt  that  it  is  recorded  here  because  it  is 
necessary  to  the  elucidation  of  what  followed.  The 
preaching  which  stirred  up  opposition  was  the  result  of 
this  miracle.  The  opposition  which  resulted  in  further 
preaching  and  greater  boldness,  grew  immediately  out  of 
this  miracle.  We  will  pass  over  the  story  three  times; 
first  to  notice  the  simple  facts;  secondly,  to  notice  the 
supreme  facts;  and  finally,  to  suggest  the  symbolized 
facts. 

The  simple  facts  may  be  dismissed  briefly.  This  is  the 
story  of  a  lame  man  healed.  Luke  declares  that  this  man 
was  a  cripple  from  birth.  That  in  itself  is  suggestive. 
Observe  carefully  the  particular  words  made  use  of  in 
the  story  of  his  healing :  "  Immediately  his  feet  and  his 
ankle-bones  received  strength.  And  leaping  up,  he  stood, 
and  began  to  walk."  Perhaps  only  medical  men  can 
fully  appreciate  the  meaning  of  these  words ;  they  are  the 
peculiar,  technical  words  of  a  medical  man.  The  word 
translated  feet,  is  only  used  by  Luke,  and  occurs  nowhere 
else.  It  indicates  his  discrimination  between  different 
parts  of  the  human  foot.  This  particular  word  refers  to 
the  base,  or  heel.  The  phrase  ankle-bones  is  again  a 
medical  phrase,  to  be  found  nowhere  else.  The  word 
"  leaping  up  "  describes  the  coming  suddenly  into  socket 
of  something  that  was  out  of  place,  the  articulation  of 
a  joint.  This  then  is  a  very  careful  medical  description 
of  what  happened  in  connection  with  this  man. 

This  then  is  the  simple  story.  A  man  crippled,  not  as 
the  result  of  accident,  not  as  the  result  of  sin  in  his  own 
life,  but  from  birth,  suffering  from  congenital  disease, 
was  suddenly  made  to  stand,  to  walk;  in  the  exuberance 
of  a  new-found  strength  he  suddenly  leapt  within  the 
precincts  of  the  Temple. 

How  was  this  wrought?  At  the  word  of  Peter  and 
John.  How  great  was  the  gap  between  the  second  and 
third  chapters  of  this  book  we  cannot  tell.  Chapter  two 

[97  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES' 

[Acts  3 :  i-io] 

ends  with  the  statement  of  the  fact  that  the  Lord  added 
to  the  company  of  believers,  by  adding  to  Himself, 
day  by  day,  those  that  were  being  saved.  That  state- 
ment ended  the  chapter  of  enthusiasm,  the  chapter 
of  ecstasy,  the  chapter  of  a  flaming  vision,  the  chap- 
ter of  song  and  praise  and  proclamation,  and  of 
crowds  swept  into  relationship  with  Jesus  Christ.  Chap- 
ter three  begins  with  the  statement  that  two  men,  Peter 
and  John,  were  going  to  the  Temple.  They  were  "  going 
up  ...  at  the  hour  of  prayer,  being  the  ninth  hour." 
There  were  three  hours  in  the  day,  separate  hours,  at 
which  people  gathered  to  the  Temple,  and  the  evening 
hour  was  the  hour  of  sacrifice,  the  ninth  hour.  The  hour 
of  prayer  was  half  an  hour  after  the  sacrifice  had  been 
offered.  In  it  the  incense  offering  was  ascending  and 
men  prayed.  Peter  and  John  went  to  the  Temple,  not  at 
the  hour  of  sacrifice,  but  at  the  hour  of  prayer 
which  followed  sacrifice.  As  we  look  at  these  two 
men,  going  up  to  the  Temple,  no  tongue  of  fire  was 
resting  upon  their  heads;  there  was  nothing  to  at- 
tract attention;  they  were  walking  in  the  commonplace; 
the  ecstasy  of  the  day  of  Pentecost  had  passed.  They 
were  two  men  who,  in  the  earlier  years  of  their  life,  had 
known  each  other,  and  had  been  friends;  who  yet  had 
probably  been  perpetual  irritants  to  each  other.  Peter 
was  the  practical  man.  John  was  the  poet.  Peter  was  a 
doer  of  deeds.  John  was  a  dreamer  of  dreams.  The 
whole  fact  of  their  difference  flames  out  in  the  last  pic- 
ture we  have  of  them  before  the  day  of  Pentecost.  Peter, 
standing  on  the  shores  of  the  lake,  after  Jesus  had  re- 
stored him,  said,  "  Lord,  and  what  shall  this  man  do  ?  " 
It  was  the  question  of  his  perplexity  about  John.  Peter's 
prescription  for  all  trouble  was  doing.  He  had  little  pa- 
tience with  dreaming.  Yet  mark  the  sacred  and  beautiful 
significance  of  the  fact  that  beyond  the  Cross  and  Resur- 
rection, and  after  Pentecost,  Peter  the  doer  and  John  the 
dreamer  went  into  close  fellowship.  They  had  found 

[98] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  3 :  i-io] 

that  they  were  not  antagonistic  but  complementary  to 
each  other.  At  the  word  of  Peter,  spoken  in  the  com- 
radeship of  the  silence  of  the  dreamer,  this  man,  lame 
from  birth,  walked,  leapt,  and  praised  God. 

The  word  was  spoken  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of 
Nazareth;  but  it  was  spoken  by  a  man  who  was  in  pos- 
session of  all  that  the  name  indicated.  "  Silver  and  gold 
have  I  none;  but  what  I  have,  that  give  I  thee.  In  the 
name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth,  walk."  This  was  no 
apology.  Peter  meant  rather  to  boast  in  his  Lord.  True 
he  had  neither  silver  nor  gold,  but  he  had  something  far 
better,  and  in  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  he  pro- 
nounced his  commanding  and  powerful  word. 

The  simple  facts  then  are  that  a  cripple  whose  life  was 
maintained  by  the  alms  of  those  who  passed  to  the  Tem- 
ple— a  man  who,  had  he  lived  in  this  day,  would  have 
been  designated  a  professional  beggar — was  suddenly 
lifted,  and  set  upon  his  feet,  and  made  into  an  ardent 
worshipper  in  the  spiritual  realm,  by  the  word  of  two 
men  who  used  the  name  of  Jesus. 

Let  us  then  consider  the  supreme  facts  revealed.  The 
first  grows  entirely  out  of  our  clear  vision  of  the  simple 
facts  already  referred  to.  The  supreme  fact  is  that  of 
the  continuity  of  the  activity  of  the  Christ.  He  was  still 
at  work,  and  doing  exactly  what  He  had  done  in  the  days 
of  His  flesh.  We  cannot  read  this  story  of  the  healing 
of  the  man,  a  cripple  from  birth,  without  being  reminded 
of  the  story  of  the  life  of  our  Lord,  Who  when  passing 
through  the  Bethesda  porches,  found  a  man  who  for 
thirty  and  eight  years  had  been  in  the  grip  of  an  infirmity, 
and  healed  him.  The  healing  of  that  man  in  the  Bethesda 
porches,  humanly  speaking,  cost  Jesus  His  life.  When 
He  had  healed  him  He  told  him  to  carry  his  bed,  and  the 
rulers  criticized  him  for  carrying  his  bed  on  the  Sabbath 
day.  When  they  found  Jesus  they  charged  Him  with 
Sabbath  breaking.  Jesus  answered  them,  "  My  Father 
worketh  even  until  now,  and  I  work."  In  effect  He  said 

[99] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  3 :  i-io] 

to  these  men  who  charged  Him  with  breaking  Sabbath; 
I  have  no  Sabbath,  for  God  has  no  Sabbath,  in  the  pres- 
ence of  human  suffering!  I  have  worked  on  the  Sab- 
bath Day  to  give  this  man  the  chance  of  Sabbath,  such 
as  he  has  never  had !  "  For  this  cause  therefore  the  Jews 
sought  the  more  to  kill  Him,  because  He  not  only  brake 
the  Sabbath,  but  also  called  God  His  own  Father,  making 
Himself  equal  with  God";  and  they  never  ceased  their 
hatred ;  and  their  planning  and  plotting  never  ended  until 
they  had  killed  Him.  Humanly  speaking  the  healing  of 
that  man  cost  Him  His  life.  Divinely  speaking  also  it 
cost  Him  His  life.  He  had  healed  that  sinning  man  by 
the  right  of  atonement,  not  then  made  visible  to  human 
sight,  but  existing  in  the  nature  of  God,  to  be  wrought 
out  into  visibility  by  the  very  Cross,  which  resulted  from 
what  He  had  done.  Now  said  Peter,  "  In  the  name  of 
Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth,  walk ! "  In  the  name  of  the 
One  Who  wrought  with  God  to  set  right  human  limitation 
by  dealing  with  human  sin.  So,  as  we  see  this  man 
responding,  we  see  the  Christ  continuing  His  work. 

But  if  in  this  miracle  we  see  the  continuity  of  the 
activity  of  the  Christ,  we  see  also  the  commencement  of 
activity  through  His  Body,  which  is  the  Church.  Peter 
and  John  were  no  longer  isolated  disciples.  They  were 
"  members  of  His  body,  of  His  flesh,  and  of  His  bones," 
to  use  the  mystic  language  of  the  New  Testament  writer. 
Peter  and  John  were  living  members  of  the  living  Christ, 
and  therefore  the  instruments  of  His  will  and  of  His 
power.  Christ  healed  through  these  two  men.  Peter 
fastened  his  eyes  upon  this  man.  Peter  spoke  directly 
to  this  man.  "  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none ;  but  what  I 
have,  that  give  I  thee."  Then  he  took  him  by  the  hand, 
and  the  Greek  word  signifies  a  seizing  by  the  hand,  a  grip 
that  lifted.  There  is  not  the  slightest  evidence  in  the 
story  of  any  faith  on  the  part  of  the  man.  Nearly  all 
the  commentators  say  that  he  must  have  exercised  his 
faith  in  order  to  be  healed,  but  it  is  not  stated  in  the 

[  100  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  3 :  i-io] 

story.  His  healing  was  a  direct  act  of  the  Christ,  through 
these  men.  Peter  looked,  and  through  the  eyes  of  Peter 
there  flashed  the  love  of  the  Christ.  Then  Peter  spoke, 
and  it  was  the  very  language  of  Jesus.  He  also  was  a 
Man  of  poverty  so  far  as  this  world's  goods  were  con- 
cerned, and  now  through  two  members  of  His  Body  He 
was  able  to  say,  "  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none ;  but  what 
I  have,  that  give  I  thee."  Through  that  touch,  that  lift- 
ing with  a  strong  hand,  Christ  was  making  contact  with 
human  need,  through  the  members  of  His  Body. 

The  third  supreme  fact  then  was  that  of  the  communi- 
cation of  life,  in  order  to  the  correction  of  disability. 
What  was  the  need  so. far  as  the  man  was  concerned? 
Leaping  instead  of  lameness;  giving  praise  instead  of 
asking  alms.  This  communication  of  life,  equal  to  the 
accomplishment  of  both  the  wonders,  was  wrought  by 
the  living  Christ,  through  the  members  of  His  Body. 

We  turn  now  to  the  last  line  of  our  consideration. 
Here  as  always,  the  miracle  has  a  spiritual  significance. 
He  Who  in  the  days  of  His  flesh  said,  "  I  am  the  Truth," 
by  that  declaration  suggested  the  unification  of  all  life  in 
His  own  Person.  Jesus  never  divided  as  we  do,  between 
the  sacred  and  the  secular;  and  the  very  laws  by  which 
Pie  operated  in  the  physical  realm,  were  those  by  which 
He  wrought  in  the  spiritual.  There  was  not  a  miracle 
He  wrought  but  has  its  spiritual  significance  as  well  as 
its  material  demonstration ;  and  what  is  true  of  the  Master 
was  true  here  also.  The  day  of  Pentecost  as  a  day,  as 
an  event,  as  an  initiation,  was  over.  The  tongues  of  fire 
had  passed  out  of  sight.  The  sound  of  the  mighty  rush- 
ing wind  was  no  more.  The  ecstatic,  enthusiastic  songs 
were  silenced.  This  is  the  first  picture  of  the  Church 
as  she  is  to  be,  as  the  result  of  the  tongue  of  fire  and  the 
mighty  rushing  wind,  and  the  enthusiasm.  Pentecost  as 
a  flaming  fire  was  never  intended  to  be  the  continuous 
and  normal  condition  of  the  Christian  Church.  The  con- 
ditions after  Pentecost  are  symbolized  in  these  chapters 

[    10!    ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  3 :  i-io] 

of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  The  normal  for  the  Church 
of  God  is  in  the  commonplaces,  and  among  the  cripples. 
The  places  of  inspiration  and  vision  are  given,  in  order 
that  we  may  translate  them  into  virtue  and  victory,  as  we 
go  to  the  world  in  its  need. 

What  then  are  the  symbolized  facts?  First  that  the 
Church's  opportunity  is  lame  humanity,  lame  from  its 
birth.  It  is  waste  of  time  to  discuss  how  humanity  came 
to  be  lame;  it  is  lame,  and  that  is  the  trouble.  The 
Church's  opportunity  is  not  to  build  schools  and  erect 
forums  where  we  shall  discuss  how  men  were  born  lame. 
The  disciples  of  old  came  to  Jesus  with  a  question,  a 
wonderfully  tempting  metaphysical  and  psychological 
question,  "  Rabbi,  who  sinned,  this  man,  or  his  parents, 
that  he  should  be  born  blind  ?  "  He  dismissed  their  ques- 
tion :  "  Neither  did  this  man  sin,  nor  his  parents ;  but 
that  the  works  of  God  should  be  made  manifest  in  him 
we  must  work  the  works  of  Him  that  sent  Me."  Lame 
humanity  is  the  Church's  opportunity.  This  is  indeed 
a  pathetic  story  and  picture ;  lame  humanity  at  the  Beau- 
tiful Gate,  but  outside!  There  at  the  gate,  with  all  the 
mountains'  far-flung  splendours  encircling  the  city ;  there, 
where  the  steps  went  up  to  the  Temple,  he  lay;  but  out- 
side. That  is  humanity's  position,  in  the  midst  of  beauty, 
but  not  of  it;  in  the  realm  of  things  lovely  and  of  good 
report,  but  excluded.  That  is  the  position  of  humanity 
everywhere ;  it  sighs  and  sobs  and  is  in  agony  at  the 
Beautiful  Gate;  but  it  cannot  get  in.  There  is  the 
Church's  opportunity. 

What  was  this  man  doing?  He  was  not  seeking  for 
strength  to  walk,  but  for  alms.  Alms  are  the  means  by 
which  men  live,  in  spite  of  disability,  and  without  work. 
That  is  what  humanity  is  doing  everywhere.  Work  is 
never  the  result  of  sin.  The  result  of  sin  is  that  man  is 
trying  to  live  on  alms  without  work!  Men  are  asking 
alms  everywhere;  they  are  paupers,  at  the  Beautiful 
Gate ;  and  that  is  the  Church's  opportunity. 

[    102    ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  3 :  i- 

Secondly  the  Church's  gift  is  here  revealed.  "  Silver 
and  gold  have  I  none ;  but  what  I  have,  that  give  I  thee." 
What  hast  thou  then,  O  Peter,  to  give  to  humanity,  lame 
at  the  Beautiful  Gate,  excluded,  begging?  That  which 
cancels  disability,  that  which  communicates  ability;  and 
ultimately,  that  which  creates  worship.  First  that  which 
cancels  disability.  Said  Peter  to  this  man,  I  have  nothing 
to  give  you  that  will  help  you  to  maintain  your  life  while 
you  are  a  cripple ;  but  I  have  something  to  cure  the  crip- 
pled condition;  and  make  you  able  to  earn  your  own 
living.  That  is  Christianity.  Christianity  has  not  come 
into  the  presence  of  the  world's  wounds  and  woes  and 
agony  to  give  out  doles  in  order  to  help  it  to  bear  its 
limitation.  Christianity  comes  to  give  men  life,  and  put 
them  on  their  feet,  and  so  enable  them  to  do  without 
alms.  Christianity  faces  a  man  with  a  gift  that  cancels 
his  disability.  Christianity  takes  hold  of  a  man  whose 
ankles  are  out  of  joint,  and  makes  them  articulate.  That 
man  knew  more  about  ankles  than  any  man  in  Jerusalem, 
for  he  had  lain  on  the  steps,  and  had  seen  all  the  people 
coming  up  to  the  Temple  for  years.  A  man  may  know 
much  about  ankles,  and  never  know  how  to  walk.  Chris- 
tianity does  not  come  to  teach  a  man  philosophy.  It 
comes  to  give  him  life,  to  give  him  that  which  cancels 
his  disability,  and  to  communicate  ability,  and  so  to  cre- 
ate worship. 

If  that  is  the  Church's  gift,  then  what  is  the  Church's 
method?  She  must  speak  and  work  in  the  name  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Nazareth,  the  risen  Christ.  We  are  on  the  other 
side  of  the  story  of  the  Cross  and  the  Resurrection.  This 
word  was  spoken  in  His  name;  but  it  was  spoken  by  a 
man  who  shared  His  very  nature.  If  we  go  to  lame 
humanity  at  the  Beautiful  Gate  in  our  own  name,  or  in 
any  other  name,  we  may  even  give  them  some  alms  that 
will  help  them  to  bear  their  disability,  but  we  shall  never 
set  them  on  their  feet.  It  is  in  His  name  that  the  Church 
must  go. 

[  103  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  3: 11-26] 

Again,  Peter  and  John  went  in  cooperation.  "  Look  on 
us,"  said  they,  as  they  steadfastly  looked  at  him.  More- 
over there  was  contact.  Peter  took  him  by  the  hand  and 
lifted  him.  "  He  took  him  by  the  right  hand,  and  raised 
him  up."  That  is  the  final  thing  in  the  Church's  method. 
We  must  come  to  the  man  that  lies  at  the  Beautiful  Gate 
begging  alms,  outside ;  and  take  him  by  the  hand.  There 
must  be  personal,  immediate,  direct  contact.  The  Church 
standing  afar  off,  and  singing  a  song  which  she  hopes 
will  reach  the  dweller  in  the  valley  does  but  mock  the 
need  of  the  dweller  in  the  valley.  The  Church  that  comes 
down  to  the  side  of  the  wounded,  weary,  woebegone 
world,  and  holds  out  the  right  hand,  and  lifts,  is  the 
Church  through  which  the  Christ  is  doing  His  own  work, 
through  which  the  Christ  will  win  His  ultimate  victory. 

Acts  3: 11-26 

This  paragraph  contains  the  story  of  how  Peter  ex- 
plained to  the  crowds  the  meaning  of  the  things  that  had 
happened.  The  scene  is  peculiarly  Hebrew.  The  place 
was  the  Temple,  in  Solomon's  porch.  The  people  were 
almost  undoubtedly  permanent  residents  in  Jerusalem,  a 
different  crowd  from  that  which  had  surrounded  the 
apostles  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  Pentecost  was  a  Jew- 
ish feast,  and  men  gathered  in  the  city  from  all  parts. 
That  feast  was  now  over,  the  multitudes  had  departed 
to  their  own  homes;  and  the  company  of  people  who 
ran  into  Solomon's  porch,  gazing  with  wonder  at  the 
healed  man,  was  undoubtedly  a  company  almost  exclu- 
sively of  Hebrews,  that  is  of  Israelites. 

This  address  of  Peter  was  peculiarly  Hebrew.  He  re- 
ferred to  God  as  "  The  God  of  Abraham,  and  of  Isaac, 
and  of  Jacob  " ;  he  declared  that  "  God  f  oreshewed  by 
the  mouth  of  all  the  prophets  " ;  and  toward  the  end  of 
the  address  he  spoke  of  the  covenant  which  God  made 
with  "'Your  father  Abraham." 

The  references  to  Jesus  were  almost  all  borrowed  from 

I  104  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  3: 11-26] 

Old  Testament  Scripture :  "  The  Servant  of  God  "  (not 
as  rendered  in  the  Authorized  Version,  "  the  Son,"  but  as 
it  is  accurately  translated  throughout  this  passage  in  the 
Revision,  "  The  Servant  of  God")  ;  a  word  which  took 
them  naturally  back  to  the  great  prophecy  of  Isaiah: 
"  The  Holy  and  the  Righteous  One,"  being  two  descrip- 
tions of  the  Old  Testament,  each  of  them  having  Mes- 
sianic value ;  and  finally  "  the  Christ  "  which  was  but  the 
Greek  form  of  the  Hebrew  word  Messiah,  indicating  the 
great  hope  of  the  people. 

The  terms  in  which  he  spoke  of  the  hopes  which  Jesus 
had  created  were  equally  suggestive.  "  That  your  sins 
may  be  blotted  out,"  was  an  immediate  quotation  from 
the  great  psalm  of  penitence ;  "  seasons  of  refreshing 
from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,"  gathered  up  and  ex- 
pressed the  perpetual  note  of  hopefulness  that  had  sung 
itself  out  in  the  psalms  and  prophecies  of  the  ancient 
covenant ;  and  when  he  spoke  of  the  teaching,  he  referred 
to  the  fulfilment  in  the  Person  of  Jesus,  of  the  promise 
of  Moses,  that  another  prophet  should  be  raised  up. 

The  opening  and  closing  words  of  the  address  indicate 
the  fact  that  the  message  was  peculiarly  one  to  the 
Israelitish  nation.  He  said,  "Ye  men  of  Israel,  why 
marvel  ye  at  this  man."  The  apostle  meant  to  say  that 
men,  not  of  Israel,  might  have  marvelled  with  greater 
show  of  reason.  When  we  come  to  the  close  of  the 
address,  notice  very  carefully  these  words,  "  Unto  you 
first  God  having  raised  up  His  Servant/'  The  thought 
most  evidently  is  that  he  had  been  expressing  himself 
throughout  the  whole  of  this  explanation  of  the  miracle, 
peculiarly  and  directly  to  the  men  of  Israel. 

It  is  necessary  to  emphasize  this  in  order  that  we  may 
understand  this  message.  Whatever  spiritual  principles 
are  taught,  the  first  application  was  to  the  men  of  Israel. 
Let  us  first  consider  in  broad  outline  the  message  to 
Israel,  and  secondly  the  teaching  for  ourselves,  which 
may  be  deduced  therefrom. 

t 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  3: 11-26] 

This  message  from  the  apostle  to  Israel  falls  into  three 
parts.  Beginning  at  the  eleventh  verse  we  have  the  ac- 
count of  the  running  of  the  people  into  Solomon's  porch, 
and  the  taking  hold  of  Peter  and  John  by  this  man.  It 
is  a  graphic  picture.  It  seems  as  though  the  healed  man 
was  loath  to  let  these  men  go,  who  had  been  the  instru- 
ments of  his  healing  and  blessing.  As  he  laid  hold  of 
them,  and  the  people  gathered  together,  Peter  seized  the 
opportunity  for  the  correction  of  the  attitude  of  the  peo- 
ple who  had  gathered  together :  "  Ye  men  of  Israel,  why 
marvel  ye  at  this  man?  or  why  fasten  ye  your  eyes  on 
us,  as  though  by  our  own  power  or  godliness  we  had 
made  him  to  walk  ?  "  He  thus  asked  them  two  questions 
which  constituted  almost  a  rebuke,  and  certainly  a  cor- 
rection of  their  attitude.  Then  immediately,  having  re- 
buked their  misapprehension  of  what  they  had  seen,  he 
began  his  explanation.  His  instruction  begins  at  the 
thirteenth  verse  and  ends  with  the  sixteenth.  "  The  God 
of  Abraham,  and  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob  " — commencing 
upon  ground  that  was  perfectly  familiar  to  these  people, 
taking  them  back  to  the  central  fact  of  their  religion — he 
stated  two  historical  facts  leading  up,  so  far  as  they 
were  concerned,  to  the  healing  of  that  man  who  stood  in 
the  midst  of  them. 

Then  notice  the  new  note  at  verse  seventeen.  "  And 
now,  brethren,  I  know  that  in  ignorance  ye  did  it,  as  did 
also  your  rulers.  But  the  things  which  God  foreshewed 
by  the  mouth  of  all  the  prophets,  that  His  Christ  should 
suffer,  He  thus  fulfilled."  From  that  verse  to  the  end 
of  the  paragraph  we  have  the  apostolic  appeal.  First  the 
correction  of  the  wrong  outlook  of  the  house  of  Israel  in 
the  presence  of  the  miracle;  then  instruction  of  the  men 
of  Israel  concerning  the  real  significance  of  the  miracle 
and  its  relation  to  eternal  things ;  and  finally  the  appeal, 
based  upon  correction  and  instruction,  to  the  house  of 
Israel  to  repent,  and  to  turn  back  again  to  God.  Such 
were  the  main  divisions  of  the  address. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  3:11-26] 

His  correction  consisted  of  two  questions.  The  first 
was,  "  Why  marvel  ye  at  this  man  ?  "  Now,  why  should 
they  not  marvel  at  this  man?  Was  there  not  a  reason 
and  a  cause  for  marvelling?  Here  was  a  man  who  had 
been  for  forty  years  incompetent,  lame  from  birth,  seek- 
ing alms  at  the  Beautiful  Gate,  a  familiar  figure  to  the 
crowds  of  Jerusalem;  now  he  was  on  his  feet,  and  in- 
stead of  asking  alms  from  men,  he  was  giving  praise  to 
God.  It  was  a  great  and  wonderful  transformation,  why 
should  they  not  marvel  ?  When  the  apostle  said  "  Why 
marvel  ye  ?  "  he  was  preparing  the  way  for  something 
which  was  to  follow.  His  choice  of  words  was  not  care- 
less: "Ye  men  of  Israel";  .  .  .  "The  God  of 
Abraham,  of  Isaac,  and  Jacob."  If  he  had  only  said, 
"  the  God  of  Abraham,"  Ishmaelites  might  have  claimed 
inclusion  in  that  description.  If  he  had  said,  "  The  God 
of  Abraham  and  Isaac,"  Edomites  might  have  come 
within  that  description.  He  narrowed  down  the  com- 
pany to  whom  he  spoke  when  he  said,  "  The  God  of 
Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob."  Jacob  became  Israel, 
and  he  spoke  to  them  as  men  of  Israel,  men  who  stood 
in  fleshly  and  covenant  relationship  to  Jacob,  and  to  him 
as  Israel,  the  man  ruled  by  God.  He  thus  reminded  them 
of  their  past  history.  They  were  men  of  the  covenant, 
of  the  Scriptures,  and  of  the  prophets.  Therefore  he 
said,  "  Ye  men  of  Israel,  why  marvel  ye?  "  You,  men 
of  such  history,  of  such  a  heritage;  you,  men  with  the 
records  of  miracles  stretching  back  through  all  the  cen- 
turies ;  you,  men  who  have  seen  in  these  last  days  so 
much  of  the  manifestation  of  God's  power  in  setting  dis- 
ability right, — "  Why  marvel  ye  at  this  man  ?  " 

Then  followed  the  second  question :  "  Or  why  fasten 
ye  your  eyes  on  us,  as  though  by  our  own  power  or  god- 
liness we  had  made  him  to  walk  ?  "  Their  wonder  in  the 
presence  of  the  miracle  was  due  to  their  forgetfulness 
of  their  past  history,  and  to  the  fact  that  they  were  out 
of  fellowship  therewith ;  and  the  explanation  which  they 

[  107  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  3: 11-26] 

offered  in  their  own  mind  as  they  gazed  upon  Peter  and 
John,  was  a  false  explanation  unworthy  of  that  history. 
He  charged  the  men  of  Israel  with  being  false  to  their 
own  history  in  wondering  in  the  presence  of  the  miracle 
they  had  just  seen;  and  he  charged  them  with  being  un- 
able to  interpret  the  secret  of  what  they  had  seen.  They 
had  never  understood  or  been  true  to  the  historical  facts, 
in  which  they  made  their  boast,  or  else  they  would  have 
seen  that  the  ultimate,  logical  result  of  all  the  things  they 
believed,  and  in  the  fellowship  of  which  they  had  lived, 
was  represented  in  the  man  at  the  Beautiful  Gate  who 
was  healed. 

Then  immediately  he  turned  to  explanation.  As  he 
began  to  explain  he  went  back:  "The  God  of  Abraham, 
and  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob,  the  God  of  our  fathers."  He 
then  made  a  startling  declaration  in  the  ears  of  those  who 
were  listening.  One  commentator  says  that  the  miracle 
of  the  speech  of  Peter  is  a  far  more  wonderful  one  than 
the  miracle  wrought  in  the  healing  of  the  man  who  lay  at 
the  Beautiful  Gate.  Notice  the  daring  of  Peter,  and  re- 
member the  fear  that  characterized  him  before  Pente- 
cost. See  him  now,  standing  in  the  temple  in  Solomon's 
porch,  with  the  crowds,  residents  of  Jerusalem,  about 
him.  He  declared  "  The  God  of  Abraham,  and  of  Isaac, 
and  of  Jacob,  the  God  of  our  fathers,  hath  glorified  His 
Servant  Jesus."  A  parenthesis  commences  here,  with  the 
words,  "  Whom  ye  delivered  up  "  and  runs  on  to  the  end 
of  the  fifteenth  verse.  The  immediate  connection  of 
declaration  is  found  by  taking  the  first  part  of  verse 
thirteen  and  linking  it  with  verse  sixteen.  "  The  God  of 
Abraham,  and  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob,  the  God  of  our 
fathers  hath  glorified  His  Servant  Jesus  .  .  .  and  by 
faith  in  His  name  hath  His  name  made  this  man  strong, 
whom  ye  behold  and  know:  yea,  the  faith  which  is 
through  Him  hath  given  him  this  perfect  soundness  in 
the  presence  of  you  all."  Thus  in  effect  he  said:  The 
God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  your  history,  the  God  of 

[  108  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  3: 11-26] 

your  nationality,  "  the  God  of  our  fathers  hath  glorified 
His  Servant  Jesus,"  hath  lifted,  exalted  Him,  to  power. 
The  resurrection  was  not  mentioned,  but  it  was  implied. 

These  men  were  men  of  Israel,  with  all  the  prejudice 
and  the  pride  of  men  of  Israel ;  they  had  looked  in  amaze- 
ment at  the  healed  man,  feeling  that  what  they  saw  was  a 
part  of  this  new  movement  of  power,  which  they  thought 
was  outside  the  covenant,  and  therefore  contrary  to  the 
purpose  of  God.  Peter  declared  that  they  were  blind 
and  foolish,  in  that  they  did  not  see  that  this  thing  was 
part  of  the  operation  of  their  own  God,  the  God  Who 
created  their  nation,  Who  was  at  the  centre  of  all  their 
history. 

In  stating  all  this,  Peter  borrowed  the  great  word  of 
Isaiah  "  His  Servant."  That  word  "  Servant "  may  not 
appeal  to  us  as  it  did  to  a  Hebrew.  The  great  prophecy 
of  Isaiah  is  the  prophecy  of  the  Servant  of  God.  We 
need  not  now  discuss  the  question  as  to  whether  the 
Servant  of  God  as  seen  by  Isaiah  was  the  ideal  nation,  or 
a  Person.  Both  things  are  surely  true.  Isaiah  saw  the 
nation  as  a  Servant;  but  he  also  saw  the  true  principle 
and  purpose  realized  in  a  Person  in  the  dim  and  distant 
future.  The  title  Servant  of  God  was  to  the  Hebrew  a 
word  expressing  a  hope,  a  word  reminding  him  forever- 
more  of  the  ancient  prophecies.  We  must  get  back  into 
the  atmosphere  of  Solomon's  porch,  and  of  these  He- 
brews thronging  Peter,  before  we  begin  to  apprehend 
how  startling  was  the  thing  he  said.  "  The  God  of  Abra- 
ham, and  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob,  the  God  of  our  fathers, 
hath  glorified  His  Servant."  These  men  would  catch  the 
prophetic  allusion,  and  be  ready  to  ask,  Who  is  the  Serv- 
ant of  God?  Before  the  enquiry  could  be  put,  Peter 
answered  in  uttering  that  word  "Jesus."  He  thus 
claimed  the  fulfilment  in  Christ  of  all  Messianic  hope 
and  prediction,  declaring  that  God  had  glorified  Him. 
These  men  might  well  say,  and  doubtless  would  say, 
Glorified  Him !  We  saw  Him  die,  He  was  crucified. 

[  109  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  3: 11-26] 

Now  return  to  the  parenthesis :  "  Whom  ye  delivered 
up  and  denied  before  the  face  of  Pilate,  when  he  had 
determined  to  release  Him."  That  was  the  historic  truth. 
They  had  denied  Him,  and  delivered  Him  up,  and  that 
in  spite  of  a  Gentile  attempt  to  set  Him  free.  Thus  he 
was  fastening  the  guilt  upon  Israel.  Mark  the  careful- 
ness of  his  word,  "  But  ye  denied  the  Holy  and  Righteous 
One,  and  asked  for  a  murderer  to  be  granted  unto  you, 
and  killed  the  Prince  of  Life."  Here  is  a  case  when  one 
wishes  that  a  word  might  be  translated  differently. 
"  Prince  "  is  not  wholly  wrong ;  but  the  Greek  word  is 
the  word  that  occurs  in  the  Hebrew  letter,  when  the 
writer  speaks  of  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  faith.  We 
might  translate  here  "  The  Author  of  Life."  Yet  Author 
hardly  conveys  the  thought.  Very  literally,  the  word 
means  a  file-leader,  one  who  takes  precedence,  one  who 
goes  first.  This  was  a  hint  of  what  he  was  about  to 
declare  more  fully,  a  hint  of  resurrection.  Let  us  attempt 
to  keep  in  mind  the  background  they  had  of  a  crucified 
Man  on  the  green  hill,  of  a  malefactor  on  Golgotha.  He 
said  to  them,  You  killed  the  Holy  and  Righteous  One; 
you  chose  the  murderer,  and  flung  out  the  File-Leader  in 
the  procession  of  life,  its  Author,  its  Prince.  God  re- 
plied to  what  you  did  by  raising  Him  from  the  dead,  and 
making  us  witnesses  of  that  resurrection.  All  that  is  in 
parenthesis,  but  we  now  see  it,  in  relation  to  the  whole. 

Then  Peter  said :  "  By  faith  in  His  name/'  the  name 
of  Jesus  Whom  ye  saw  die,  Whose  death  you  brought 
about,  Whom  God  raised  from  the  dead,  and  Who  is 
glorified  and  demonstrated  the  Servant  of  God,  the  long- 
looked  for  Messiah ;  "  by  faith  in  His  name,"  this  man 
has  been  healed.  They  had  marvelled  because  they  had 
become  blind  to  the  goings  of  their  own  God,  because  they 
were  out  of  harmony  with  the  processes  and  procedure  of 
the  God  of  Abraham  and  of  Isaac  and  of  Jacob;  and 
consequently  they  had  failed  to  be  able  to  explain  the 
mystery  of  the  healed  man.  So  that  in  this  instructive 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  3 : 11-26] 

part  of  the  address,  Peter  took  that  man,  and  showed 
that  his  healing  was  the  natural  outcome  of  the  economy 
in  the  midst  of  which  they  lived. 

The  rest  of  the  address  was  of  the  nature  of  appeal. 
"  And  now,  brethren,  I  know  that  in  ignorance  ye  did  it, 
as  did  also  your  rulers."  Notice  the  tenderness  of  this. 
One  is  almost  inclined  to  say,  has  he  not  weakened  his 
argument?  Would  it  not  have  been  better  if  he  had 
refrained  from  anything  like  this  admission?  Does  he 
not  seem  to  take  away  from  the  guilt  that  he  has  been 
charging  upon  them?  I  think  the  answer  to  such  en- 
quiries is  to  be  found  in  the  word  of  Peter,  "  I  know  that 
in  ignorance  ye  did  it."  It  does  not  express  his  opinion 
of  the  situation;  it  is  rather  his  declaration  of  the  fact 
that  he  accepted  the  truth  of  what  Jesus  had  said,  when 
in  the  very  hour  of  His  dying,  He  prayed,  "  Father,  for- 
give them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  I  know, 
said  Peter,  "  that  in  ignorance  ye  did  it,  as  also  did  your 
rulers."  Nevertheless  he  charged  them  with  the  guilt, 
and  showed  them  it  was  by  their  will,  and  their  decision 
on  the  human  side,  that  this  Man  Jesus  was  murdered. 
"  But  the  things  which  God  f  oreshewed  by  the  mouth  of 
all  the  prophets,  that  His  Christ  should  suffer,  He  thus 
fulfilled."  In  these  words,  over  against  the  blunder,  the 
calamity,  the  tragedy  of  the  ignorant  murder  of  Jesus, 
he  set  that  infinite  purpose  of  grace  which  triumphed 
over  their  sin,  and  fulfilled  the  very  purposes  of  God  as 
declared  in  the  past,  in  the  death  and  resurrection  of' 
Jesus. 

Immediately,  he  made  his  definite  appeal :  "  Repent  ye 
therefore,  and  turn  again."  Into  that  "  therefore "  we 
must  read  everything  that  was  meant.  Why  should  they 
repent  and  turn  again?  The  things  that  follow  declare 
the  issues  of  repentance,  but  the  things  preceding  declare 
the  reason  for  repentance  on  the  part  of  the  house  of 
Israel.  These  reasons  were:  that  Jesus  was  the  Servant 
of  God;  that  through  Jesus,  God  had  been  carrying  on 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  3: 11-26] 

and  carrying  out  His  purposes ;  that  when  they  procured 
the  death  of  Jesus,  forcing  Pilate  to  condemn  Him,  they 
blundered,  and  were  guilty  of  refusing  the  Holy  and 
Righteous  One;  and  that  in  spite  of  their  blindness  and 
sin  and  ignorance  and  blundering,  God  raised  Him  and 
fulfilled  His  purpose,  the  purpose  of  grace  and  the  pur- 
pose of  life.  "  Therefore,"  because  of  their  sin,  and  of 
His  grace ;  because  in  the  putting  away  of  Jesus  they  fell 
out  of  the  line  of  their  own  progressive  national  history, 
and  because  by  the  raising  of  Jesus,  God  made  possible 
the  putting  away  of  the  very  sin  which  they  committed 
in  His  murder,  "  therefore  "  they  were  to  "  repent  .  .  . 
and  turn  again."  He  thus  called  these  people  back  from 
ignorance  into  light;  and  so  back  from  all  the  sins  that 
had  grown  out  of  ignorance,  into  the  true  line  of  conduct. 
Peter  having  called  these  people  to  repentance,  prom- 
ised certain  results.  "  Repent  .  .  .  and  turn  again ; 
that  your  sins  may  be  blotted  out,  that  so  there  may 
come  seasons  of  refreshing  from  the  presence  of  the 
Lord,  and  that  He  may  send  the  Christ  Who  hath  been 
appointed  for  you,  even  Jesus ;  Whom  the  heavens  must 
receive  until  the  times  of  restoration  of  all  things." 
There  can  be  no  explanation  of  this  save  by  remembering 
that  he  was  talking  to  the  house  of  Israel.  To  make  it 
applicable  to  all  the  world,  is  to  miss  its  real  meaning. 
When  he  began  to  speak  of  the  issues  of  repentance  and 
turning  again,  the  application  was  narrowed  to  the  house 
of  Israel.  The  first  phase,  "That  your  sins  may  be 
blotted  out,"  may  have  a  general  application.  But  let 
us  follow  on.  What  was  to  be  the  result  of  blotting  out 
of  sin?  "  That  so  there  may  come  seasons  of  refreshing 
from  the  presence  of  the  Lord."  What  was  to  be  the 
issue  of  these  seasons  of  refreshing  from  the  Lord? 
"  That  He  may  send  the  Christ  Who  hath  been  appointed 
for  you  "—the  house  of  Israel — "  even  Jesus ;  Whom 
the  heavens  must  receive  until  the  times  of  restoration  of 
all  things."  If  we  take  these  words  as  applicable  to  the 

[ 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  3 : 11-26] 

house  of  Israel,  at  once  the  sequence  is  seen.  The  res- 
toration of  all  things  is  intimately  associated  with  the 
coming  of  Christ  to  the  house  of  Israel,  the  Messiah  for 
them,  and  to  them ;  and  His  coming  to  them  waits  for  the 
repentance  and  turning  to  Him  of  the  house  of  Israel. 
Or,  to  take  it  in  the  other  order,  when  the  house  of  Israel 
repents  and  turns  to  Jehovah,  then  the  sins  of  the  house 
of  Israel  will  be  blotted  out ;  and  then  there  will  come  to 
the  house  of  Israel  seasons  of  refreshing  from  the  pres- 
ence of  the  Lord ;  then  there  will  come  through  the  house 
of  Israel  the  restoration  of  all  things,  and  that  in  con- 
nection with  the  advent  of  Messiah.  We  speak  of  it  as  a 
second  advent,  but  it  will  be  the  first  advent  in  which 
He  will  be  received  by  His  own  people.  If  I  am  asked 
if  I  believe  that  what  Peter  expected  will  be  so,  with- 
out any  hesitation,  I  say  Yes.  I  do  not  think  Israel  is 
a  lost  and  abandoned  nation.  I  believe  that  Israel  is  to 
be  found  and  gathered  together.  It  is  because  I  so  be- 
lieve, that  I  cannot  accept  any  theory  that  robs  Israel  of 
its  present  living  identity,  and  merges  it  in  some  other 
nation.  Israel  will  yet  repent  and  turn  to  Him,  and  He 
will  blot  out  their  sins.  Until  this  time  there  has  been 
no  repentance  of  Israel;  but  there  will  be  a  day  of  re- 
pentance, and  a  day  of  turning  to  Him. 

What,  for  us,  is  the  teaching  of  this  address,  delivered 
so  distinctly  and  particularly  to  the  house  of  Israel?  It 
seems  to  me  there  are  three  lessons  as  to  the  economy  of 
God.  First,  that  His  ancient  purposes  are  unchanged; 
secondly,  that  the  restoration  of  all  things  waits  the 
Advent  of  Jesus;  and  thirdly,  that  this  will  be  the  time 
of  the  recovery  of  Israel. 

But  what  are  the  spiritual  principles  that  I  learn  as  I 
read  this  address?  In  that  part  of  the  address  which  I 
have  described  as  corrective,  two  spiritual  principles  are 
involved ;  first,  that  wonder  in  the  presence  of  the  super- 
natural demonstrates  infidelity;  and  secondly,  that  in- 
fidelity creates  false  explanations.  The  man  who  is  at- 

[  "3  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  3: 11-26] 

tempting  to  get  rid  of  the  supernatural  from  his  Bible 
and  from  his  religion  does  not  believe  in  God.  He  may 
have  some  idea  of  God  as  of  a  moral  force,  but  the  God 
of  the  Bible  cannot  be  believed  in  by  a  man  who  won- 
ders, and  is  startled  in  the  presence  of,  and  attempts  to 
account  for  supernatural  manifestations  along  other  lines. 
Wonder  in  the  presence  of  the  supernatural  always  dem- 
onstrates infidelity.  Granted  the  truth  of  the  first  verse 
in  the  Bible,  and  there  is  no  difficulty  with  the  miracles. 
"  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heavens  and  the 
earth."  This  is  the  supreme  miracle,  and  it  is  no  miracle 
when  God  is  postulated.  It  was  the  simple  activity  of 
His  power.  The  supernatural  is  that  which  is  a  little 
higher  than  man  can  see,  a  little  pro  founder  than  he  can 
understand. 

In  the  instructive  part  of  this  address  moreover,  there 
are  spiritual  principles.  The  patent  one  is  that  of  the 
unutterable  sin  and  foolishness  of  rejecting  Jesus.  The 
triumph  of  God  even  over  such  sin  and  folly,  is  seen  in 
His  raising  Him  from  the  dead,  and  thus  making  Him 
the  Saviour  of  man. 

Finally,  the  appeal  emphasizes  the  fact  that  the  chil- 
dren of  privilege  have  responsibilities ;  and  upon  their  ful- 
filment of  such  responsibilities  depends  the  continuity 
and  the  enlargement  of  privilege. 

If  Israel  be  to-day  a  people  scattered  and  peeled  over 
the  face  of  the  world,  the  reason  for  the  scattering  and 
peeling  for  long  and  weary  years,  in  which  she  is  cast 
away  from  service,  is  that  she  became  self-centred,  and 
lived  wholly  alone,  and  forgot  the  surrounding  nations 
she  ought  to  have  blessed. 

Therein  is  a  message  for  the  Church.  If  our  privileges 
are  high  and  holy,  our  responsibilities  are  correspond- 
ingly great.  As  we  forget  our  responsibilities,  so  surely 
the  privileges  themselves  become  grave-clothes  that  hin- 
der and  bury,  rather  than  inspirations  that  drive  and 
help. 

[  "4  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  4 :  1-22] 
Acts  4: 1-22 

The  story  of  this  paragraph  still  gathers  around  the 
healed  man.  We  first  saw  the  wonder  wrought  in  the 
Name.  Then  we  heard  Peter's  explanation  to  the  men 
of  Israel  delivered  in  Solomon's  porch.  We  now  come 
to  a  smaller  company,  in  some  ways  a  more  remarkable 
one,  in  many  ways  a  very  interesting  one.  Suddenly, 
while  teaching  the  people  in  Solomon's  porch,  Peter  and 
John  were  arrested,  and  kept  in  ward  for  a  night.  Im- 
mediately outside  Solomon's  portico  was  to  be  found  the 
Basilica  in  which  the  Sanhedrim  assembled,  and  that 
means  that  it  was  outside  the  Beautiful  Gate  of  the  Tem- 
ple. Outside  that  Beautiful  Gate  the  lame  man  had 
been  found.  Having  been  healed,  he  had  laid  hold  upon 
Peter  and  John,  his  mouth  filled  with  thanksgiving;  and 
the  people  seeing  this,  had  gathered  together  in  the  porch, 
where  Peter  had  specifically  and  directly  spoken  to  the 
men  of  Israel.  Now  his  speech  was  interrupted  and 
hindered.  This  was  the  first  open  opposition  to  the 
apostolic  message  in  the  new  activity  of  Christianity. 
Let  us  examine  the  court;  watch  the  proceedings;  and 
consider  the  lessons  of  permanent  value. 

Whereas  the  word  is  not  used,  it  is  perfectly  evident 
that  the  court  before  which  Peter  and  John  were  ar- 
raigned was  that  of  the  Sanhedrim,  for  its  composition, 
as  described  by  Luke  in  the  opening  words  of  this  chap- 
ter, can  leave  us  in  no  doubt  on  the  matter.  The  apostles 
were  arrested  by  "  the  priests  and  the  captain  of  the 
Temple."  The  phrase  is  an  interesting  one,  indicating 
the  fact  that  at  that  time  the  Hebrew  people  still  had 
the  right  of  life  and  death  in  the  matter  of  offences  com- 
mitted in  the  Temple.  They  were  entirely  under  Roman 
rule,  they  had  been  forbidden  to  pass  the  death  penalty 
for  any  civil  offence,  but  Rome  still  permitted  them  to 
visit  with  death  any  who  violated  the  sanctity  of  the 
Temple.  The  captain  of  the  Temple  was  the  head  of  that 
body  of  religious  police,  whose  business  it  was  to  watch 

»5 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  4 : 1-22] 

the  Temple  courts,  and  see  that  there  was  no  violation 
of  their  sanctity.  "  The  priests  and  the  captain  of  the 
Temple  and  the  Sadducees  came  upon  them."  Thus  the 
cause  of  the  arrest  was  that  the  priests  had  reported  to 
the  captain,  inspired  by  their  own  Sadducean  conviction. 

Then  in  verse  five,  we  are  told — and  here  we  have  an 
exact  description  of  the  Sanhedrim — "  It  came  to  pass  on 
the  morrow,  that  their  rulers,  and  elders,  and  scribes, 
were  gathered  together  in  Jerusalem/'  That  was  the 
constitution  of  the  ancient  Sanhedrim;  the  rulers,  that 
is,  the  priests  and  the  officials ;  the  elders,  the  heads  of  the 
chief  families  in  Israel;  the  scribes,  the  interpreters  of 
the  law  and  teachers  of  the  people.  The  Sanhedrim  con- 
sisted of  seventy-one  members,  twenty-three  forming  a 
quorum,  before  which  such  cases  as  those  already  re- 
ferred to,  of  the  violation  of  the  sanctity  of  the  temple 
courts,  might  be  brought.  It  was,  so  far  as  it  went,  a 
legal  assembly. 

Standing  in  remarkable  contrast  to  the  method  these 
men  adopted  with  Christ,  is  the  method  they  now  adopted 
with  His  apostles.  They  waited  till  the  morning.  This 
was  according  to  their  own  law,  which  in  the  case  of 
Christ  they  did  not  observe.  Certain  names  are  given: 
Annas  the  high  priest,  deposed  by  the  Romans,  but  still 
held  in  honour  by  Israel ;  Caiaphas,  appointed  by  Roman 
rule ;  and  two  evidently  notable  persons,  John,  and  Alex- 
ander. Notice  the  significant  phrase,  "  As  many  as  were 
of  the  kindred  of  the  high  priest."  The  aristocratic 
religion  of  the  hour  was  Sadducean ;  the  democratic  was 
Pharisaic.  All  the  wealthy  people  in  Jerusalem  belonged 
to  the  Sadducees. 

This  then  was  a  remarkable  gathering  of  the  Sanhe- 
drim, properly  constituted;  together  with  the  wealthy 
Sadducean  rulers  of  society,  and  of  religious  thinking  in 
Jerusalem.  It  was  a  very  remarkable  assembly.  Here  is 
a  picture  waiting  for  some  artist  to  paint.  The  tribunal, 
in  all  the  glory  of  robing  and  the  dignity  of  the  men, 

[•116] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  4:  1-22] 

would  be  seated  in  a  semicircle,  with  the  president  in 
the  centre;  and  probably  gathered  round,  as  was  the 
custom  of  the  time,  the  law  students,  listening  to  every 
case,  and  so  becoming  acquainted  with  the  processes  of 
law. 

But  let  us  notice  quite  carefully,  and  principally,  the 
mental  attitude  of  that  court.  We  have  already  noticed 
that  these  men  were  Sadducees.  It  is  evident  that  the 
Sanhedrim  was  packed  that  morning  of  set  purpose  with 
Sadducees.  The  high  priest  was  a  Sadducee ;  his  friends 
and  kindred  were  specially  named  as  present.  Notable 
men  were  also  there,  and  we  see  in  the  first  word  de- 
clared, that  the  inspiration  of  the  arrest  was  Sadducean. 

Now  who  were  the  Sadducees  ?  There  are  three  things 
to  be  borne  in  mind  concerning  them,  one  of  which  is  of 
supreme  interest  to  us.  Sadducees  denied  the  super- 
natural; they  affirmed  the  freedom  of  human  will;  and, 
the  oral  traditions,  repeated  by  Pharisees,  taught  by 
Pharisees,  insisted  upon  by  Pharisees,  they  held  in  con- 
tempt. The  principal  matter  which  we  need  to  remem- 
ber, is  that  they  were  rationalists  in  religion.  They  were 
religious  undoubtedly,  for  they  believed  in  God,  and  in 
the  Mosaic  law,  but  they  denied  every  story  of  the 
miraculous.  To  take  the  description  of  them  that  is 
found  in  another  verse  in  this  book,  they  believed  neither 
in  angels,  spirits,  nor  resurrection.  They  were  the  men 
who  had  turned  the  Hebrew  economy  into  an  ethical 
system.  Their  belief  in  God  was  not  the  belief  of  the 
Pharisees.  Resurrection  they  denied;  the  existence  of 
angels  they  laughed  at;  and  the  idea  of  spirit  they  had 
abandoned.  This  was  the  mental  attitude  of  the  San- 
hedrim that  morning  when  Peter  and  John  were  ar- 
raigned before  them.  The  inspiration  of  opposition  to 
Christianity  had  now  changed  from  Pharisaism  to  Sad- 
duceeism.  In  the  life  of  Christ  the  opposition  was  chiefly 
Pharisaic.  Very  little  is  said  about  the  opposition  of  the 
Sadducees  in  His  life.  They  are  sometimes  seen  in  coali- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  4 : 1-22] 

tion  with  the  Pharisees,  but  the  deadly  opposition  that 
ended  in  the  death  of  Jesus  was  Pharisaic.  In  the  Acts 
the  Pharisees  are  hardly  seen  at  all.  As  a  matter  of  fact 
they  are  seen  rather  friendly  to  Christianity.  Twice  a 
Pharisee  lifted  his  voice  in  defence  of  some  Christian 
evangelist  later  on,  and  the  whole  opposition  to  Chris- 
tianity that  is  revealed  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  has  a 
new  inspiration.  It  came  from  a  different  centre.  This  is 
in  itself  a  revelation  of  the  impression  made  at  the  time 
as  to  the  central  truth  of  the  Christian  propaganda.  The 
whole  idea  was  spiritual,  and  therefore  in  conflict  neces- 
sarily with  that  which  was  severely  material.  The  whole 
impression  made  upon  Jerusalem  and  upon  those  who 
listened  and  watched  these  men  was  that  of  their  abso- 
lute confidence  in  the  supreme  reality  of  unseen  things. 
They  believed  in  angels.  Presently  they  will  affirm  that 
an  angel  opened  the  prison  door  and  liberated  them. 
The  whole  burden  of  their  claim  was  that  they  were 
working  in  cooperation  with  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God. 
The  one  central  note  of  all  their  proclamation  was  the 
declaration  that  Jesus  had  been  raised  from  the  dead 
and  was  alive.  The  angels  are  not  patent  to  common 
vision ;  the  Spirit  breatheth  where  He  listeth,  and  men 
cannot  watch  the  processes  of  His  coming  and  going; 
Jesus  had  passed  out  of  mortal  sight;  but  these  men 
believed  in  the  absolute  and  final  reality  of  the  things 
unseen,  and  they  were  asserting  them. 

It  was  inevitable  that  there  should  be  conflict  between 
the  Sadducees  and  these  men.  Either  Sadduceeism  must 
end,  or  Christianity  must  be  stamped  out.  Observe  care- 
fully Luke's  declaration,  that  they  were  "  sore  troubled 
because  they  taught  the  people,  and  proclaimed  in  Jesus 
the  resurrection  from  the  dead."  It  was  not  merely  that 
they  declared  Jesus  Himself  was  risen  from  the  dead, 
but  in  preaching  that,  they  preached  the  Resurrection. 
Such  was  the  court,  and  such  the  mental  mood  of  the 
judges. 

[  "8  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  4 : 1-22] 

Let  us  now  look  at  those  who  were  placed  in  the  centre 
of  that  court,  Peter  and  John.  We  have  already  noticed 
the  close  comradeship  existing  between  these  two  men; 
Peter  the  practical  and  John  the  poet ;  John  the  dreamer, 
and  Peter  the  doer.  These  were  the  men  arraigned  be- 
fore the  assembly,  the  speaker  and  the  thinker. 

But  there  was  a  third  man  there :  "  And  seeing  the 
man  which  was  healed  standing  with  them."  We  do  not 
know  whether  he  had  been  locked  up  for  the  night;  if 
not,  in  all  probability  he  had  waited  until  morning,  until 
these  men  who  had  given  him  what  none  other  had,  were 
released.  Now  he  stood  with  them. 

Carefully  observe  Peter  and  John,  and  observe  that 
which  cannot  be  seen  with  the  eyes  of  sense.  They  were 
"  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit."  That  means  that  they  had 
clear  vision,  absolute  certainty,  strong  passion,  and  un- 
flinching courage.  As  we  first  look  upon  this  scene,  and 
see  the  dignity  surrounding  these  men,  notice  the  cold 
analytical  acumen  of  Sadducean  philosophy  confronting 
them,  we  wonder  how  these  two  fisherf ol£  will  fare.  But 
we  need  have  no  fear ;  for  they  were  filled  with  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  they  stood  in  the  midst  of  that  assembly,  with 
unflinching  courage. 

What  impression  did  they  make  upon  the  council? 
Let  us  run  a  little  ahead  of  the  story,  for  the  impression 
is  not  described  until  after  the  process  of  the  examina- 
tion; but  it  is  well  that  we  should  notice  it  here.  The 
impression  that  they  made  was,  "  that  they  had  been 
with  Jesus."  Men  filled  with  the  Spirit  always  make 
that  impression.  That  is  the  impression  which  the  filling 
of  the  Spirit  creates.  If  a  man  shall  tell  me  he  has  re- 
ceived specific  gifts  at  some  specific  hour  which  he  de- 
scribes, and  the  impression  he  makes  upon  me  is  antago- 
nistic to  the  mind  of  Jesus,  I  know  that  he  is  not  filled 
with  the  Spirit.  The  word  "  ignorant "  used  to  describe 
these  men  is  a  little  unfortunate ;  "  plebeian  "  would  better 
convey  the  idea.  They  were  unlearned  and  plebeian  men, 

t  »9 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  4: 1-22] 

that  is  men  of  the  common  class.  But  they  had  boldness 
of  speech,  and  boldness  does  not  merely  mean  braveness, 
but  clarity,  clearness  of  statement.  On  another  occasion 
when  Jesus  was  talking  in  the  metropolitan  centre  of  the 
learning  of  His  time,  they  said,  "  How  knoweth  this 
Man  letters,  having  never  learned  ? "  This  puzzle  was 
repeated  in  the  case  of  Peter  and  John.  "  They  took 
knowledge  of  them,  that  they  had  been  with  Jesus." 
Notice  the  mistake  they  made.  This  was  the  result  of 
their  own  philosophy.  They  spoke  of  the  men  as  having 
been  with  Jesus,  in  a  past  tense.  What  was  the  truth? 
Christ  was  in  the  men,  and  speaking  through  the  men; 
and  the  similarity  which  they  detected  was  not  that  linger- 
ing from  contact  with  a  lost  teacher,  but  that  created 
by  the  presence  of  the  living  Christ. 

Now  let  us  watch  the  proceedings.  There  are  four 
things  to  observe  in  the  challenge  made  to  these  men. 
The  court  first  enquired,  "  By  what  power,  or  in  what 
Name,  have  ye  done  this?"  One  can  imagine  that  the 
accused  might  have  said,  What  do  you  mean  by  "  this  "? 
They  did  not  do  so,  for  the  meaning  was  patent.  There 
was  the  healed  man;  and  when  they  said  "this"  they 
tacitly  admitted  that  they  were  in  the  presence  of  a  fact 
for  which  they  could  not  account.  In  their  very  question 
there  was  a  recognition  of  something  done.  We  must 
begin  there.  The  Sadducees  could  not  escape  from  it. 
Every  one  knew  the  man  who  had  been  for  forty  years 
and  more  in  that  condition,  a  cripple  at  the  Beautiful 
Gate,  asking  alms.  He  was  now  standing  in  the  circle  of 
the  Sanhedrim,  with  a  light  on  his  face,  and  gladness  in 
his  heart,  near  to  the  two  men  who  had  healed  him. 
They  admitted  the  patent  fact  from  which  they  could  not 
escape.  The  question  was  how  it  had  been  done.  This 
was  an  attempt  to  divert  the  thinking  from  the  supreme 
and  final  evidence,  into  a  metaphysical  disquisition.  This 
is  a  favourite  method  of  the  enemies  of  Christianity. 

We  now  come  to  the  enquiry  itself :  "  By  what  power," 

[    120    ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  4 :  1-22] 

that  is,  what  force  did  you  employ  to  set  this  man  upon 
his  feet?  or,  "  In  what  Name."  This  was  a  very  technical 
question.  It  was  a  refusal  to  entertain  the  view  pre- 
sented in  Solomon's  porch.  There  Peter  had  declared 
distinctly  that  in  the  Name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  the  man 
had  been  healed.  They  swept  that  aside.  They  did  not 
entertain  it  for  a  moment.  Then  they  asked,  "  By  what 
power  or  in  what  Name  have  ye  done  this  ?  "  There  is  a 
great  deal  of  light  on  this  story  in  the  book  of  Deuter- 
onomy. In  the  thirteenth  chapter,  there  are  instructions 
carefully  given  to  the  rulers  of  the  people  concerning 
possible  manifestations  in  their  history.  Let  us  read  one 
or  two  words.  "  If  there  arise  in  the  midst  of  thee  a 
prophet,  or  a  dreamer  of  dreams  " — and  a  perfect  de- 
scription of  the  two  men  who  stood  before  the  Sanhe- 
drim is  then  given — "  and  he  give  thee  a  sign  or  a 
wonder,  and  the  sign  or  the  wonder  come  to  pass,"  and  if 
that  sign  actually  wrought  is  intended  to  lead  you  from 
Jehovah  to  other  gods,  you  are  not  to  hearken,  and  this 
man  is  to  be  punished  with  death.  In  the  fourteenth 
verse  we  read :  "  Then  shalt  thou  enquire,  and  make 
search,  and  ask  diligently ;  and,  behold,  if  it  be  truth,  and 
the  thing  certain,  that  such  abomination  is  wrought  in 
the  midst  of  thee"  then — there  was  to  be  punishment. 
The  Sanhedrim  was  obeying  this  ancient  instruction  to 
their  people.  Here  were  two  men,  a  prophet  and  a 
dreamer  of  dreams,  standing  side  by  side.  They  had 
definitely  and  positively  wrought  a  sign;  and,  according 
to  the  ancient  instruction,  the  rulers  of  the  people  were 
to  search  and  enquire  diligently.  The  death  penalty  was 
to  be  passed  upon  men  attempting  to  lead  men  from 
Jehovah  to  some  other  god.  Thus  is  revealed  the  subtlety 
of  their  question  and  their  method. 

There  was  a  marked  method  in  Peter's  answer.  It 
exactly  replied  to  all  contained  in  the  challenge.  First 
the  challenge  was  a  recognition  of  something  done. 
Peter  drew  attention  to  that  in  his  reply.  "If  we  this 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  4: 1-22] 

day  are  examined  concerning  a  good  deed  done  to  aft 
impotent  man."  Notice  in  this,  the  inferential  revelation 
of  the  imworthiness  of  their  opposition.  You  are  ex- 
amining us  for  a  good  deed  done  to  an  impotent  man. 
Again,  they  had  asked  for  the  power  and  the  Name. 
Peter  gave  the  exact  information,  but  in  the  other  order,; 
He  began  with  the  Name,  and  then  declared  the  power: 
"  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth,  Whom  ye  crucified."  Peter 
did  not  intend  that  there  should  be  any  mistake.  Not  the 
Messiah,  not  Jesus  merely ;  but  with  deliberateness,  care- 
fulness, he  fastened  their  attention  upon  the  One  Whose 
Name  they  fain  would  make  forgotten  forever.  Jesus, 
the  Messiah,  of  Nazareth  Whom  ye  crucified.  That  was 
the  Name.  But  what  was  the  power?  He  immediately 
went  on,  "Whom  God  raised  from  the  dead,  in  Him 
doth  this  man  stand  here  before  you  whole."  This  is  the 
Name,  the  Name  in  which  you  charged  us  not  to  speak; 
this  is  the  power,  the  raising  of  that  One  Whom  you 
declared  did  not  rise,  because  there  is  no  resurrection. 
Thus  Peter  insisted  upon  the  declaration  made  in  Solo- 
mon's porch,  which  they  had  declined  to  receive. 

But  notice  very  particularly  how  Peter  finished.  That 
Deuteronomic  instruction  said  that  if  there  should  be 
an  actual  sign  wrought,  tending  to  lead  men  from  Je- 
hovah, the  men  working  the  sign  must  die.  He,  said 
Peter,  "  is  the  Stone  which  was  set  at  nought  of  you  the 
builders,  which  was  made  the  head  of  the  corner.  And 
in  none  other  is  there  salvation ;  for  neither  is  there  any 
other  Name  under  heaven,  that  is  given  among  men, 
wherein  we  must  be  saved."  By  that  quotation  from 
Psalm  118  he  denied  that  he  was  leading  men  away  from 
Jehovah;  and  claimed  that  he  was  acting  in  harmony 
with  the  foretelling  of  their  ancient  Scriptures,  which  was 
the  burden  of  the  message  he  had  delivered  in  the  porch 
of  Solomon. 

Then  followed  the  conference.  The  prisoners  were 
excluded;  and  we  see  the  measure  of  the  intelligence  of 

[    122   ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  4: 1-22] 

the  Sanhedrim.  First  we  note  their  discovery  of  the  rela- 
tion of  Peter  and  John  to  Jesus,  and  the  certainty  of  the 
miracle,  and  their  decision  not  to  attempt  to  deny  it.  We 
see  also  the  measure  of  their  ignorance  in  their  decision 
to  threaten  these  men.  Imagine  any  court  threatening 
a  man  who  is  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  But  of  course 
there  was  no  Holy  Spirit  according  to  their  philosophy, 
and  therefore  that  was  the  proper  thing  to  do.  If  one 
man  be  threatened  by  a  Tribunal,  composed  of  the  forces 
of  culture,  there  is  little  hope  of  him ;  but  if  that  man  be 
filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  will  challenge  the  whole 
company,  and  the  victory  will  be  with  him. 

When  they  charged  these  men  to  be  silent,  Peter  flung 
back  their  judgment  on  them,  and  set  over  against  their 
threatening  the  one  eternal  principle  of  right.  "  Whether 
it  be  right,"  that  is  the  question.  Waive  your  technicali- 
ties and  have  done  with  your  casuistry.  Is  it  right?  If 
it  be  right,  threatening  is  of  no  avail. 

This  story  of  the  first  opposition  reveals  for  all  time 
the  nature  of  opposition  to  Christianity ;  and  also  the  real 
secrets  of  the  Church's  power.  Opposition  to  Christian- 
ity is  always  based  on  Sadduceeism,  is  always  rooted  in 
rationalism,  is  always  the  outcome  of  materialistic 
philosophy.  James  when  describing  the  wisdom  of  the 
world,  the  wisdom  of  men,  putting  it  into  contrast  with 
the  wisdom  that  comes  from  heaven  does  so  in  biting, 
burning  words.  He  speaks  of  the  "wisdom  of  the 
world  "  as  being  "  earthly,  sensual,  devilish  " ;  it  is  earthly 
in  its  outlook ;  sensual  in  its  desire ;  devilish  in  its  choices. 
The  intellect  in  looking  out,  sees  only  the  earth;  the 
emotion  desiring,  is  wholly  sensual;  the  will  choosing  is 
under  the  dominion  of  devils.  It  is  the  rationalistic  con- 
ception of  life  that  is  angry  with  Christianity,  most  subtle 
of  all  foes,  and  most  to  be  dreaded.  Mrs.  Besant  lectur- 
ing for  the  Secular  Society  in  the  old  days  bitterly  at- 
tacked Christianity.  Mrs.  Besant,  theosophist,  never  at- 
tacked Christianity.  I  am  not  defending  her  position, 

[  123  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  4 : 1-22] 

but  it  is  interesting  to  remember  that  a  spiritual  concep- 
tion does  not  attack  Christianity.  It  is  the  material  ideal, 
the  ideal  that  says  in  the  wilderness,  Bread  out  of  stones 
is  all  you  need;  the  ideal  that  says  in  the  midst  of  the 
life  of  to-day,  Let  us  eat  and  drink  for  to-morrow  we  die ; 
that  is  the  force  against  Christianity;  and  it  is  always 
Sadducean. 

This  story  teaches  also  that  opposition  to  Christianity 
is  always  opposition  to  actual  good  being  done  in  the 
world.  The  whole  work  of  Christ  is  that  of  healing, 
helping,  saving.  The  hour  has  come  surely  when  the 
Church  must  decline  to  allow  responsibility  to  rest  upon 
Christ  for  her  ofttime  blunders,  and  misrepresentations 
of  His  purpose.  The  business  of  the  Church  in  the 
world  is  not  the  discussion  of  theories,  is  not  that  of 
indulging  in  speculations,  or  formulating  philosophies ;  it 
is  that  of  seeking  and  saving  that  which  is  lost.  It  is  out 
to  find  men  lying  at  the  Beautiful  Gate,  excluded  from 
worship,  and  to  put  them  on  their  feet,  and  make  them 
worshippers. 

Finally  opposition  to  Christ  is  always  opposition  in 
spite  of  conclusive  evidence.  There  is  the  healed  man, 
Oh  ye  men  of  the  Sanhedrim,  confronting  you !  In  God's 
name,  why  waste  time  accounting  for  him,  why  not  let 
this  thing  go  on?  The  healed  man  has  been  multiplied 
in  all  the  centuries.  The  healed  man  is  in  all  the  world 
to-day.  The  healed  man  is  here,  healed  mentally, 
spiritually,  physically,  in  proportion  as  he  is  true  to 
the  great  spiritual  truths  to  which  he  has  submitted 
himself. 

Then,  on  the  other  side,  the  story  reveals  the  Church's 
secret  of  power.  The  reality  of  the  spiritual  is  demon- 
strated by  results  produced  in  the  visible  and  material. 
The  Church  has  no  argument  unless  she  has  a  healed 
man,  and  the  Church  that  is  not  healing  men,  remaking 
them,  has  no  argument  for  her  Christianity ;  "  Seeing  the 
man  which  was  healed  standing  with  them,  they  could  say 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  4:23-31] 

nothing  against  it."    The  unassailable  and  final  answer  of 
Christianity  to  detraction  is  the  healed  man. 

The  basis  of  courage  is  spiritual  and  such  courage  is 
vindicated  by  such  results.  Vindicated?  I  take  the 
word  back.  Courage  is  created  by  such  results.  Are  we 
a  little  afraid  to-day  in  the  presence  of  the  materialism  of 
the  age?  No  man  with  his  eyes  open  will  deny  that  the 
age  is  material.  Is  the  Church  afraid  of  it?  Are  we 
halting,  speculating,  and  attempting  to  recast  things  so 
as  to  meet  the  materialistic  age  ?  If  so  the  reason  is  that 
there  is  a  dearth  of  healed  men.  I  would  like  always  to 
preach  as  Peter  and  John  did  that  day,  with  the  healed 
man  by  my  side ;  men  who  have  been  healed  and  remade, 
men  upon  whose  faces  there  is  the  light  that  never  was 
on  sea  or  land ;  these  are  the  men  that  make  the  preacher 
courageous.  If  we  are  to  face  the  materialism  of  the 
age  with  purpose  and  courage,  we  must  have  these  evi- 
dences. 

Finally,  opposition  on  the  part  of  the  material  to  the 
spiritual  eventuates  in  the  destruction  of  the  material. 
Dr.  John  Hall,  for  so  many  years  the  minister  of  Fifth 
Avenue  Presbyterian  Church,  New  York,  once  illustrated 
that  in  this  way.  He  said:  "A  serpent  fastens  upon  a 
steel  file  and  attempts  to  gnaw  it  through;  it  is  at  first 
gratified  at  the  evidences  of  apparent  success;  but  pres- 
ently blood  is  there,  and  the  serpent  finds  that  the  file  has 
been  destroying  its  tooth  rather  than  its  tooth  the  file." 

If  Christianity  is  becoming  materialized,  God  have 
mercy  on  us  and  the  world.  It  must  be  the  Christianity 
of  men  and  women  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  knowing 
the  power  of  the  One  Name,  and  bringing  men  to  deliv- 
erance through  it,  which  alone  can  be  victorious. 

Acts  4:23-31 

In  this  paragraph  we  come  to  the  last  scene  in  the  story 
of  the  opposition  resulting  from  the  healing  of  the  man 
at  the  Beautiful  Gate.  Here  we  find  ourselves  in  entirely 

[  125  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  4:23-31] 

new  surroundings,  in  striking  contrast  to  those  of  the 
previous  study.  This  paragraph  opens  with  the  declara- 
tion "And  being  let  go,  they  came  to  their  own  company" ; 
and  we  can  imagine  the  different  atmosphere  into  which 
Peter  and  John,  and  in  all  likelihood  the  lame  man,  now 
passed.  "  Their  own  company  "  was  most  probably  the 
apostolic  band  and  the  whole  Church.  We  last  saw  them 
standing  in  the  midst  of  the  Sanhedrim  and  the  Sad- 
ducean  atmosphere.  Now  we  see  them  in  the  midst  of 
their  own  company,  and  the  spiritual  atmosphere. 

In  considering  the  story  of  how  the  Sanhedrim  dealt 
with  these  men,  we  noticed  that  the  opposition  was  based 
upon  the  Sadducean  conception  of  life,  which  was  en- 
tirely materialistic.  They  had  stood  in  the  hostile  and 
critical  atmosphere  of  that  Sadducean  philosophy,  defend- 
ing their  position  by  reaffirming  the  truth  of  the  resur- 
rection of  Jesus.  We  now  see  them  in  an  entirely  new 
atmosphere.  "  Being  let  go,  they  came  to  their  own 
company,"  a  company  of  those  who  in  all  probability 
during  the  hours  of  their  imprisonment  had  been  in 
prayer  for  them,  perhaps  with  a  great  deal  of  fear  in 
their  hearts.  To  this  company  of  believers,  and  in  this 
atmosphere  of  spirituality,  Peter  and  John  told  their 
story.  It  was  a  story  of  opposition,  intellectual  and 
active.  The  rulers  of  the  people  had  now  taken  definite 
action,  in  this  first  arrest  and  arraignment  of  the  apostles, 
and  this  first  charge  to  them  not  to  speak  in  the  name  of 
Jesus.  The  dealing  of  the  Sanhedrim  with  the  apostles 
had  for  the  moment  been  characterized  by  mildness ;  but 
they  had  left  no  doubt  in  the  minds  of  the  apostles  that 
they  were  in  active  and  definite  hostility  to  the  preaching 
of  the  resurrection;  and  so  this  company  of  the  apostolic 
band,  gathered  together  and  listening  to  Peter  and  John 
were  conscious  of  growing  hostility  without,  indicative  of 
danger.  The  One  in  Whose  name  they  were  gathered 
and  Whose  evangel  they  were  proclaiming  had  been  cruci- 
fied. They  had  come  to  see  the  larger  meanings  of  that 

[  126] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  4:23-31] 

crucifixion — and  that  they  had  done  so,  is  evident  in  the 
prayer  we  have  now  to  consider.  Nevertheless,  they  saw 
what  that  fact  of  crucifixion  meant  on  the  human  plane. 
Jesus  had  been  crucified  because  of  His  testimony  to  the  y 
spiritual,  in  an  age  characterized  by  material  thinking. 
Because  of  His  affirmation  of  the  supremacy  of  the 
spiritual,  His  persistent  calling  of  men  back  from  dust  to 
Deity,  men  had  at  last  attempted  to  silence  His  voice  by 
crucifying  Him.  Their  message  was  that  of  His  Resur- 
rection, which  was  that  of  His  victory.  They  knew  the 
issue  of  this  kind  of  preaching.  They  knew  that  the  hos- 
tility that  was  stirred  against  them  was  determined  and 
definite  and  daring;  that  as  it  had  stopped  at  nothing  in 
order  to  silence  the  voice  of  the  supreme  Teacher,  so  now 
it  would  stand  at  nothing  in  order  to  silence  the  voices  of 
those  who  were  repeating  what  He  had  said,  with  the 
added  argument  and  force  of  their  declaration  of  His 
resurrection. 

The  last  statement  of  the  paragraph  reveals  the  ulti- 
mate effect  of  this  opposition  of  the  Sadducees  upon  the 
apostolic  band.  "  They  spake  the  word  of  God  with 
boldness."  They  continued  to  do,  what  two  of  their 
number  had  done  at  the  Beautiful  Gate,  in  Solomon's 
porch,  and  before  the  Sanhedrim.  At  the  Beautiful 
Gate  Peter  had  said  to  the  lame  man,  "  Silver  and  gold 
have  I  none ;  but  what  I  have,  that  give  I  thee."  Taking 
him  by  the  hand  in  the  name  of  the  risen  Christ  he  had 
commanded  him  to  rise,  and  straightway  he  had  stood 
upon  his  feet.  In  Solomon's  porch  Peter  had  rebuked 
the  rationalism  of  the  men  of  Israel,  showing  that  if  they 
were  true  to  their  own  history  they  would  not  be  sur- 
prised at  the  wonder  wrought.  Before  the  Sanhedrim, 
without  any  hesitation,  or  apology,  they  had  declared  the 
selfsame  truths.  When  the  chief  priests  and  the  Sad-  / 
ducees  "  beheld  the  boldness  of  Peter  and  John,  and  had  ^ 
perceived  that  they  were  unlearned  and  ignorant  men, 
they  marvelled;  and  they  took  knowledge  of  them,  that 

[  127  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  4:23-31] 

they  had  been  with  Jesus."  The  threatening  which  fol- 
lowed was  not  that  of  the  vulgar  mob,  but  that  of  the 
cultured  elders;  it  was  not  that  of  a  crowd  swept  by 
passion,  but  that  of  quiet,  calculating,  subtle  foes.  They 
threatened  them  and  let  them  go.  The  apostles  had 
come  back  to  their  own  company  and  all  were  perfectly 
conscious  of  this  hostility,  which  was  in  the  air,  and  now 
was  beginning  to  manifest  itself.  They  saw  definitely 
what  it  meant  in  the  future ;  but  the  effect  produced  was 
that  "  They  spake  the  word  of  God  with  boldness." 

We  shall  attempt  to  discover  the  secrets  of  this  bold- 
ness. There  is  nothing  more  interesting  in  this  part  of 
the  book,  or  indeed  throughout  the  whole  apostolic  story 
than  its  continuity.  The  word  "  boldness  "  suggests  clear 
and  daring  statement;  a  clear  enunciation  of  certain 
truths,  so  that  there  could  be  no  mistaking  of  the  mean- 
ing; and  an  almost  blunt  and  defiant  enunciation,  that 
arrested  attention,  and  compelled  men  to  listen.  This 
note  of  boldness  runs  through  all  the  apostolic  teaching. 
There  is  an  utter  absence  of  apology;  or  of  hesitation. 
Prophets  and  apostles  forevermore  faced  men  and  said: 
These  things  are  so,  Thus  saith  the  Lord.  This  first 
manifestation  arrests  our  attention,  and  we  enquire  the 
secrets  of  it. 

Broadly  stated,  the  boldness  of  this  apostolic  band  re- 
sulted from  prayer  offered  and  answered.  That  tells  the 
whole  story  of  this  paragraph.  These  men  prayed,  and 
the  answer  came.  These  men  heard  the  story  that 
Peter  and  John  had  to  tell,  and  then  one  of  them  un- 
doubtedly speaking  the  mind  of  the  rest, — for  they  were 
of  one  mind  and  one  heart, — they  lifted  up  their  voice 
in  one  prayer;  and  straightway,  without  any  hesitation 
and  waiting,  the  answer  came,  the  place  was  shaken,  and 
they  were  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  spake  the  word 
of  God  with  boldness.  While  that  tells  the  whole  story, 
let  us  examine  more  particularly  the  nature  of  the  prayer, 
and  the  nature  of  the  answer  to  the  prayer. 

[•128] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  4:23-31] 

We  turn  first  to  the  prayer  itself.  Notice  two  things : 
first  the  convictions  that  created  the  prayer ;  and  secondly 
the  desire  expressed,  as  it  reveals  the  attitude  of  the  men 
praying. 

The  convictions  concerning  God  are  indicated  by  the 
form  of  address,  by  what  they  stated  concerning  their 
own  ancient  Scriptures,  and  by  what  they  said  about  the 
crucifixion  of  Christ. 

The  prayer  opened  with  the  words,  "  O  Lord,"  and 
that  word  Lord  is  a  very  rare  one  in  the  New  Testament. 
It  is  not  the  one  usually  translated  Lord.  It  is  a  word 
which  we  might  translate  by  using  the  word  despot.  Of 
course  we  have  come  to  associate  everything  that  is  in- 
iquitous with  the  word  "  despot " ;  but,  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  it  simply  means  absolute  ruler;  it  indicates  final 
sovereignty.  Later,  in  the  prayer  they  used  the  other 
and  commoner  word,  but  it  opened  with  a  title  that  in- 
dicated their  attitude  toward  God  and  their  conviction 
concerning  Him.  The  first  thought  suggested  is  that  of 
their  belief  in  the  sovereignty  of  God,  and  they  illus- 
trated the  meaning  of  this  form  of  address  by  saying 
"  Thou  that  didst  make  the  heaven  and  the  earth  and  the 
sea,  and  all  that  in  them  is."  They  were  confining  them- 
selves for  illustration  to  the  things  nearest  to  them,  to 
the  very  material  world  which  the  Sadducees  said  was 
everything.  The  Sadducees  denied  the  existence  of  any- 
thing beyond  that  which  was  patent  and  self-evident ;  the 
heaven,  that  is,  as  a  firmament  with  all  its  mystery;  the 
solid  earth;  and  the  sea;  these  were  the  sum-total  of  the 
things  which  the  Sadducee  accepted  or  believed  in.  Now 
these  men  said,  "  O  Lord,  Thou  that  didst  make  the 
heaven  and  the  earth  and  the  sea."  Evidently,  therefore, 
to  them  God  was  more  than  all.  This  was  the  subcon- 
scious conviction  that  underlay  the  prayer  of  these  men. 
Prayer  always  begins  there.  No  man  ever  prays  unless 
he  has  this  conception  of  God,  as  being  more  than  the 
sum-total  of  the  things  of  which  he  is  conscious  in  his 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  4:23-31] 

philosophy  and  in  his  science.  Underlying  this  prayer, 
therefore,  which  issued  in  boldness,  was  this  conviction 
of  the  absolute  sovereignty  of  God. 

As  we  move  on  we  find  another  conviction,  or  another 
phase  of  the  one  conviction.  "  Who  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
by  the  mouth  of  our  father  David  Thy  servant,  didst  say: 

•* 

Why  did  the  Gentiles  rage, 

And  the  peoples  imagine  vain  things? 

The  kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves  in  array* 

And  the  rulers  were  gathered  together, 

Against  the  Lord,  and  against  His  Anointed." 

Their  quotation  was  taken  from  the  second  Psalm, 
which  all  Jewish  expositors  admitted,  and  admit,  to  be 
Messianic  in  its  value.  In  all  probability  it  was  written 
by  David  in  the  midst  of  some  local  circumstances  to 
which  it  referred,  but  it  had  larger  applications  and  fur- 
ther meanings.  Whether  their  conviction  was  false  or 
true  is  not  now  under  discussion.  The  point  is  that  these 
men  attributed  the  psalm  to  David,  to  the  Spirit,  to  the 
foreknowledge  of  God;  and  consequently  their  convic- 
tion concerning  God  was  not  that  of  His  sovereignty 
only,  but  also  that  of  His  wisdom.  They  believed  that 
when  David  sang  that  psalm,  he  sang  better  than  he 
knew,  and  fuller  than  he  thought;  that  behind  the  singer 
was  the  inspiring  Spirit;  and  that  at  the  back  of  the 
wisdom  that  foresaw  human  events,  was  God  Himself. 

But  there  is  yet  another  phase  of  conviction  evident, 
perhaps  in  some  senses  more  remarkable,  more  full  of 
comfort  and  helpfulness.  "  For  of  a  truth  in  this  city 
against  Thy  holy  Servant  Jesus,  Whom  Thou  didst 
anoint,  both  Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate,  with  the  Gentiles 
and  the  peoples  of  Israel,  were  gathered  together."  We 
must  pause  here  to  notice  carefully  how  these  men  de- 
scribed what  had  happened  in  the  city.  Mark  carefully 
their  description  of  the  forces  massed  "  against  Thy  holy 
Servant  Jesus,  Whom  Thou  didst  anoint."  Herod,  repre- 

[  130  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  4:23-31] 

senting  Hebrew  authority ;  Pontius  Pilate,  the  representa- 
tive of  Roman  authority ;  "  with  the  Gentiles/'  the  nations 
outside  the  Covenant;  "  and  the  peoples  of  Israel,"  those 
of  the  Covenant ;  "  were  gathered  together."  These  had 
been  gathered  together  to  destroy  Jesus.  That  is  quite 
true;  but  that  is  not  what  these  men  said.  They  said: 
"  They  were  gathered  together,  to  do  whatsoever  Thy 
hand  and  Thy  counsel  foreordained  to  come  to  pass." 
That  is  the  last  phase  of  their  conviction  concerning  God. 
It  was  the  conviction,  not  merely  of  His  sovereignty,  not 
merely  of  His  wisdom,  but  of  His  actual,  definite,  govern- 
ment and  overruling,  in  the  affairs  of  men. 

These  then  were  their  conceptions  of  God.  He  made 
the  heaven,  and  the  earth,  and  the  sea;  and  therefore  He 
is  before,  and  He  is  more  than  they.  He  foretold, 
through  the  singing  of  a  man  long  centuries  ago,  the 
course  of  events;  and  therefore  He  is  full  of  wisdom. 
But  more,  He  presides  over  history.  These  men  in  the 
Upper  Room  were  looking  back  to  those  sad,  dismal,  and 
awful  days  in  Jerusalem  when  they  arrested  the  Lord 
and  Master  Whom  they  loved;  when  He  was  bandied 
about  between  Herod  and  Pilate,  when  the  outside  na- 
tions and  the  chosen  people  combined  to  murder  Him; 
but  they  did  not  speak  about  murder  when  they  prayed. 
They  would  do  that,  when  they  were  outside.  They 
would  charge  His  murder  upon  those  who  were  guilty; 
but  now  they  were  in  the  secret  place  of  prayer.  They 
saw  the  people,  assembled  tumultuously  together,  but  high 
over  all  they  saw  the  Throne,  and  God  governing  and 
compelling. 

Peter  had  given  utterance  to  the  same  thought  in  the 
Pentecostal  sermon  when  he  put  the  two  things  into  close 
connection  saying  "  Him  " — that  is,  Jesus, — "  being  de- 
livered up  by  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge 
of  God,  ye  by  the  hand  of  lawless  men  did  crucify  and 
slay."  In  this  prayer  there  was  only  the  recognition  of 
the  Divine  overruling.  These  were  the  things  in  which 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  4:23-31] 

they  believed:  the  sovereignty  of  God;  the  wisdom  of 
God;  the  active  government  of  God;  and  these  convic- 
tions concerning  God,  inspired  their  prayer. 

Their  convictions  concerning  Jesus  are  as  clearly  re- 
vealed. First  they  believed  in  the  sinlessness  of  Jesus. 
"  Thy  holy  Servant  Jesus."  Twice  they  repeated  the 
word.  They  believed  in  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus.  Hav- 
ing quoted  the  second  psalm  that  referred  to  the  economy 
of  the  Son,  they  said  of  Jesus,  "  Whom  Thou  didst 
anoint."  They  believed  that  through  the  Cross,  He  ac- 
complished the  purpose  of  God,  for  when  they  spoke  of 
the  things  done  by  Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate  and  the 
Gentiles  and  the  Chosen,  they  spoke  of  the  Cross  not  as 
defeat,  but  as  victory. 

The  word  "  accomplishment "  was  surely  used  of  set 
purpose.  Peter  and  John  were  two  of  the  men  who  had 
been  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration.  There  they  heard 
Jesus  talk  with  Moses  and  Elijah  about  "  The  exodus  that 
He  should  accomplish."  These  men  recognized  that  He 
accomplished,  even  through  that  death  that  seemed  so 
tragic,  a  definite  purpose. 

These  then  were  the  convictions  that  underlay  the 
prayer  of  this  apostolic  band;  convictions  concerning 
God,  His  sovereignty,  His  wisdom,  His  government ;  con- 
victions concerning  Jesus,  His  sinlessness,  His  Messiah- 
ship,  and  His  accomplishment  through  death  of  the  Will 
of  God. 

Now  let  us  turn  to  the  desires  expressed.  .  Notice  in 
the  first  place  the  evident  consciousness  of  danger  re- 
vealed in  the  actual  petition.  Their  first  petition  was, 
"  Look  upon  their  threatenings."  Their  conviction  con- 
cerning God  was  that  He  is  sovereign,  that  He  is  All- 
wise,  that  He  is  governing  the  affairs  of  men,  and  making 
even  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him.  They  knew  the 
threatening  outside,  and  the  only  thing  they  could  do 
with  it  was  to  remit  it  to  Him.  "  Look  upon  their 
threatenings."  They  did  not  ask  that  the  threatenings 

[  132  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  4:23-31] 

might  cease,  nor  even  that  the  threatenings  might  not  be 
carried  out.  They  did  not  ask  that  they  might  escape 
from  the  logical  issue  of  persecution  and  death  that  they 
had  seen.  There  was  no  such  request.  They  asked  that 
He  would  look  upon  their  threatening;  and  then  imme- 
diately that  they  might  have  boldness  to  speak  the  word, 
while  God  stretched  out  His  hand  to  heal :  "  Grant  unto 
Thy  servants  to  speak  Thy  word  with  all  boldness,  while 
Thou  stretchest  forth  Thy  hand  to  heal."  Thus  they 
prayed  for  the  continuance  of  that  very  activity  which 
had  produced  the  hostility.  At  the  Beautiful  Gate  they 
had  spoken  the  word  with  boldness,  and  God  had 
stretched  out  His  hand  and  healed  the  man;  and  all  the 
hostility  had  come  out  of  those  facts.  Now  they  prayed, 
and  in  effect  they  said:  God  help  us  to  keep  on  in  spite 
of  everything,  doing  that  which  has  produced  the  threat- 
ening. They  had  been  charged  not  to  speak  in  the  Name 
again.  They  flung  the  caution  aside.  To  the  Sanhedrim 
Peter  had  said,  "  Whether  it  is  right  in  the  sight  of  God 
to. hearken  unto  you  rather  than  unto  God,  judge  ye." 
Now,  in  the  secret  place,  the  men  of  courage  came  into 
the  presence  of  the  God  in  Whom  they  believed,  and 
they  had  but  one  thing  to  ask,  that  they  might  still  speak 
the  word  with  boldness,  while  He  stretched  forth  His 
hand  to  heal. 

But  there  is  another  part  to  the  prayer,  revealing  the 
deepest  desire  of  the  hearts  of  these  men :  "  That  signs 
and  wonders  may  be  done  through  the  name  of  Thy  holy 
Servant  Jesus."  Men  of  such  conviction,  are  always  men 
of  such  desire.  Men  who  know  such  a  God  and  such  a 
Jesus,  are  always  men  who  supremely  desire, — not  to 
escape  from  suffering,  not  to  be  spared  all  the  toil  and  the 
travail  of  proclaiming  the  evangel, — but  that  His  name 
should  be  vindicated  and  glorified  by  perpetual  victory, 
and  therefore  that  they  may  be  kept  bold  in  the  preach- 
ing. 

These  praying  men  impress  us,  first  as  being  consistent. 

[  133  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  4:23-31] 

This  is  a  great  word  which  we  have  largely  misused. 
Some  people  think  that  to  be  consistent,  means  that  the 
same  thing  is  said  yesterday,  to-day,  and  forever.  A 
great  consistency  may  make  a  man  deny  to-day  what  he 
said  yesterday,  because  he  finds  out  that  what  he  said 
yesterday  was  not  true.  To  be  consistent  is  to  be  pos- 
sessed and  mastered  by  some  one  principle.  Because 
these  men  were  so  possessed  and  mastered,  they  were 
strong.  They  were  cautious  also.  This  is  seen  in  the 
fact  that  they  were  conscious  of  the  peril,  and  therefore 
claimed  the  resources  which  were  at  their  disposal  in 
God.  But  supremely  these  men  were  courageous.  There 
was  no  suggestion  of  retreat.  The  only  passion  in  their 
hearts  was  to  go  forward,  and  their  only  fear  was  that 
they  might  fear,  and  so  fail. 

The  answer  to  the  prayer  came  immediately.  There 
was  first  a  sign :  "  the  place  was  shaken."  That  was  a 
response  to  their  conviction  concerning  God.  As  Sov- 
ereign of  the  universe  He  laid  His  power  upon  the  ma- 
terial house,  and  it  was  shaken.  Do  not  be  at  all  anxious 
if  that  kind  of  sign  is  not  repeated  in  this  century.  The 
only  infidelity  to  be  feared  is  that  which  denies  the  pos- 
sibility. Nevertheless,  a  material  miracle  is  always  a 
sign  of  dulness  in  the  spiritual  sense.  All  the  miracles 
of  the  ancient  days  were  necessary  in  order  to  lead  on  to 
the  higher  spiritual  miracles  which  resulted.  The  Master 
said  to  His  disciples :  "  Greater  works  than  these  shall  ye 
do ;  because  I  go  unto  the  Father."  To  read  the  context 
is  to  see  that  the  "  greater  works  "  are  the  works  of 
spiritual  wonder.  But  to  these  people  a  material  sign 
was  granted,  the  shaking  of  the  house.  Then  they  were 
filled  with  the  Spirit.  This  has  sometimes  been  described 
as  a  New  Pentecost.  This  is  a  most  unfortunate  expres- 
sion. There  can  be  no  new  Pentecost.  Pentecost  was 
once,  and  forever.  The  day  of  Pentecost  was  not  a  day 
of  twenty-four  hours.  The  day  of  Pentecost  is  the  day 
of  grace.  This  is  the  day  of  Pentecost.  When  the  Spirit 

[  134  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  4:23-31] 

was  outpoured  in  the  Upper  Room,  the  day  dawned, 
which  has  not  yet  passed.  This  was  no  new  Pentecost, 
but  a  new  enduement,  a  new  filling.  A  simple  formula 
of  New  Testament  terminology  concerning  the  activities 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  will  always  help  us  to  intelligent  think- 
ing: One  baptism,  many  fillings,  constant  anointing. 
These  are  all  phrases  of  the  New  Testament.  This  was 
a  new  filling,  a  new  enduement  of  power;  perhaps  be- 
cause fulness  had  been  interfered  with  by  fear,  while 
they  were  waiting  for  Peter  and  John.  Personally  I  be- 
lieve that  the  new  filling  was  intended  to  prevent  the 
development  of  incipient  fear.  They  feared,  and  there 
was  granted  to  them  a  new  consciousness  of  the  inrush 
of  the  Spirit.  In  Dr.  Elder  Cumming's  wonderfully  il- 
luminative book  The  Eternal  Spirit,  he  traced  with  ac- 
curate and  scholarly  precision  the  difference  between 
the  phrases  "full  of  the  Spirit"  and  "filled  with  the 
Spirit "  as  used  in  the  New  Testament.  Some  one  full 
of  the  Spirit  may  nevertheless  be  filled  to  overflowing 
for  specific  service,  and  for  work  that  waits  to  be  done. 
These  men  were  filled  with  a  new  consciousness,  and  a 
new  actuality  of  the  presence  and  the  power  of  the  Spirit ; 
with  the  result  that  they  went  out,  and  spoke  the  word 
of  God  with  boldness. 

This  study  teaches  us  that  if  we  would  deliver  the 
testimony  of  the  risen  Christ,  characterized  by  the  bold- 
ness of  clarity  and  courage,  we  need  right  convictions 
concerning  God,  concerning  His  Son;  and  the  constant 
reception  of  power  by  the  inflow  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The 
last  is  the  issue  of  the  former.  It  is  God,  Who  is  the 
sovereign  Lord,  All-wise,  actually  governing,  to  Whom 
we  must  ever  turn.  It  is  Christ,  Who  is  sinless,  the 
anointed  and  appointed  Messiah,  Who  accomplished 
through  death  the  purpose  of  God,  to  Whom  we  must  go. 
In  proportion  as  we  are  submitted  to  Christ,  and  wait 
in  prayer  upon  God,  there  will  ever  come  to  us  that  in- 
flow of  the  Spirit,  which  will  make  us  bold  to  proclaim 

1 135 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  4 : 32-37] 

the  evangel ;  and  great  results  may  and  must  follow  where 
the  Church  is  thus  convinced  and  Spirit-filled. 

Acts  4: 32-37 

We  have  been  considering  the  infant  Church  in  the 
midst  of  hostile  forces.  We  now  come  to  a  section  of  the 
book  which  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  the  internal  conditions 
of  her  life  at  that  time.  This  particular  section  falls 
into  two  parts.  There  is  first  a  picture  of  the  Church's 
fellowship,  and  then  a  picture  of  its  discipline.  We  are 
now  to  deal  with  the  first  of  these. 

Opinions  held  about  this  story  by  expositors  and  teach- 
ers are  very  divergent.  They  may  generally  be  divided 
into  two  main  positions.  There  are  those  who  count  this 
as  a  mistake — the  first  apostolic  mistake.  There  are  those 
who  believe  it  was  Divinely  ordered,  and  the  inevitable 
outcome  of  the  Pentecostal  effusion. 

Those  who  declare  that  this  was  the  first  great  mistake 
made  by  the  early  Church  do  so  for  certain  reasons  which 
we  must  briefly  pass  in  review. 

They  affirm  first,  that  the  action  of  the  early  disciples 
was  due  to  their  expectation  of  the  speedy  return  of 
Christ;  that  He  would  personally  and  actually  return 
within  the  generation;  and  that  therefore  there  was  no 
need  to  retain  possession  of  earthly  goods.  These  early 
disciples  were  certainly  looking  for  the  return  of  Christ, 
as  the  disciples  of  to-day  ought  to  be,  and  if  they  are  not 
— to  quote  Dr.  Denny — the  bloom  is  brushed  from  their 
Christian  experience;  but  we  have  no  right  to  say  that 
these  early  disciples  expected  Him  within  a  generation. 
They  expected  Him  all  the  time,  and  that  was,  and  is, 
the  true  attitude.  In  this  story,  however,  not  a  word  is 
said  to  suggest  that  this  expectation  was  the  motive  for 
the  selling  of  their  lands  and  their  houses. 

Again,  it  is  affirmed  that  this  action  was  the  cause  of 
that  subsequent  poverty  of  the  Church  in  Jerusalem, 
which  made  necessary  the  collections  that  were  taken 

136] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  4:32-37] 

through  the  Greek  cities,  and  sent  to  Jerusalem.  Such  a 
statement  is  wholly  gratuitous,  and  without  a  vestige  of 
Biblical  authority,  probably  the  hypothesis  of  some  one 
who  approached  the  story  with  an  anti-communistic 
prejudice. 

That  it  is  said  that  the  action  was  a  mistake  is  proved 
by  the  resulting  experiences,  those  namely,  of  Ananias 
and  Sapphira,  and  of  the  murmuring  of  the  Hellenists 
because  in  the  distribution  certain  of  their  widows  were 
neglected.  But  the  first  lie,  and  the  first  discipline  in  the 
Church  were  due,  not  to  the  action  chronicled  here,  but 
to  the  violation  of  the  principles  revealed  here.  The  lie 
was  the  lie  of  a  man  and  woman  who  were  not  true  to 
the  ideal;  and  the  murmur  of  the  Hellenists  was  against 
an  unfair  distribution. 

Yet  again  it  has  been  objected  to  by  those  who  have 
treated  the  story  as  though  the  practice  was  one  of  indis- 
criminate charity,  which  as  practised  to-day,  is  so  un- 
questionably unwise.  But  there  is  no  similarity  at  all 
between  the  two  things.  This  was  wholly  a  Church  ac- 
tivity. The  material  fellowship  was  merely  the  outward 
and  visible  sign  of  a  spiritual  fellowship,  necessarily  ex- 
isting between  regenerate  men  and  women. 

And  yet  once  more,  there  are  those  who  consider  the 
action  mistaken,  because  they  treat  it  as  though  it  were 
on  the  pattern  of  modern,  legislative,  social  propaganda. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  was  not  legislative  at  all.  There 
was  no  law  that  any  one  should  sell  his  land  or  house. 
In  the  case  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  the  apostle  said 
very  definitely,  While  it  was  your  own,  it  was  your  own ; 
no  one  asked  you  to  sell  it.  The  action  in  each  case  was 
purely  voluntary,  and  that  of  regenerate  men. 

A  word  of  caution  is  necessary  in  the  case  of  many 
who  defend  the  story.  Too  often  it  is  quoted  in  defence 
of  a  propaganda  which  fails  to*  begin  with  Pentecost. 
That  inclusively  reveals  the  danger  of  taking  this  story, 
and  preaching  it  promiscuously,  as  though  it  were  a  na- 

[  137  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  4 : 32-37] 

tional  idea,  toward  the  realization  of  which  we  are  to 
work  to-day.  Archbishop  Magee,  years  ago,  was  severely 
criticized  when  he  said  that  the  British  nation  could  not 
be  governed  on  the  principles  of  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount.  But  he  was  perfectly  right.  The  Sermon  on  the 
Mount  can  be  applied  to  England  when  England  is  a 
nation  of  regenerate  men  and  women,  and  never  until 
then.  We  are  sometimes  told  to-day  that  the  work  of  the 
preacher  is  to  preach  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  and  at- 
tempt to  establish  the  Kingdom.  Certainly  it  is,  if  we 
begin  with  Pentecost ;  but  we  must  have  Pentecost  before 
we  can  have  the  condition  of  affairs  described  here.  This 
condition  of  affairs  was  the  immediate  outcome  of  Pente- 
cost, with  all  that  it  meant,  of  new  vision,  emotions,  con- 
ceptions, power. 

Let  us  attempt  to  look  at  the  story  of  these  few  verses ; 
first  at  the  general  description  found  in  verses  32-35 ;  and 
then  at  the  particular  illustration  given  in  verses  36  and 

37- 

First,  we  have  a  general  description  of  the  condition 

of  affairs  obtaining  among  the  members  of  the  early 
Church.  This  was  not  a  new  departure  in  the  case  of 
the  Church;  it  was  not  a  new  venture  consequent  upon 
new  opposition.  In  chapter  two,  verses  44  and  45,  we 
have  an  account  of  the  things  happening  immediately 
after  Pentecost.  There  at  the  very  beginning,  immedi- 
ately upon  the  descent  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  filling  of 
these  people  by  the  Spirit,  these  same  conditions  ob- 
tained. Notice  the  forty-second  verse  of  that  second 
chapter  and  then  verses  forty-three  to  forty-seven  as 
they  explain  verse  forty-two.  The  forty-second  verse 
makes  this  declaration,  "And  they  continued  steadfastly 
in  the  apostles'  teaching,  and  fellowship,  in  the  breaking 
of  bread  and  the  prayers."  Four  things  are  named. 
The  verses  which  follow  simply  break  that  verse  up  and 
show  how  they  continued  in  these  four  things.  First, 
The  apostles'  teaching :  "  And  fear  came  upon  every 

1 138] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  4:32-37] 

soul ;  and  many  wonders  and  signs  were  done  through  the 
apostles/'  Secondly,  Fellowship :  "  And  all  that  believed 
were  together,  and  had  all  things  common ;  and  they  sold 
their  possessions  and  goods,  and  parted  them  to  all,  ac- 
cording as  any  man  had  need."  Thirdly,  Breaking  of 
bread :  "  And  day  by  day,  continuing  stedf  astly  with 
one  accord  in  the  temple,  and  breaking  bread  at  home, 
they  did  take  their  food  with  gladness  and  singleness  of 
heart."  Finally,  Prayers :  "  Praising  God,  and  haying 
favour  with  all  the  people.  And  the  Lord  added  to  them 
day  by  day  those  that  were  being  saved."  These  were 
the  conditions  immediately  following  upon  Pentecost. 
The  disciples,  by  the  coming  of  the  Spirit,  baptized  into 
union  with  their  Lord,  continued  steadfastly  in  the 
apostles'  doctrine,  which  does  not  merely  mean  that  they 
listened  to  the  apostles,  but  that  they  supported  the  teach- 
ing of  the  apostles  by  the  witness  of  their  lives.  There- 
fore, they  continued  steadfastly  moreover  in  fellowship. 
There  is  no  richer  word  in  the  New  Testament  than  the 
Greek  word  so  translated.  Koinonia  is  translated  in  a 
great  many  ways,  because  no  single  word  can  convey  all 
its  richness.  It  and  its  cognate  words  are  translated  fel- 
lowship, communion,  communication,  distribution,  con- 
tribution, partners,  partakers.  The  root  of  the  word  is 
found  in  the  statement  that  they  "  had  all  things  com- 
mon." The  word  translated  common  is  the  root  out  of 
which  the  word  koinonia  comes.  Fellowship  therefore 
is  having  all  things  in  common.  The  great  teaching  of 
the  New  Testament  is  that  the  child  of  God  has  fellow- 
ship with  God,  that  is,  all  things  in  common  with  God. 
All  the  resources  of  God  are  at  the  disposal  of  the  child 
of  God.  All  the  resources  of  the  child  of  God  are  at  the 
disposal  of  God.  These  men  of  the  early  Church  there- 
fore, and  necessarily,  had  all  things  in  common  with  each 
other.  The  conditions  then  that  we  find  described  in 
this  fourth  chapter  are  exactly  the  conditions  which  in- 
evitably followed  the  Pentecostal  effusion,  the  baptism 

[  139  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  4  -.32-37] 

of  the  Spirit,  the  indwelling  of  these  men  and  women  by 
Christ  Himself  through  the  Spirit.  They  were  brought 
by  that  baptism  into  new  relation  with  Christ,  and  so  into 
new  relation  with  God  Himself.  That  inevitably  meant 
new  relationship  with  each  other. 

At  the  centre  of  the  Ephesian  letter,  the  apostle  urged 
those  Christians  to  whom  he  was  writing,  to  walk  worthily 
of  the  calling  wherewith  they  were  called.  The  first 
charge  he  laid  upon  them  was  this :  "  Giving  diligence  to 
keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace."  Hav- 
ing so  written,  he  described  what  he  meant  by  the  unity 
of  the  Spirit  in  these  stately  words,  "  There  is  one  body, 
and  one  Spirit."  That  one  body  is  Christ,  and  all  His 
people.  He  then  showed  how  men  come  into  that  union : 
"  One  Lord,"  Christ ;  "  One  faith,"  fastening  upon  Him  ; 
"  One  baptism,"  that  of  the  Spirit,  making  the  trusting 
soul  one  with  Him.  Finally  he  described  the  result  of 
that  union:  "  One  God  and  Father  of  all,  Who  is  over  all, 
and  through  all,  and  in  all."  That  is  ko'monia,  fellow- 
ship, all  things  in  common.  Men  and  women  made  par- 
takers of  the  Divine  nature,  seeing  in  the  Divine  light, 
feeling  with  the  Divine  love,  living  with  the  Divine  life. 
That  is  the  basis  of  the  communion  of  this  chapter.  The 
communism  was  not  that  of  people  who  have  signed 
articles,  and  decided  to  pool  property.  It  was  the  com- 
munism of  a  new  life,  which,  possessing  all,  made  these 
attitudes  and  activities  irresistible  and  necessary. 

Let  us  now  turn  to  a  closer  examination  of  the  para- 
graph, and  so  of  the  fellowship ;  noticing  first,  its  power ; 
secondly,  its  principles;  and  thirdly,  its  practice. 

The  power  of  this  fellowship  is  revealed  in  the  words : 
"  The  multitude  of  them  that  believed  were  of  one  heart 
and  soul."  It  does  not  matter  for  the  moment  whether 
these  believers  sold  their  houses  and  land,  or  not.  That  is 
not  the  important  thing.  Do  not  begin  with  the  selling 
of  a  house,  and  the  selling  of  land;  begin  with  the  fact 
that  "  they  that  believed  were  of  one  heart  and  soul." 

[  140  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  4 : 32-37] 

The  initial  fact  is  found  in  the  phrase,  "  them  that  be- 
lieved"; and  the  resultant  fact  in  the  statement  that 
they  "  were  of  one  heart  and  soul."  These  men  were  of 
one  heart  and  soul  because  they  had  believed.  Belief  here 
must  be  interpreted  by  all  the  evangelical  values  of  the 
New  Testament.  The  people  who  believed,  necessarily 
became  men  and  women  of  one  heart  and  soul.  "  Them 
that  believed  "  is  a  phrase  of  inclusion  and  of  exclusion. 
We  cannot  take  this  story,  and  apply  it  on  the  level  of 
that  crowd  in  Jerusalem  which  did  not  believe;  and  we 
must  not  attempt  to  apply  the  teaching  of  this  story  to 
the  promiscuous  multitudes  to-day  that  do  not  believe. 
"  Them  that  believed,"  were  those  who  had  yielded  them- 
selves to  the  Lordship  of  Jesus,  to  obedience  to  His 
teaching. 

What  was  the  result  of  their  believing?  "They  were 
of  one  heart  and  soul."  The  two  phrases  are  not  care- 
lessly selected.  "  One  heart,"  reveals  the  emotional  and 
inspirational  centre ;  "  One  soul,"  reveals  the  new  life  as 
dynamic.  This  company  of  people,  having  believed  in 
Him,  submitted  to  His  Lordship,  being  loyal  thereto,  were 
of  one  heart.  They  were  moved  by  one  great  impulse, 
one  love  mastered  them ;  they  had  one  outlook,  one  in- 
ward consciousness,  one  inspirational  motive.  But  more, 
infinitely  more,  they  were  of  one  soul.  The  word  soul 
here  is  the  word  that  indicates  life;  it  is  not  the  high 
word  which  means  spirit,  but  the  word  which  refers  to 
life  as  a  force,  as  a  dynamic. 

We  can  never  have  the  flowers  and  the  fruits  of  the 
garden  of  the  Lord  unless  we  have  the  roots ;  and  we  shall 
never  be  able  to  reproduce  in  any  community,  in  any 
nation,  all  the  fair  and  gracious  beauty  of  this  condition, 
save  as  we  can  realize  anew  the  one  heart  and  the  one 
life  of  that  early  company  of  first  disciples. 

But  now  let  us  notice  the  principle  of  this  activity. 
The  first  element  was  that  of  selflessness :  "  And  not  one 
of  them  said  that  aught  of  the  things  which  he  possessed 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  4 : 32-37] 

was  his  own."  The  trouble  with  much  social  propaganda 
to-day  is  that  every  man  says  that  what  he  has,  is  his 
own.  Here  no  man  said  so,  because  no  man  thought 
so.  The  one  heart  and  the  one  life  had  completely 
ended  the  selfishness  of  these  people.  They  were  self- 
less. 

The  second  element  was  that  of  a  corporate  conscious- 
ness. "  They  had  all  things  common."  If  we  cannot  un- 
derstand what  that  means,  we  must  go  to  some  of  the 
apostolic  writings,  and  listen  to  their  descriptions  of  what 
the  Church  ought  to  be.  If  one  member  suffers,  all  the 
members  talk  about  it,  and  attempt  to  be  sympathetic, 
and  decide  to  make  a  collection.  That  is  not  the  idea  at 
all.  That  is  what  we  do  to-day !  This  is  it :  "  Whether 
one  member  suffereth  all  the  members  suffer  with  it;  or 
one  member  is  honoured,  all  the  members  rejoice  with 
it."  That  is  corporate  consciousness.  They  had  all 
things  common.  "  Not  one  of  them  said  aught  of  the 
things  which  he  possessed  was  his  own." 

There  is  yet  another  element  to  be  observed.  These 
people  lived  in  the  conviction  of  the  supremacy  of  the 
spiritual  over  the  material.  The  very  life  of  the  Spirit 
in  them  made  the  question  of  property  a  secondary  ques- 
tion. We  may  call  them  improvident.  That  is  the  word 
of  the  world,  and  I  am  not  sure  that  it  is  not  the  word  of 
the  flesh  and  the  devil  also.  These  people  were  so  mas- 
tered by  the  spiritual  power  that  possessed  them,  so  driven 
in  this  fresh  and  fragrant  dawn  of  the  Church's  life  by 
the  reality  of  the  eternal  and  the  spiritual,  that  they  held 
with  light  hands  the  things  of  the  world.  All  material 
property  was  subservient  to  spiritual  purpose,  and  so  they 
said  that  nothing  they  had  was  their  own. 

Then  observe  carefully  that  there  was  no  compulsion, 
neither  rules,  nor  regulations,  nor  pledges!  The  mul- 
tiplication of  pledges  is  always  a  sign  of  the  decadence 
of  the  Church's  life.  There  was  a  great  spiritual  impulse, 
but  there  was  no  compulsion  other  than  that ;  these  men 

[  142  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

lActs  4 : 32-37] 

were  not  compelled  to  give  up  anything;  everything  was 
voluntary.  The  distribution  was  apostolic,  and  according 
as  every  man  had  need.  The  movement  was  purely  vol- 
untary, wholly  and  absolutely  spiritual,  the  answer  of  ex- 
ternal activities  to  the  inward  dynamic.  One  heart,  the 
emotional  centre ;  one  life,  spiritual  dynamic ;  one  activity, 
all  things  belonging  to  all. 

In  the  midst  of  the  story  we  find  the  wider  value  of 
this  great  fellowship.  Those  who  criticize  this  action  of 
the  early  Church  generally  deal  with  this  particular  verse 
by  omitting  it.  "  And  with  great  power  gave  the  apostles 
their  witness  of  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  and 
great  grace  was  upon  them  all."  The  apostolic  witness 
to  the  resurrection  was  made  powerful  by  the  spirituality 
and  the  selflessness  of  the  life  of  the  Church  in  itself ;  it 
had  the  evidence  of  life  in  harmony  with  the  life  of 
Christ,  the  evidence  of  love  as  the  master-passion  of  all 
activity.  This  was  the  supreme  evidence  in  apostolic 
preaching  to  the  resurrection  of  Jesus.  And  again  "  great 
grace  was  upon  them  all."  We  must  not  read  that  as 
though  it  meant  that  grace  like  some  glorious,  yet  nebu- 
lous Divine  cloud  of  benediction  hung  over  them.  "  Great 
grace  was  upon  them  all,"  means  that  there  was  a  beauty 
and  a  glory  manifest  in  their  own  character;  and  that 
beauty  and  glory,  or  to  use  the  word  itself,  that  grace  co- 
operated with  the  apostolic  testimony  to  resurrection. 
The  word  was  with  power  because  it  was  incarnate  in 
the  life  of  that  early  Church. 

Leave  that  general  outline  and  turn  to  the  particular 
illustration.  Joseph  was  in  all  probability  a  wealthy  man. 
We  have  met  his  relations  before.  He  was  the  brother 
of  Mary,  that  is,  of  Mary  the  wealthy  woman  who  lived 
in  Jerusalem,  at  whose  house  the  early  disciples  gathered. 
Mary  was  the  mother  of  Mark,  so  that  Mark  was  a 
nephew  of  this  man.  He  was  by  birth  a  man  of  Cyprus, 
which  at  that  time  was  a  great  centre  for  Jewish  people  ; 
and  he  was  a  Levite.  But  if  we  really  want  to  know 

[  143  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  4:32-37] 

something  of  the  man,  let  us  mark  well  the  name  which 
the  apostles  gave  him:  Barnabas.  This  was  a  name 
given,  indicative  of  the  supreme  quality  of  this  man. 
Bar-Nabas  means  son  of  prophecy.  We  have  a  transla- 
tion in  the  text,  "  which  being  interpreted  is,  Son  of 
Exhortation."  The  Authorized  Version  says,  "  The  Son 
of  Consolation,"  which  the  Revised  Version  has  retained 
in  the  margin.  The  difference  is  the  same  as  that  ob- 
taining in  the  translation  of  the  word  Paraclete.  Did 
Jesus  say,  "I  will  send  you  a  Comforter?"  or  did  He 
say,  "  I  will  send  you  an  Advocate  ?  "  He  really  said 
both.  Actually  He  said,  I  will  send  you  the  Paraclete. 
The  meaning  of  the  word  Paraclete  is,  one  called  to  the 
side  of  another;  and  one  called  to  the  side  of  another 
for  a  twofold  purpose,  the  Advocate,  to  argue,  and  the 
Comforter,  to  comfort.  That  the  element  of  comfort  was 
in  His  mind  was  evident  by  the  fact  that  He  said,  I  will 
not  leave  you  orphans,  I  will  send  you  the  Paraclete. 
The  fact  that  exhortation  was  in  His  mind  was  evident 
by  the  fact  that  He  said,  "  When  the  Paraclete  is  come 
He  will  teach  you  all  things."  In  the  word  Paraclete 
therefore  we  have  the  thoughts  of  exhortation  and  of 
consolation.  Here  is  the  same  word — the  son  of  Para- 
klesis,  the  son  of  exhortation,  or  consolation.  The  apostles 
surnamed  him  thus  because  of  what  he  was  in  himself. 
This  man  was  a  man  gifted  in  speech,  but  it  was  speech 
that  while  it  was  exhortative,  was  also  full  of  comfort. 
If  we  follow  his  history  through  the  book  of  the  Acts, 
we  shall  see  how  true  this  was. 

Now  this  man  had  land,  and  he  sold  it,  and  laid  the 
proceeds  at  the  feet  of  the  apostles.  Look  at  this  story  in 
the  atmosphere  of  the  present  day.  Men  have  such  a 
passion  for  holding  land,  that  they  speak  of  it  as  Real 
Estate.  The  fact  that  this  man  had  land  and  sold  it, 
was  remarkable.  It  was  a  great  venture  of  faith.  Here 
were  the  apostles,  a  few  men  with  all  the  massed  light 
and  leading  of  their  age  against  them.  These  men  set  up 

[  144  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  4: 32-37] 

a  fanatical  communism,  not  by  rule  and  regulation,  but 
by  the  wild  impulse  of  love;  and  here  was  a  landowner 
who  sold  his  land  and  brought  the  proceeds  and  laid  it 
at  the  feet  of  the  apostles.  That  is  an  illustration  of  the 
principle  that  underlay  the  whole  movement.  It  was  an 
act  of  love,  for  it  was  accomplished  in  the  power  of  that 
great  principle  here  enunciated.  No  man  said  that  any- 
thing he  possessed  was  his  own.  It  was  an  outcome  of 
life,  he  was  compelled  to  it  by  the  nature  of  the  life  he 
shared  in  common  with  the  rest.  This  is  an  illustration  of 
what  all  these  men  did  in  greater  or  less  degree.  Bar- 
nabas had  land  and  he  sold  it.  That  was  his  investment. 
We  have  not  reached  the  dividends  yet.  Those  will  be 
found  later  on  in  the  book. 

So  in  conclusion  we  observe  two  or  three  matters  of 
supreme  importance.  First,  we  must  remember  that  this 
is  a  picture  of  conditions  obtaining  only  within  the 
Church.  We  must  remember  secondly  that  these  are 
conditions  which  ought  to  obtain  within  the  Church.  It 
may  be  said  that  this  condition  of  affairs  is  very  perilous. 
Ananias  and  Sapphira  illustrate  the  peril  of  it.  The 
Hellenist  murmuring  testifies  to  the  peril  of  it.  But  in 
each  case  we  must  finish  the  story.  In  a  Church  that 
can  establish  that  order,  Ananias  and  Sapphira  cannot 
live.  In  a  Church  that  can  establish  that  order,  the  mur- 
muring of  the  Hellenists  issues  in  the  appointment  of 
Spirit-filled  deacons,  and  the  trouble  is  settled.  There 
is  administrative  power.  Do  not  quote  Ananias  and 
Sapphira  and  the  Hellenist  murmuring  as  showing  the 
impossibility  of  realizing  this  ideal.  If  it  is  not  possible 
to-day,  it  is  because  we  have  lost  the  purity  that  makes 
the  lie  impossible  within  our  borders ;  because  we  have 
lost  the  unity  of  Spirit  that  can  administer  in  any  hour 
of  difficulty.  Let  us  be  honest !  If  that  is  a  lost  ideal,  it 
is  because  the  power  realizing  it  is  largely  a  lost  power. 
The  only  restoration  will  be  in  the  power  of  the  prelimi- 
nary things.  In  the  Evangelical  Revival  how  many  won- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  5 : 1-16] 

derful  things  were  said  and  sung.  Call  to  mind  one  of 
the  old  hymns  and  this  couplet  therein : 

"  Let  the  priests  themselves  believe, 
And  put  salvation  on." 

Go  back  to  the  apostolic  writings,  "  Judgment  must  begin 
at  the  house  of  God."  If  we  are  ever  able  to  return  to 
that  realization  of  fellowship,  it  will  be  in  the  power  of 
the  absolute  rilling  of  the  Spirit.  When  we  are  of  one 
heart,  one  inspirational  centre;  of  one  soul,  one  dynamic 
of  life ;  then  again,  it  will  be  true  that  not  one  of  us  will 
say  that  aught  of  the  things  which  he  possesses  is  his 
own.  There  will  be  no  rules  and  regulations,  but  a  great 
love.  That  is  where  the  Church  has  most  sadly  failed. 
When  Peter  came  to  write  his  letter,  he  wrote  words 
which  to  me  are  the  most  wonderful  in  all  the  apostolic 
writings,  as  setting  forth  one  phase  of  truth  about  the 
Church.  "  Ye  are  an  elect  race,"  that  is  the  life  prin- 
ciple ;  "  a  royal  priesthood  " ;  that  is  our  relation  to  God ; 
"  a  holy  nation,"  that  is  the  social  order.  That  is  where 
we  have  failed. 

We  are  not  what  we  ought  to  be  within  the  Church. 
I  have  no  hope  whatever  of  any  social  propaganda  outside 
the  Church.  If  we  cannot  realize  this  fair  and  fragrant 
vision  of  beauty  within,  at  least  let  each  soul  see  to  it 
that  it  does  believe;  that  the  inspirational  centre  of  its 
life  is  love,  and  the  dynamic  behind  all  its  activities,  that 
Spirit  which  makes  things  material  forever  subservient 
to  things  spiritual.  The  measure  in  which  each  does  this 
will  be  the  measure  of  the  Church's  approximation  to  the 
lost  ideal.  Let  us  pray  for  some  measure  of  restoration ; 
for  therein  lies  the  Church's  safety,  and  her  power  of 
testimony  to  the  resurrection  of  Christ  in  the  world. 

Acts  5:1-16 

The  opening  word  of  this  section,  "  But,"  at  once  sug- 
gests a  contrast.  Interest  still  centres  in  the  Church  in 

1 146] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  5 : 1-16] 

Jerusalem.  We  are  still  observing  the  first  things  in  its 
history  in  that  city.  We  have  contemplated  the  first 
impression  produced,  the  first  message  delivered,  the  first 
opposition  manifested,  and  the  first  realization  of  fellow- 
ship. We  have  seen  the  hostility  of  rationalism,  the 
Sadducean  party  opposed  to  the  work  of  the  apostles, 
preeminently  because  they  proclaimed  the  Resurrection  of 
Jesus  from  among  the  dead.  Then  following  the  hostility 
which  manifested  itself  after  the  healing  of  the  lame 
man  at  the  Beautiful  Gate,  and  expressed  itself  for  the 
present  only  in  examination  and  threatening,  we  saw  the 
great  and  gracious  and  wonderful  picture  of  the  fellow- 
ship of  spirituality;  that  first  fascinating  account  of  how 
these  people— answering  the  impulse  of  love,  walking  in 
light,  and  energized  by  life,  all  of  which  things  had  come 
to  them  in  new  measure  and  method  by  the  coming  of 
Pentecost — had  all  things  in  common. 

In  this  passage  we  are  faced  with  a  new  peril,  and  a 
new  manifestation  of  power.  The  passage  opens  with  the 
tragic  and  awful  story  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira;  but  it 
closes  with  the  account  of  how  all  the  sick  who  were 
brought  to  the  apostles  were  healed.  All  that  is  here  re- 
corded of  judgment  and  of  blessing  is  the  outcome  of  the 
One  Presence  in  the  Church.  The  blasting  and  the  bless- 
ing were  the  acts  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  His  administration 
of  the  work  and  the  will  of  Christ.  The  story  therefore 
of  the  whole  paragraph  is  that  of  the  first  discipline,  and 
reveals  its  occasion,  its  operation,  and  its  outcome.  The 
occasion  of  discipline  was  the  sin  of  Ananias  and  Sap- 
phira; its  operation  was  the  direct,  swift,  and  awful  judg- 
ment of  God;  its  outcome  was  a  new  fear  and  a  new 
power  resulting  therefrom. 

We  need  to  understand  exactly  what  this  sin  was. 
First  let  it  be  noted  that  it  was  a  sin  within  the  fellow- 
ship of  the  Church.  There  can  be  no  doubt  whatever  that 
Ananias  and  Sapphira  were  already  associated  with  that 
company  of  believing  souls  which  constituted  the  infant 

[  147  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  5 : 1-16] 

Church  in  Jerusalem.  The  perils  without  we  have  seen; 
but  this  peril  was  within,  and  was  far  more  insidious,  far 
more  subtle,  far  more  dangerous,  than  all  those  from 
without.  The  Church  has  never  been  harmed  or  hindered 
by  opposition  from  without;  it  has  been  perpetually 
harmed  and  hindered  by  perils  from  within. 

Let  it  be  carefully  remembered  that  the  sin  of  Ananias 
and  Sapphira  was  not  that  of  refusing  to  contribute. 
They  brought  a  part  of  the  price.  Neither  was  it  that 
of  refusing  to  give  all.  It  was  not  wrong  that  they 
should  bring  part  of  the  price.  We  must  insist  again 
upon  that  which  we  emphasized  in  our  last  study,  that  the 
communism  of  the  early  Church  was  not  by  law,  rule, 
regulation,  requirement.  It  was  the  natural  and  beautiful 
outcome  of  the  spirit-life  by  which  all  were  mastered. 
Consequently  when  Ananias  and  Sapphira  gave  only  part 
of  the  result  of  their  selling  of  land,  of  their  selling  of 
their  possession,  there  was  no  wrong  in  keeping  back  part 
of  the  price.  There  was  no  regulation  in  this  early  com- 
munity that  men  should  give,  or  that  they  should  give  all. 
This  was  not  a  requirement  for  fellowship  or  for  service. 

Wherein  then  lay  the  sin?  One  must  discover  the  na- 
ture of  the  sin  by  what  Peter  said  both  to  Ananias  and 
Sapphira.  The  sin  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  was  the  sin 
of  pretending  that  part  was  all.  It  was  the  sin  of  hypoc- 
risy, of  attempting  to  appear  what  they  really  were  not, 
of  endeavouring  to  make  it  appear  that  they  had  done 
what  they  really  had  not.  The  sin  was  that  of  lying;  so 
the  apostle  named  it :  "  How  is  it  that  thou  hast  con- 
ceived this  thing  in  thy  heart?  Thou  hast  not  lied  unto 
men,  but  unto  God."  This  was  the  terrible  nature  of 
the  sin;  not  that  of  refusing  to  give;  not  that  of  only 
giving  part ;  but  that  of  attempting  to  make  men  believe 
that  they  had  given  all,  when  they  had  only  given  part, 
and  so  that  of  lying  to  God. 

We  may  illustrate  this  by  the  things  of  to-day.  If  a 
man  attend  a  convention  or  a  religious  service,  and  sing 

1 148 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  5 : 1-16] 

with  fervour,  "  My  all  is  on  the  altar  "  when  it  is  not, 
he  is  committing  the  sin  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira.  The 
Church's  administration  to-day  is  not  what  it  was,  or 
there  might  be  many  dead  men  and  women  at  the  end  of 
some  services.  The  sin  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  is  that 
of  attempting,  by  confession  of  the  mouth,  or  song  of  the 
lips,  to  make  it  appear  that  things  are,  as  they  really  are 
not.  The  one  thing  that  made  Christ  angry,  the  one  thing 
against  which  He  uttered  His  severest  words,  was  the  sin 
of  hypocrisy.  What  severe  things  He  said  to  the  men 
who  pretended  to  be  religious;  what  scorching,  blasting 
words  fell  from  His  lips  against  such.  He  had  no  atti- 
tude toward  the  hypocrite,  but  that  of  unsparing  severity; 
no  language  for  the  hypocrite,  but  the  language  of  de- 
nunciation and  of  fire.  Ye  hypocrites  who  whiten  the 
external,  and  within  "  are  full  of  dead  men's  bones  and 
of  all  uncleanness." 

This  Divine  attitude  toward  hypocrisy  is  revealed  by 
contrast  in  the  story  of  God's  dealings  with  His  people 
as  recorded  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  in  the  accounts 
of  Christ's  attitude  toward  honest  men  and  women. 
Honesty  never  made  God  angry,  even  when  it  seemed  to 
blaspheme,  as  in  the  case  of  Job.  Christ  was  ever  patient. 
An  angry  protest  might  honestly  be  made  against  some- 
thing He  said,  and  if  His  terms  of  dealing  with  the  pro- 
test were  severe,  the  severity  was  with  the  mistake,  and 
not  with  the  man  who  made  it.  Perhaps  the  simplest 
illustration  may  be  cited.  When  Martha  faced  Him  upon 
the  day  of  her  awful  sorrow  at  the  death  of  their  brother, 
she  was  angry.  The  story  cannot  be  read  without  catch- 
ing the  accent  of  an  honest,  impatient  anger.  But  He  was 
not  angry.  He  patiently  bore  with  it,  shed  light  upon  it, 
and  illuminated  her  mind.  He  led  her  into  rest  by  an- 
swering the  angry  protest  in  such  way  as  to  astonish  her. 
If  we  are  in  the  midst  of  sorrow,  and  feel  that  God  has 
done  hardly  by  us,  and  then  sing  of  resignation,  that  is 
hypocrisy.  But  if  we  are  in  the  midst  of  sorrow,  and 

[  149  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  5 : 1-16] 

tell  Him  all  the  hot  anger  of  our  hearts,  He  will  be  pa- 
tient and  gentle,  and  lead  us  into  light.  He  Who  said 
"  I  am  the  truth  "  never  made  any  peace  with  a  lie.  This 
man  and  this  woman  lied.  That  was  their  sin. 

But  let  us  look  at  the  sin  a  little  more  closely,  in  order 
that  we  may  see  what  it  really  meant.  We  can  only  see 
it  in  the  light  of  the  previous  story,  that  of  the  fellow- 
ship of  the  saints.  Self  instead  of  love  was  the  impulse 
of  the  lying;  darkness  instead  of  light  was  its  method; 
and  an  earthly  possession  instead  of  the  fulness  of  life 
was  the  issue. 

Self  instead  of  love  was  the  impulse.  The  marvel  of 
the  love  existing  among  the  Christians  at  that  time  we 
have  seen  illustrated  in  the  picture  of  our  last  study;  it 
was  love  that  made  men  cease  to  say  that  anything  they 
had  was  their  own ;  love  that  made  them  feel  each  other's 
joys,  and  each  other's  sorrows  in  a  holy  communism. 
In  the  midst  of  that  atmosphere  of  love,  Satan  was  al- 
lowed to  enter  the  heart ;  and  the  choice  made  was  that  of 
selfishness  instead  of  that  of  love. 

It  was,  moreover,  the  method  of  darkness  instead  of 
light.  Wondrous  light  had  come  to  these  men;  light  in 
which  the  apostles  themselves  saw  more  clearly  the  mean- 
ing of  Christ,  and  the  ultimate  issue  of  His  mission,  than 
they  had  done  in  the  three  years  in  which  they  had  been 
disciples  close  at  His  side.  It  was  a  strange  and  mystic 
light  that  illuminated  all  the  dark  horizon,  and  led  into 
life  with  all  its  new  meaning.  In  the  midst  of  that  light, 
Ananias  and  Sapphira  lived  in  the  darkness,  and  walked 
in  the  darkness,  and  chose  the  method  of  deceit. 

They  chose,  moreover,  to  retain  earthly  possessions 
for  themselves,  rather  than  enter  into  all  the  spacious 
issues  of  the  life  which  they  had  received.  Barnabas, 
having  land,  sold  it,  and  laid  the  proceeds  at  the  feet  of 
the  apostles;  and  as  we  go  on  through  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles,  presently  we  find  another  thing  recorded  about 
him.  He  was  "A  man  full  of  faith,  and  of  the  Holy 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  5 : 1-16] 

Spirit."  That  was  the  larger  life.  He  flung  the  dusty 
possessions  away,  and  took  hold  upon  the  infinite  things. 
But  these  people  clung  to  the  thing  that  was  material,  and 
in  so  doing  denied  the  operation  of  the  spiritual  life. 
That  which  is  the  price  of  honesty,  is  always  the  ruin 
of  a  life.  Judas  may  grasp  his  thirty  pieces  of  silver, 
but  he  will  never  spend  them.  There  is  no  purchasing 
power  in  the  gain  of  dishonesty.  Ananias  and  Sapphira 
retained  a  part  of  their  possession,  but  they  lost  even  the 
thing  they  sought  to  gain,  when  they  were  content  to  lose 
the  greater  gain. 

We  turn  next  to  consider  the  operation  of  discipline. 
Here  we  have  to  do  with  matters  which  we  must  describe 
as  supernatural.  Yet  there  is  a  sense  in  which  they  were 
natural,  rather  than  supernatural.  If  we  interpret  what 
happened  that  day,  by  the  higher  law  of  the  higher  life 
that  had  come  to  these  men,  it  was  natural.  The  un- 
natural thing  is  that  men  should  still  live  in  the  Church, 
professedly  in  the  name  of  Christ,  and  continue  in  their 
impurity.  This  was  the  true  nature  of  the  new  condi- 
tions. The  discerning  Spirit  was  at  work,  and  the  at- 
mosphere was  such  that  it  was  impossible  for  a  man 
with  a  lie  in  his  heart  to  come  in,  without  the  lie  being 
known  and  detected.  The  tremendous,  the  overwhelm- 
ing part  of  this  picture,  the  thing  that  astonishes  and 
fills  us  with  awe,  is  not  the  death  of  Ananias  and  Sap- 
phira. It  is  rather  that  of  the  purity  of  the  Church  that 
compelled  that  death;  compelled  it,  not  by  law  and  con- 
trol, but  by  the  atmosphere  of  the  Spirit  in  which  the 
Church  was  purified,  and  in  which  the  Church  was  wholly 
and  absolutely  at  the  disposal  of  the  Spirit.  There  was 
once  a  flaming  sword  that  guarded  the  way  to  the  tree  of 
life.  How  flaming,  in  the  power  of  holiness,  was  this 
atmosphere,  into  which  if  a  man  passed  with  the  profes- 
sion of  generosity  on  his  lips  and  a  lie  in  his  heart,  he 
was  immediately  arrested  and  smitten.  I  look  back  upon 
the  great  scene,  and  it  is  not  the  death  of  a  man  that  fills 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  5 : 1-16] 

me  with  awe,  but  that  of  the  Church's  condition.  That 
little  company  of  believing  souls,  a  growing  company  all 
the  time,  but  still  comparatively  a  small  company,  was  the 
Body  of  Christ,  His  instrument  for  the  revealing  of  His 
will,  and  the  carrying  out  of  His  will.  It  was  dominated 
by  the  Spirit,  and  so  was  mastered  by  His  love,  walked 
in  His  light,  and  was  energized  by  His  life.  There  came 
into  that  assembly  a  man  with  a  lie  upon  his  lips ;  and  in 
a  moment  one  spokesman  of  the  fellowship  addressed  him 
with  a  faithfulness  that  could  only  be  the  outcome  of  the 
Spirit's  indwelling,  inspiration,  and  interpretation.  Peter 
had  no  mixed  motive  in  his  heart,  he  had  no  desire  to 
retain  the  patronage  of  Ananias  because  he  was  a  wealthy 
man ;  but  being  a  man  wholly  at  the  disposal  of  the  Spirit 
for  the  doing  of  the  work  of  Christ,  his  word  was  that 
of  terrific  directness. 

Then  observe  that  Peter  said  no  word  to  Ananias  about 
his  death.  The  sentence  was  not  the  calling  down  upon 
a  man  of  a  curse  at  the  caprice  of  an  ecclesiastical  official. 
The  death  of  Ananias  was  the  act  of  God.  It  is  prob- 
able that  no  man  in  that  company  was  more  surprised 
than  Peter  himself  when  Ananias  fell  dead.  He  "  gave 
up  the  ghost."  He  could  not  live  in  that  atmosphere. 

It  was  also  the  purification  of  the  Church.  This  was 
an  act  of  discipline  by  which  a  man  who  would  have 
spoiled  the  Church's  fellowship,  and  paralyzed  its  power, 
by  polluting  its  purity,  was  swept  on  one  side.  Through 
all  the  story  of  God's  dealing  with  men,  it  will  be  found 
that  the  beginning  of  some  new  departure  such  as  this, 
has  been  characterized  by  an  act  of  sudden  judgment. 
The  question  is  often  asked :  Why  has  not  this  continued  ? 
If  the  Church  had  continued  to  live  as  a  whole,  in  that 
atmosphere,  that  discipline  would  have  been  maintained. 
The  Church  has  become  dangerously  weak  in  the  matter 
of  discipline.  We  have  welcomed  altogether  too  care- 
lessly men  into  our  fellowship  who  are  not  of  us;  and 
as  the  mixed  multitude  was  the  perpetual  curse  through 

r  152 1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  5 : 1-16] 

all  the  years  to  the  Hebrew  nation ;  so  the  mixed  multi- 
tude in  the  fellowship  of  the  Christian  Church  has  been, 
and  still  is,  the  supreme  curse  of  the  Christian  Church. 
Far  better  the  three  hundred  men  that  lapped,  than  the 
thirty-two  thousand  who  first  gathered  about  Gideon.  I 
look  back  with  wonder  and  astonishment  and  amazement 
and  ever-increasing  awe  at  that  awful  atmosphere  of  the 
purity  of  the  early  Church,  in  which  a  lie  could  not  live  ; 
and  in  which  the  judgment  was  swift,  sudden,  sure,  ap- 
palling, awful,  direct,  by  the  hand  of  God. 

Finally  the  outcome  is  clearly  revealed  in  the  passage. 
Two  words  will  express  it:  fear,  and  power.  Luke  is 
careful  to  say  that  the  fear  came  upon  the  Church,  and 
was  felt  outside  it  also.  "  Great  fear  came  upon  the 
whole  Church."  That  is  the  first  occurrence  of  the  word 
Church  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  Never  before  had 
the  company  been  called  the  Church.  Here  she  emerges 
in  her  conscious  and  corporate  life.  There  fell  upon 
them  a  new  sense  of  fear,  the  revelation  of  the  awful 
purity  of  the  atmosphere  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  had 
felt  the  thrill  of  love,  and  had  answered  it  in  that  holy 
fellowship  described  in  the  previous  chapter.  Now  they 
were  taught  by  this  activity  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the 
case  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  the  purity  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  The  very  Church  itself  fell  into  solemn  and  aw- 
ful awe  under  the  sense  of  that  purity.  Where  the  Spirit 
indwells  and  has  full  sway,  the  same  awe  forevermore 
abides.  We  have  heard  very  much  in  recent  years  of  the 
ministry  of  the  Spirit.  More  books  have  been  written 
on  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  during  the  last  fifty  years 
than  in  all  the  nineteen  centuries  preceding.  Yet  I  am 
sometimes  afraid,  in  reading  books,  in  listening  to  ad- 
dresses, in  singing  hymns  about  the  Spirit,  that  we  have 
been  more  impressed  by  the  joy  of  the  life,  than  by  the 
awful  solemnity  of  its  purity.  The  early  Church  had  to 
learn  not  only  the  love  that  made  a  man  feel  that  nothing 
he  possessed  was  his  own,  but  that  a  lie  could  not  live 

1 153] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  5 : 1-16] 

in  the  atmosphere  of  the  Spirit.  Either  Ananias  or  the 
Spirit  must  go.  The  two  cannot  live  side  by  side.  Fear 
fell  upon  the  Church,  wholesome  Godly  fear;  the  Spirit 
of  awe  sweeping  over  the  company  of  believers ;  the  fear 
that  made  them  investigate  as  to  whether  or  not,  per- 
chance there  were  any  lie  in  their  own  position  and  pro- 
fession. Would  God  that  such  a  baptism  of  fire  might 
fall  upon  us  to-day,  the  fear  that  drives  us  to  a  solemn 
enquiry  as  to  whether  our  anthems  are  blasphemy,  our 
hymns  impertinence,  and  our  profession  a  lie.  I  am 
passing  no  judgment  upon  any  man,  but  I  am  bringing 
my  life  to  the  bar  of  the  judgment  of  purity.  It  is  only 
as  we  come  there  that  we  gain  the  full  value  of  this 
story. 

But  the  fear  fell  upon  the  community  outside,  as  well 
as  upon  the  Church;  upon  all  the  city,  and  upon  all  the 
leaders  of  men  that  thronged  the  city.  That  sudden  and 
swift  and  awful  judgment  became  a  flaming  sword  bar- 
ring the  entrance,  and  holding  men  away.  There  is  a 
sense  in  which  the  Church  of  God  should  always  be 
spoken  of  as  Mother  Church,  with  her  dear  arms 
stretched  out  to  take  back  the  lost  and  wandering.  But 
the  Church  must  be  a  holy  Church,  a  flame,  a  fire,  and  a 
scorching;  so  that  while  the  wandering  may  come  back, 
they  know  in  their  coming  that  the  garments  spotted  by 
the  flesh  must  be  burned  as  they  enter;  that  the  unholy 
traffic  must  be  left  at  the  door;  that  no  man  or  woman 
can  hope  to  come  into  the  fellowship  of  the  Christian 
Church,  whose  hands  are  stained  with  unholy  business; 
that  no  man  or  woman  can  hope  to  find  refuge  in  the 
Church  unless  their  lives  are  true  and  pure  and  conse- 
crated to  the  highest  of  all  ideals.  It  will  be  a  good 
thing  for  the  Church  when  she  gets  back  so  near  to  the 
Pentecostal  manifestation  and  power,  that  fear  falls  upon 
the  outside  world.  Why  is  it  that  the  outside  world  does 
not  fear  in  the  presence  of  the  Church  ?  Why  is  it  that 
parliaments  and  kings  and  emperors  are  not  afraid  of 

1 154 1 


.THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  5 : 1-16] 

the  Church?  Because  the  Church  has  allowed  to  come 
within  her  borders  the  unclean  thing;  because  she  is  not 
pure.  If  only  the  Church  of  God  had  maintained  that 
level  of  purity  that  comes  from  absolute  abandonment  to 
the  indwelling  Spirit,  so  that  His  life  might  have  flamed 
at  her  gates,  men  would  have  come  for  healing,  but  never 
for  refuge  for  a  lie. 

But  the  result  was  not  only  fear;  it  was  also  power. 
"  By  the  hands  of  the  apostles  were  many  signs  and 
wonders  wrought  among  the  people;  and  they  were  all 
with  one  accord  in  Solomon's  porch.  But  of  the  rest 
durst  no  man  join  himself  to  them;  howbeit  the  people 
magnified  them;  and  believers  were  the  more  added  to 
the  Lord."  Then  mark  the  peculiar  evidence  of  power 
that  follows.  "  Insomuch  that  they  even  carried  out  the 
sick  into  the  streets  and  laid  them  on  beds  and  couches, 
that,  as  Peter  came  by,  at  the  least  his  shadow  might 
overshadow  some  one  of  them.  And  there  also  came  to- 
gether the  multitude  from  the  cities  round  about  Jeru- 
salem, bringing  sick  folk,  and  them  that  were  vexed  with 
unclean  spirits :  and  they  were  healed  every  one." 

There  are  several  things  of  importance  in  that  para- 
graph. First  of  all  notice  that  the  paragraph  does  not 
say  that  the  shadow  of  Peter  healed  any  one  of  them,  or 
that  it  did  not.  Do  not  let  us  deny  the  accuracy  of  the 
story,  by  denying  the  truth  of  something  that  is  not  af- 
firmed. The  phrase  "  the  shadow  of  Peter  "  is  a  purely 
Eastern  phrase;  and  in  the  Eastern  lands  to-day  people 
will  try  to  escape  from  the  shadow  of  one  man  because 
there  is  an  evil  influence  supposed  to  be  in  it;  and  they 
will  try  to  come  into  the  shadow  of  another  in  which 
there  is  supposed  to  be  an  influence  for  good.  This  is  a 
purely  Eastern  picture,  but  see  what  it  reveals ;  and  see 
what  these  men  thought  of  Peter.  Sick  people  felt  they 
would  be  healed  if  put  in  his  shadow.  It  is  a  revelation 
of  these  people's  conception  of  the  power  of  the  Chris- 
tian Church.  They  were  afraid,  and  yet  they  knew  that 

[  155 


THE  ACTS  DE  THE"  APOSTLES. 
[Acts  5  i  1-16] 

purity  was  at  the  heart  of  the  fierce  fire  that  scorched 
and  blasted  sin.  The  world  always  knows  it.  At  the 
heart  of  the  fire  there  is  not  only  purity,  but  blessing. 
The  world  is  keenly  conscious  of  the  fact  that  the  only 
healing  is  the  healing  of  purity  and  holiness,  however 
much  they  may  argue  to  the  contrary.  As  they  carried 
the  sick  out  into  the  streets  and  laid  them  there,  their 
doing  so  was  evidence  of  the  impression  made  upon  them 
of  that  little  company  of  pure  souls,  in  the  presence  of 
whom  no  lie  could  live. 

Then  there  was  the  actual  healing  of  the  multitudes. 
Observe  how  careful  Luke  the  physician  is.  We  can 
detect  the  touch  of  the  physician  in  all  his  writings.  He 
drew  attention  to  the  different  kinds  of  sickness.  "  There 
also  came  together  the  multitudes  from  the  cities  round 
about  Jerusalem,  bringing  sick  folk,  and  them  that  were 
vexed  with  unclean  spirits;  and  they  were  healed  every 
one."  That  is  to  say  there  was  bodily  and  mental  healing, 
healing  for  the  bodies  of  the  sick,  healing  for  the  minds 
demon-possessed;  and  they  were  healed  every  one.  The 
Church  ought  to  face  this  problem  and  enquire  as  to 
whether  we  have  not  lost,  with  our  loss  of  purity,  an  ac- 
tual power  which  ought  to  have  enabled  us  to  deal  with 
very  much  of  physical  and  mental  disease,  which  is  still 
in  our  midst,  and  which  baffles  us  on  every  hand.  Take 
the  story  as  written  here,  and  the  story  of  all  healing 
in  the  New  Testament,  and  it  will  at  once  be  seen  where 
the  wrong  emphasis  is  placed.  Gifts  were  bestowed  upon 
some  in  the  Church  and  exercised  by  them.  There  is  no 
case  recorded  where  healing  was  made  dependent  upon 
a  certain  kind  of  faith,  or  even  upon  an  attitude  of  faith 
on  the  part  of  the  person  who  was  sick. 

What  are  the  individual  applications  of  the  story? 
First  surely  this  story  speaks  to  us  in  the  most  solemn 
terms  of  the  necessity  for  truth  and  holiness  in  the  in- 
dividual life.  The  need  abides  as  much  as  ever.  He 
requires  truth  in  the  inward  parts. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  5 : 1-16] 

In  making  an  application  of  the  story  so  far  as  the 
Church  is  concerned,  I  repeat  that  here  is  a  story  that 
begins  with  destruction  and  ends  in  healing,  but  it  is  the 
one  power  in  both  cases.  Hell  and  heaven  are  made  by 
the  selfsame  presence.  It  depends  upon  what  a  man  is, 
as  to  whether  the  presence  of  God  to  him  be  heaven  or 
hell.  "  Who  among  us  can  dwell  with  the  devouring 
fire?  Who  among  us  can  dwell  with  everlasting  burn- 
ings? He  that  walketh  righteously;  and  speaketh  up- 
rightly." God  is  the  one  and  final  environment  of  man's 
soul,  and  He  is  heaven  or  hell  to  a  man  according  to  what 
the  man  is.  The  same  mystic  might  in  that  early  Church 
of  the  indwelling  and  abiding  Spirit  struck  a  lying  man 
and  woman  to  death,  and  healed  the  crowds  that  came. 
It  is  but  one  Presence,  and  indeed  there  is  a  very  re- 
markable interrelation  between  the  two  effects.  Through 
judgment  in  the  Church  the  Spirit  moved  to  the  healing 
of  all  that  were  brought.  It  is  when  the  Church  is 
cleansed  and  pure  that  she  is  ready  to  be  an  instrument 
of  His  healing,  whether  it  be  of  spirit  or  mind  or  body. 
Through  judgment  to  healing  is  the  movement  of  this 
narrative. 

The  Church  pure  is  the  Church  powerful.  Go  back 
over  her  history  and  see  how  true  that  is.  It  has  always 
been  so.  Mathematics  have  no  place  in  the  economy  of 
God,  numbers  are  nothing;  quality  is  everything. 

But  the  Church  Spirit-filled  is  the  Church  pure.  The 
only  power  equal  to  making  a  Church  pure  is  that  of  the 
indwelling  Spirit  of  God. 

And  the  last  thing  is,  the  Church  obedient  is  the  Church 
Spirit-filled.  In  proportion  as  she  is  obedient  to  the 
light  she  has,  she  is  filled  not  once  and  forever,  but  per- 
petually with  the  eternal  inrush  of  the  Spirit,  which  is 
also  the  eternal  outflow  of  the  Spirit's  power.  "  Living 
water"  said  the  Lord  Himself.  What  is  living  water? 
Water  that  is  not  stagnant,  simply  that,  and  nothing 
more.  The  term  does  not  suggest  mineral  properties,  but 

1 157] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  5 : 17-42] 

a  continual  flow.  If  I  gather  from  the  bubbling  spring 
some  water,  and  say  I  will  retain  some  of  this  living 
water  for  use,  it  ceases  to  be  living  water  in  the  moment 
I  have  so  gathered  it.  Living  water  is  for  evermore 
flowing  in,  and  through,  and  out.  The  great  and  gracious 
river,  figurative  of  the  Spirit,  is  full  of  suggestiveness. 
The  Church  must  be  filled  by  the  Spirit,  Who  ever  fills, 
and  ever  purifies,  and  ever  flows  through.  But  if  the 
Church  by  her  worldliness,  by  her  complicity  with  the 
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  dams  the  flow  of  the  river, 
she  loses  her  power,  because  she  loses  her  purity. 

All  the  great  principles  revealed  concerning  the  Church 
are  true  of  the  individual.  It  is  the  pure  man  who  is 
the  strong  man.  It  is  the  Spirit-filled  man  who  is  the 
pure  man.  It  is  the  man  obedient  to  the  light  received, 
who  is  the  Spirit-filled  man. 

Acts  5 : 17-42 

We  are  still  dealing  with  the  first  things  of  the  Chris- 
tian Church,  and  come  now  to  the  first  definite  persecu- 
tion. We  see  the  forces  opposed  to  Christianity,  gaining 
courage,  most  evidently  the  courage  of  desperation.  The 
rulers  were  strangely  perplexed  by  the  new  and  remark- 
able victories  that  were  being  gained  in  the  city.  At  the 
centre  of  our  paragraph  there  is  a  statement  which  gives 
us  a  general  outlook  upon  the  condition  of  affairs  in 
Jerusalem.  This  declaration  is  the  more  remarkable  in 
that  it  was  made,  not  by  Peter,  but  by  the  high  priest; 
not  by  one  who  stood  in  defence  of  the  Christian  move- 
ment, but  by  the  chief  leader  of  the  opposition  thereto. 
From  the  standpoint  of  the  opposition  it  was  surely  a 
word  spoken  inadvisedly.  I  sometimes  wonder  if  the 
high  priest  would  have  uttered  such  remarkable  testi- 
mony to  that  little  band  of  men  arraigned  before  him, 
if  he  had  known  that  it  would  be  preserved  for  all  time. 
He  said  to  them :  "  We  strictly  charged  you  not  to  teach 
in  this  name;  and  behold,  ye  have  filled  Jerusalem  with 

1 158] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  5 : 17-42] 

your  teaching1,  and  intend  to  bring  this  Man's  blood  upon 
us."  This  was,  as  we  have  said,  most  remarkable  testi- 
mony to  the  growth  of  Christianity  in  Jerusalem  at  that 
time.  It  shows  how  profound  an  effect  was  being  pro- 
duced upon  the  city ; — "  Ye  have  filled  Jerusalem  with 
your  teaching  " ;  and  more,  ye  "  intend  to  bring  this  Man's 
blood  upon  us."  This  was  a  revelation  of  the  fact  that 
the  testimony  and  teaching  of  the  apostles  were  turning 
public  opinion  toward  a  true  conception  of  the  action  of 
the  rulers  in  encompassing  the  death  of  Christ. 

As  we  read  this  chapter  there  are  three  standpoints 
from  which  we  may  consider  the  story  profitably:  first, 
that  of  the  opposition: — its  composition,  its  reason,  and 
its  methods;  secondly,  that  of  the  Church: — its  master 
principle,  the  methods  of  its  work,  and  its  temper  in  the 
midst  of  opposition ;  finally,  that  of  seeing  God  amid  the 
shadows,  keeping  watch  above  "His  own, — His  methods, 
and  His  victories. 

In  order  that  we  may  follow  this  course,  the  simple 
facts  of  the  story  must  be  kept  in  mind.  The  apostles 
were  imprisoned  by  the  jealousy  of  the  Sadducees.  In 
the  early  morning,  before  daybreak,  they  were  delivered 
supernaturally  by  the  intervention  of  an  angel.  Imme- 
diately upon  their  release  they  returned — just  as  the  sun 
was  flushing  the  eastern  sky,  and  as,  in  the  Hebrew 
economy  therefore,  the  ancient  sacrifice  was  about  to  be 
offered  in  the  temple — and  carried  on  that  work,  for  the 
doing  of  which  they  had  been  imprisoned.  A  little  later 
in  the  day,  but  still  in  the  morning,  the  Sanhedrim  as- 
sembled, and  they  were  perplexed  because  the  apostles 
were  lost.  There  is  a  touch  of  humour  in  the  situation, 
in  that  trembling  in  the  most  august  assembly  of  men 
that  Jerusalem  could  produce.  Luke  describes  that  as- 
sembly on  this  occasion  with  careful  accuracy  as  the 
senate  and  council,  that  is  the  greater  and  the  lesser 
Sanhedrim.  In  imagination  we  see  them  assembled  in 
their  robes,  and  dignity,  and  glory;  everything  in  readi- 

[  159 1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  5 : 17-42] 

ness  except  the  prisoners.  They  were  not  forthcoming. 
While  they  waited,  messengers  were  sent  to  the  prison, 
only  to  discover  their  absolute  helplessness  in  the  pres- 
ence of  the  Divine  movement,,  for  the  messengers  re- 
turned to  tell  them  the  prisoners  had  escaped.  Then 
came  another  messenger,  and  there  seems  to  be  a  touch 
of  satire,  whether  intended  or  not,  in  his  message :  "  The 
men  whom  ye  put  in  the  prison  are  in  the  temple  stand- 
ing and  teaching  the  people."  The  apostles  were  at  last 
brought,  and  placed  in  the  centre  of  the  council;  ar- 
raigned on  the  charge  of  continuing  to  preach  and  teach 
in  the  name  of  Jesus.  The  apostolic  defence  followed, 
that  address  of  Peter,  a  perfect  example  of  courage  and 
clearness  and  concise  declaration  of  fundamental  truths. 
It  was  a  powerful  statement,  and  the  council  decided  to 
dismiss  the  men  with  a  caution,  and  then  violated  their 
own  order,  by  beating  th<*fn.  We  then  see  them  go  forth, 
and  a  most  illuminative  thing  is  written  of  them :  "  They 
therefore  departed  from  the  presence  of  the  council,  re- 
joicing that  they  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  dishonour 
for  the  Name."  Such  is  the  story. 

First  then  let  us  observe  the  opposition.  A  description 
is  given  in  verse  seventeen  of  those  before  whom  the 
apostles  were  arraigned :  "  The  high  priest  .  .  .  and 
all  they  that  were  with  him  (which  is  the  sect  of  the 
Sadducees)."  Then  in  verse  twenty-one:  "The  high 
priest  .  .  .  called  the  council  together " ; — that  is 
the  inner  circle  of  the  Sanhedrim,  that  which  was  known 
as  the  Lesser  Sanhedrim,  lesser  not  in  importance  but  in 
numbers ; — "  and  all  the  senate  " ; — that  is  the  whole  com- 
pany of  the  Sanhedrim.  Pharisees  were  included  in  that 
gathering.  When  we  were  considering  the  first  opposi- 
tion we  saw  how  very  careful  the  writer  of  the  story 
was  to  show  that  the  whole  Sanhedrim  was  not  in  op- 
position ;  but  now  the  complete  Sanhedrim  was  gathered 
together.  The  full  gathering  was  a  revelation  of  keen 
interest.  It  was  a  rare  thing  in  those  days  for  the  whole 

[ 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  5 : 17-42] 

of  that  great  assembly  to  meet  together.  The  Sanhedrim 
was  the  constituted  Hebrew  authority,  having  limited 
jurisdiction  under  the  Roman  rule,  and  they  met  occa- 
sionally, a  handful  of  them;  but  this  whole  gathering 
was  evidence  of  remarkably  keen  interest  in  the  case 
before  them.  This  full  gathering  of  the  Sanhedrim  was 
a  very  important  thing,  showing  the  growth  of  the  Chris- 
tian movement  in  Jerusalem.  So  keenly  interested  were 
the  rulers  of  the  people,  that  the  whole  Sanhedrim  had 
come  together,  gathering  from  far  and  near.  They  were 
all  there  because  they  had  felt  the  thrill  of  the  new  move- 
ment. The  air  was  electric  with  it.  The  high  priest, 
spokesman  of  the  rest,  said,  "  Ye  have  rilled  Jerusalem 
with  your  teaching."  Men  were  talking  in  the  assembly 
courts,  in  the  places  of  commerce,  and  everywhere,  about 
this  new  heresy,  this  new  doctrine,  this  new  teaching, 
this  new  way,  this  new  life,  this  new  religion. 

The  real  inspiration  of  the  opposition  is  revealed  quite 
clearly  in  verse  twenty-one;  it  was  jealousy.  Jealousy 
is  always  an  ugly  word;  and  it  means  here  exactly  what 
it  means  in  our  English  tongue.  Their  jealousy  is  ex- 
plained by  verse  twenty-eight.  These  rulers  had  dis- 
covered that  their  own  authority  was  being  set  at  nought 
as  the  result  of  a  new  authority  which  was  at  work  in  the 
city;  an  authority  that  had  no  central  council,  no  police 
to  enforce  it,  no  army  behind  it ;  but  a  mighty,  spiritual 
power,  making  itself  felt  in  all  the  city.  In  consequence 
of  that  new  authority,  theirs  was  being  set  on  one  side, 
first  by  these  very  men  who  were  arraigned  before  them, 
and  therefore  by  the  people.  They  were  "  much  per- 
plexed concerning  them  whereunto  this  would  grow." 
They  were  unable  to  see  the  direction,  and  they  were  in 
trouble  as  to  the  ultimate  issue. 

The  final  reason  of  the  opposition  was  hatred.  These 
men  did  not  understand  this  new  movement.  They  could 
not  account  for  it.  It  was  a  great  mystery  to  them  that 
they  had  not  been  able  to  end  it  when  they  crucified  its 

[• 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  5 : 17-42] 

'Leader ;  and  an  even  greater  mystery,  that  when  they  laid 
a  charge  of  silence  upon  a  handful  of  Galilean  fishermen, 
it  proved  to  be  absolutely  and  utterly  without  avail. 
Despite  all  their  determination  to  stamp  out  the  heresy 
of  the  Nazarene,  Jerusalem  was  full  of  the  doctrine.  In 
the  presence  of  that  mystery  their  hearts  were  moved 
with  hatred  because  they  felt  the  reins  of  power  slipping 
from  their  own  fingers. 

The  methods  of  the  opposition  were  those,  first  of  in- 
timidation ;  and  finally  of  caution,  according  to  the  advice 
of  Gamaliel.  This  advice  was  by  no  means  strong,  but 
preeminently  weak.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  Church, 
the  advice  of  Gamaliel  to  give  them  time  was  excellent; 
but  from  the  standpoint  of  the  opposition  it  was  weak. 
The  strong  attitude  is  never  that  of  allowing  anything  to 
drift,  in  order  to  see  its  result;  but  rather  that  of  in- 
tellectual determination  to  examine  and  discover  the 
meaning  of  that  which  is  moving  men.  Saul  of  Tarsus 
was  honest,  intellectual,  strong,  mighty  before  he  was 
converted,  and  he  was  so  afterwards.  His  two  attitudes 
of  mind  were  these;  first  to  crush  the  movement;  and 
then,  when  he  was  arrested  and  compelled  to  come  to  the 
inner  heart  of  the  mystery,  he  discovered  that  the  only 
attitude  was  that  of  toiling  and  suffering  in  order  to  put 
a  crown  upon  the  brow  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  opposition 
to  the  Christian  Church  was  mainly  Sadducean,  ration- 
alistic, that  which  protests  against  the  supernatural.  In 
the  presence  of  the  supernatural  it  was  strangely  per- 
plexed, and  acting  upon  the  advice  of  Gamaliel,  decided 
to  watch  developments,  rather  than  to  face  and  solve  the 
problem. 

Let  us  now  look  at  the  Church.  As  we  look  back  at 
the  city  of  Jerusalem  and  accept  this  dictum  of  the  high 
priest  that  it  was  full  of  the  doctrine,  we  must  feel  a 
sense  of  contrast  with  the  present  times.  To-day  there 
are  great  multitudes  of  people  gathering  together  to  wor- 
ship God.  We  thank  God  for  all  the  assemblies  of  His 

1 162 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  5 : 17-42] 

saints.  There  is  an  atmosphere  of  fiery  fervour  and  ir- 
resistible dynamic  in  these  stories  that  we  miss  to-day. 
If  we  can  see  that  early  Church,  we  shall  discover  the 
reason  of  the  difference.  The  opposition  is  exactly  the 
same.  It  does  not  take  the  same  forms  to-day.  It  never 
will  take  the  same  form  again.  Physical  imprisonment 
and  torture  are  largely  things  of  the  past.  They  will  not 
be  tolerated  to-day.  But  if  the  method  of  the  opposition 
is  different,  the  spirit  is  with  us  still.  Sadduceeism  is 
rampant,  so  is  Pharisaism ;  they  are  represented  to-day  by 
rationalism  and  ritualism.  These  are  the  opponents  of 
living,  vital  Christianity  to-day,  just  as  they  were  in 
Jerusalem. 

How  then  is  the  Church  to  be  victorious  in  the  midst  of 
these  things  ?  Let  us  go  back  to  our  story.  Observe  the 
principle  upon  which  these  men  acted.  It  is  expressed 
in  one  brief  statement :  "  We  must  obey  God  rather  than 
men/'  That  was  the  master-principle  of  the  early 
Church.  The  word  translated  obey  is  a  rare  word  in  the 
New  Testament,  occurring  not  more  than  four  times 
altogether.  It  stands  exclusively  for  obedience;  it  does 
not  suggest  anything  except  actual,  absolute,  unquestion- 
ing submission. 

In  his  defence  Peter  affirmed  three  things  concerning 
God :  God  raised  Jesus ;  God  exalted  Jesus  to  His  right 
hand;  God  gave  the  Spirit  to  them  that  obey  Him. 
These  were  the  great  things  which  had  brought  these 
men  into  the  position  of  absolute  surrender  to  God;  the 
resurrection,  the  ascension,  and  the  outpouring  of  the 
Spirit  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  In  the  power  of  these 
things  Peter  said,  "  We  must  obey  God  rather  than  men." 
We  must  put  emphasis  upon  almost  every  word  in  that 
little  sentence,  in  order  to  find  the  profound  significance 
of  it.  "  We  must  obey  God."  That  is  the  language  of 
a  company  of  people  who  have  come  into  fellowship  with 
God,  and  have  swept  out  from  their  lives  all  other 
mastership  and  all  other  authority.  Or  again,  "  We  must 

1 163 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  5 :  17-42] 

obey  God."  Not  we  must  consider  Him,  or  patronize 
Him,  or  hold  theories  concerning  Him,  or  defend  the  fact 
of  His  existence.  Yet  further,  "  We  must  obey  God." 
It  is  when  a  man,  or  a  company  of  men,  says,  I  must,  or, 
We  must,  that  we  listen  with  respect.  When  a  man  says, 
I  ought,  we  are  interested,  but  not  moved.  A  man  may 
know  what  he  ought  to  do,  and  never  do  it.  When  a  man 
says  I  must,  and  begins  to  interpret  his  rights  or  his  be- 
liefs in  the  terms  of  obligation,  then  he  is  passing  into 
the  realm  of  power.  "  We  must."  All  these  men  are 
against  you — "  We  must."  You  will  be  imprisoned — 
"  We  must."  We  are  determined  that  you  shall  not — 
"  We  must."  Finally,  "  We  must  obey  God."  They  did 
not  endeavour  to  persuade  others  to  bear  their  responsi- 
bility, but  took  the  burden  upon  themselves. 

The  proportion  in  which  the  Church  and  individual 
members  of  the  Church  say  that,  is  the  measure  in  which 
the  old  impressions  can  be  made  again,  the  old  victories 
won,  the  old  power  be  known.  That  may  seem  like  a 
somewhat  severe  impeachment  of  the  Christian  Church 
to-day.  If  it  be  so  then  let  us  remember  that  whenever 
men  say  "  We  must  obey  God,"  and  mean  it,  they  safe- 
guard themselves  against  the  power  of  opposition,  the 
peril  of  patronage  and  the  paralysis  of  compromise.  To 
ponder  these  three  words  is  to  see  some  of  the  reasons 
why  the  Church  is  not  producing,  and  has  not  recently 
produced  the  old  effects. 

One  is  almost  ashamed  to  speak  of  suffering  for  Christ 
to-day,  there  is  so  little  of  it.  We  see  these  men  scarred, 
bruised,  and  battered;  carrying  in  their  bodies  the 
stigmata  of  Jesus,  the  actual  brutal  scars  and  bruises  in 
the  flesh  as  the  result  of  stones  and  stripes ;  when  we  put 
against  all  that,  the  suffering  we  have  to  endure  to-day, 
one  is  almost  ashamed  to  speak  of  it  as  suffering.  But 
opposition  is  with  us  still,  insidious,  smiling,  devilish 
opposition ;  and  perhaps  that  kind  of  opposition  is  harder 
to  fight  than  the  other.  How  shall  we  be  safeguarded 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  5 : 17-42] 

against  yielding  to  opposition  ?  "  We  must  obey  God." 
The  Church's  gravest  danger  has  never  been  created  by 
opposition.  When  she  has  been  opposed  and  persecuted 
she  has  been  pure  and  strong.  Never  until  she  was 
patronized  did  she  become  weak.  Wherever  the  Church 
is  patronized  and  admired  by  the  world,  she  becomes 
weak.  How  shall  we  safeguard  against  that  ?  "  We 
must  obey  God."  So  surely  as  the  Church  is  obeying 
Him,  she  can  never  be  weakened  by  patronage,  and  she 
never  can  be  paralyzed  by  compromise.  She  must  for- 
evermore  stand  alone,  bearing  her  testimony,  opening  her 
portals  to  receive  the  wounded  in  order  that  they  may  be 
healed,  spreading  her  arms,  great  mother  Church,  to  take 
the  wanderers  back  again,  and  lead  them  to  health  and 
blessedness;  but  never  permitting  the  standard  of  her 
ideals  to  be  lowered,  or  her  message  of  righteousness  to 
be  silenced,  or  her  claim  on  behalf  of  God  to  be  reckoned 
as  of  no  account. 

In  this  story  we  find  not  only  the  principle,  but  the 
methods  of  the  early  Church.  These  are  revealed  in  the 
final  word  of  Peter,  "  We  are  witnesses  of  these  things ; 
and  so  is  the  Holy  Spirit,  Whom  God  hath  given  to  them 
that  obey  Him."  What  is  a  witness  ?  Not  a  person  who 
talks  merely.  Many  people  will  talk  who  are  not  wit- 
nesses; and  many  people  will  witness,  who  do  not  talk. 
A  witness  is  a  martyr.  A  martyr  is  a  confessor,  not  with 
the  lip  only,  but  with  the  life ;  a  martyr  is  an  evidence,  a 
credential,  a  demonstration.  I  see  Peter  standing  in  the 
midst  of  the  intellectual  aristocracy  of  Jerusalem,  saying 
in  effect:  You  have  no  right  to  question  the  accuracy  of 
what  we  say  until  you  have  accounted  for  what  we  are. 
"  We  are  witnesses."  See  what  we  were;  see  what  we 
are;  and  know  that  the  change  has  been  wrought  because 
God  raised  Jesus,  exalted  Him  to  be  a  Prince  and  a 
Saviour,  to  give  repentance  and  remission,  and  gave  us 
the  Spirit.  We  have  followed  Him;  we  have  repented, 
our  sins  are  remitted;  we  have  the  Spirit.  "We  are 

165 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  6: 1-7] 

witnesses."  See  what  we  are.  The  Church  is  never 
powerful  unless  she  can  produce  her  witnesses;  not  her 
preachers  merely.  If  men  and  women  are  listening  to 
preaching  and  are  incarnating  the  thing  preached,  and 
are  becoming  living  witnesses,  concrete,  incarnate  docu- 
ments, that  is  the  way  of  the  Church's  victory. 

But  observe  the  completion  of  the  declaration.  "  We 
are  witnesses  .  .  .  and  so  is  the  Holy  Spirit/'  That 
is  the  Church's  final  power.  That  is  the  mightiest  fact 
of  all.  If  we  lack  cooperation  with  the  Holy  Spirit, 
unless  we  are  in  business  partnership  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  we  can  do  nothing  to  impress  Jerusalem  or 
London.  Unless  the  preacher  is  touched  with  the  unseen, 
unless  the  Church  catches  and  flashes  upon  the  world  the 
mystic  light  of  the  infinite,  which  cannot  be  gathered  in 
the  academy  or  university,  preacher  and  Church  will  be 
"  Faultily  faultless,  icily  regular,  splendidly  null."  If  we 
would  fill  London  with  our  doctrine,  we  must  be  in 
partnership  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  Then  through  joy  and 
pain,  the  Church  will  move  forward  with  God  in  con- 
tinual victory. 

Acts  6:1-7 

In  these  seven  verses  we  have  the  account  of  the  first 
organization  within  the  Church.  While  this  is  a  story 
which  seems  to  be  almost  entirely  local,  yet  it  is  full  of 
value  in  its  revelation  of  abiding  principles.  There  is 
nothing  more  interesting  in  the  study  of  this  book,  or 
indeed  in  the  study  of  the  whole  New  Testament,  than 
the  absence  of  anything  like  detailed  instruction  as  to  ec- 
clesiastical arrangements.  The  incidental  things  are 
not  apparent ;  but  the  essential  things  are  clearly  manifest. 
The  incidental  rearrangements  are  largely  out  of  sight; 
the  eternal  things  that  admit  of  no  rearrangement  are  per- 
petually in  view. 

Let  us  then  look  at  this  brief,  human,  natural  story  of 
the  first  organization  of  the  Christian  Church — not  a  full 

[  166  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  6:1-7] 

and  final  organization,  but  one  in  order  to  meet  an  im- 
mediate need ;  not  so  much  that  we  may  see  the  particular 
officers  or  system,  but  that  we  may  see  the  underlying 
spirit  and  life  and  method. 

It  is  necessary,  however,  that  we  should  first  see  the 
local  colouring ;  the  occasion  of  the  organization ;  and  the 
men  chosen  for  the  particular  work. 

The  occasion  was  that  of  the  actual,  or  supposed, 
neglect  of  the  Hellenist  widows  in  the  distribution  of 
those  funds  which  had  resulted  from  the  inspired  com- 
munism of  the  early  Church.  This  was  not  a  quarrel  be- 
tween Jews  and  Gentiles ;  these  people  were  all  Jews ;  the 
Revised  Version  is  careful  to  render  the  word  Hellenist, 
which  means  "  Grecian  Jew."  For  an  understanding  of 
the  distinction  we  must  go  back  to  the  days  of  the  Mac- 
cabees, and  remember  all  that  wonderful  activity  which 
had  resulted  in  the  creation,  within  Judaism,  of  two  dis- 
tinct and  antagonistic  parties.  There  were  out-and-out 
Hebrews.  They  were  dwellers  in  Palestine,  and  largely 
in  Jerusalem,  who  spoke  Hebrew  or  Aramaic,  and 
observed  all  the  customs  and  traditions  of  Hebraism. 
The  Hellenist  Jews  still  worshipped  Jehovah,  still  fol- 
lowed the  ritual  of  the  ancient  economy,  but  very  largely 
spoke  the  Greek  tongue,  and  had  come  under  the  influence 
of  Greek  thinking,  apart  altogether  from  Christianity. 
There  was  therefore  a  very  clear  line  of  division  between 
the  Hebrews,  and  the  Hellenist  Jews. 

I  am  always  thankful  for  the  book  of  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles,  and,  among  other  reasons,  because  it  takes 
away  the  false  impression  some  people  have  that  the  early 
Church  was  absolutely  perfect.  I  am  perpetually  hear- 
ing to-day  that  we  need  to  go  back  to  apostolic  times.  It 
is  therefore  a  great  comfort  to  me  to  see  that  in  days  of 
multiplication,  success,  and  victory,  there  were  difficulties 
within  the  Church,  murmuring  in  the  midst  of  develop- 
ment. These  people  had  been  baptized  by  the  Spirit  into 
union  with  Christ,  and  were  living  still  in  the  glory  of 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  6 : 1-7] 

that  Pentecostal  effusion,  which  had  wrought  such 
wonders  in  individual  lives,  and  had  so  impressed  Jeru- 
salem. Yet  here  into  the  company  of  the  Church,  into 
this  sacred  fellowship,  there  had  come  materialistic  and 
social  distinctions,  that  ought  forever  to  have  been  de- 
stroyed at  the  doorway  of  the  Church.  I  am  not  glad  of 
the  division — for  all  such  divisions  ought  to  cease  the 
moment  the  threshold  of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  is 
crossed;  but  I  am  glad  the  story  reveals  it.  The  antag- 
onism between  Hellenist  and  Hebrew  was  within  the 
Church.  Here  then  we  have  a  picture  not  of  heresy,  but 
of  schism.  If  I  may  simply  illustrate  the  difference,  a 
schism  is  a  rent,  a  sect  is  a  piece  torn  off.  There  are 
no  sects  in  Christianity ;  but  alas,  there  is  a  great  deal  of 
schism.  Never  a  piece  has  been  torn  off  from  the 
Church  yet;  would  to  God  we  all  believed  it.  There  is 
a  great  deal  of  schism,  alas  and  alas,  which  ought  not  to 
be;  but  there  are  no  sects  in  the  Church.  We  still  can 
sing  Baring  Gould's  great  hymn,  "  We  are  not  divided  " ; 
and  have  loving  pity  for  the  man  who  cannot  join  us 
honestly  in  that  singing.  Here  was  a  schism,  a  rent,  a 
division,  born  of  social  distinction  that  ought  never  to 
have  been  recognized  within  the  Christian  Church. 

What  was  the  issue?  Seven  men  were  chosen;  and 
all  the  names  of  these  men  were  Greek  names.  There 
was  not  a  Hebrew  name  amongst  them.  Almost  certainly 
six  of  the  men  chosen  were  Hellenist  Jews ;  one  of  them 
a  proselyte,  that  is,  a  Greek  who  had  become  a  Hebrew 
by  religion.  The  remarkable  thing  about  this,  is  that  the 
difficulty  was  that  the  Hellenists  imagined  that  the 
Hebrews  inside  the  Church  were  neglecting  them  in  the 
daily  ministration,  and  when  presently  the  issue  of  the 
spiritual  and  apostolic  method  was  declared,  the  Church 
manifested  not  its  weakness  but  its  strength,  in  the  fine 
and  gracious  act  of  electing  seven  men,  not  Hebrews  but 
Hellenists,  men  from  the  very  company  of  those  who 
thought  their  widows  were  neglected.  These  men 

t  168] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  6 : 1-7] 

would  henceforth  have  to  do  with  the  distribution  of 
alms,  not  to  the  Hellenists  only,  but  to  the  Hebrews  also. 
That  is  the  very  spirit  of  Christianity.  It  overcomes 
prejudice  by  heaping  upon  those  who  imagine  they  have 
been  neglected,  all  the  honours  and  responsibilities  of 
office.  I  am  afraid  we  are  a  long  way  from  apostolic 
times !  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  once  said,  If  you  have 
an  angular,  peculiar  person  in  your  church,  always  put 
him  into  office,  and  keep  him  at  work.  It  was  fine  philos- 
ophy, warranted  by  this  action  of  the  early  Church. 

So  much  for  that  which  is  purely  local.  Through  the 
local  and  the  incidental,  we  discover  the  ideal  and  the 
essential.  Perspective  is  the  value  of  distance.  From  a 
distance  then,  let  us  look  back  at  that  picture,  and  observe 
three  things:  first,  the  organism;  secondly,  the  organiz- 
ing; finally,  the  organization. 

First  the  organism.  It  is  not  described.  There  is  no 
mention  of  unity  here  at  all.  Indeed,  it  is  a  paragraph 
that  seems  to  deal  with  a  quarrel,  a  schism ;  and  yet,  look- 
ing back  at  the  whole  company,  there  is  revealed  the 
Christian  Church;  not  finally  organized,  but  a  great 
organism.  The  one  Lord,  and  Hebrew  and  Hellenist 
Christians  alike  were  loyal  to  the  one  Lord.  The  one 
faith,  fastened  upon  that  one  selfsame  Lord,  and  ex- 
pressing itself — if  in  divergent  opinions  as  between 
themselves — in  common  loyalty  to  the  one  Lord.  Finally, 
the  one  Spirit,  presiding  over  the  whole  company,  and 
inspiring  all  of  them,  so  that  it  was  possible  for  the 
apostles  to  say,  "  Look  ye  out  therefore,  brethren,  from 
among  you  seven  men  of  good  report,  full  of  the  Spirit." 

Then  we  see  not  merely  the  one  life,  but  all  the  organs 
in  the  one  life,  necessary  for  the  fulfilling  of  the  purpose 
of  that  life.  They  were  all  present.  There  were  men 
there,  quite  capable  of  managing  all  the  business  enter- 
prises of  the  Church;  and  there  were  men  there,  equally 
capable  of  proclaiming  the  great  message  of  the  Church. 
There  were  men  there  to  whom  had  been  committed  the 

1 169 


THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  6: 1-7] 

service  of  the  Word,  the  preaching  of  the  Word. 
There  were  men  there  who  had  all  the  ability  necessary 
for  the  serving  of  tables,  for  carrying  out  all  the  business 
side  of  the  Church's  work.  In  that  company  there  were 
all  the  organs  necessary  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  full 
meaning  of  the  life  of  the  Church.  They  had  not  been 
found,  they  had  not  been  set  in  order;  there  was  a  little 
conflict  between  them ;  a  little  misunderstanding ;  but  they 
were  there.  There  existed  a  perfect  organism,  possessed 
of  all  the  organs  necessary  for  the  fulfilling  of  the  mean- 
ing of  its  own  life. 

The  one  purpose  was  that  namely  of  the  proclamation 
of  the  Evangel,  the  presentation  to  men  of  the  Person  of 
the  world's  Redeemer,  the  increase  of  the  Word. 

The  sense  of  relation  existing  is  manifest  first  in  the 
complaint.  These  people  complained  because  they  recog- 
nized the  unity,  the  inter-relationship,  the  mutual  respon- 
sibility, and  felt  that  it  was  not  being  realized.  I  leave 
out  of  count  the  question  as  to  whether  the  complaint  was 
warranted  or  not,  as  something  which  cannot  be  decided, 
because  the  story  is  silent  concerning  it.  The  fact,  of  the 
complaint  is  demonstration  of  an  underlying  conscious- 
ness of  unity.  Those  Hellenists  who  imagined  that  the 
Hellenist  widows  were  being  neglected,  felt  the  neglect 
was  a  violation  of  that  great  fellowship,  of  which  we  have 
already  spoken ;  and  so  the  complaint  was  the  manifesta- 
tion of  the  underlying  sense  of  unity.  That  unity  has 
most  clear  manifestation  in  the  organization  of  the 
Church,  which  resulted  from  this  particular  schism. 
Forget  the  murmuring  of  the  Hellenists  for  a  moment, 
and  see  in  Jerusalem  the  one  Church,  an  organism  not 
completely  organized,  not  perfectly  working.  There  was 
a  defect  somewhere,  but  to  use  a  medical  distinction,  it 
was  a  functional  trouble,  not  an  organic  one.  It  is  when 
we  recognize  the  organism  that  we  are  able  to  organize. 
In  proportion  as  we  forget  the  organism,  our  organiza- 
tion is  a  mockery,  a  blunder,  a  disaster. 

L 170  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  6:1-7] 

We  now  turn  to  the  subject  of  the  organizing  in  the 
presence  of  the  difficulty.  This  process  consisted  in  the 
discovery  of  the  organs,  and  their  employment.  Here 
comes  out  into  prominence  two  orders  of  the  Christian 
ministry.  In  the  Congregational  Church,  we  generally 
speak  of  this  as  the  institution  of  the  order  of  the  diac- 
onate.  The  word  "  deacon "  is  used  in  the  Anglican 
Church  in  another  sense  to  the  sense  in  which  we  use  it. 
It  should  be  remembered  that  the  word  "  deacon  "  never 
occurs  in  this  passage.  I  believe  these  men  were  deacons ; 
but  the  word  does  not  occur  here.  The  Greek  word 
from  which  the  word  deacon  comes  is  in  this  passage, 
but  it  is  used  not  only  of  the  seven  but  also  of  the 
apostles.  The  apostles  were  also  deacons.  It  is  im- 
portant therefore  to  discover  the  meaning  of  the  actual 
word.  It  simply  means  men  who  serve.  Two  orders 
emerge  into  view  in  this  process  of  organizing;  men  who 
serve  "  the  Word/'  and  men  who  "  serve  tables."  The 
twelve  said,  "It  is  not  fit  that  we  should  forsake  the 
Word  of  God,  and  serve  tables,"  and  presently  the  very 
word  "  service  "  is  used  of  the  work  of  preaching  the 
Word.  Consequently  the  first  order  is  that  of  preaching 
of  the  Word,  which  includes  apostolic,  prophetic,  evan- 
gelistic, and  pastoral  work,  as  Paul  himself  elaborated  it, 
when  he  came  to  write  the  Ephesian  letter.  The  preach- 
ing of  the  Word,  whether  apostolic,  which  is  fundamental 
and  authoritative ;  or  prophetic,  which  makes  application 
of  principles  to  an  age;  or  evangelistic,  which  woos  and 
wins  individuals ;  or  pastoral,  which  teaches  and  instructs 
the  saints  that  they  may  grow;  all  these  are  contained 
within  the  one  great  function  of  the  preaching  of  the 
Word. 

There  is  also  another  service  which  emerges  at  this 
point; — the  service  of  tables.  How  did  it  originate? 
Mark  carefully  the  simple  order.  As  the  result  of  the 
preaching  of  the  Word  new  conditions  of  life  were 
created.  The  numbers  of  those  who  believed  in  Jesus 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  6 : 1-7] 

multiplied,  the  Church  grew  in  numbers,  and  whenever  a 
Church  grows  in  numbers  it  necessarily  grows  in  neces- 
sity and  need.  All  new  conditions  of  life  demand  new 
arrangements,  new  care,  new  thought.  These  conditions 
demanded  business  attention.  The  business  attention 
must  be  business  attention  in  the  spirit  of  the  Word 
preached.  Consequently  this  need  for  a  new  service  was 
created.  It  was  necessary  that  there  should  be  an  order 
of  men,  who  should  cooperate  with  the  preachers  of  the 
Word,  by  caring  for  the  new  conditions  arising  as  the  re- 
sult of  the  preaching  of  the  Word.  Therefore  the  office 
here  revealed  is  not  inferior  to  the  apostolic  office ;  it  is 
separate  from  it,  and  yet  complementary  to  it. 

Notice  in  the  second  place  the  procedure.  The  first 
thing  in  this  organism  was  the  setting  free  of  the  apostles 
for  their  own  work,  setting  them  free  from  high  work 
which  nevertheless  hindered  them  in  the  doing  of  their 
own.  It  was  high  and  holy  work,  this  work  of  caring 
for  the  distress  existing  among  the  members  of  the 
Church.  It  is  always  high  and  holy  work,  every  part  of 
the  business  of  the  Church — the  swinging  open  of  the 
door,  the  reception  of  the  man  who  comes  across  the 
threshold,  and  placing  him  in  relation  to  service  and 
work.  It  is  great  in  every  detail,  but  the  doing  of  it 
hinders  the  men  who  are  called  to  the  preaching  of  the 
Word.  The  apostles  said,  "It  is  not  fit  that  we  should 
forsake  the  Word  of  God  " — not  to  do  a  low  thing,  a 
mean  thing,  a  vulgar  thing;  but  to  do  a  high  and  holy 
thing,  if  the  high  and  holy  thing  prevents  our  fulfilment 
of  that  which  is  our  specific  work.  The  first  organiza- 
tion was  designed  to  set  the  preacher  of  the  Word  free 
from  everything  except  prayer  and  the  preaching  of  the 
Word.  "  We  will  continue  steadfastly  in  prayer  and  in 
the  ministry  of  the  Word." 

Notice  the  process,  the  method,  under  the  apostolic 
guidance.  They  instructed  the  people  as  to  how  they 
should  act,  and  ratified  their  choice,  but  the  appointment 

[  172  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  6: -i -7] 

of  the  seven  was  a  Church  appointment.  The  whole 
multitude  of  disciples  were  gathered  together ;  and  they — 
the  whole  multitude,  not  the  apostles — chose  these  men. 
The  details  of  election  are  not  given.  This  is  in  keeping 
with  the  utter  absence  of  ecclesiastical  detail  which  char- 
acterizes the  apostolic  records.  The  perpetual  presence 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  was  to  be  the  safeguard  of  method  and 
of  choice.  That  which  is  final  and  necessary  is  the  pres- 
ence of  the  Spirit,  His  safeguarding  of  the  organization, 
His  selection  of  the  proper  men  for  the  proper  work, 
His  making  known  of  the  will  of  the  Lord  for  the  whole 
company  of  disciples,  under  the  direction  of  the  apostolic 
teaching  and  apostolic  authority.  These  are  things  that 
are  very  simple,  and  yet  they  are  of  supreme  importance. 

Mark  very  carefully  the  four  things  said  concerning 
the  men  chosen  to  work  in  the  Church.  First,  "  Men 
from  among  you  " ;  secondly,  "  of  good  report " ;  thirdly, 
"  full  of  the  Spirit  ";  finally,  "  full  of  .  .  .  wisdom." 
These  are  not  qualifications  for  preachers  of  the  Word. 
This  is  the  apostolic  revelation  of  the  conditions  upon 
which  men  take  office  in  the  Christian  Church.  These 
are  abiding  conditions. 

First,  "  from  among  you."  This  is  the  first  law  of 
Christian  service,  that  those  employed  in  serving  the  dis- 
ciples of  the  Church  should  be  of  the  number  of  the  dis- 
ciples. That  condemns  forever  mixed  finance  com- 
mittees, and  shows  that  no  Church  has  any  business  to 
bring  on  to  its  financial  board  a  man  who  is  not  definitely 
and  distinctively  a  Christian  man. 

Secondly,  men  "  of  good  report,"  and  the  root  of  the 
word  "  report "  is  the  same  root  as  that  for  the  apostolic 
word  "  witness  " ;  martyrs ;  men  of  good  witness.  That 
is  a  twofold  qualification;  they  are  to  be  men  well  re- 
ported of ;  and  they  are  to  be  men  who  have  borne  such 
witness  as  to  create  a  good  report.  May  I  illustrate  this 
by  another  passage  that  seems  to  be  at  a  distance  from 
this,  and  yet  is  closely  akin  to  it;  the  apostolic  charge 

t  173  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  6 : 1-7] 

which  Paul  delivered  to  Timothy,  "  Let  no  man  despise 
thy  youth."  By  that  he  did  not  mean  that  Timothy  was 
to  charge  men  not  to  despise  his  youth ;  he  meant  rather 
that  he  was  to  see  to  it  that  his  youth  was  not  despicable ; 
that  he  was  not  a  man  that  men  could  despise.  These 
were  men  of  good  report,  men  of  whom  other  men  spoke 
excellent  things;  but  in  order  to  be  that,  they  were  men 
of  excellent  things,  they  were  men  who  had  borne  good 
witness.  This  suggests  the  absolute  necessity  for  the 
choice  of  men  of  character  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  for 
the  carrying  out  of  the  functions  of  the  Church. 

Again,  they  were  to  be  men  "  full  of  the  Spirit " ;  that 
is,  of  full  realization  of  Christian  power  and  purpose. 
There  are  men  who  hold  aloof  from  service,  and  say  they 
cannot  lay  claim  to  that  realization.  Let  us  understand 
the  meaning  of  the  phrase.  A  man  full  of  the  Spirit  is 
one  who  is  living  a  normal  Christian  life.  Fulness  of  the 
Spirit  is  not  a  state  of  spiritual  aristocracy,  to  which  few 
can  attain.  Anything  less  than  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit 
for  the  Christian  man  is  disease  of  his  spiritual  life,  a 
low  ebb  of  vitality.  Fulness  of  the  Spirit  is  not  abnormal, 
but  normal  Christian  life.  Fulness  of  the  Spirit  does  not 
necessarily  mean,  indeed  it  does  not  at  all  mean,  the 
abandonment  of  interest  in  things  of  the  earth;  but  it 
does  mean  that  the  things  of  this  earth — home,  business, 
profession,  and  all  life,  are  touched  by  a  hand  which  is 
Christ's  hand;  dealt  with  by  heart  and  soul  and  will, 
under  the  dominion  of  the  Christ.  Such  men,  men  of 
faith,  of  Christian  devotion,  and  Christian  life,  are  to  hold 
office  in  the  Church. 

But  there  was  yet  another  qualification,  they  were  to 
be  men,  "  full  of  ...  wisdom."  It  is  interesting  to 
notice  here  that  whereas  there  are  different  Greek  words, 
translated  in  our  Bible  "  wisdom,"  the  word  here  is 
ffoyta,  a  word  never  used  in  Scripture  save  of  God  or 
of  good  men,  except  in  one  case  where  in  evident  irony, 
the  practical  apostle  James  says,  "  This  wisdom  is  not  a 

[  174  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  6 : 1-7] 

wisdom  that  cometh  down  from  above,  but  is  earthly, 
sensual,  devilish."  In  this  word  "  wisdom "  there  is  a 
moral  quality,  but  infinitely  more ;  it  is  a  word  that  sug- 
gests the  reaching  of  the  best  ends  by  the  best  means. 
They  were  to  be  men  of  sanctified  common  sense.  That 
is  not  translation,  but  it  is  interpretation.  The  man  who 
holds  office  in  the  Church  needs  tact,  and,  if  he  lacks  it, 
he  may  have  many  other  things  and  be  of  very  little  use. 
He  must  be  a  disciple,  a  man  of  good  report,  a  normal 
Christian,  full  of  the  Spirit ;  but  he  must  be  full  of  wis- 
dom. The  very  liberty  which  Christ  creates  is  one  of  the 
greatest  perils  threatening  the  Christian  Church ;  a  great 
and  gracious  benediction  but  a  perpetual  peril,  as  all  the 
highest,  noblest,  and  most  beautiful  things  are  the  most 
perilous  things,  because  their  adjustment  is  so  delicate 
and  exquisite.  The  men  who  are  to  take  office  in  the 
Christian  Church  must  be  men  of  sanctified  common 
sense.  An  old  story  comes  back  to  mind,  the  first  applica- 
tion of  which  is  in  another  direction.  A  Professor  in  a 
Theological  College  on  the  American  side  of  the  Atlantic, 
in  his  opening  address  to  freshmen  who  had  come  up  to 
take  the  course,  said,  "  Gentlemen,  you  need  three  things 
if  you  are  to  be  successful;  gifts,  grace,  and  gumption. 
We  can  do  nothing  to  help  you  as  to  the  first;  I  believe 
God  has  given  you  gifts;  we  can  by  training  and  prayer 
help  you  to  gain  grace;  but  if  you  have  not  gumption 
neither  God  nor  man  can  help  you,  and  I  advise  you  not 
to  continue  your  studies."  If  this  is  true  of  theological 
students,  and  ministers  of  the  Word,  it  is  more  true  of 
the  men  who  have  to  preside  over  the  very  delicate  work 
of  serving  the  tables  of  the  Christian  Church. 

We  finally  see  the  organization  completed.  The 
organization  of  the  Christian  Church  is  its  unified  variety 
at  work;  all  the  variety  unified  in  order  to  work;  the 
whole  Church  obedient  to  one  life-principle,  which  is 
service;  the  whole  Church  working  without  friction, 
which  is  strength;  then  the  accomplishment  of  results, 

1 175 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  6 : 1-7] 

which  is  success.  "  The  Word  of  God  increased."  This 
is  a  most  remarkable  expression,  showing  that  true 
growth  of  organization  is  a  growth  of  capacity  for  reveal- 
ing Jesus.  "  The  number  of  the  disciples  multiplied," 
and  that  in  the  heart  of  opposition — Jerusalem.  By  ful- 
filment of  function  there  was  growth  of  the  organism, 
and  by  growth  of  the  organism  there  was  increase  of 
power  and  increase  of  work.  Luke  put  the  final  touch 
upon  the  story  when  he  wrote  a  most  astonishing  thing, 
"  A  great  company  of  priests  were  obedient  to  the  faith." 
The  manifestation  of  the  new  exercise  of  spiritual  priest- 
hood destroyed  in  the  best  way  possible  false  priestism, 
by  bringing  the  priests  themselves  into  the  place  of  belief. 
So  finally  we  look  back  to  that  first  organization  and 
see  that  it  was  spiritual,  simple,  and  sufficient ;  but  it  was 
not  final.  A  great  deal  of  subsequent  organization  is 
carnal,  complex,  and  corrupt.  We  have  to  learn  in  the 
work  of  the  Christian  Church  that  we  must  get  back  to 
this  ancient  chapter,  and  its  underlying  principles,  re- 
membering forevermore  that  the  external  manifestation 
may  change,  and  change  perpetually.  In  the  twelfth 
chapter  of  Paul's  first  letter  to  the  Corinthians  light  may 
be  found  on  this  great  theme.  Some  of  the  gifts  that  the 
apostle  there  enumerates  are  not  in  existence  in  the 
Church  to-day;  the  reason  for  their  non-existence  being 
that  He  divided  "  to  each  one  severally  even  as  He  will." 
Other  gifts  may  be  found  in  the  Church  to-day  which  the 
apostle  did  not  name,  because  they  were  not  then  be- 
stowed. To  try  to  compress  the  activity  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  in  the  Christian  Church  into  a  formula  of  a  dead 
generation,  even  though  the  story  be  in  the  Bible,  is  to 
hinder  the  progress  of  the  Kingdom  of  God.  We  must 
remember  that  the  Spirit  is  living  amongst  us  now.  What 
we  supremely  need  is  to  obey  the  Spirit's  leading,  and 
leave  ourselves  to  His  direction;  always  remembering 
that  the  work  of  the  whole  Church,  whether  it  be  the 
service  of  the  Word  or  the  service  of  tables,  is  holy 

1 176] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  6 :  8-15  and  7 : 54-60] 

work;  and  at  the  gate  of  the  sanctuary  service  is  a  flam- 
ing sword,  and  no  man  must  dare  enter  and  lay  unclean 
hands  upon  the  holy  vessels,  or  attempt  out  of  an  impure 
heart  to  accomplish  results  of  purity. 


Acts  6 : 8-15  and  7 : 54-60 

We  now  come  to  the  consideration  of  the  eighth  and 
last  of  these  first  things  of  the  Christian  Church; — the 
first  martyr.  I  use  the  word  martyr  now  in  the  sense  in 
which  it  is  usually  employed.  In  the  process  of  the 
centuries  we  have  come  to  \use  the  word  only  of  such  as 
seal  their  testimony  with  their  blood.  When  we  chant 
the  Te  Deum  and  sing,  "  The  noble  army  of  martyrs 
praise  Thee,"  our  minds  turn  back  to  the  long  and 
wonderful  line  of  those  who  have  been  so  true  to  truth, 
that  they  have  died  rather  than  violate  it  in  life,  or  deny 
it  in  teaching.  But  those  who  have  died  for  the  truth 
were  not  made  martyrs  by  their  dying ;  they  died  because 
they  were  already  martyrs.  The  fires  of  Smithfield  in  the 
olden  days  never  made  martyrs ;  they  revealed  them.  No 
hurricane  of  persecution  ever  creates  martyrs ;  it  reveals 
them.  Stephen  was  a  martyr  before  they  stoned  him. 
He  was  the  first  martyr  to  seal  his  testimony  with  his 
blood. 

The  story  of  Stephen  is  full  of  strength  and  colour. 
The  personality  of  the  man  arrests  us  first  in  that  he 
breaks  suddenly  upon  the  view,  and  as  suddenly  passes 
out  of  sight.  He  was  one  of  the  seven  allocated  to  the 
work  of  serving  tables,  a  deacon  in  the  Church.  Almost 
immediately  he  flamed  into  a  more  remarkable  promi- 
nence than  any  of  the  apostles  themselves,  by  his  stoning 
to  death,  in  which  there  was  the  merging  of  tragedy  and 
victory. 

We  gather  from  his  name  that  he  was  either  a  Greek 
or  a  Hellenist,  that  is  a  Grecian  Jew.  His  name  indeed 
would  have  to  have  been  prophetic.  Stephen  means  a 

[  177  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  6 : 8-15  and  7 :  54-60] 

crown.  One  can  imagine  that  some  fond  mother  named 
the  boy  thus,  and  so  expressed  her  hope  that  he  would 
come  to  some  crowning ;  but  little  she  knew  the  crowning 
to  which  he  would  come,  the  first  to  wear  the  crown  of 
the  martyr  in  the  history  of  the  catholic  Church. 

There  are  very  many  ways  in  which  this  story  of 
Stephen  might  be  profitably  examined.  I  propose  to  deal 
with  it  as  presenting  the  first  clash  of  battle,  even  to  the 
shedding  of  blood,  between  the  forces  of  the  world  and 
the  Christian  Church.  There  had  been  one  such  clash  of 
battle,  even  to  the  shedding  of  blood,  before;  but  it  was 
not  between  the  world  and  the  Church,  but  between  the 
world  and  Christ.  This  story  is  preeminently  remarkable 
for  the  fact  that  to  that  one  "  Death-grapple  in  the  dark- 
ness 'twixt  old  systems  and  the  Word,"  this  is  in  succes- 
sion, continuity,  and  fellowship.  We  remember  the  open- 
ing phrase  of  the  book  of  the  Acts,  "  The  former  treatise 
I  made,  O  Theophilus,  concerning  all  that  Jesus  began 
both  to  do  and  to  teach."  By  that  very  suggestive  com- 
mencement, as  we  have  already  said,  the  writer  gave  char- 
acter to  his  earlier  treatise,  and  also  a  key  to  the  second 
treatise.  He  connected  them.  The  Gospel  contained  the 
account  of  the  things  that  Jesus  began  to  do  and  to  teach, 
and  that  suggestive  phrase  indicates  the  fact  that  the  min- 
istry and  mission  of  Jesus  did  not  end  with  the  things  re- 
corded in  the  Gospel.  Therefore  it  becomes  a  key  to  the 
book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  which  is  the  story  of  the 
things  that  Jesus  continues  to  do  and  continues  to  teach 
through  His  Body,  which  is  the  Church,  by  the  presidency 
and  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Christ  is  seen,  through 
His  Body,  carrying  on  the  things  He  began  to  do  and  to 
teach.  That  is  the  supreme  quality  or  quantity  of  in- 
terest in  the  picture  presented  by  Luke,  of  Stephen  in  his 
confession  and  in  his  martyrdom.  Here  is  a  concrete 
illustration  of  what  the  apostle  meant  when  he  spoke  of 
filling  up  "  that  which  is  lacking  in  the  afflictions  of 
Christ."  By  the  use  of  that  word  lacking,  the  apostle  did 

t 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  6 :  8-15  and  7 : 54-6o] 

not  mean  to  infer  that  there  was  any  absent  element  in 
the  sufferings  of  Christ;,  something  that  had  to  be  added, 
as  to  elemental  value.  The  word  lacking  means  the 
deficit,  that  is,  that  which  comes  later.  The  underlying 
thought  of  the  apostle  is  that  the  sufferings  of  Christ  are 
not  over.  Just  as  in  the  mystery  of  the  Incarnation  there 
has  been  granted  to  us  a  glimpse  into  the  eternal  fact  of 
the  nature  of  God,  and  the  heart  of  God,  and  the  suffer- 
ing of  God;  so  with  the  work  of  Jesus  Christ  and  His 
suffering  and  His  death.  The  actuality  of  His  suffering 
did  not  cease ;  it  is  continued  in  all  such  as  in  fellowship 
with  Him  suffer  shame  for  His  name ;  their  suffering  is 
His,  His  suffering  is  theirs.  To  Stephen  fell  the  singular 
honour  of  being  the  first  member  of  the  Body  of  Christ 
in  whom  this  continual  process  of  suffering  was  manifest, 
this  travail  that  will  never  end  until  the  ultimate  purpose 
of  God  be  achieved.  We  often  speak  of  the  hour  that  is 
to  come,  with  hope  and  confidence,  when  "  He  shall  see 
of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  be  satisfied."  Let  us  never 
forget  that  the  travail  itself  is  not  ended;  that  God,  and 
God  in  Christ,  and  God  in  Christ  in  His  Church,  are  still 
travailing  in  the  birth-pangs  of  redemption,  toward  the 
ultimate  realization  of  His  great  Divine  purpose.  Here 
in  this  early  story  of  the  Church  is  a  wonderful  manifes- 
tation of  a  member  of  the  Body  of  Christ  making  up  that 
which  is  behindhand  in  His  affliction,  in  fellowship  with 
his  Lord  in  nature,  in  testimony,  in  suffering,  and  in 
triumph.  We  learn  the  profound  meanings  of  this  whole 
succession  of  suffering  in  order  to  victory,  by  an  examina- 
tion of  this  first  manifestation.  There  are  two  lines  of 
thought ;  first,  the  fellowship  between  Stephen  and  Jesus ; 
and  secondly,  the  witness  of  Stephen  to  the  world.  The 
relation  of  these  two  things  is  patent.  Stephen  is  first 
seen,  filled  with  the  Spirit,  preaching  with  great  wisdom, 
working  wonders  in  Jerusalem.  Then  he  is  seen  bearing 
his  testimony  before  the  Sanhedrim,  that  testimony 
which  we  speak  of  as  his  defence.  It  was  the  testimony 

[  179  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  6: 8-15  and  7 : 54-60] 

of  Stephen  to  the  world ;  and  that  testimony  was  the  out- 
come of  his  fellowship  with  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 

Let  us  first  consider  the  fellowship  between  this  man 
and  Jesus.  Those  familiar  with  the  life-story  of  Jesus 
cannot  read  this  story  of  Stephen  without  feeling  how 
remarkable  are  the  notes  of  identification  and  similarity 
between  the  two.  Here  was  a  man  walking  along  the 
very  pathway  of  the  Gospels  with  Christ.  The  attitude 
manifested  toward  him  in  Jerusalem  and  by  the  council, 
is  almost  identical  with  the  attitude  of  the  rulers  toward 
Jesus.  When  we  come  to  the  dying  of  Stephen,  the  last 
thing  that  passed  his  lips  was  almost  a  quotation  of  some 
of  the  last  things  that  Jesus  said.  Jesus  in  His  dying 
said,  "Father,  into  Thy  hands  I  commend  My  Spirit." 
"  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do." 
Stephen  in  his  dying  said,  "  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my 
spirit."  "  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge."  There 
is  perfect  harmony  between  this  story  of  how  a  man 
preached  and  wrought  wonders  and  uttered  his  great  ad- 
dress and  went  to  death;  and  the  story  of  how  the  Man 
of  Nazareth  preached  and  wrought  wonders  and  uttered 
His  great  discourses  and  took  His  way  to  death. 

Between  Stephen  and  Jesus  there  was  communion  of 
nature,  there  was  communion  of  testimony,  there  was 
communion  of  suffering,  and  finally  there  was  communion 
of  triumph. 

Let  us  observe  first  of  all  the  communion  of  nature. 
Stephen  is  described  as  being  "  full  of  grace  and  power." 
That  is  a  comprehensive  and  final  description  of  the 
nature  of  this  man.  Our  minds  go  back  to  the  earlier 
writing  of  Luke,  and  to  his  declaration  concerning  Jesus, 
that  He  grew  in  stature  and  in  favour  with  God  and  with 
men.  When  Luke  had  to  describe  the  nature  of  Jesus 
he  always  did  so  by  the  equivalents  of  those  two  words, 
grace  and  power.  To  express  the  underlying  thought  in 
the  speech  of  our  own  day,  I  would  say,  Stephen  was  full 
of  sweetness  and  strength.  These  words  are  really  not 

[  180  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  6 : 8-15  and  7 : 54-60] 

so  fine  as  the  others,  but  they  may  help  us  for  the  moment. 
Sweetness,  grace,  all  that  is  beautiful  and  tender  and  com- 
passionate; and  strength,  power,  all  that  suggests  vigour 
and  determination,  dignity  and  authority.  These  two 
qualities  were  not  in  separated  compartments,  but  merged 
in  one  personality,  so  that  coming  into  the  presence  of  this 
man  one  was  welcomed  by  his  grace,  and  at  the  same 
moment  aware  of  his  power.  These  same  things  were 
perpetually  manifest  in  Jesus.  We  hear  Him  saying  to 
the  multitudes,  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and 
are  heavy  laden,"  with  such  sweet,  wooing  winsomeness 
that  they  crowded  after  Him ;  and  then  saying,  "  If  any 
man  would  come  after  Me,  let  him  deny  himself  and 
take  up  his  cross  and  follow  Me,"  with  such  sudden, 
awful  solemnity  that  they  hardly  dare  come  at  all.  Here 
then  was  a  man  who  shared  the  very  nature  of  Jesus ;  a 
deacon  of  the  early  Church,  a  man  serving  tables ;  but  so 
in  fellowship  with  the  nature  of  Christ  that  the  impres- 
sion he  made  upon  the  men  and  women  who  were  round 
about  him,  was  that  of  great  grace  and  beauty  of  char- 
acter, combined  with  great  strength  of  purpose.  These 
two  things  persisted  to  the  end.  Grace  was  manifested 
in  his  cry,  "  Lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge  " ;  and  power 
in  the  words,  "  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit."  The 
secret  of  Stephen's  character  was  that  he  was  in  fellow- 
ship with  Christ  in  nature,  a  partner  of  the  very  life  of 
Christ. 

Secondly,  let  us  notice  as  briefly,  their  fellowship  in 
testimony.  Luke  says  of  Stephen  that  he  "wrought 
great  wonders  and  signs  "  in  Jerusalem.  In  the  first 
Pentecostal  sermon,  Peter,  speaking  of  Jesus,  said  of 
Him,  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  a  Man  approved  of  God  unto 
you  by  mighty  works  and  wonders  and  signs,  which  God 
did  by  Him  in  the  midst  of  you,  even  as  ye  yourselves 
know."  Thus  the  very  testimony  of  Jesus  by  wonders 
and  signs  as  well  as  by  word  of  mouth,  was  the  testimony 
that  Stephen  had  been  bearing  in  Jerusalem.  Luke  here 

[  181  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  6 : 8-15  and  7 :  54-6o]  _, 

speaks  of  the  wisdom  and  the  Spirit  by  which  Stephen 
spake ;  and  in  the  second  chapter  of  his  first  treatise  he 
speaks  of  the  wisdom  and  Spirit  by  which  Jesus  spake, 
in  almost  identical  phrases.  The  selfsame  words  that  he 
used  to  describe  the  work  and  teaching  of  Jesus,  he  now 
used  to  describe  the  work  and  teaching  of  Stephen. 
Thus  we  see  in  Stephen  a  man,  not  only  in  fellowship 
with  the  nature  of  Jesus,  but  also  in  fellowship  with  the 
testimony  of  Jesus  repeating  His  works,  uttering  His 
words.  In  Stephen  the  Christ  Who  had  communicated 
to  him  His  life,  found  an  instrument  for  word  and  work ; 
and  thus  the  things  He  began  to  do  He  still  did. 

Mark  in  the  next  place,  the  fellowship  of  suffering. 
The  cause  of  Stephen's  suffering  was  that  he  had  borne 
testimony  to  the  same  things  as  had  his  Master.  He  had 
strenuously  rebuked  sin.  When  we  come  to  study  his 
defence  we  shall  see  with  what  fine  art  he  led  them  over 
their  own  history,  until  he  came  to  the  point  where  he 
charged  them  with  the  murder  of  God's  ultimate  Servant, 
Whom  he  designated  "  the  Righteous  One."  The  hatred 
of  their  heart  resulted  from  his  rebuke  of  their  sin. 
Mark  the  course  of  that  hatred ;  their  suborning  of  wit- 
nesses, their  attitude  toward  him  throughout  the  whole  of 
his  trial,  and  then  the  brutal  sentence.  The  fellowship 
of  this  man  with  his  Lord  was  of  the  closest.  Because 
of  the  fellowship  in  nature  fully  realized,  there  was  fel- 
lowship in  testimony  fully  declared,  and  therefore  there 
was  fellowship  in  suffering. 

In  the  measure  in  which  persecution  still  exists,  this 
law  still  operates.  Men  cannot  live  a  Christian  life  with- 
out suffering.  The  old  brutal  methods  of  persecution  are 
forever  at  an  end  for  us  at  least;  but  it  is  impossible  to 
share  His  nature  and  share  His  witness  without  coming 
into  fellowship  with  His  sufferings  in  an  ungodly  and 
antagonistic  age. 

Finally,  the  fellowship  was  that  of  His  triumph.  The 
great  secret  is  told  when  Luke  says  he  was  full  of  the 

1 182 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  6: 8-15  and  7:  54-60] 

Spirit.  Mark  the  manifestations  of  that  triumph.  It  is 
seen  in  his  outlook  on  his  foes.  He  was  full  of  pity  for 
them,  and  so  he  prayed,  "  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their 
charge."  That  was  the  triumph  of  grace.  It  is  seen  also 
in  his  outlook  on  death.  He  was  absolute  master  over  it, 
as  he  said,  "  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit."  That  was 
the  triumph  of  power.  In  that  ultimate  triumph  there 
was  fellowship  with  Jesus.  Christ  never  spoke  of  His 
own  death  by  any  other  term  than  that  which  indicated 
power  and  authority.  Men  still  speak  of  death  with  the 
sense  that  there  is  defeat  in  it.  No  man  loves  death. 
For  believers,  death  is  irradiated  with  light,  but  it  is  the 
light  of  that  which  lies  beyond  it.  Yet  Jesus  never  spoke 
of  death  in  the  terms  in  which  men  speak  of  death. 
When  He  spoke  of  death  He  spoke  of  it  as  an  exodus, 
as  something  He  could  accomplish,  as  something  in  the 
presence  of  which  He  said  with  defiant  authority,  "  I  lay 
down  My  life,  that  I  may  take  it  again.  No  one  taketh 
it  away  from  Me,  but  I  lay  it  down  of  Myself."  He 
suffered  in  its  presence,  because  of  the  infinite  mystery 
of  its  pain ;  yet  seeing  through,  He  approached  it  with  the 
tread  of  a  Victor.  Now  His  servant  went  out  of  the 
city,  the  brutal  stones  rained  on  him,  he  was  dying ;  and 
in  the  final  agony  he  spoke  of  death,  not  as  of  something 
mastering  him,  but  as  an  experience  in  which  he  was  able 
to  commit  his  spirit  to  another.  This  was  the  triumph 
of  perfect  fellowship  with  Christ. 

There  was  granted  to  this  man  in  the  final  hour  an 
unveiling;  in  order  that  he  might  know  all  the  full  and 
gracious  experience  of  spiritual  certainty,  and  that  he 
might  have  the  very  help  and  encouragement  needed.  It 
was  a  vision  of  Christ's  actual  fellowship  with  him.  Do 
I  think  he  really  saw  that  which  he  thought  he  saw? 
Surely  yes.  Other  men  would  not  see  it.  There  are 
many  things  which  other  men  can  never  see  which  yet 
are  seen.  It  is  well  for  us  of  the  Christian  faith  to  re- 
member that,  and  face  it  perpetually.  Do  not  let  us  try 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  6 :  8-15  and  7 : 54-60] 

to  explain  all  our  religion  to  the  man  who  is  not  a  Chris- 
tian. It  cannot  be  done.  There  is  a  statement  in 
Hebrews,  "  He  endured  as  seeing  Him  Who  is  invisible." 
We  still  talk  of  men  who  are  far-sighted,  and  we  usually 
mean  men  who  see  enough  to  arrange  and  combine  for 
their  own  ends.  Dying  Stephen  saw  the  heavens  opened, 
and  saw  the  glory  of  God.  No  one  else  saw  that  glory. 
What  was  it  that  Stephen's  eyes  looked  upon?  "  The  Son 
of  Man."  That  is  a  description  which  no  one  had  used 
of  Jesus  in  the  day  of  His  flesh  except  Himself,  save  on 
one  occasion  in  criticism.  Stephen  used  of  his  Lord  the 
tender  title  that  He  had  so  loved.  Other  writers  speak  of 
the  risen  and  ascended  Christ  as  sitting  on  the  right  hand 
of  God.  Stephen  did  not  see  Him  sitting.  Stephen  saw 
Him  standing.  The  two  positions  suggest  the  two  activi- 
ties of  His  Priesthood.  He  was  a  Priest  after  the  order 
of  Aaron,  whose  business  it  was  to  make  Atonement.  As 
such  He  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  because  His  work 
is  accomplished.  But  He  was  also  a  priest  after  the  order 
of  Melchizedek.  When  Abraham  was  returning  from 
conflict,  Melchizedek  brought  forth  bread  and  wine. 
Melchizedek  was  a  priest  of  God  who  ministered  to  the 
failing  strength  of  the  warrior  of  faith.  Stephen  saw 
the  heaven  opened,  and  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  great 
Archetype  doing  Melchizedek's  work,  standing  and 
ministering.  Because  a  member  of  His  Body  was  in  pain 
and  suffering,  He  stood  to  minister  to  him  in  the  hour 
of  his  agony.  The  whole  thing  may  be  very  simply  ex- 
plained by  using  Paul's  words,  "Whether  one  member 
suffer eth,  all  the  members  suffer  with  it " ;  and  linking 
with  them  other  of  his  words,  "  The  head  cannot  say  to 
the  foot,  I  have  no  need  of  you."  When  Stephen,  a 
member  of  the  great  Body  on  the  earth,  was  in  pain,  the 
agony  was  felt  in  heaven,  and  the  Head  of  the  Body 
stood.  The  dying  Stephen  saw  the  standing  Christ. 
Wherever  a  saint  yof  God  in  fellowship  with  the  nature, 
testimony,  and  suffering  of  Christ  is  in  pain,  He  stands, 

1 184 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  7 : 2-60] 

the  great  High  Priest  in  sympathy  and  in  ministry,  until 
He  welcomes  that  suffering  one  over  the  line,  and  into 
the  eternal  fellowship. 


Acts  7:2-60 

We  now  turn  to  consider  the  testimony  borne  by 
Stephen  as  a  witness  of  Jesus,  in  his  apology,  and  by  his 
dying.  This  word  apology  is  one  of  the  discrowned 
words  in  our  language.  We  constantly  misuse  it  in  our 
daily  speech.  We  say  we  apologize,  when  we  confess 
that  we  are  wrong.  An  apology  is  really  an  argument 
that  we  are  right. 

This  address  of  Stephen  was  an  apology,  not  for  him- 
self, but  for  his  Master.  His  testimony  in  life  and  in 
death  was  Christo-centric ;  therefore  it  shared  the  clear- 
ness, authority,  and  influence  of  the  testimony  of  Jesus. 
Just  as  we  have  seen  in  the  previous  study  the  wonderful 
unity  between  Stephen  and  his  Lord;  so  here  we  shall 
see  the  same  unity  between  the  testimony  of  Stephen  and 
the  testimony  of  Jesus.  Stephen's  outlook  was  that  of 
Christ.  Stephen  could  have  said  as  accurately  as  did 
Paul,  "  To  me  to  live  is  Christ."  We  shall  confine  our- 
selves to  the  witness  of  his  trial  and  death,  recognizing 
that,  being  the  outcome  of  his  former  testimony,  it  har- 
monized therewith. 

Let  us  remind  ourselves  of  the  circumstances  of  this 
great  apology.  Stephen  was  arraigned  before  the 
Council,  that  is  before  the  Sanhedrim;  and  the  charge 
preferred  against  him  was  a  strange  mixture  of  truth 
and  error.  This  is  what  they  said  of  him,  "We  have 
heard  him  speak  blasphemous  words  against  Moses,  and 
against  God."  That  was  their  interpretation  of  what  he 
had  said.  They  suborned  false  witnesses  who  said: 
"  This  man  ceaseth  not  to  speak  words  against  this  holy 
place,  and  the  law."  These  were  their  impressions  of  the 
results  of  his  teaching. 

1 185] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  7 : 2-60] 

But  the  definite,  specific  charge — for  a  charge  had  to  be 
formulated  for  the  Sanhedrim — was  this,  "We  have 
heard  him  say,  that  this  Jesus  of  Nazareth  shall  destroy 
this  place,  and  shall  change  the  customs  which  Moses  de- 
livered unto  us."  That  last  statement  was  true  un- 
doubtedly; he  had  said  that  very  thing.  He  had  said 
that  the  mission  of  Jesus  must  culminate  in  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  temple,  and  the  changing  of  the  customs ;  but 
when  they  interpreted  that  to  mean  that  he  blasphemed 
Moses  and  God;  that  this  man  had  set  himself  against  all 
that  was  Divine  in  the  origin  of  the  Hebrew  economy, 
they  were  wrong.  He  was  arraigned  upon  a  charge 
partially  true  and  partially  false.  There  is  never  any 
more  serious  situation  than  that : 

"A  lie  which  is  all  a  lie  may  be  met  with  and  fought 

outright ; 

But  a  lie  that  is  partly  truth  is  a  harder  matter  to 
fight." 

Mark  the  answer  of  Stephen  first,  in  general  terms. 
It  was  not  a  defence.  There  was  not  in  this  whole  speech 
of  Stephen  a  single  reply  as  to  whether  he  had  said  the 
things  they  charged  him  with  saying.  The  personal  ele- 
ment is  wholly  absent.  He  was  not  careful  for  a  single 
moment  to  defend  himself  even  against  misinterpretation. 
He  did  not  attempt  to  show  the  difference  between  the 
formal  charge  and  their  interpretation  of  it.  He  was  so 
utterly  lost  in  the  sense  of  God,  and  the  spaciousness  of 
his  outlook  in  Jesus  Christ,  that  he  did  not  seem  to  think 
it  worth  while  to  reply  to  the  actual  words  of  the  charge 
made  against  him.  On  the  other  hand,  he  did  most  def- 
initely reply  thereto,  and  defend  the  declaration  that  the 
temple  must  be  destroyed,  and  would  be  destroyed  with- 
out loss;  and  declared  with  new  emphasis  the  necessity 
for  the  change  of  the  customs  established  by  Moses. 
From  beginning  to  end  however  he  made  it  perfectly 
patent  that  the  last  thing  in  his  mind  was  any  intention 

[  186  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  7:2-60] 

of  speaking  against  God  or  against  Moses.  Rather  he 
argued  that  all  that  happened  in  the  coming  of  Jesus  was 
in  fulfilment  of  the  great  central  prophecy  of  their  own 
lawgiver,  Moses. 

The  apology  of  Stephen  is  therefore  not  in  the  nature 
of  a  defence,  but  of  an  arraignment.  Looking  back  over 
the  centuries  at  the  great  scene,  we  see  Stephen,  not  so 
much  as  a  prisoner  at  the  bar,  but  as  the  vicegerent  of 
God,  the  judge  of  the  nation. 

This  was  a  great  crisis  in  the  national  history.  There 
had  come  such  a  crisis  during  the  ministry  of  Jesus  when 
He  had  said,  "  O  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  that  killeth  the 
prophets,  and  stoneth  them  that  are  sent  unto  her !  How 
often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  children  together,  even 
as  a  hen  gathereth  her  chickens  under  her  wings,  and  ye 
would  not!  Behold,  your  house  is  left  unto  you  deso- 
late." In  the  ministry  of  Jesus  He  first  spoke  of  the 
temple  as  "  My  Father's  house,"  but  at  the  end  He  spoke 
of  it  as  "your  house  .  .  .  left  unto  you  desolate." 
Now  the  second  crisis  had  come  in  the  history  of  the 
people.  They  had  been  given  a  Pentecostal  opportunity. 
They  had  received  a  new  spiritual  presentation  of  the 
Evangel  in  the  early  mission  of  the  apostles.  All  those 
first  things  which  we  have  been  considering  constituted 
the  witness  of  Christ  by  the  Spirit  in  Jerusalem. 
Presently  the  mangled  body  of  Stephen  was  Jerusalem's 
answer  to  this  new  opportunity.  Ere  he  went  out  to 
death  he  stood,  not  as  a  prisoner  at  the  bar,  but  as  the 
judge  of  the  people,  declaring  in  the  very  terms  of  Christ, 
the  doom  of  the  city  that  had  rejected  Him. 

His  address  was  peculiarly  Eastern.  It  is  very  difficult 
for  the  Western  mind  to  follow  the  movement,  and  catch 
the  cumulative  force  of  its  arraignment  of  the  nation. 
At  the  close  he  said,  "  Ye  stiffnecked  and  uncircumcized 
in  heart  and  ears,  ye  do  always  resist  the  Holy  Spirit." 
We  of  the  West  live  lonely  lives;  we  speak  of  our 
fathers  and  our  inheritance,  but  we  hardly  begin  to  feel 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  7 : 2-60] 

the  force  of  the  relationship.  The  Easterner  lives  in  the 
past  as  well  as  the  present.  Mr.  Johnston  Ross  has  said 
that  no  Westerner  can  ever  understand  the  words :  "  Fill 
ye  up  the  measure  of  your  fathers."  In  that  sense  the 
whole  method  of  this  address,  and  the  sweep  of  its  argu- 
ment, is  Eastern.  Stephen  would  not  consent  to  deal  with 
the  immediate,  save  in  relation  to  all  that  which  had  pre- 
ceded it.  He  saw  in  events  that  were  happening  around 
him,  not  incidents,  but  movements  in  the  rhythmic  march 
of  God,  and  revelations  of  the  perpetual  sin  of  his  own 
people. 

It  was  a  great  historic  declaration,  because  it  was  the 
declaration  of  a  man  who  looked  out  over  history,  and 
saw  it  in  its  highest  values.  There  were  few  dates,  and 
few  names ;  and  some  of  the  names  were  mistakes,  as  will 
be  gathered  when  the  story  is  carefully  considered;  for 
instance,  he  said  Babylon,  where  he  ought  to  have  said 
Damascus,  when  he  quoted  from  the  ancient  prophets. 
Of  course  the  mistakes  may  be  due  to  copyists  of  the 
manuscripts. 

The  argument  itself  was  an  interpretation  of  history 
from  the  heights.  Dr.  Pierson  said  at  the  Ecumenical 
Conference  of  Foreign  Missions  in  New  York  that 
"  History  is  His  story,  if  man  can  climb  high  enough  to 
read  it."  Stephen  had  climbed  the  heights,  and  looking 
back  over  the  history  of  his  people  he  interpreted  it  in 
the  light  of  the  Divine  method,  and  the  Divine  over- 
ruling. Beginning  with  Abraham,  nay,  beginning  with 
the  God  of  glory,  and  then  in  human  history  with 
Abraham,  passing  in  review  all  the  centuries  after  Abra- 
ham, he  ended  with  Jesus.  Their  charges  against  him 
were,  "We  have  heard  him  speak  blasphemous  words 
against  Moses,  and  against  God  " ;  "  We  have  heard  him 
say,  that  this  Jesus  of  Nazareth  shall  destroy  this  place, 
and  shall  change  the  customs  which  Moses  delivered  unto 
us."  In  answer,  he  gave  them  a  general  view  of  the 
whole  history  of  that  nation  of  which  they  were  a  part, 

[  188  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  7 : 2-60] 

and  in  which  they  made  their  boast.  Beginning  with 
Abraham  he  ended  with  Jesus. 

Abraham  was  first  mentioned  as  the  man  of  faith. 
Joseph  was  mentioned,  but  only  in  connection  with  the 
attitude  toward  him  of  the  patriarchs.  The  patriarchs 
sold  Joseph.  Moses  they  understood  not,  and  refused. 
The  test  of  testimony — mark  the  fine  satire  of  it — was  in 
the  wilderness ;  and  the  forty  years  of  their  rebellion  are 
in  his  mind.  "  Solomon  built  Him  a  house.  Howbeit 
the  Most  High  dwelleth  not  in  houses  made  with  hands." 
The  prophets,  their  fathers  persecuted  them.  Of  the 
Righteous  One  they  had  become  the  betrayers  and 
murderers.  Through  all  the  movement  he  emphasized 
the  continuity  of  their  failure. 

Mark  also  how  he  pointed  out  to  them  through  all  the 
address  the  persistent  purpose  of  God.  "  The  God  of 
glory  "  was  the  first  phrase,  and  the  glory  of  God  was  the 
perpetual  theme.  As  we  read  this  apology  we  see  clearly 
that  which  Russell  Lowell  described,  in  the  words, 

"...    standeth  God  within  the  shadow 
Keeping  watch  above  His  own." 

The  apology  may  be  read  from  beginning  to  end,  losing 
sight  of  the  nation,  and  watching  only  the  goings  of  God 
through  individuals;  Abraham,  a  lonely  man;  Joseph,  a 
lonely  man ;  Moses,  a  lonely  man ;  the  prophets,  one  after 
another  standing  out  in  supreme  and  awful  isolation ;  and 
at  last  the  Righteous  One,  quite  alone.  Yet  every  indi- 
vidual is  seen  creating  a  new  social  opportunity  and  re- 
quirement, and  marking  perpetual  progress  in  the  Divine 
movement.  As  I  read  this  defence,  and  watch  the  goings 
of  God,  I  am  impressed  with  the  truth  of  Lloyd  Garri- 
son's word,  "  One  with  God  is  a  majority."  Therefore  I 
learn  also  that  one  man  can  excommunicate  a  Church,  one 
man  can  shut  out  a  nation  from  national  greatness ;  one 
man  can  set  up  an  altar  to  which  the  Church  returning, 

[  189  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  7 : 2-60] 

may  be  redeemed ;  and  one  man  can  lift  a  standard  around 
which  the  nation  gathering,  it  can  be  remade.  This  man, 
standing  arraigned  before  the  Sanhedrim,  led  them  back 
over  their  whole  history,  and  the  supreme  note  and  glory 
of  his  apology  was  its  revelation  of  the  goings  of  God. 

He  was  also  impressing  upon  them  the  perpetual  re- 
bellion of  man,  man's  hindrance  to  God's  progress.  It 
is  one  long  story  of  man's  utter  inability  to  cooperate 
with  God. 

Yet  again,  not  only  is  it  the  story  of  God's  method,  and 
of  man's  hindrance,  it  is  the  story  from  beginning  to  end 
of  God's  victory.  God  is  revealed  as  forevermore  mov- 
ing a  little  further  forward,  from  Abraham  to  whom  He 
gave  the  promise  of  a  seed;  never  resting  in  His  march 
until  the  promise  was  fulfilled  in  the  Person  of  the  Right- 
eous One. 

He  left  them  to  make  their  own  deduction.  It  was  a 
self-evident  one.  He  charged  them  with  having  rejected 
the  last  movement  in  the  Divine  progress.  The  argument 
from  history  was  that  they  rejecting,  were  rejected;  and 
that  the  rejected  One  was  crowned.  He  admitted  the 
partial  truth  of  the  charge  they  brought  against  him,  by 
revealing  to  them  the  fact  that  the  temple  must  be  de- 
stroyed; but  also  insisting  upon  it  that  it  might  be  de- 
stroyed without  loss,  because  the  throne  of  God  remains, 
and  the  government  of  God  is  utterly  unchanged ;  and  ex- 
plaining to  them  what  he  really  meant  by  the  testimony 
he  had  borne,  and  the  truth  he  had  declared.  Stephen, 
standing  before  the  Sanhedrim,  interpreted  the  goings  of 
God  to  a  people  who  professed  to  know  Him,  and  yet 
were  perpetually  hindering  Him.  In  succession  to  his 
Lord  he  uttered  again  the  things  that  Jesus  had  said, 
claiming  that  God  had  never  been  defeated,  but  that  man 
had  perpetually  failed,  as  he  had  failed  to  understand 
and  follow  the  Divine  guidance. 

The  testimony  that  Stephen  bore  in  his  dying  was 
that  of  witness  to  the  supremacy  of  the  spiritual,  to  the 

[  190  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  7 : 2-60] 

reality  of  the  unseen,  and  therefore,  to  the  fact  that  the 
glory  of  God  is  essentially  demonstrated  by,  and  active 
in  the  grace  of  God. 

First,  it  was  a  witness  to  the  supremacy  of  the  spiritual. 
Jesus  had  said :  "  Fear  not  them  which  kill  the  body,  and 
after  that  have  no  more  that  they  can  do."  "  After 
that!"  What  can  there  be  after  that?  The  ultimate 
fear  in  the  human  heart  that  has  lost  its  vision  of  God, 
and  the  sense  of  the  spiritual,  is  the  fear  of  death.  A 
man  may  profess  to  believe  that  death  does  not  end  all, 
and  yet  in  his  underlying  consciousness,  his  very  fear  of 
death  is  demonstration  that  he  has  no  certainty  of  that 
which  lies  beyond,  does  not  believe  in  the  supremacy  of 
the  spiritual  after  death.  The  one  great  conflict  of 
human  life  unilluminated  by  fellowship  with  God,  is  con- 
flict with  death,  effort  to  postpone  it,  to  evade  it,  to  fight 
it  off,  so  to  live  as  not  to  hasten  it.  The  materialist  is  f  or- 
evermore  saying,  "  Let  us  eat,  and  drink,  for  to-morrow 
we  die."  Therefore  let  to-morrow  be  postponed,  for  it 
is  the  final  dread,  the  ultimate  agony.  Jesus  said,  "  Fear 
not  them  which  kill  the  body,  and  after  that  have  no  more 
that  they  can  do,"  and  in  that  word  there  flashed  forth 
the  light  of  His  conception  of  essential  personality;  the 
body  killed,  but  the  man  continuing.  With  softened  foot- 
fall, and  reverent  demeanour,  we  come  to  the  Cross. 
What  does  the  Cross  say?  Among  other  things,  pro- 
founder  and  mightier,  it  yet  surely  says,  "  Fear  not  them 
which  kill  the  body,  and  after  that  have  no  more  that  they 
can  do."  I  watch  Christ  Himself  fastened  to  the  Cross, 
and  to  my  own  heart  there  is  profound  and  overwhelming 
significance  in  the  word  He  uttered,  "  Father,  into  Thy 
hands  I  commend  My  spirit."  They  had  killed  the  body 
— it  was  then  ceasing  to  be,  the  life-blood  was  ebbing 
away,  the  vision  was  becoming  dim,  and  as  men  looked  on 
they  said,  He  is  dying ;  but  He  said,  "  I  commend  My 
spirit."  "  I  lay  down  My  life,  that  I  may  take  it  again. 
No  one  taketh  it  away  from  Me,  but  I  lay  it  down  of 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  7 :  2-60] 

Myself."  That  was  the  ultimate  argument  for  the 
supremacy  of  the  spiritual. 

Stephen  was  a  witness,  a  martyr  of  Jesus,  an  argument 
for  the  truth  of  the  thing  that  he  preached,  taught,  and 
lived ;  an  evidence  of  Christianity,  a  credential.  He  went 
outside  Jerusalem,  and  the  stones  fell  thickly  upon  him. 
In  the  attitude  of  dying  he  was  a  witness  to  the  suprem- 
acy of  the  spiritual.  "Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit." 
It  is  that  conception  and  conviction  of  the  supremacy  of 
the  spiritual  which  alone  is  equal  to  enabling  a  man  to 
"  fear  not  them  which  kill  the  body."  The  awakened 
sense  of  the  reality  of  the  spiritual  makes  cowards  of  us 
all.  The  courage  that  will  face  all  opposition,  and  bear 
all  bruising,  and  die,  is  courage  born  of  the  conviction  of 
the  reality  of  the  spiritual.  That  day  the  Sadducean  mob 
that  largely  composed  the  Sanhedrim  (for  the  Pharisees 
were  in  the  minority),  as  they  watched  this  man  die,  saw 
how  their  theories  were  laughed  out  of  court  by  a  man 
who  could  bow  in  quietness  and  meekness  to  death,  in  the 
strength  of  his  conviction  of  the  supremacy  of  the 
spiritual. 

How  far  do  we  know  that  conviction,  and  live  in  that 
power?  It  is  a  little  difficult  to  answer  this  to-day,  be- 
cause no  stones  are  waiting  for  us  in  the  city.  We  may 
never  be  called  upon,  in  this  land  at  least,  so  to  die  as 
Stephen  died.  But  there  are  subtler  things  than  stones. 
Have  I  the  courage  that  will  make  me  true  in  the  place 
of  criticism  and  opposition,  of  supercilious  disdain  for  the 
name  of  Christ?  I  have  not,  if  Christ  is  to  me  but  the 
name  of  a  Teacher,  high  and  noble  though  He  may  have 
been.  But  if  I  know  the  spiritual,  if  my  life  is  circum- 
ferenced  around  the  centre  that  is  homed  in  eternity, 
then  I  shall  have  courage;  courage  enough  to  die  for 
Christ  perchance ;  but  also  that  which  is  much  more  dif- 
ficult, courage  enough  to  live  for  Christ  in  places  of 
subtle  and  insidious  difficulty.  The  only  courage  that 
dares,  is  the  courage  born  of  the  conviction  of  the 

[  192  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  7 : 2-60] 

supremacy  of  the  spiritual.    That  was  Stephen's  dying 
witness. 

Because  it  was  that,  it  was  also  witness  to  the  reality 
of  the  unseen.  "  I  see  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son 
of  man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God."  None  other 
saw  the  vision  in  the  crowd  of  people  round  about  him. 
His  murderers  had  no  such  vision.  Saul  of  Tarsus  did 
not  see  it;  but  I  think  Stephen's  testimony  haunted  him, 
and  constituted  the  very  goads  against  which  he  tried  to 
kick.  This  man  saw  the  unseen ;  and  by  that  dying  word, 
and  the  triumph  of  his  speech,  and  the  light  upon  his  face 
from  the  glory  of  a  great  vision,  he  testified  in  the  Saddu- 
cean,  rationalistic  age  in  which  he  lived  and  died,  to  the 
reality  of  unseen  things. 

Finally,  the  most  overwhelming  testimony  of  his  death 
was  its  witness  to  the  glory  of  God  as  being  grace.  In 
that  prayer  of  his,  full  of  tenderness,  there  was  an  echo 
of  the  prayer  of  his  Lord.  Stephen  died  with  a  prayer 
upon  his  lips  for  the  very  men  who  were  murdering  him ; 
and  by  that  they  knew  that  he  believed,  and  lived  in  the 
power  of  the  belief,  that  the  glory  of  God,  to  which  he 
had  referred  at  the  commencement  of  his  argument,  was 
the  very  grace  of  God.  The  prayer  did  not  only  reveal 
his  desire  for  his  enemies,  but  also  his  confidence  in  the 
pardon  of  God.  He  prayed  to  a  God  ready  to  pardon. 
There  he  lay,  dying  under  the  brutal  stones,  with  the 
great  consciousness  of  the  failure  of  his  own  people  in 
their  past  history  filling  his  soul.  He  saw  the  outstand- 
ing places  of  their  failure  in  their  long  rejection  of  the 
messengers  of  God,  and  he  watched  God's  movement  ever 
onward ;  and  now  when  they  had  cast  out  the  Righteous 
One,  and  were  stoning  him  to  death  he  prayed  for  their 
pardon. 

The  story  ends  with  the  mangled  body  of  Stephen. 
No,  it  does  not  so  end!  It  ends  with  the  brief  word 
written  after,  to  stimulate  interest,  and  suggest  something 
still  to  come,  "  And  Saul  was  consenting  unto  his  death." 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  8 : 1-13] 

The  witness  is  dead ;  the  truth  lives ;  and  in  his  very  dying 
he  has  sown  the  seed  of  a  mighty  harvest  in  the  heart  of 
the  hardest  man  in  the  crowd.  So  the  first  martyr  seal- 
ing his  testimony  with  his  blood,  reveals  to  us  how  true 
the  thing  is  that  has  been  said,  and  proven  through  all 
the  centuries,  "  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of 
the  Church." 

Acts  8: 1-13 

The  martyrdom  of  Stephen  created  a  crisis  in  the 
history  of  the  Church.  In  reading  the  Acts,  we  find  that 
from  this  point  onward  Jerusalem  is  no  longer  the  centre 
of  interest.  It  almost  fades  from  the  page.  This  is  not 
loss;  but  great  gain.  When  Jerusalem  ceases  to  be  the 
centre  of  interest,  the  record  does  not  suffer  in  any  way, 
nor  does  it  reflect  upon  Jerusalem.  The  local,  the  tem- 
poral, the  material,  are  of  little  importance  in  the  Church 
of  God.  The  universal,  the  eternal,  the  spiritual  are 
supreme.  It  was  of  the  very  spirit  of  an  old  and  past 
economy  to  fasten  upon  a  geographical  centre,  and  to  de- 
pend upon  material  symbols.  The  Church  now  moves 
out  upon  the  great  pathway  of  her  victorious  business, 
independent  of  Jerusalem.  That  is  the  supreme  revela- 
tion of  this  book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  Not  easily 
did  they  learn  the  lesson,  for  the  apostles  clung  to  Jeru- 
salem ;  but  the  great  spiritual  movement,  independent  of 
Jerusalem  and  of  apostles,  went  forward;  not  slighting 
Jerusalem,  not  unmindful  of  Jerusalem,  nor  careless  of 
its  past  history  and  early  contribution;  but  far  more  in- 
fluenced by  the  vision  of  Jerusalem  from  on  high,  the 
mother  of  us  all,  a  spiritual  ideal  and  victory.  No  longer 
hampered  by  localities  and  temporalities,  the  surging 
spiritual  life  of  the  Church  swept  them  all  away,  and 
moved  quietly  and  majestically  on  to  new  quests  and  new 
triumphs.  Church  failure  has  invariably  resulted  from 
an  attempt  to  check  that  spiritual  movement  which  is 
independent  of  locality,  and  of  all  things  material. 

t  194  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  8 : 1-13] 

Whenever  the  Church  is  governed  from  Jerusalem,  or 
from  Rome,  or  from  anywhere  else  other  than  Heaven,  it 
is  hindered  and  hampered  and  prevented  from  fulfilling 
the  great  functions  of  its  life. 

The  paragraph  now  under  consideration  falls  into  three 
parts ;  the  events  chronicled  gather  around  three  persons, 
Saul,  Philip,  and  Simon;  and  three  words  suggest  its 
values :  persecution,  power,  and  peril.  The  story  of  per- 
secution, breaking  out  in  Jerusalem  and  scattering  the 
disciples,  centres  around  Saul.  The  story  of  power, 
manifesting  itself  in  strange  circumstances  and  new  sur- 
roundings and  peculiar  atmospheres,  centres  around 
Philip.  The  story  of  peril  centres  around  Simon.  Let 
us  first  examine  the  passage,  and  then  attempt  to  observe 
its  spiritual  significance. 

The  story  of  persecution  centres  around  Saul.  In  the 
seventh  chapter,  at  verse  fifty-eight,  we  find  the  words 
which  introduce  this  man  to  our  notice :  "  The  witnesses 
laid  down  their  garments  at  the  feet  of  a  young  man 
named  Saul."  Then  immediately  follow  the  first  words 
in  the  present  paragraph :  "  And  Saul  was  consenting 
unto  his  death."  The  question  naturally  arises:  Who  is 
this  man?  We  find  his  own  account  of  himself,  as  he 
was  in  those  days,  in  his  letter  to  the  Philippians :  "  Cir- 
cumcized  the  eighth  day,  of  the  stock  of  Israel,  of  the 
tribe  of  Benjamin,  a  Hebrew  of  Hebrews;  as  touching 
the  law,  a  Pharisee;  as  touching  zeal,  persecuting  the 
Church;  as  touching  the  righteousness  which  is  in  the 
law,  found  blameless."  This  account  becomes  the  more 
remarkable  when  it  is  remembered  that  it  was  written 
not  less  than  thirty  years  after  his  apprehension  by  Christ. 
After  thirty  years  of  Christian  experience,  thirty  years' 
fellowship  with  the  risen  Lord,  he  looked  back  to  what 
he  was  in  the  old  days.  Beginning  on  the  level  of  the 
flesh,  he  indicated  his  relationship  to  the  ancient  economy. 
"  Circumcized  the  eighth  day."  There  was  no  careless- 
ness in  the  matters  of  ritual  observance  on  the  part  of  his 

1 195] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  8:1-13] 

parents.  "  Of  the  stock  of  Israel,  of  the  tribe  of  Ben- 
jamin." He  was  a  Hebrew,  purely  and  wholly  so,  of 
Hebrew  parents.  "As  touching  the  law,  a  Pharisee." 
He  was  of  the  spiritual  party  in  the  Hebrew  nation. 
"  As  touching  zeal,  persecuting  the  Church."  He  was 
intense  in  his  devotion  to  what  he  believed  to  be  true. 
"  As  touching  the  righteousness  which  is  in  the  law,  found 
blameless."  He  was  true  to  the  light  as  he  saw  it. 

So  Saul  comes  into  view;  a  Hebrew  of  Hebrews;  a 
spiritual  ritualist;  a  zealous  man;  a  man  convinced;  a 
man  sincere;  a  man  ardent  and  passionate;  a  man  de- 
termined ;  a  man  with  a  clean  moral  record.  Around  this 
remarkable  man  the  story  of  persecution  gathers. 

The  words  of  Luke  reveal  the  turmoil  in  the  city. 
"  Devout  men  buried  Stephen  and  made  great  lamenta- 
tion over  him."  I  personally  believe  that  Stephen  was 
buried,  not  by  Christian  men,  but  by  Hebrews.  The 
phrase  "  Devout  men  "  is  peculiar  and  suggestive.  De- 
vout men,  not  believers  or  disciples,  but  the  devout  men 
in  Hebraism  carried  Stephen  to  his  burial.  "  But  Saul 
laid  waste  the  Church,  entering  into  every  house,  and 
dragging  men  and  women  committed  them  to  prison." 

In  that  double  declaration  there  is  manifested  a  divi- 
sion of  opinion,  even  among  Hebrew  people,  concerning 
the  death  of  Stephen.  Some  of  them  lamenting  the 
brutality,  tenderly  buried  him  with  great  lamentation. 
Others,  strangely  stirred,  broke  out  into  wild  and  up- 
roarious persecution  of  the  Christians.  Jerusalem  was 
filled  with  the  noise  and  the  turmoil  of  persecution. 

Two  forces  were  in  opposition  in  Jerusalem.  They 
had  been  in  opposition  ever  since  the  ministry  of  Jesus 
began.  Now  they  were  coming  into  conflict  again  most 
definitely.  On  the  one  hand  was  Sadducean  Judaism, 
and  on  the  other,  spiritual  Christianity.  The  remarkable 
fact  here  is,  that  Sadducean  Judaism  was  being  led  in  its 
opposition  to  Christianity  by  a  Pharisee.  Saul  of  Tarsus, 
a  Pharisee,  was  already  acting  contrary  to  his  deep  relig- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  8 : 1-13] 

ious  convictions,  perhaps  unconsciously,  when  he  led  that 
Sadducean  opposition  to  Jesus  Christ.  He  was  no  lover 
of  the  Sadducean  high  priest.  By  virtue  of  his  early 
Pharisaic  training,  he  was  utterly  opposed  to  the  Sad- 
ducean philosophy.  Moreover,  he  had  seen  Stephen  die. 
To  all  that  we  shall  return  when  we  come  to  the  story 
of  his  conversion. 

All  this  turmoil  grew  out  of  Stephen's  speech  and 
death.  We  see  the  base,  attempting  to  rid  itself  of  the 
high;  we  see  materialism,  attempting  to  silence  the  voice 
of  spirituality.  We  see  Calvary  repeated.  They  put 
Christ  to  death  because  His  conceptions  were  spiritual 
and  theirs  were  material.  They  put  Him  to  death  be- 
cause He  insisted  upon  the  supremacy  of  the  spiritual, 
while  they  grovelled  in  the  dust  of  materialism.  Now 
these  people,  living  by  the  impulse  of  His  indwelling  life, 
must  come  to  the  same  conflict. 

As  we  watch  that  scattering  crowd,  we  are  observing 
the  progress  of  the  Christian  Church.  They  were  enter- 
ing into  fellowship  with  His  sufferings,  and  therefore 
they  were  entering  into  the  fulfilment  of  His  purpose  for 
Judaea  and  Samaria.  "  There  arose  on  that  day  a  great 
persecution  against  the  Church  which  was  in  Jerusalem ; 
and  they  were  all  scattered  abroad  throughout  the  regions 
of  Judaea  and  Samaria."  Thus  were  they  scattered 
through  the  regions  which  Jesus  had  told  them  to  pass 
over,  and  announce  His  Gospel,  and  they  were  going  in 
fellowship  with  His  sufferings. 

So  we  pass  to  the  story  of  Philip,  and  of  power.  Philip 
is  introduced  in  chapter  six,  verses  three  to  six,  "  Look 
ye  out  therefore,  brethren,  from  among  you  seven  men  of 
good  report,  full  of  the  Spirit  and  of  wisdom,  whom  we 
may  appoint  over  this  business  .  .  .  and  they  chose 
Stephen,  a  man  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
Philip."  In  the  twenty-first  chapter,  verse  seven,  we  find 
these  words:  "And  when  we  had  finished  the  voyage 
from  Tyre  we  arrived  at  Ptolemais;  and  saluted  the 

[  197  1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  8 :  1-13] 

brethren,  and  abode  with  them  one  day.  And  on  the 
morrow,  we  departed  and  came  unto  Caesarea ;  and  enter- 
ing into  the  house  of  Philip  the  evangelist,  who  was  one 
of  the  seven^  we  abode  with  him.  Now  this  man  had 
four  daughters,  virgins,  who  prophesied."  Philip  the 
deacon,  one  of  the  seven,  became  Philip  the  evangelist. 
He  was  among  the  number  of  those  who  were  driven 
from  Jerusalem  by  Saul's  persecution.  In  the  twenty- 
first  chapter,  Philip  is  seen  entertaining  Paul  on  his  mis- 
sionary journey.  How  they  must  have  talked  together 
of  those  early  days,  and  of  the  martyred  Stephen. 

"  Saints,  did  I  say  ?  with  your  remembered  faces, 
Dear  men  and  women,  whom  I  sought  and  slew  1 
Ah,  when  we  mingle  in  the  heavenly  places 
How  will  I  weep  to  Stephen  and  to  you ! 

"  Oh  for  the  strain  that  rang  through  our  reviling, 
Still,  when  the  bruised  limbs  sank  upon  the  sod, 
Oh  for  the  eyes  that  looked  their  last  in  smiling, 
Last  on  this  world  here,  but  their  first  on  God !  " 

I  think  they  talked  of  that  at  Csesarea. 

This  man  Philip  then  was  the  centre  of  the  wonderful 
movement  in  the  city  of  Samaria.  Jews  have  no  deal- 
ings with  Samaritans,  but  Christians  have,  and  Philip 
came  to  Samaria.  There  he  proclaimed  the  Messiah.  In 
the  course  of  this  passage  two  great  words  for  preaching 
are  used  in  describing  the  work  of  Philip.  He  proclaimed 
the  Christ — and  that  is  the  Greek  word  kerusso,  which 
means  to  proclaim  as  a  herald.  We  find  later  that 
Philip  preached  the  Gospel,  and  that  is  the  Greek  word 
euaggelizo,  which  indicates  the  proclamation  of  good 
news.  The  message  concerning  Christ,  delivered  through 
the  deacon-evangelist  Philip,  arrested  Samaria.  In 
Samaria  the  Christian  preacher  found  a  new  atmosphere 
and  a  new  outlook.  Moreover,  Samaria  was  at  the  time 
under  the  spell  of  Simon  the  sorcerer.  To  Samaria, 
driven  by  persecution,  there  came,  not  an  apostle,  but 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  8  .-1-13] 

a  man  set  apart  to  serve  tables,  in  order  that  the  apostles 
migiit  be  set  apart  to  preach  the  Word.  He  proclaimed 
Christ,  and  his  preaching  was  accompanied  by  mental 
and  physical  signs.  Unclean  spirits  were  cast  out,  and 
men  were  healed.  The  city  was  full  of  joy,  resulting 
from  these  things;  and  in  that  attitude  of  amazement, 
of  surprise,  and  of  joy,  they  listened.  This  story  of 
Philip  is  but  an  illustration  of  a  much  wider  movement. 
The  whole  Church,  driven  by  persecution,  was  proceed- 
ing in  power. 

So  we  come  to  the  story  of  Simon,  and  of  peril.  Simon 
had  amazed  the  city  of  Samaria  with  sorcery,  and  had 
gathered  around  him  a  great  company  of  people.  He  had 
flung  the  spell  of  his  personality  over  the  city  by  his  self- 
advertisement  :  "  Giving  out  that  himself  was  some  great 
one."  How  is  a  city  to  be  delivered  from  that  kind  of 
spell  ? 

To  Samaria  Philip  came,  full  of  the  Spirit,  and  driven 
by  the  indwelling  life  of  the  Christ,  and  there  he  pro- 
claimed the  Christ.  Observe  the  difference:  Philip  pro- 
claimed another,  the  Messiah;  Simon  proclaimed  him- 
self. 

The  third  part  of  our  paragraph  elaborates  the  declara- 
tion of  the  second.  The  second  says  that  "  he  proclaimed 
Christ";  the  third  that  he  preached  "the  Kingdom  of 
God  and  the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ " ;  and  this  with  power 
because  he  himself  was  submitted  to  it,  and  driven  by 
it.  "  The  Kingdom  of  God  and  the  Name  of  Jesus 
Christ " ;  that  was  a  new  centre  for  a  new  society. 

The  people  who  had  been  under  the  spell  of  the  sor- 
cerer, listened.  They  believed,  and  they  were  baptized. 
The  most  marvellous  victory  in  Samaria — for  victory  it 
was — was  the  belief  and  the  baptism  of  Simon.  We 
have  no  right  to  say  that  Simon  was  insincere.  The 
very  words  used  of  the  multitude  are  used  also  of  Simon, 
and  I  believe  his  belief  was  as  sincere  as  that  of  the 
rest,  and  his  baptism  was  as  valid  as  theirs. 

[  199  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  8: 1-13] 

But  there  was  a  great  incompleteness  in  the  whole  of 
this.  The  belief  was  intellectual  assent,  and  the  baptism 
was  intellectual  consent.  In  the  fourteenth  verse  to 
which  we  come  in  our  next  study,  we  read  that  the 
apostles  heard  that  they  had  "  received  the  Word  of 
God."  That  is  to  say  that  they  had  received  it  intel- 
lectually. They  had  not  received  the  Spirit  which  brings 
regeneration,  the  beginning  of  the  new  life.  This  first 
victory  broke  the  spell  of  the  sorcerer.  He  himself  was 
captured,  and  the  city  passed  under  the  spell  of  the 
evangel.  Great  multitudes  intellectually  accepting  the 
truth  of  what  Philip  had  declared,  submitted  themselves 
to  the  rite  of  water  baptism  as  an  indication  of  their  ac- 
ceptance. It  was  a  remarkable  triumph. 

The  enquiry  necessarily  arises  at  this  point,  as  to  how 
it  was  that  these  people  did  not  receive  the  Spirit  imme- 
diately upon  their  intellectual  assent  to  the  truth.  I  have 
no  answer.  Whether  the  reason  was  spiritual  or  psycho- 
logical is  debatable.  The  story  as  it  stands  reminds  us 
once  more  that  we  have  no  right  to  base  a  system  or 
economy  on  any  one  picture  given  to  us  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles.  Here  were  people  believing  on  Jesus,  and  sub- 
sequently receiving  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  There 
are  other  pictures  where  people  believing  received  the 
Spirit  immediately.  We  cannot,  I  repeat,  base  an  econ- 
omy or  a  system  on  any  one  instance.  Our  economy 
must  be  based  rather  on  the  whole  revelation  of  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles.  As  in  the  Gospel  stories,  we  see  that 
Jesus  did  not  fulfil  His  ministry  in  the  souls  of  two 
men  in  the  same  way,  that  there  was  infinite  variety  in 
His  method;  so  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  we  see  that 
Christian  experience  cannot  be  tabulated  and  systema- 
tized in  the  case  of  any  one,  for  all  are  different.  God 
fulfils  Himself  in  many  ways.  Let  us  make  room  for 
Him  in  the  experience  of  other  men,  and  not  attempt 
to  say  that  thus  and  so,  and  by  sequence  which  we  have 
systematized  in  our  theology,  must  men  pass  into  fullness 

[  200  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  8:1-13] 

of  life.  Here  is  a  case,  for  some  reason  which  cannot 
be  discovered,  in  which  men  came  into  intellectual  assent 
and  consent,  and  yet  lacked  for  a  little  while  the  real 
touch  of  life  which  made  them  members  of  the  Church, 
and  witnesses  of  the  Christ.  When  presently  the  apostles 
came,  they  found  Simon  and  the  rest  lacking  the  Spirit. 
Then  came  differentiation  and  discrimination,  resulting 
from  the  next  attitude  taken  up  by  Simon,  and  the 
rest. 

What  are  the  spiritual  significances  of  this  passage? 
First  of  all  it  is  singularly  impressive  in  its  revelation 
of  the  sovereignty  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Note  well  His 
compelling  power.  He  said  to  these  men :  "  Ye  shall  be 
My  witnesses  in  Jerusalem,  Judea,  Samaria  and  to  the 
uttermost  part  of  the  earth."  They  halted,  and  waited, 
and  failed  to  go  forward.  Then,  through  the  fidelity  of 
Stephen  He  ultimately  compelled  their  teaching  and 
preaching  in  Samaria,  though  He  drove  them  out  by 
persecution. 

His  sovereignty  is  seen,  not  only  in  His  compelling 
power,  but  in  His  continued  fellowship  with  these  men. 
Persecution  never  for  a  moment  weakened  their  con- 
sciousness of  Christ,  or  their  loyalty  to  Him.  That  is 
always  so  with  martyrs,  with  witnesses,  with  those  in 
whom  He  dwells.  Here  is  a  man,  loud-voiced  in  his 
profession  of  loyalty  to  Christ,  and  when  persecution 
begins,  his  testimony  ceases.  That  man  never  really 
knew  Christ  in  his  inner  life.  Christ  was  external  to  his 
life.  The  one  thing  persecution  can  never  do  for  a  true 
witness,  is  to  blur  the  vision  of  Christ,  or  change  the 
loyalty  of  the  witness  to  Him.  One  little  word  occurs 
here,  which  alone  has  no  significance,  but  in  its  connec- 
tion is  full  of  most  exquisite  beauty.  "  They  therefore 
that  were  scattered  abroad  went  about  preaching  the 
Word."  Wherefore  ?  Because  they  were  persecuted  and 
driven  out.  How  revealing  is  that!  Persecuted  and 
driven  out,  He  yet  held  His  throne  in  them ;  and  secured 

[  201  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  8: 14-25] 

their  loyalty,  for  He  never  parted  company  with  them  in 

spiritual  experience. 

The  next  lesson  is  that  of  the  universality  of  the  Gos- 
pel. In  Samaria  we  see  the  Gospel  in  a  new  atmosphere. 
That  matters  nothing.  Christ  arrests  Samaria  as  easily 
as  He  arrested  Jerusalem.  The  evangel  brings  convic- 
tion in  Samaria,  as  surely  as  it  brought  it  in  Jerusalem. 

Finally,  we  learn  the  lesson  of  the  spirituality  of  the 
Church.  Mark  the  obscurity  of  the  apostles.  All  were 
driven  from  Jerusalem,  except  the  apostles.  The  ma- 
jority of  expositors  say  that  it  was  necessary  that  the 
apostles  should  remain  at  Jerusalem  for  purposes  of 
government.  I  respect  that  view,  but  I  am  not  sure.  I 
am  rather  inclined  to  think  that  they  should  have  been 
out  on  the  highway  of  witness.  When  apostles  stay  at  a 
geographical  centre,  they  may  do  more  harm  than  good. 
If  they  had  been  out  upon  the  missionary  pathway  they 
would  have  been  fulfilling  the  meaning  of  the  word 
apostle,  as  they  were  not  when  remaining  at  a  centre. 

God  is  not,  however,  dependent  upon  apostles  that  stay 
at  Jerusalem.  He  has  Philip  the  deacon,  the  evangelist. 
The  Christian  Church  in  her  spiritual  conception  is  in- 
dependent of  localities  and  men.  She  fulfils  her  true 
function  by  the  presence  and  power  of  the  Spirit  in  all 
such  as  allow  Him  right  of  way  to  administer  the  affairs 
of  the  Christ. 

Acts  8 : 14-25 

This  paragraph  has  still  to  do  with  the  work  of  the 
early  Church  in  Samaria,  and  is  the  sequel  to  our  previous 
study.  Samaria  as  a  centre  of  operation  was  not  chosen 
by  the  council  of  the  apostles  in  Jerusalem.  It  was  un- 
doubtedly in  the  original  intention  of  the  Christ.  Perse- 
cution had  broken  out  in  Jerusalem,  and  the  saints  were 
scattered  here,  there,  and  everywhere;  and  among  the 
rest,  Philip  had  come  to  Samaria  and  preached  the 
Gospel. 

[  202  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  8 : 14-25] 

In  this  paragraph  Jerusalem  and  the  apostles  reappear. 
The  news  reached  Jerusalem  that  Samaria  had  received 
the  Word  of  God,  a  statement  which  must  have  power- 
fully affected  that  group  of  men,  who  still  retained  some 
of  their  old  Jewish  prejudice  against  Samaria;  for  it  is 
evident  that  Hebrew  believers  did  carry  over  with  them 
into  their  new  relationship  to  Christ,  the  old  prejudices 
against  all  things  outside  the  Hebrew  economy.  Imme- 
diately, however,  the  apostles  fell  into  line,  and  cooper- 
ated, sending  two  of  their  number  to  Samaria.  We  see 
here  a  new  cooperation  in  spiritual  ministry. 

Another  thing  that  impresses  us  is  that  the  apostles 
themselves  became  evangelists.  Peter  and  John  having 
been  to  Samaria,  having  seen  the  work  of  God,  having 
been  the  instruments  for  consolidating  that  work,  and  for 
purifying  it  at  its  very  beginning  by  the  exclusion  of 
Simon,  went  back  again  to  Jerusalem;  but  as  they  went, 
they  "preached  the  Gospel  to  many  villages  of  the 
Samaritans." 

This  paragraph  then  falls  into  three  sections :  first  the 
apostolic  visitation  of  Samaria;  secondly  the  apostolic 
discipline  in  the  case  of  Simon ;  and  thirdly  the  apostolic 
evangelism  through  the  villages  of  Samaria. 

It  is  impossible  to  read  this  story  without  once  more 
being  impressed  with  something  we  have  already  noticed 
in  an  earlier  chapter — the  comradeship  of  these  two  men 
Peter  and  John.  We  shall  not  have  occasion  to  refer  to  it 
again  in  the  course  of  this  book,  because  John  here  passes 
out  of  the  record.  He  is  never  seen  again  in  the  New 
Testament  history,  save  when  Paul  refers  to  his  being  in 
Jerusalem  in  the  Galatian  letter,  and  in  his  own  refer- 
ences to  his  sojourn  in  Patmos  in  the  Apocalypse.  In 
this  companionship  of  P'eter  and  John,  we  see  the  spir- 
itual fellowship  of  opposites  in  Christian  service.  How 
utterly  and  absolutely  different  they  were!  Peter  the 
practical ;  John  the  poet.  Peter  the  man  of  deeds ;  John 
the  dreamer.  When  the  work  in  Samaria  had  to  be  in- 

[  203  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  8: 14-25] 

spected, — for  I  think  that  was  the  first  apostolic  inten- 
tion,— the  Spirit,  acting  through  the  apostles,  sent  these 
two ;  the  man  of  deeds,  and  the  man  of  dreams. 

The  whole  fiction  of  Petrine  supremacy  breaks  down 
in  the  light  of  this  story.  If  it  be  true  that  Peter  was 
the  chief,  how  comes  it  that  he  was  sent  by  his  brethren  ? 
Peter  and  John  were  sent  in  a  holy  fellowship  by  the 
Spirit  of  God  Who  in  the  Church  at  Jerusalem  was  still 
acting,  and  that  as  the  Interpreter  of  the  Will  of  Christ 
the  only  Head  of  the  Church. 

We  turn  our  attention  to  the  Samaritans.  What  is  the 
story  of  these  men  in  Samaria  ?  First  that  they  "  re- 
ceived the  Word  of  God."  Secondly  they  were  "bap- 
tized into  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  Thirdly  they  had 
not  received  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Let  us  institute  a  simple  enquiry.  Why  did  they  not 
receive  the  Spirit  of  God  immediately  ?  In  the  paragraph 
concerning  the  teaching  of  Philip,  we  learned  that  he 
proclaimed  Christ  as  Messiah ;  and  that  he  preached  good 
tidings  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  and  the  name  of  Jesus. 
I  lay  emphasis  upon  those  two  statements  because  they 
cover  the  whole  outlook  of  New  Testament  preaching. 
There  are  many  words  in  the  Greek  New  Testament 
translated  preach;  but  there  are  two  principal  words,  and 
both  of  them  are  used  here  about  Philip.  The  two  great 
ideals  of  preaching  are  discoverable  in  what  Philip  did  in 
Samaria;  the  word  kerusso,  which  suggests  the  proclama- 
tion of  a  herald ;  the  word  euaggelizo  which  suggests  the 
declaration  of  good  news.  Philip  did  both.  He  pro- 
claimed as  a  herald  the  Messiahship  of  Christ.  He 
preached  as  an  evangelist  the  good  news  of  the  Kingdom 
of  God,  and  of  the  name  of  Jesus.  This  double  declara- 
tion concerning  the  preaching  of  Philip  shows  that  there 
was  nothing  lacking  in  his  preaching.  We  must  not  ac- 
count for  the  fact  that  when  these  people  believed  and 
were  baptized  they  did  not  receive  the  Spirit,  by  saying 
that  the  preaching  of  Philip  was  faltering.  Further  on 

[  204  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  8 : 14-25] 

in  our  studies  we  shall  find  that  there  were  men  in 
Ephesus,  who  had  not  received  the  Spirit.  The  preach- 
ing of  Apollos  was  faulty.  Apollos  had  not  known,  but 
Philip  did  know.  Here  was  preaching  which  was  preach- 
ing in  the  fullest  New  Testament  sense  of  the  word,  the 
authoritative  proclamation  of  the  Lordship  of  Jesus ;  the 
glad  telling  of  the  good  news  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  and 
of  the  name  of  Jesus — the  name  of  Jesus  being  the  symbol 
of  salvation.  The  preaching  was  complete.  Why  then 
was  it  that  when  people  believed  into  that  very  Name 
which  he  preached,  and  evidently  were  baptized  in  water, 
that  they  did  not  receive  the  Spirit  ?  There  is  no  answer. 
There  is  no  reason  to  be  discovered  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  for  that  delay.  If  that  statement  appears  to  be 
most  unsatisfactory,  the  fact  that  there  is  no  answer,  is  an 
answer.  When  the  Church  of  God  begins  to  recognize 
that,  strange  and  paradoxical  as  it  may  appear,  we  shall 
be  at  the  end  of  a  vast  amount  of  confusion  in  systematic 
teaching  concerning  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The 
fact  is  of  importance,  and  so  we  repeat  it.  There  was  a 
full  preaching,  authoritative  and  evangelistic,  of  the 
Messiahship  of  Jesus,  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  of  the 
saving  name  of  Christ.  Men  and  women  believing  into 
the  Name — which  is  more  than  believing  on  it, — sub- 
mitted themselves  to  all  that  the  preaching  claimed,  and 
were  baptized.  Yet  they  had  not  received  the  Spirit. 

Peter  and  John  came -down  to  Samaria,  and  as  a  result 
of  their  visitation  these  men  did  receive  the  Spirit.  Let 
us  look  then  somewhat  carefully  at  the  story  from  that 
standpoint.  What  did  the  apostles  do?  They  prayed 
for  them ;  they  laid  their  hands  upon  them ;  and  then  they 
received  the  Holy  Spirit. 

In  further  explanation  of  the  statement  that  there  is 
no  answer  to  our  enquiry;  and  in  the  presence  of  this 
description  of  what  happened,  and  of  the  method  by 
which  these  men  received  the  Spirit;  what  light  is  there 
upon  our  problem?  We  may  be  inclined  to  think  that  in 

[  205  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  8 : 14-25] 

order  to  the  reception  of  the  Spirit  it  was  necessary 
that  there  should  be  apostolic  ministry ;  that  while  Philip 
the  evangelist  could  preach  a  whole  gospel  and  bring  men 
into  intellectual  assent,  and  belief,  and  even  to  the  obedi- 
ence of  baptism,  yet  because  he  was  not  an  apostle  there 
could  be  no  reception  of  the  Holy  Spirit?  If  that  be  set 
up  as  a  system,  then  we  are  face  to  face  with  a  new 
problem.  The  mightiest  missionary  that  ever  existed  in 
the  early  Church,  Paul,  received  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  by  the  ministry,  not  of  an  apostle  nor  even  of  a 
deacon,  but  of  Ananias  a  simple  disciple.  So  we  must 
be  very  careful  not  to  set  up  a  system  that  will  break 
down  presently.  Or  again  we  may  be  inclined  to  think 
that  while  this  was  not  apostolic,  yet  it  was  the  plan  of 
God  that  men  should  only  receive  the  Spirit  as  hands 
were  laid  upon  them.  We  must  not  speak  slightingly  of 
any  material  ordinance,  if  it  be  in  the  economy  of  God. 
Was  it  then  the  laying  on  of  hands  which  Philip  had 
neglected,  and  the  apostles  fulfilled  ?  Presently  Cornelius 
received  the  Spirit,  and  the  apostle  Peter  never  laid  hands 
on  him.  We  must  be  careful  not  to  create  a  system 
that  does  not  hold  good  in  all  cases.  If  we  say  there 
must  be  some  human  intermediation,  then  why  not  in  the 
case  of  Cornelius  ?  The  moment  we  become  mystified  in 
the  presence  of  the  operations  of  the  Spirit,  we  have 
reached  the  heart  of  truth.  "  The  wind  bloweth  where 
it  will,  and  thou  hearest  the  voice  thereof,  but  knowest 
not  whence  it  cometh,  and  whither  it  goeth."  The  mo- 
ment in  which  any  theologian,  or  school  of  theology,  at- 
tempts to  systematize  the  method  of  the  coming  of  the 
Spirit  into  human  lives,  in  that  moment  they  are  exclud- 
ing a  score  of  His  operations,  and  including  only  one. 
These  people  had  not  received  the  Spirit.  "The  wind 
bloweth  where  it  will ; "  and  this  is  the  supreme  glory 
of  the  Christian  Church.  Its  life  and  its  power  is  not 
that  of  organization  or  ministry,  but  that  of  the  indwell- 
ing Spirit. 

[  206  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  8:14-25] 

But  what  happened?  They  received  the  Holy  Spirit. 
What  difference  did  that  make?  In  the  first  letter  of 
Paul  to  the  Corinthians,  and  in  that  twelfth  chapter  con- 
cerning spiritualities,  is  this  verse — "  For  in  one  Spirit 
were  we  all  baptized  into  one  body."  What  then  hap- 
pened when  the  Spirit  came  to  these  men  in  Samaria? 
Exactly  the  same  thing  that  happened  when  the  Spirit 
came  to  the  men  in  the  Upper  Room  on  the  day  of  Pente- 
cost. Exactly  the  same  thing  that  happened  when  the 
Spirit  came  presently  to  Cornelius,  falling  upon  him  as 
upon  those  disciples  at  the  first.  Exactly  what  happened 
when  the  Spirit  came  to  Saul  of  Tarsus.  Exactly  what 
happened  when  the  Spirit  came  to  the  little  handful  of 
disciples  at  Ephesus.  Exactly  the  same  thing  that  hap- 
pened when  the  Spirit  of  God  came  into  our  lives.  They 
were  baptized  into  the  one  Body  of  Christ.  This  is  a 
figure  of  speech,  but  it  is  a  supremely  beautiful  and 
fitting  one.  If  we  would  know  all  the  glory  of  it,  and 
understand  what  happened  to  the  Samaritan  Christians, 
we  must  study  carefully  the  teaching  of  the  apostle,  in 
which  with  inimitable  art  and  matchless  skill,  he  takes  the 
figure  of  the  body  with  its  different  parts  and  members 
and  functions.  Therein  he  speaks  of  "  diversities  of 
gifts."  The  word  diversities  may  suggest  division;  so 
that  we  will  use  another  word  here,  diaereses  of  gifts, 
diaereses  of  ministrations  and  of  workings.  The  diaeresis 
indicates  a  difference,  and  yet  the  running  together  of 
two  letters  in  close  connection  as  in  the  word  naive. 
Now  in  the  body,  the  diversities  in  that  sense,  of  gifts, 
of  ministrations,  of  workings,  are  in  one  body;  Christ, 
the  Head,  and  all  the  members.  That  is  what  happened 
when  the  Spirit  came.  Samaritans  were  baptized  into 
the  one  Body ;  that  is  to  say  from  henceforth  personality 
to  them  was  to  be  Christian  personality.  Intellectually 
there  was  the  outlook  of  Jesus ;  emotionally  the  passion  of 
Jesus;  volitionally  the  choices  of  their  lives  were  the 
choices  of  Jesus.  He  in  them,  would  think  and  love  and 

[  207  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  8: 14-25] 

will.  In  that  moment  they  were  baptized  into  that  one 
Body;  and  that  meant  membership  in  the  Church;  all 
their  resources  at  the  disposal  of  the  Church,  all  the 
gifts  in  the  Church,  were  gifts  bestowed  for  their  sake, 
whether  they  were  gifts  of  the  apostles,  evangelists, 
prophets,  teachers,  or  helpers.  These  people  came  into 
the  mystic  mystery  of  the  one  lonely  and  indivisible 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ. 

The  picture  that  immediately  follows  emphasizes  the 
teaching  by  way  of  contrast.  What  did  Simon  ask  for, 
and  what  did  Simon  want?  It  is  constantly  imagined 
that  he  asked  for  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  wanted  to  buy  the 
Holy  Spirit,  but  the  story  does  not  say  so.  He  said  to 
Peter :  "  Give  me  also  this  power  that  on  whomsoever  I 
lay  my  hands,  he  may  receive  the  Holy  Spirit."  He  did 
not  ask  for  the  Holy  Spirit;  he  asked  for  power  to  be- 
stow Him.  The  whole  city  had  been  under  the  spell  of 
this  man's  sorceries,  and  here  was  something  that  he 
lacked.  What  he  craved  was  not  the  power  of  the  Spirit, 
but  the  power  to  bestow  the  Spirit.  There  was  born  that 
which  in  the  history  of  the  Church  has  been  described  as 
simony,  the  buying  and  selling  of  position  and  office 
within  the  Church;  the  idea  that  ecclesiastical  prefer- 
ments can  be  procured  in  any  denomination  by  money; 
the  conception  that  the  things  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  of 
the  Church  can  be  purchased  in  current  coin,  of  any  state, 
or  country.  He  asked  for  power  to  bestow  the  Spirit; 
to  be  admitted  into  the  fellowship  of  the  place  in  which 
the  apostles  stood;  and  to  be  brought  to  the  position, 
where  by  the  laying  on  of  hands  he  also  might  confer 
power.  The  sin  was  a  desire  to  possess  spiritual  power 
for  personal  ends.  God  deliver  us  from  all  Pharisaism, 
and  all  attempts  to  make  application  of  that  revelation 
of  peril  to  any  other  communion  than  our  own.  Not 
merely  the  man  who  buys  a  living  in  some  Church  and 
sells  it;  but  the  man  who  in  the  great  spiritual  conven- 
tion falls  into  line  with  certain  suggestions  of  the  speaker, 

[  208  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  8:14-25] 

and  professes,  and  seems  to  desire  some  spiritual  bless- 
ing1, in  order  to  personal  aggrandizement  and  fame;  is 
guilty  of  the  same  sin.  A  man  does  not  receive  the 
Spirit  in  order  to  crowd  his  church,  and  if  a  man  seeks 
for  a  spiritual  gift  in  order  that  he  may  enrich  himself 
at  any  point,  in  any  way,  he  is  attempting  to  traffic  with 
spiritual  things  for  personal  aggrandizement. 

Think  of  the  subtle  peril  of  this  suggestion  to  Peter. 
He  rose  superior  to  the  temptation,  but  still  mark  the 
temptation,  in  order  that  we  may  learn  this  fact,  that  the 
only  way  in  which  to  resist  this  temptation  is  the  way  of 
the  fullness  of  spiritual  life.  Peter  knew  full  well  that 
the  Spirit  had  not  fallen  upon  these  men  by  the  laying 
on  of  his  hands.  That  is  what  Simon  thought  he  saw. 
Peter  knew,  and  declared  that  it  was  the  gift  of  God.  Yet 
how  easy  it  would  have  been  to  have  agreed  to  the  bar- 
gain proposed.  This  was  the  peril  confronting  the  early 
Church,  when  a  man  asked  to  come  into  its  office  in  re- 
turn for  money.  Looking  back  over  the  history  of  the 
Christian  Church  we  see  that  she  has  not  always  resisted. 
Mark  well  Peter's  almost  terrible  severity ;  and  I  have  no 
explanation  of  that  severity  save  as  I  believe  that  he 
saw  the  peril  to  himself  and  to  the  Church :  "  Thy  silver 
perish  with  thee,  because  thou  hast  thought  to  obtain 
the  gift  of  God  with  money.  Thou  hast  neither  part  nor 
lot  in  this  matter."  Thou  canst  not  invade  the  spirituali- 
ties with  thy  carnalities.  If  the  Church  believed  that  to- 
day, and  acted  upon  it,  she  might  lack  a  good  deal  she 
possesses,  but  would  be  richer  for  the  lack.  There  is  a 
lack  that  means  power;  there  is  a  possession  that  means 
paralysis. 

But  observe  the  true  spirit  of  the  apostle,  and  the  true 
evidence  of  the  indwelling  Spirit  in  the  tender  sympathy 
of  Peter  for  the  man,  "  Repent  therefore  of  this  thy 
wickedness,  and  pray  the  Lord,  if  perhaps  the  thought 
of  thy  heart  shall  be  forgiven  thee."  Not  in  the  thunder 
of  a  final  anathema  did  the  apostolic  speech  end,  but  in 

[  209  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  8: 14-25] 

the  tender  hope  of  restoration.  That  is  the  Spirit  of 
Christ.  Some  interpreters  have  said  that  when  Simon 
said,  "  Pray  ye  for  me  to  the  Lord  that  none  of  the  things 
which  ye  have  spoken  come  upon  me/'  he  was  impeni- 
tent, and  only  afraid  of  punishment  I  do  not  think  we 
have  any  right  to  say  so.  That  is  a  subject  better  left 
where  the  record  leaves  it. 

Our  last  paragraph  deals  with  the  apostolic  evangeliza- 
tion. In  this  connection  it  is  interesting  to  turn  back 
to  the  Gospel  of  Luke.  There,  in  the  ninth  chapter  and 
at  verse  forty-nine,  we  read: 

"  And  John  answered  and  said,  Master,  we  saw  one 
casting  out  demons  in  Thy  name;  and  we  forbade  him, 
because  he  followeth  not  with  us.  But  Jesus  said  unto 
him,  Forbid  him  not:  for  he  that  is  not  against  you 
is  for  you.  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  days  were  well 
nigh  come  that  He  should  be  received  up,  He  steadfastly 
set  His  face  to  go  to  Jerusalem,  and  sent  messengers  be- 
fore His  face,  and  they  went  and  entered  into  a  village 
of  the  Samaritans  to  make  ready  for  Him;  and  they  did 
not  receive  Him  because  His  face  was  as  though  He 
were  going  to  Jerusalem.  And  when  His  disciples  James 
and  John  saw  this,  they  said,  Lord,  wilt  Thou  that  we 
bid  fire  to  come  down  from  heaven  and  consume  them? 
But  He  turned  and  rebuked  them." 

John  would  have  destroyed  the  Samaritan  village  by 
fire  in  those  early  days,  but  now  he  is  seen  preaching  the 
Gospel  in  the  Samaritan  village.  No  comment  is  neces- 
sary. It  is  such  a  wonderful  revelation  of  what  the  spir- 
itual life  really  is.  The  man  was  completely  changed. 
He  was  still  Boanerges,  a  son  of  thunder,  a  man  of  reso- 
lute and  determined  endeavour;  only  the  whole  force  of 
his  nature  had  been  turned  in  another  direction.  That 
is  the  story  of  the  fullness  of  spiritual  life.  Let  us  be 
careful  not  to  imagine  that  when  the  Spirit  takes  hold  of 
man  or  woman  He  makes  them  all  of  one  pattern.  He 

[    210   ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  8: 14-25] 

takes  the  man  and  turns  the  whole  force  of  his  life  into 
a  constructive  instead  of  a  destructive  direction. 

The  abiding  truths  we  have  surely  seen  as  we  have 
passed  the  story  in  survey.  As  we  read  of  the  coming  of 
the  apostles  to  Samaria,  and  the  reception  of  the  Samari- 
tans of  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  we  learn  the  truth  anew, 
that  nothing  short  of  the  actual  reception  of  the  Spirit 
is  Christianity.  Men  may  come  very  near,  they  may  be 
intellectually  convinced  of  the  supremacy  of  Jesus;  they 
may  even  decide  that  they  will  adopt  His  ethical  ideal; 
they  may  go  so  far  as  to  determine  that  they  will  imitate 
the  perfection  of  His  example.  But  these  things  do  not 
make  men  Christians.  The  whole  evangel  of  the  authori- 
tative Christ,  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  of  the  saving 
Name,  may  be  understood,  but  there  may  be  no  touch  of 
life.  If  men  have  not  received  the  Holy  Spirit,  they  are 
not  members  of  the  Christ.  No  man  has  entered  into 
true  Christianity,  save  as  there  has  come  to  him  that  life 
which  is  illumination,  which  is  emotion,  which  is  voli- 
tion, and  all  which  are  Christian.  "If  any  man  hath 
not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His." 

We  learn  also  from  this  story,  what  Christian  life 
really  means.  There  was  glorious  cooperation  in  service ; 
apostles  and  evangelists  working  together.  There  is  per- 
fect fellowship  in  all  the  orders  of  the  Christian  ministry 
in  the  fullness  of  the  Spirit.  Peter  and  John  the  apostles, 
are  glad  to  go  down  and  help  consummate  the  work  of 
Philip  the  evangelist.  There  is  no  antagonism  in  the 
heart  of  Philip  against  the  work  of  Peter  and  John. 

Again,  by  the  awful  and  solemn  exclusion  of  Simon, 
we  learn  that  the  Spirit-filled  Church  is  a  Church  in 
which  simony  cannot  live. 

Finally  we  have  a  further  illustration  of  the  marvellous 
power  of  the  Church.  One  sentence  is  enough  to  illus- 
trate it;  victory  was  gained  in  Samaria.  This  Judaism 
had  never  won.  How  near  the  Samaritans  had  come  to 
Judaism — the  Samaritan  Pentateuch,  the  Samaritan  cir- 

[211    ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  8:26-40] 

cumcision,  the  Samaritan  rite  and  symbol;  but  ritualism 
approximating  to  ritualism  never  brings  the  ritualists  to- 
gether; and  Judaism  and  Samaritanism  never  merged. 
Judaism  never  conquered  Samaritanism,  but  the  Word 
of  God  won  in  Samaria.  So  the  triumph  of  the  Church 
must  be  that  of  the  Word  proclaimed  in  the  power  of  the 
Spirit. 

Acts  8:26-40 

While  this  paragraph  commences  with  words  that  sug- 
gest intimate  relation  with  what  has  preceded,  there  is 
nevertheless  a  very  definite  and  decided  break  in  the 
narrative  at  this  point.  The  verse  begins :  "  But  an  angel 
of  the  Lord  spake  unto  Philip."  The  work  of  Philip  is 
still  in  view,  and  yet,  here  commenced  that  wider  move- 
ment in  the  activity  of  the  Christian  Church,  of  the  be- 
ginnings of  which,  the  remainder  of  this  book  of  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles  tells  the  story.  It  only  tells  the  story 
of  beginnings,  because  this  wider  movement  in  the  work 
of  the  Church  is  not  yet  completed. 

We  have  seen  the  first  movements,  indicated  in  the 
commission  of  Jesus,  "  In  Jerusalem,  in  Judsea  and 
Samaria."  Now  we  have  the  first  movement  beyond,  to- 
ward "  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth."  We  almost 
invariably  speak  of  the  opening  of  the  door  to  the  Gen- 
tiles as  having  taken  place  in  the  house  of  Cornelius,  and 
of  Peter  being  the  first  messenger  of  the  evangel  to  the 
Gentiles.  That  may  be  true,  or  it  may  not.  There  is  a 
question  as  to  what  the  Ethiopian's  nationality  really  was. 
I  believe  that  by  race  he  was  Ethiopian,  that  is  a  Gentile ; 
and  therefore,  that  not  to  Peter  the  apostle,  but  to  Philip 
the  deacon  was  given  the  work  of  first  expanding  the 
commission  of  Jesus  so  as  to  win  one  for  Him  from 
among  the  number  of  those  who  by  the  Jews  were  looked 
upon  as  outside  the  covenant  of  promise. 

Of  the  issues  of  this  movement  toward  Africa,  we  have 
no  record.  There  are  legends,  interesting,  but  quite  unre- 

[   212   ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  8 : 26-40] 

liable.  Our  interest  in  this  story  is  in  the  movement  it- 
self, as  this  account  reveals  its  direction  and  methods. 
So  we  shall  first  examine  the  story,  and  then  attempt  to 
observe  its  abiding  teaching. 

Let  us  first  look  more  carefully  at  this  Ethiopian 
Eunuch.  We  are  told  quite  clearly  certain  things  about 
him.  He  was  "  a  man  of  Ethiopia,"  he  was  "  a  eunuch 
of  great  authority  under  Candace,  queen  of  the  Ethio- 
pians " ;  he  "  was  over  all  her  treasure."  It  has  been 
suggested  that  he  was  a  proselyte  to  Judaism,  a  proselyte 
of  the  Gate,  a  proselyte  of  righteousness.  If  this  was 
so,  he  would  not  be  admitted  to  the  inner  sanctuary  at 
Jerusalem,  but  would  be  allowed  to  stand  in  an  outer 
court,  in  order  to  worship.  There  are  those  who  hold 
that  this  expression,  "  a  man  of  Ethiopia  "  simply  means 
that,  being  a  Jew,  he  was  nevertheless  born  in  Ethiopia, 
and  had  risen  there  to  this  position  of  power  and  emi- 
nence. Probably  he  was  indeed  a  man  of  Ethiopia  in 
the  full  sense  of  the  word,  a  son  of  Africa,  himself  one 
of  the  race  of  Ham,  a  negro.  That  is  my  own  personal 
conviction.  I  believe  he  was  the  first  of  the  African 
race  to  become  a  Christian.  It  is  now  established  that 
at  least  three  centuries  before  Christ  Greek  literature  and 
thought  had  permeated  that  central  African  district,  and 
that  a  most  remarkable  civilization  was  realized  under 
Candace.  Probably  this  word  Candace  is  not  the  name 
of  a  woman,  but  rather  a  title,  like  Pharaoh.  The 
Egyptian  portraiture  of  the  Ethiopians  shows  the  distinct 
negro  type. 

I  never  read  this  story  without  wondering  how  it  came 
about,  that  seeing  this  man  passed  down  into  Ethiopia  so 
early  in  the  history  of  the  Christian  Church,  Africa  is 
where  she  is  to-day.  In  the  earliest  churches  in  existence 
in  Africa,  we  find  that  they  failed  to  translate  the  Scrip- 
tures into  their  own  language,  failed  to  give  the  Bible 
to  their  own  people.  The  story  of  missions  the  whole 
wide  world  over,  shows  that  the  success  or  failure  of  such 

[  213  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  8 : 26-40] 

missions  has  always  been  dependent  on  whether  those 
brought  to  Christ  had  the  Scriptures  in  their  own  lan- 
guage or  not. 

This  man  had  been  to  Jerusalem  to  worship,  and  he 
was  now  on  his  way  back.  What  had  he  found  in  Jeru- 
salem ?  He  went  to  the  Hebrew  centre  of  worship,  to  the 
Hebrew  priesthood,  to  the  Hebrew  temple.  He  went 
to  that  system  of  worship,  a  portion  of  the  sacred  litera- 
ture of  which  he  held  in  his  hand,  and  was  reading  on 
his  way  home.  In  Jerusalem  he  found  that  whole  system 
of  worship  materialized,  under  Sadducean  influence; 
materialized,  ritualistic,  dead. 

In  some  of  the  things  this  man  said  to*  Philip  on  his 
return  journey,  one  can  hear  the  echo  of  his  discontent 
with  everything  he  had  found  in  Jerusalem.  The  state- 
ment, "  He  was  returning  and  sitting  in  his  chariot,  and 
was  reading  the  prophet  Isaiah,"  shows  his  interest  in 
some  of  the  profotmdest  things  of  the  Hebrew  religion. 
Philip  had  said  to  him,  "  Understandest  thou  what  thou 
readest  ?  "  In  his  answer  I  can  detect  the  restlessness  of 
a  great  disappointment  and  discontent.  "  How  can  I, 
except  some  one  shall  guide  me  ?  "  The  word  "  guide  " 
there  is  a  very  technical  word.  It  is  used  again  and 
again  with  reference  to  authoritative  teaching  and  inter- 
pretation. Christ  described  the  authoritative  teachers  of 
His  time  as  "  blind  guides." 

This  man,  profoundly  interested  in  the  deepest  things 
of  the  Hebrew  religion — for  Hebrew  expositors  will 
agree  that  the  great  prophecy  of  Isaiah  was  reckoned  by 
themselves  to  be  the  finest  and  profoundest  of  their 
writings  and  literature — had  found  his  way  back  to  that 
writing,  and  therein  to  that  strange  and  mystic  chapter, 
telling  the  story  of  the  Servant  of  God,  suffering,  bruised, 
and  through  travail  proceeding  to  triumph. 

While  profoundly  interested,  he  was  equally  ignorant. 
Said  he,  "  How  can  I  understand,  except  some  one  shall 
guide  me ? "  .  .  .  "I  pray  thee,  of  whom  speaketh 

[  214  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  8:26-40] 

the  prophet  this?  of  himself,  or  of  some  other?  "  If  the 
fact  that  he  read  proved  his  interest,  and  his  confession 
proved  his  ignorance;  this  question  proved  his  intelli- 
gence. It  was  the  question  of  the  hour  among  the  ex- 
positors. Was  that  portraiture  of  the  latter  part  of  the 
prophecy  of  Isaiah,  which  at  that  particular  point  be- 
comes the  portrait  of  a  suffering,  bruised,  and  broken 
Servant  nevertheless  emerging  into  triumph,  Isaiah's  ac- 
count of  himself?  Or  was  he  speaking  of  some  one 
else  ?  "  Who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  and  to  whom 
hath  the  arm  of  the  Lord  been  revealed?"  Was  Isaiah 
uttering  a  lamentation  about  the  failure  of  his  own  min- 
istry, or  was  he  speaking  of  some  One  Who  should  come 
and  should  fail?  That,  moreover,  is  the  question  which 
is  still  being  debated  concerning  this  chapter.  There  are 
those  to-day  who  are  a  little  more  inclined  to  be  dog- 
matic than  was  the  Ethiopian  Eunuch.  It  is  affirmed 
that  Isaiah  had  no  view  and  no  vision  of  the  ultimate 
suffering  of  the  Servant  of  God,  but  that  the  whole  mean- 
ing of  the  passage  was  exhausted  in  his  own  experience, 
or  possibly  in  that  of  Jeremiah.  But  that  is  not  our  sub- 
ject now.  We  are  interested  in  the  man.  A  man  of 
authority,  he  had  been  to  Jerusalem,  seeking  to  worship ; 
to  satisfy  in  the  city  of  holy  associations,  in  the  very 
central  place  of  worship,  the  deepest,  profoundest,  and 
holiest  cravings  of  his  life.  This  man  laden  with  honour, 
overwhelmed  with  responsibility,  sitting  in  his  chariot, 
read  aloud  as  men  did  in  those  days,  the  prophecy  of 
Isaiah,  pondering  over  it,  perplexed  by  it,  catching  the 
music  in  it,  and  yet  wondering  what  it  all  meant.  He  was 
a  hungry  soul! 

Let  us  now  look  at  Philip  in  these  new  circumstances. 
"  But  an  angel  of  the  Lord  spake  unto  Philip,  saying, 
Arise,  and  go  toward  the  south  unto  the  way  that  goeth 
down  from  Jerusalem  unto  Gaza;  the  same  is  desert." 
The  word  "  But "  suggests  change  in  the  circumstances 
of  Philip's  ministry.  From  Samaria,  the  city  crowded 

1 215 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  8 : 26-40] 

with  interests,  and  crowded  with  men,  he  was  sent  to  the 
lonely  road,  that  winds  away  from  civilization  across  the 
desert,  toward  another  civilization,  foreign,  alien,  dif- 
ferent. From  a  ministry  among  multitudes,  with  all  its 
thrill  and  fascination,  to  a  conversation  with  one  man. 
Philip  did  not  even  know  he  was  going  to  one  man.  He 
only  knew  he  was  going  to  the  Desert!  Samaria  was 
the  city  of  fellowship,  new  fellowship,  glad  fellowship, 
the  fellowship  of  souls  won  for  his  Lord.  Philip  the 
beloved  evangelist  had  been  in  the  midst  of  that  sacred 
fellowship.  He  was  now  disturbed,  and  sent  into 
loneliness :  "  Go  toward  the  south  unto  the  way  that 
goeth  down  from  Jerusalem  unto  Gaza;  the  same  is 
desert." 

But  that  is  only  part  of  the  story.  It  was  an  angel  who 
told  him  to  go.  When  obeying,  and  having  arrived,  he 
saw  the  retinue  passing  along  the  road,  and  this  man 
sitting  in  the  chariot,  it  was  the  Spirit  Who  whispered 
in  his  heart,  "  Go  near,  and  join  thyself  to  this  chariot." 
With  the  company  of  angels,  in  fellowship  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  there  is  no  loneliness.  In  this  great  life  and  move- 
ment and  service  of  which  Philip  was  an  honoured  instru- 
ment, there  are  heavenly  guidances,  and  eternal  illumina- 
tions, and  spiritual  comradeships,  which  make  men  for- 
evermore  independent  of  crowds,  or  anything  else  that 
the  world  holds  to  be  sacred. 

Both  the  Eunuch  and  Philip  were  prepared  for  this 
interview.  The  preparation  of  the  Eunuch  consisted  in 
the  fact  that  he  had  the  prophetic  writings,  and  a  sense 
of  his  own  ignorance.  The  preparation  of  Philip,  in  that 
he  knew  the  historic  fulfilment  of  the  writing,  and  was 
indwelt  by  the  Spirit  of  knowledge.  On  the  one  hand 
was  a  man  poring  over  most  wonderful  writings,  seeing 
glimpses  of  light,  catching  strains  of  music;  but  unable 
to  find  his  way  into  the  fullness  of  life,  unable  to  catch 
all  the  music  of  the  great  song.  On  the  other  hand  was 
a  man  who  had  seen  the  ancient  prophecy  wrought  out 

[216] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  8 : 26-40] 

in  the  experience  of  One  upon  Whom  his  eyes  had  in  all 
probability  rested,  and  Whom  he  had  come  to  know  more 
perfectly  by  the  fulfilment  in  him  of  the  Christ  life  by  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

Let  us  now  look  at  the  method  of  Philip's  approach. 
He  did  so  with  an  enquiry,  and  with  a  play  on  words, 
which  cannot  easily  be  translated  into  English.  The 
Greek  word  for  reading,  quite  literally,  means  "  to  know 
again."  When  a  man  reads,  he  is  supposed  to  be  know- 
ing again,  repeating  over  again.  Some  one  else  had 
known,  had  written,  and  the  man  reading,  knows  it  again. 
There  is  a  fine  philosophy  of  how  to  read  suggested  by 
the  Greek  word  for  "  reading."  The  word  "  understand- 
est "  was  really  the  second  part  of  his  second  word.  It 
is  as  though  he  had  said,  Knowest  thou  what  thou  know- 
est  again?  That  is  a  very  imperfect  way  of  suggesting 
the  play  upon  words.  In  the  method  there  was  a  gentle 
raillery,  intended  to  arrest  the  mind.  The  question 
meant,  Is  there  any  use  in  your  reading?  Do  you  know 
what  you  are  reading?  Do  you  know  what  you  are  know- 
ing again? 

Then  mark  the  answering  question,  "  How  can  I,  ex- 
cept some  one  shall  guide  me  ?  "  This  was  the  expression 
of  a  great  discontent.  He  besought  Philip  to  come  up 
and  sit  with  him.  If  he  was  filled  with  discontent,  he  was 
also  full  of  desire  for  instruction. 

Philip  had  no  doubt  as  to  whether  the  prophet  spoke 
of  himself,  or  of  some  other.  Philip  would  not  have 
denied  that  the  prophet  spoke  of  himself;  but  he  knew 
that  when  he  began  to  speak  of  himself,  "  Who  hath  be- 
lieved our  report  ?  and  to  whom  hath  the  arm  of  the  Lord 
been  revealed?"  he  climbed  upon  that  suggestion  of  the 
Divine  authority  of  his  own  mission,  and  saw  through 
the  centuries  another  Servant  of  God.  He  saw  the  great 
ultimate  working  out  of  the  things  that  he  had  felt  in  his 
own  soul.  Philip  therefore  declared  that  it  was  Jesus 
of  Whom  the  prophet  wrote.  The  questions  of  the 

[  217  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  8:26-40] 

Eunuch  were  answered,  as  this  man,  not  an  apostle,  not 
directed  by  Jerusalem,  but  instructed  by  the  Spirit,  and 
guided  by  the  Christ,  sat  in  the  chariot,  and  explained 
the  ancient  writing. 

What  was  the  issue?  On  the  part  of  the  Eunuch,  obe- 
dience, implicit  and  immediate.  "  Behold,  here  is  water ; 
what  doth  hinder  me  to  be  baptized  ?  "  The  gloss  which 
was  in  the  text  as  a  verse,  now  rightly  relegated  to  the 
margin,  may  throw  some  light  upon  the  fact  that  in 
preaching  Jesus,  Philip  had  led  him  also  toward  those 
final  things  which  Jesus  had  said  concerning  condi- 
tions; and  so  he  went  down  into  the  water,  and  was 
baptized. 

Philip,  having  done  his  work,  was  caught  away  by  the 
Spirit,  and  "  was  found  at  Azotus."  It  is  not  at  all  neces- 
sary that  this  should  be  accounted  a  miracle.  I  am  never 
anxious  to  read  miracles  in,  where  they  are  not;  any 
more  than  I  am  anxious  to  rule  miracles  out,  where  they 
are  in.  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  caught  away  Philip ;  and 
the  Eunuch  saw  him  no  more  for  he  went  on  his  way 
rejoicing."  He  was  quite  independent  of  Philip.  The 
picture  is  not  that  of  the  Eunuch  left  dazed,  upon  the 
highway,  wondering  what  had  become  of  Philip.  He  had 
forgotten  Philip,  for  he  had  found  all  for  which  his  soul 
was  hungry.  "  He  went  on  his  way  rejoicing,"  the  new 
light  upon  his  brow,  the  new  life  thrilling  through  his 
spirit,  the  new  love  mastering  him.  He  was  independent 
of  Jerusalem  now,  he  was  independent  even  of  the  mes- 
senger ;  because  he  had  found  the  Master. 

The  abiding  teaching  of  the  story  is  patent.  It  is  the 
story  of  the  victorious  Christ  at  work  immediately  among 
men.  Sang  the  ancient  Psalmist: 

"  Thou  hast  ascended  on  high,  Thou  hast  led  away 

captives ; 

Thou  hast  received  gifts  among  men, 
Yea,  among  the  rebellious  also." 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9 : 1-9] 

I  go  further  on  in  the  Psalm,  and  find  these  words : 

"  Ethiopia  shall  haste  to  stretch  out  her  hands  unto 
God," 

It  was  the  One  that  had  ascended  on  high,  Who  had  led 
captivity  captive,  Who  saw  Ethiopia  stretching  out  her 
hands  to  God.  Nay  He  it  was  by  the  Spirit  Who  caused 
that  stretching  out  of  the  hands.  He  was  at  work  by  the 
Spirit  in  the  heart  of  the  Ethiopian  Eunuch  before  Philip 
reached  him.  The  Spirit  was  ahead  of  Philip,  making 
this  man  discontented,  giving  him  to  know  his  own  igno; 
ranee.  So  we  see  the  Christ  preparing  this  Ethiopian 
Eunuch;  commanding  His  servant  to  leave  the  city  for 
the  desert,  the  crowds  for  loneliness,  the  fellowship  for 
isolation.  As  we  see  the  meeting  between  these  two  men, 
we  realize  anew  that  this  Christ  is  He  Who  opens,  and 
no  man  shuts;  Who  shuts,  and  no  man  opens.  He  is 
still  carrying  on  these  same  things  in  these  same  ways. 
He  opens  doors,  and  then  through  His  people,  enters  the 
doors  He  opens.  Long  e'er  the  missionary  comes  to  the 
land  we  call  benighted,  He  is  preparing  for  the  coming 
of  the  missionary.  It  is  not  always  by  Isaiah  that  He 
prepares,  but  by  the  fetish,  that  the  Ethiopian  carries 
with  him  to-day.  Happy  indeed  is  that  missionary  who 
can  do  what  Philip  did,  begin  just  where  the  enquirer  is, 
and  preach  Jesus.  There  is  no  gleam  of  light  in  the 
world's  religions  but  that  Christ  fulfils  it;  and  no  dis- 
content of  the  human  heart  but  that  He  meets  it. 

The  last  thing  this  story  has  for  us  is  a  revelation  of 
the  responsibilities  of  His  own.  It  may  be  dismissed  in  a 
sentence  as  to  statement !  //  Christ  is  hindered,  it  is  be- 
cause some  Philip  is  not  willing  to  go!  It  may  be  pon- 
dered long  and  carefully  in  application ! 

Acts  9:1-9 

We  now  turn  to  the  more  definite  and  systematic  ex- 

[  219  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  9 : 1-9] 

pansion  of  the  Christian  movement  beyond  the  first  cir- 
cles, and  follow  the  growth  of  the  Christian  Churches 
among  those  Asian  cities  which  were  so  largely  under 
Greek  influence.  This  movement  is  the  more  remarkable 
when  we  remember  the  antagonism  between  Hebraism 
and  Hellenism. 

This  particular  paragraph  contains  the  story  of  the 
conversion  of  Saul  of  Tarsus.  It  must,  however,  be  re- 
lated to  the  whole  triumphant  movement  of  Christ,  by 
His  Spirit,  through  His  Church.  It  was  not  difficult  in 
some  senses  for  Christian  Hebrews  to  evangelize  Judaea. 
Their  brethren,  after  the  flesh,  dwelt  in  Judaea,  and  while 
it  is  perfectly  true  that  they  were  slow  to  do  it,  and  did 
not  set  to  work  at  all  systematically  until  they  were  driven 
forth  by  persecution,  still  there  was  no  religious  revul- 
sion produced  in  the  minds  of  any  as  they  preached  their 
great  evangel  through  Judaea. 

It  was  a  little  more  difficult  to  preach  in  Samaria,  for 
there  existed  the  influences  of  the  ancient  traditions,  and 
the  habits  of  long  centuries,  which  were  expressed  in  the 
familiar  words:  "Jews  have  no  dealings  with  Samari- 
tans." That  antagonism  to  everything  Samaritan  had 
manifested  itself  in  the  request  proffered  by  one  of  the 
sons  of  thunder  when  they  would  have  called  down  fire 
out  of  heaven  to  destroy  the  Samaritan  village  which  had 
refused  to  receive  Jesus.  But  under  the  conviction  of 
the  Spirit,  a  man  full  of  the  Spirit  had  gone  down  to 
Samaria,  and  had  preached,  and  Samaria  had  received 
the  Gospel,  and  the  triumph  had  been  won. 

But  now  by  far  the  most  difficult  work  awaited  these 
men.  Once  they  stepped  over  the  boundary-line,  and  be- 
gan to  touch  these  ancient  cities,  with  their  Jewish  cus- 
toms and  Greek  influences,  they  were  in  a  new  atmos- 
phere, and  one  far  more  difficult  for  them  than  any  in 
which  they  had  so  far  preached  the  evangel. 

The  last  three  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament,  those 
of  Haggai,  Zechariah,  and  Malachi,  were  undoubtedly 

[  220  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9 : 1-9] 

post-exilic.  In  the  course  of  the  prophecy  of  Zechariah, 
with  its  wonderful  visions  and  strange  foretellings  of  the 
coming  of  a  King  to  be  rejected,  and  yet  ultimately  to 
be  crowned,  these  words  occur,  "  I  will  stir  up  thy  sons, 
O  Zion,  against  thy  sons,  O  Greece."  These  words  were 
not  mere  rhetoric.  They  are  for  us  revealing  words. 
They  had  immediate  reference  to  the  Greek  aggressive- 
ness under  Alexander  the  Great ;  and  they  had  their  first 
fulfilment  in  the  victory  of  Judas  Maccabseus  over  An- 
tiochus  Epiphanes.  These  facts  are  matters  of  history. 
Yet,  while  the  words  of  Zechariah  had  such  fulfilment, 
they  had  a  deeper  significance,  for  they  suggested  the 
diametrically  opposed  ideals  of  Hebraism  and  Hellenism. 

We  must  recognize  this  antagonism  between  the  two 
ideals.  The  ideal  of  Hebraism  was  that  of  the  moral,  the 
righteous,  the  religious,  and  it  insisted  upon  law.  The 
ideal  of  Hellenism  was  that  of  the  culture  and  freedom  of 
human  life,  the  perfection  of  the  powers  of  nature,  the 
full  play  of  all  the  forces  of  individual  life.  As  we  put 
these  two  ideals  thus  into  contradistinction,  in  the  meas- 
ure in  which  we  are  Christian  we  see  that  they  are  not 
really  contradictory,  but  complementary.  But  for  ages 
this  antagonism  was  very  manifest. 

To  quote  from  Dr.  Hugh  Black's  Culture  and  Re- 
straint: "  The  policy  of  Alexander  aimed  at  unifying 
the  various  elements  that  made  up  his  world-wide 
empire,  by  the  diffusion  of  a  common  language  and 
civilization.  To  this  end  the  Oriental  races  were 
to  be  saturated  with  Hellenic  culture  by  means  of 
the  Greek  colonies  that  followed  in  the  wake  of  the 
victorious  army.  Entirely  new  Greek  towns  were 
founded,  while  the  older  cities  were  leavened  by  Greek 
settlements.  Thus  over  one-half  of  Asia  a  network  of 
Greek  culture  was  stretched,  which  had  as  its  object  the 
reducing  under  its  influence  of  the  whole  surrounding 
regions." 

To  take  one  glance  again  at  the  Maccabsean  rising  and 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  9 : 1-9] 

victory.  Onias,  the  High  Priest,  contemporary  with 
Judas  Maccabseus,  opposed  with  all  the  force  of  his  re- 
ligious fervour  the  Hellenizing  influences  which  were 
spreading  through  the  whole  region. 

Turning  to  the  time  of  Christ  we  find  the  opposing 
forces  represented  in  the  two  parties,  of  the  Sadducees 
and  the  Pharisees.  The  Jewish  nation  had  become  largely 
Sadducean.  The  Sadducees  were  Hellenists.  The 
Pharisees  stood  for  Hebraism.  There,  in  the  last 
analysis,  was  the  conflict  between  the  Hebrew  ideal, 
which  the  Pharisee  represented,  and  for  which  he  fought, 
and  for  which  he  made  his  traditions  a  safeguard ;  and 
the  Greek  ideal  of  culture  and  freedom,  the  glorification 
of  human  life,  and  the  denial  of  the  supernatural,  for 
which  the  Sadducee  stood.  This  then  was  the  atmos- 
phere at  this  time.  Away  beyond  Judaea,  Galilee,  and 
Samaria,  lay  these  ancient  cities  that  had  become  Hel- 
lenized ;  and  in  the  midst  of  them  were  colonies  of  Jews ; 
Hellenized  Jews;  and  to  these  also  the  Gospel  must  be 
preached. 

This  introduction  has  been  necessary  background  to  a 
right  understanding  of  the  apprehension  of  Saul  of  Tar- 
sus. In  the  very  word  Tarsus  there  is  significance.  He 
was  born  there,  a  Hebrew  of  Hebrews,  as  he  tells  us  in 
one  of  his  epistles.  Both  his  father  and  mother  were 
Hebrews;  there  was  no  mixture  in  his  blood.  Timothy 
was  born  of  Greek  and  Hebrew  parents,  but  not  so  Saul. 
Nevertheless  Saul  was  of  Tarsus,  a  Greek  city,  the  great 
university  city  of  the  time.  At  about  fourteen  years  of 
age  his  parents  were  anxious  that  he  should  not  pass 
under  the  Hellenizing  influences  of  Tarsus;  so  they  did 
not  send  him  to  the  university  there,  but  to  Jerusalem; 
and  he  was  brought  up  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel. 

This  man,  born  in  Tarsus,  received  the  earliest  and 
mightiest  impressions  in  the  atmosphere  of  Hellenism. 
He  received  his  religious  education  from  father  and 
mother,  Hebrews,  not  Sadducees,  but  Pharisees ;  and  then 

[   222    ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9 :  1-9] 

was  sent  up  to  Jerusalem  to  complete  that  education  at 
the  feet  of  Gamaliel.  This  was  a  wonderful  merging; 
indeed  a  coming  together  of  opposing  forces.  The  boy 
had  spent  his  play-time  in  a  Greek  atmosphere,  and  had 
gained  his  earliest  impressions  there,  the  impressions  that 
will  abide,  even  though  the  snows  of  innumerable  winters 
are  upon  the  brow.  This  man,  a  Hebrew  of  Hebrews,  a 
Pharisee,  was  also  a  Hellenist.  Greece  had  touched  him 
with  its  culture,  its  refinement,  its  poetry,  and  all  its  glory, 
and  his  zealous,  godly,  and  much  to  be  reverenced  teacher, 
Gamaliel,  was  utterly  unable  to  eradicate  the  poetry  and 
passion  of  Greece,  for  he  had  been  too  long  in  Tarsus. 

With  all  that  in  mind,  we  turn  to  our  story.  It  gives 
the  account  of  the  apprehension  by  Christ  of  the  man 
who  was  to  be  His  special  instrument  in  carrying  His 
Gospel  to  these  cities  under  the  influence  of  Greek  cul- 
ture. We  see  the  wonderful  fitness  of  the  choice. 
Whereas,  it  is  perfectly  true,  that  when  the  Master  has 
a  piece  of  work  to  be  done,  He  can  take  hold  of  a  man 
devoid  of  equipment,  and  bestow  upon  him  fitness  for 
service;  again  and  again  the  past  is  taken  into  account; 
and  the  preparation  of  the  earliest  years  is  perpetually 
preparation  within  the  will  of  God  for  the  accomplish- 
ment of  a  great  purpose.  As  to  natural  fitness,  Peter 
would  not  have  been  successful,  John  would  have  been 
altogether  out  of  place,  James  would  certainly  have  failed. 
But  this  man  Saul  was  one  whose  preparation  consisted 
in  his  blood  relationships,  and  all  those  years  spent  in 
Tarsus.  The  choosing  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  not  capri- 
cious. 

Briefly  then  let  us  look  at  the  man  to  be  apprehended ; 
at  the  apprehension  itself;  and  at  the  man  after  the  ap- 
prehension. 

The  man  to  be  apprehended.  There  are  previous 
glimpses  of  him  in  the  eighth  chapter.  He  is  there  seen 
minding  the  clothes  of  the  men  who  are  hurling  the  stones 
upon  Stephen.  The  next  statement  concerning  him  is 

[  223  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  9 : 1-9] 

that  he  was  "consenting  unto  his  (Stephen's)  death." 
In  that  declaration,  which  means  that  he  gave  his  vote 
for  the  death  of  Stephen,  is  a  revelation  of  the  fact  that 
he  was  a  member  of  the  Sanhedrim.  He  was  a  man 
saturated  with  Greek  ideals ;  yet  even  bitterly  devoted  to 
Hebraism ;  a  man  at  war  with  the  Sadducean  philosophy, 
profoundly  convinced  of  the  divinity  of  Pharisaism,  hav- 
ing given  his  vote  for  the  dying  of  Stephen  and  of  others, 
minding  the  clothes  of  such  as  cast  the  stones.  We  are 
further  told,  and  can  dismiss  the  whole  tragic  story  in 
the  words  of  the  sacred  narrative,  that  "  he  laid  waste 
the  Church." 

Now  let  us  take  up  the  story  as  it  is  written :  "  But 
Saul,  yet  breathing  threatening  and  slaughter  against  the 
disciples  of  the  Lord,  went  unto  the  high  priest."  Let  us 
see  the  mental  mood  of  this  man,  so  far  as  we  are  able. 
Take  that  verse  again.  Vincent  translates  thus,  "  Breath- 
ing hard,  out  of  threatening  and  murderous  desire."  The 
Greek  form  there  certainly  warrants  that  translation.  It 
is  the  picture  of  a  man  fiercely  opposed,  breathing  hard, 
out  of  threatening  and  murderous  desire.  That  is  too  fa- 
miliar a  picture  to  need  exposition.  But  we  have  omitted 
a  word.  "  But  Saul  yet  breathing  out  threatening  and 
murderous  desire,"  or  "  But  Saul  still  breathing  out 
threatening."  That  is  a  small  word,  which  seems  as 
though  it  mattered  little,  yet  it  is  full  of  profound  sig- 
nificance. Surely  there  is  nothing  lost  by  the  omission 
of  this  word.  To  omit  it  is  still  to  have  the  picture  of  a 
fierce  man,  determined  to  stamp  out  the  Nazarene  heresy, 
a  man  definitely  appointed  as  the  public  prosecutor  of 
Christianity.  But  that  is  not  all  the  picture.  The  word 
"  yet "  or  "  still,"  is  one  which  suggests  continuity  in  an 
attitude,  in  spite  of  something.  In  this  passage  certain 
words  are  omitted  in  the  Revised  Version  which  appeared 
in  the  Authorized.  There  is  no  question  that  they  are 
accurately  omitted;  but  in  the  twenty-sixth  chapter  and 
the  fourteenth  verse,  when  Paul  was  telling  the  story 

[  224  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9 : 1-9] 

of  his  conversion,  he  quoted  words  which  Jesus  addressed 
to  him,  which  are  not  chronicled  in  this  paragraph :  "  It 
is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  goad  ?  "  The  answer 
of  Paul,  "  What  shall  I  do,  Lord?  "  is  also  omitted.  This 
is  found  in  the  twenty-second  chapter,  and  the  tenth 
verse,  where  Paul  was  again  narrating  the  fact  of  his 
conversion.  When  Christ  said  to  him,  "  It  is  hard  for 
thee  to  kick  against  the  goad,"  what  did  He  mean? 
Surely  He  meant,  Saul,  there  are  forces  playing  about 
you,  that  would  drive  you  in  one  direction;  and  you  are 
kicking  against  them.  This  man,  a  Hebrew  of  Hebrews, 
was  determined  to  stamp  out  the  Nazarene  heresy,  and  he 
had  obtained  letters  of  the  high  priest,  and  was  on  his 
way  to  Damascus,  to  hale  men  and  women  to  prison; 
but  he  was  kicking  against  the  goads,  he  was  fighting 
against  conviction. 

Let  us  go  back  again  to  the  sixth  chapter,  and  to  verses 
eight  and  nine : 

"  And  Stephen,  full  of  grace  and  power,  wrought  great 
wonders  and  signs  among  the  people.  But  there  arose 
certain  of  them  that  were  of  the  synagogue  called  the 
synagogue  of  the  Libertines,  and  of  the  Cyrenians,  and 
of  the  Alexandrians,  and  of  them  of  Cilicia  and  Asia, 
disputing  with  Stephen." 

This  means  that  Stephen's  conflict  was  with  the  Hellen- 
ists, not  with  the  Hebrews.  The  whole  of  his  marvellous 
address  was  a  protest  against  Hellenism.  Stephen's  fight 
was  not  with  Pharisaism.  We  must  be  fair  to  Phari- 
saism. The  rags  of  Pharisaism  were  its  self-sufficiency, 
its  boastfulness,  its  contempt  for  others ;  but  the  heart  of 
Pharisaism  was  spiritual,  a  defence  of  spiritual  religion 
against  rationalism.  Stephen's  fight  was  with  Sadducee- 
ism.  Probably  Saul  had  heard  that  great  defence  of 
Stephen;  and  all  his  Pharisaic  sympathy  would  be  with 
Stephen.  As  this  man  listened  to  Stephen,  he  heard  a 
man  emphasizing  the  spirituality  of  religion,  and  charg- 

[  225  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  9 : 1-9] 

ing  upon  them  that  they  were  turning  from  spiritual 
things.  Yet  he  had  consented  to  his  death,  had  seen  him 
die,  and  there  had  been  manifested  to  him,  his  own  be- 
lief in  the  supernaturalism  of  religion.  He  had  seen  a 
man  bloody  from  the  stones,  bruised  and  battered  and 
beaten,  going  out  of  life,  with  his  face  lit  with  a  glorious 
light,  and  had  heard  his  declaration  that  he  had  seen  into 
the  world  beyond,  a  living  Lord  and  Master.  It  was  the 
vindication  of  his  own  philosophy  and  profoundest  con- 
viction. "  Yet  breathing  threatening  and  slaughter." 
This  man  was  fighting  against  a  strange  turmoil  of  mind, 
in  which  mental  questionings,  enquiries,  wonderings, 
amazement,  mingled. 

Moreover  he  had  now  been  to  the  Sadducean  high 
priest,  sacrificing  his  own  deepest  religious  principle  in 
going ;  and  had  asked  and  obtained  from  him  letters,  em- 
powering him  to  hale  to  prison  and  to  death  men  and 
women  who,  however  much  they  might  seem  to  be  an- 
tagonistic to  the  ancient  ritual  of  his  people,  did  never- 
theless hold  the  spiritual  verities  which  he  himself  held. 
So,  troubled  by  all  these  forces  of  the  past,  and  this 
mental  turmoil,  revealed  in  a  white-hot  passion,  partly 
born  of  the  fact  that  he  was  violating  a  growing  con- 
viction, Christ  apprehended  him. 

By  the  omissions  here  from  the  text  of  the  words  of 
Christ,  Luke  fastened  attention  on  the  actual  person  of 
Christ,  without  deflecting  the  thought  of  the  reader  more 
than  necessary  to  Saul.  The  first  phase  in  the  appre- 
hension of  Saul  was  that  of  a  great  light  shining  round 
about  him  out  of  heaven,  above  the  brightness  of  the 
sun.  It  was  a  moment  fraught  with  tremendous  issues 
in  the  whole  programme  of  Christ  in  the  world.  Then 
came  the  enquiry.  A  voice  spoke,  not  in  the  Greek,  but 
in  the  Hebrew  tongue,  "  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest 
thou  Me?"  It  was  a  voice  out  of  heaven,  out  of  the 
light,  asking  him,  a  man  on  the  earth,  why  he  persecuted 
the  One  Who  spoke.  What  a  strange  thing,  what  a  star- 

[  226  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9: 1-9] 

tling  thing!  "Who  art  Thou,  Lord?"  cried  the  aston- 
ished Saul.  Oh,  the  revolution,  the  convulsion,  the  up- 
heaval in  the  soul  of  Saul.  Then  came  the  most  arrest- 
ing thing.  The  voice  replied :  "  I  am  Jesus  Whom  thou 
persecutest."  Then  there  broke  upon  his  consciousness, 
dimly  and  indistinctly,  more  perfectly  apprehended  in 
after  days,  the  great  truth  that  Christ  and  the  Church 
were  one.  How  Paul  wrought  out  this  truth  in  those 
great  letters  afterwards,  as  he  insisted  upon  this  unity 
of  the  living  Lord  with  His  people.  It  is  as  though  Christ 
had  said  to  him,  Those  men  and  women  whom  you  have 
haled  to  prison  have  suffered;  but  it  is  I  Who  have  suf- 
fered in  their  suffering,  Saul.  The  brutal  stones  that 
you  saw  hurled  upon  Stephen,  cutting  into  his  flesh,  and 
giving  him  physical  pain,  reached  Me,  hurt  Me.  I  felt 
every  throb  of  Stephen's  pain. 

But  there  was  another  meaning  in  the  words.  "  Why 
persecutest  thou  Me  ?  "  I  am  above  thee  in  the  heavens ; 
thou  canst  not  undo  My  work;  that  against  which  thou 
art  righting,  is  not  the  fanaticism  of  a  mistaken  fanatic ; 
it  is  the  march  of  God  through  human  history.  "  Why 
persecutest  thou  Me  ?  "  In  that  moment,  nebulously  as 
yet,  not  perfectly  apprehended,  the  truth  was  breaking 
upon  the  mind  of  this  man,  and  by  implication,  ere  he 
knew  it,  he  had  yielded  himself  to  the  One  Who  had 
spoken  out  of  the  eternal  light,  and  Who  had  addressed 
him  by  name.  "  Who  art  Thou,  Lord  ?  "  That  use  of 
the  word  Lord  revealed  a  fine  recognition  of  a  trained 
mind,  in  the  presence  of  such  a  manifestation  of  su- 
premacy. When  the  light  came,  and  the  voice  spoke, 
prejudices  went,  and  all  the  antagonism  that  created  the 
fever  heat  of  his  hostility  ended.  He  was  in  the  presence 
of  supremacy,  and  he  admitted  it  as  he  said,  Lord! 

Then  came  the  revealing  words,  "  I  am  Jesus."  Again 
Paul  told  the  story,  and  in  doing  so  spoke  of  the  answer 
coming  in  the  form,  "  I  am  Jesus  of  Nazareth."  Who 
was  Jesus  to  Saul  of  Tarsus?  A  dead  man,  disgraced, 

[  227  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  9 : 1-9 1 

and  hated!  Then  there  came  the  light  and  a  voice.  In 
the  presence  of  it  he  said,  "  Who  art  Thou,  Lord?  "  The 
answer  came,  "  I  am  Jesus."  The  Jesus  that  he  thought 
dead  was  alive.  The  Jesus  that  he  thought  disgraced 
was  at  the  centre  of  heavenly  glory.  The  Jesus  that  he 
hated,  spoke  to  him  in  the  language  of  an  ineffable  love. 
We  do  not  wonder  that  this  man  never  looked  back !  It 
was  a  great  arrest,  a  great  apprehension. 

He  was  then  commanded  to  do  one  thing,  and  that  the 
most  simple :  "  Rise,  and  enter  into  the  city,  and  it  shall 
be  told  thee  what  tliou  must  do."  That  is  always  the 
Master's  method.  Was  it  a  simple  thing?  It  was  a  very 
severe  thing.  They  were  expecting  him  in  Damascus; 
those  opposed  to  Christ  were  expecting  him  as  their 
leader;  and  those  with  Christ  were  expecting  him  as  a 
great  enemy.  Christ  said,  Go  into  the  city,  and  wait. 

So  he  came  to  Damascus.  Damascus  was  one  of  the 
first  cities  that  Alexander  had  conquered,  and  into  which 
he  had  brought  his  great  influence.  Paul  came  into 
Damascus  led,  for  he  was  blind,  defeated,  and  captured. 
I  think  when  I  get  to  heaven  I  shall  want  to  know  what 
became  of  the  high  priest's  letters.  He  who  had  come 
armed  with  official  authority  to  end  the  Nazarene  heresy, 
was  led  in,  the  blind  slave  of  the  Christ.  Those  were 
wonderful  days,  the  three  days  and  nights  that  the  blind- 
ness continued!  We  are  not  surprised  to  read  that  he 
ate  and  drank  nothing.  What  happened  in  his  thinking? 
One  little  word  in  the  Philippian  letter  helps  us.  "  What 
things  were  gain  to  me,  these  have  I  counted  loss  for 
Christ."  He  was  finding  the  balance  of  things.  What 
things  were  gain,  I  counted  loss ;  my  Hebrew  birthright, 
for  I  had  been  born  into  Christ;  the  Hebrew  rite  of 
circumcision,  and  all  the  observance  of  the  ritual,  for  I 
had  entered  into  life  in  Christ.  Did  you  count  the 
Pharisee's  supernaturalism  loss,  Paul?  Yes,  because  I 
gained  the  spiritualities  in  Christ.  I  think  through  those 
three  days  of  blindness  and  fasting,  he  was  taking  stock 

[  228  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9: 10-22] 

of  the  situation,  and  every  hour  there  came  to  him  a  new 
consciousness,  not  of  loss,  but  of  gain. 

Mark  again  the  Master's  fitness  in  the  choice  of  the 
instrument.  To  see  the  Hebraism  and  Hellenism  merg- 
ing in  Paul  read  in  the  Galatian  letter  these  words :  "  I 
have  been  crucified  with  Christ,"  that  is  Hebraism,  re- 
straint; "  and  it  is  no  longer  I  that  live,"  that  is  Hellen- 
ism, culture.  Then  he  merged  the  two,  "  but  Christ  liveth 
in  me,"  and  that  is  Christianity.  In  that  final  sentence 
Hebraism  and  Hellenism  have  joined  hands;  culture  is 
seen  resulting  from  restraint,  and  restraint  merging  into 
culture.  In  this  story  then,  we  see  Heaven's  arrest  of 
the  apostle  who  passed  through  the  Asian  cities  to  carry 
the  evangel  to  these  regions  beyond. 

Acts  9 : 10-22 

The  opening  words  of  the  paragraph  suggest  continuity. 
In  the  first  nine  verses  of  this  chapter  we  saw,  first  the 
man  to  be  apprehended,  Saul  of  Tarsus;  secondly,  his 
apprehension,  as  on  the  way  to  Damascus  the  light  shone 
round  about  him  and  the  voice  of  Jesus  spoke  to  him ;  and 
thirdly,  the  man  after  his  apprehension,  in  Damascus. 
The  man  who  had  set  his  face  toward  Damascus,  having 
obtained  letters  from  the  Sadducean  high  priest  in  order 
that  he  might  hale  to  prison  and  to  death  all  who  were 
followers  of  the  Nazarene,  was  led  into  Damascus  weak- 
ened, silent,  and  blind. 

We  now  come  to  the  second  stage  in  the  preparation 
of  this  man  for  his  work.  The  contrast  is  very  remark- 
able between  the  condition  in  which  we  left  him  in  our 
last  study,  and  that  in  which  we  shall  leave  him  at  the 
close  of  this  one.  We  left  him  blind;  we  shall  leave 
him  with  the  scales  fallen  from  his  eyes,  seeing.  We 
left  him  silent,  we  shall  leave  him  in  the  midst  of  the 
Jews  of  Damascus,  preaching  and  proving  that  Jesus  is 
the  Christ.  We  left  him  weakened  by  the  way,  broken 
down,  with  prejudices  swept  away  as  by  a  hurricane ;  we 

[  229  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  " 
[Acts  9: 10-22] 

shall  leave  him  growing  stronger  as  his  face  is  set  toward 
his  great  work. 

The  paragraph  presents  us  with  three  pictures.  The 
first  is  that  of  Ananias  and  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  second 
is  that  of  Ananias  in  his  dealings  with  Saul.  The  third 
is  that  of  Saul  in  the  synagogues.  Let  us  examine  the 
pictures,  and  then  attempt  to  gather  up  the  spiritual 
significance  of  them. 

We  are  at  once  arrested  by  the  man  Ananias.  Nothing 
is  known  about  him  other  than  that  which  is  revealed  in 
this  book  of  the  Acts;  and  the  poverty  of  the  revelation 
is  the  richness  of  the  unveiling.  He  is  comparatively 
obscure.  He  passes  before  our  vision  at  this  point  and 
never  again,  save  as  he  is  referred  to  by  Paul,  and  save 
as  his  influence  can  be  discovered  in  the  writings  and 
thought  of  Paul.  It  is  certain  that  the  influence  of  the 
first  things  Ananias  said  to  Saul,  and  the  first  things  he 
did  for  Saul,  permeated  all  the  writings  of  Paul,  and  had 
a  bearing  on  all  his  missionary  endeavour.  When  this 
man  Saul  was  to  be  dealt  with,  and  his  face  set  toward 
the  line  of  his  life-work,  and  when  he  was  to  be  brought 
into  the  reception  of  all  those  spiritual  forces  which  were 
necessary  thereto,  the  instrument  employed  by  God  was 
an  obscure  man.  We  spoil  the  picture  of  Ananias  which 
the  Spirit  has  given  us,  when  we  add  to  it  the  daubing  of 
legends.  Ananias  is  named  as  a  disciple,  and  nothing 
more.  He  held  no  official  position.  He  was  not  an 
apostle.  We  have  already  seen  how  independent  the 
Holy  Spirit  was,  and  is,  of  apostles.  He  sent  the  deacon 
Philip  to  Samaria.  We  now  see  that  He  is  not  even 
dependent  upon  deacons,  a  most  salutary  lesson,  even  for 
the  present  age.  He  employed  a  disciple,  neither  an 
apostle,  nor  a  deacon,  and  made  him  the  instrument 
through  whom  the  fullness  of  spiritual  blessing  came 
to  the  man  who  was  to  be  the  pioneer  missionary;  not 
only  to  bring  individual  men  in  Asian  cities  to  Christ, 
but  in  capturing  Hellenism  and  bringing  it  to  the 

[  230  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9:10-22] 

rebirth,  through  his  profound  and  Spirit-inspired  min- 
istry. 

Another  thing  we  must  not  omit  here,  although  it  is 
found  in  Paul's  first  record  of  his  conversion  in  chapter 
twenty-two.  In  making  his  defence  he  referred  to  this 
man  thus :  "  One  Ananias,  a  devout  man  according  to 
the  law."  Now  this  was  not  a  description  of  his  Chris- 
tian character,  but  of  his  Hebrew  character.  Paul  was 
the  last  man  to  describe  a  Christian  as  a  devout  man 
according  to  the  law.  He  was  "  a  devout  man  according 
to  the  law,  well  reported  of  by  all  the  Jews  that  dwelt 
there."  This  meant  that  Ananias  was  not  a  Hellenist, 
but  a  Hebrew.  Saul,  who  by  religious  education  was 
preeminently  a  Hebrew,  but  who  by  all  the  influences  of 
childhood  was  a  Hellenist,  was  now  to  be  sent  to  the 
Greek  cities ;  and  the  man  sent  to  lead  him  into  fullness 
of  life  was  a  Hebrew,  having  the  Hebrew  ideal  as  the 
master  ideal  of  his  Christianity. 

Jesus  spoke  in  a  vision  to  this  man  Ananias,  calling 
him  by  name.  His  response  was  quick  and  immediate, 
"  Behold,  I  am  here,  Lord."  Jesus  told  him  what  He 
would  have  him  do,  listened  patiently  to  his  protest,  and 
urged  him  to  obedience. 

This  story  impresses  us  with  the  naturalness  of  the 
supernatural  to  those  early  Christians.  Luke  writes  it 
without  any  defence,  does  not  for  a  single  moment  think 
it  necessary  to  explain,  or  to  account  for  it.  No  surprise 
is  expressed  that  the  voice  of  the  Lord  was  actually  heard 
by  this  man,  that  there  was  direct  and  immediate  com- 
munication between  them.  Jesus  was  alive  from  the 
•4ead,  and  Ananias  was  not  surprised  when  he  heard 
Him  speak.  Moreover  Ananias  did  not  get  ready  to  re- 
ply, he  was  ready.  It  is  a  glorious  picture  of  wonder- 
fully tender,  direct,  and  immediate  familiarity  between 
Christ  and  His  own. 

Jesus  speaking  to  Ananias  referred  to  "  Saul,  a  man  of 
Tarsus."  Tarsus  was  the  centre  of  Hellenistic  educa- 

t  231  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  9: 10-22] 

tion,  and  to  name  it  to  such  a  man  was  to  suggest  that 
against  which  the  whole  of  his  philosophy  was  at  war. 
The  objection  of  Ananias  was  a  perfectly  natural  one. 
Saul's  reputation  had  preceded  him.  The  purpose  of 
Saul's  mission  to  Damascus  was  known.  Ananias  said, 
"  I  have  heard  from  many  of  this  man,  how  much  evil 
he  did  to  Thy  saints  at  Jerusalem;  and  here  he  hath 
authority  from  the  chief  priests  to  bind  all  that  call  upon 
Thy  name."  It  is  interesting  to  notice  in  passing  that 
the  word  saints  has  only  been  used  once  before  in  the 
New  Testament.  It  is  found  in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew, 
but  there  it  is  applied  to  men  of  the  old  economy,  as  it 
speaks  of  the  saints  who  came  out  of  their  graves.  It 
had  never  been  applied  to  Christians  until  now.  It  is 
peculiarly  a  Pauline  word.  I  think  he  learned  it  from 
Ananias.  It  is  followed  by  a  definition  of  saints,  "  All 
that  call  upon  Thy  name."  The  Corinthian  letter, — a 
letter  peculiarly  written  for  the  sake  of  Christians  living 
in  the  midst  of  Hellenist  Judaism, — commenced,  "  Paul, 
called  an  apostle  .  .  .  unto  the  Church  of  God  which 
is  at  Corinth  .  .  .  called  saints,  with  all  that  call 
upon  the  name"  The  similarity  is  at  least  significant. 

To  Ananias  the  Lord  gave  the  secret  of  His  own  heart 
about  Saul  in  the  words :  "  He  is  a  chosen  vessel  unto 
Me,  to  bear  My  name  before  the  Gentiles  and  kings,  and 
the  children  of  Israel."  So  Ananias  was  sent. 

The  next  picture  is  that  of  Ananias  and  Saul.  Saul 
spent  three  days  in  the  "  street  which  is  called  Straight." 
Visitors  to  Damascus  know  the  street.  It  is  still  there, 
and  constitutes  the  main  highway.  Along  that  street  he 
passed,  led  blind  to  the  house  of  one  Judas,  which  now 
lies  below  the  rubbish.  That  street  in  Damascus  stretched 
from  the  western  to  the  eastern  gate.  In  the  days  of 
Saul  it  was  very  beautiful,  typical  in  every  way  of  that 
Greek  movement  to  which  we  have  made  so  many  refer- 
ences; a  great  highway  through  the  city  of  Damascus, 
the  principal  highway,  divided  by  Corinthian  columns 

[  232  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9 : 10-22] 

into  three  avenues,  along  the  centre  one  of  which  the 
footmen  walked,  while  along  that  on  one  side  all  the 
traffic  proceeded  to  the  western  gate,  and  along  the  other 
moved  the  traffic  to  the  eastern  gate.  There,  in  one  of 
the  principal  residences,  as  befitted  the  reception  of  the 
representative  of  the  high  priest  in  Jerusalem,  Saul  of 
Tarsus  was  received;  and  there  in  his  blindness  he  spent 
three  days.  The  attempt  to  identify  the  Judas  of  that 
house  with  a  Judas  of  the  New  Testament  is  utterly  un- 
warranted. The  Judas  who  entertained  Saul  entertained 
him  as  the  ambassador  of  the  high  priest,  and  was  full 
of  amazement  at  the  strange  thing  that  had  happened  to 
him  in  those  days. 

To  that  house,  befitting  the  reception  of  the  representa- 
tive of  the  high  priest  in  Jerusalem,  Ananias  made  his 
way.  When  he  arrived  he  laid  his  hands  upon  him,  and 
said,  "  Saul,  brother."  He  thus  immediately  recognized 
the  new  relationship.  Then,  proceeding  he  referred  to 
"  the  Lord."  That  was  the  word  which  Saul  had  used 
on  the  way  to  Damascus,  when  he  said,  "  Who  art  Thou, 
Lord  ?  "  The  answer  given  to  him  was :  "  I  am  Jesus 
Whom  thou  persecutest."  Now  Ananias  said :  "  The 
Lord,  even  Jesus,  Who  appeared  unto  thee  in  the  way 
which  thou  earnest,  hath  sent  me,  that  thou  mayest  re- 
ceive thy  sight,  and  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit."  That 
message  was  delivered,  while  the  hands  of  Ananias  lay 
upon  Saul. 

Then,  "  Straightway  there  fell  from  his  eyes  as  it  were 
scales,  and  he  received  his  sight."  We  are  certainly 
warranted  in  believing  that  while  only  the  falling  of  the 
scales  is  mentioned,  the  full  experience  came  to  him,  to 
which  Ananias  had  referred;  he  received  his  sight,  and 
the  fullness  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Carefully  observe  that 
these  were  not  the  hands  of  an  apostle,  not  the  hands  of  a 
deacon,  but  the  hands  of  a  disciple.  Christ  sent  a  dis- 
ciple, he  laid  his  hands  upon  this  chosen  vessel  who  was 
to  bear  Christ's  name  before  kings  and  Gentiles.  In 

[  233  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  9 : 10-22] 

simple  address,  with  nothing  in  it  that  was  official,  witK 
all  brotherliness,  and  in  simple  obedience  he  put  his  hands 
upon  him,  and  said  to  him,  "  Saul,  brother,  the  Lord, 
even  Jesus  .  .  .  hath  sent  me  that  thou  mayest  re- 
ceive thy  sight,  and  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit " ;  and 
immediately  he  received  the  fullness  of  the  Spirit. 

From  subsequent  stories  we  learn  that  Ananias  com- 
manded him  to  be  baptized,  and  to  wash  away  his  sins 
after  he  had  received  the  fullness  of  the  Spirit.  This  of 
course  was  the  baptism  of  water,  and  was  the  sign  of  a 
break  with  the  past,  and  in  all  external  things,  a  falling 
into  line  with  the  spiritual  change  that  had  been  wrought 
in  him.  The  baptism  of  the  Spirit  in  this  case,  was  fol- 
lowed by  the  baptism  which  was  for  outward  confession. 

The  last  picture  is  that  of  Saul  in  the  synagogues. 
But  between  the  picture  of  Saul  and  Ananias  and  this 
one,  at  least  two  years  had  elapsed,  during  which  Saul 
had  been  in  Arabia.  This  we  learn  from  his  letter 
to  the  Galatians.  From  that  period  of  solemn  solitude 
under  the  shadow  of  Sinai  he  returned  to  Damascus. 
He  had  started  forth  from  Jerusalem  to  reach  these 
syngagogues  as  the  persecutor;  he  now  came  as  the 
preacher.  He  started  for  them  in  order  to  put  an  end 
to  the  Nazarene  heresy;  he  reached  them  as  the  great 
apostle  of  the  Way  of  Life  through  the  Nazarene. 
"  Straightway  in  the  synagogues  he  proclaimed  Jesus," 
and  mark  carefully  what  follows,  he  preached  that  Jesus 
"  is  the  Son  of  God."  That  was  a  new  departure,  an  en- 
largement of  the  evangel.  It  is  interesting  to  discover 
when  we  turn  to  the  writings  of  the  apostles,  that  the 
phrase  "  the  Son  of  God  "  is  peculiarly  that  of  Paul  and 
of  John.  Preeminently  it  is  that  of  John,  for  in  his  brief 
epistles  in  which  there  are  seven  chapters,  the  phrase  is 
found  twenty-three  times.  In  all  of  Paul's  writings,  in- 
cluding the  Hebrews  for  the  sake  of  this  argument,  it 
occurs  twenty-nine  times.  Peter  was  the  first  to  use  it 
at  Csesarea  Philippi,  but  it  is  only  found  once  in  his  let- 

[  234  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9 : 10-22] 

ters.  It  is  the  full  statement  of  the  mystery  of  the  Per- 
son of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  straightway  this  man 
commenced  to  preach  that.  What  a  wonderful  contrast 
between  this  proclamation  of  Saul  in  the  synagogues  that 
Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  intention  with  which  he 
had  come  there !  He  started,  a  sincere  man,  to  persecute 
those  who  differed  from  him.  He  stood  in  the  syna- 
gogues, a  sincere  man,  but  with  no  thought  of  persecuting 
those  who  differed  from  him  now.  He  would  preach  to 
them,  persuade  them,  argue  with  them,  but  there  was  no 
persecution. 

As  we  review  the  whole  paragraph,  what  are  its  su- 
preme spiritual  values  ?  First,  its  revelation  of  the  living 
Christ  dealing  immediately  with  His  own,  accomplishing 
His  purposes,  through  His  own,  enlarging  His  operations 
in  the  world  by  joining  others  to  Himself.  The  living 
Lord,  the  risen  Lord,  is  seen  carrying  on  His  own  work ; 
in  a  vision  appearing  to  Ananias;  in  a  vision  appearing 
to  Saul;  and  so  bringing  them  together.  The  living 
Christ  was  at  work.  Oh  for  a  recovery  of  this  lost  sense ! 
How  often  we  seem  to  put  Him  at  a  distance.  We  pray 
to  Him  as  though  we  had  to  travel  leagues  to  find  Him. 
We  treat  Him  as  though  from  some  high  altitude  He  had 
committed  the  work  to  us,  and  was  unmindful  of  it,  save 
as  we  persuaded  Him  to  look  at  it.  The  picture  here  is 
that  of  the  overruling  and  living  Person,  knowing  the 
right  man  for  the  right  place,  and  the  right  message  for 
the  right  man. 

And  once  again  we  have  an  illustration  of  the  truth  of 
the  words  Jesus  uttered :  "  the  Spirit  bloweth  where  He 
will."  We  cannot  compel  this  Spirit  into  any  par- 
ticular line  of  action.  No  apostle,  no  deacon,  but  a  dis- 
ciple, laid  hands  upon  this  man,  and  the  fullness  of  the 
Spirit  was  received. 

Observe  also  the  first  thing  Paul  did  after  receiving  the 
fullness  of  the  Spirit.  "  He  took  food."  He  fasted  until 
he  received  the  Spirit,  but  the  first  thing  he  did  after  re- 

[  235  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  9 : 23-30] 

ceiving  the  Spirit  was  to  eat  a  meal.  Do  not  let  us  im- 
agine that  we  demonstrate  the  fact  that  we  are  full  of  the 
Spirit  when  we  trifle  with  our  physical  life.  He  ate  his 
meal,  and  then  in  the  strength  of  the  fullness  of  the  Spirit 
and  a  meal,  he  left  for  Arabia.  That  is  the  whole  philos- 
ophy of  common-sense  Christianity. 

Acts  9 : 23-30 

We  now  come  to  the  third,  and  last  section,  in  the  ac- 
count of  the  apprehension  of  Saul  of  Tarsus,  in  which 
there  are  four  stages.  The  first  is  covered  by  the  words, 
"  When  many  days  were  fulfilled."  During  those  days, 
Saul  passed  into  Arabia  and  tarried  there  probably  for 
two  years.  The  second  is  that  of  his  return  to  Damascus. 
The  third  is  that  of  his  return  to  Jerusalem.  The  fourth 
is  that  of  his  return  to  Tarsus. 

At  once  the  supreme  interest  of  the  story  becomes 
manifest.  At  the  commencement  of  the  chapter  we  saw 
Saul  leaving  Jerusalem  for  Damascus,  and  read  of  the 
happening  by  the  way.  We  looked  at  him  in  those  hours 
of  darkness,  when  all  external  things  being  excluded  by 
the  beneficence  of  his  blindness,  his  thoughts  were  in- 
evitably turned  to  his  inner  and  deeper  life.  We  saw 
him  receiving  the  fullness  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  that  hour 
of  the  coming  of  Ananias. 

We  shall  now  attempt  to  see  him  in  that  period  over 
which  a  veil  is  drawn  to  a  very  large  extent ;  the  period 
of  the  sojourn  in  Arabia.  Then  we  shall  watch  him 
moving  back  over  the  pathway;  first  to  Damascus;  then 
to  Jerusalem,  from  which  he  had  started  as  the  officially 
appointed  prosecutor  of  such  as  named  the  name  of 
Jesus;  and  so  back  to  Tarsus,  to  the  home  of  his  boy- 
hood. We  see  nothing  more  of  him,  until,  because  of  the 
new  movement  in  Antioch,  Barnabas  went  down  to 
Tarsus,  and  found  him. 

Between  the  apprehension  on  the  Damascus  road  and 
his  return  to  Jerusalem  three  years  elapsed.  "  He  was 

[236] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9 : 23-30] 

certain  days  with  the  disciples  which  were  at  Damascus  " 
(verse  19).  "And  when  many  days  were  fulfilled" 
(verse  23). 

What  happened  within  the  compass  of  the  "many 
days  "  with  which  this  paragraph  opens  ?  The  answer  is 
to  be  found  in  the  Galatian  letter,  chapter  one,  verse 
seventeen,  "  Neither  went  I  up  to  Jerusalem  to  them 
that  were  apostles  before  me;  but  I  went  away  into 
Arabia;  and  again  I  returned  unto  Damascus."  Within 
the  compass  of  that  indefinite  phrase  "  many  days  "  Saul 
went  into  Arabia.  There  are  chronological  uncertainties 
here.  Some  think  the  visit  to  Arabia  was  one  of  brief 
duration,  and  that  he  returned  almost  immediately  to 
spend  the  greater  part  of  the  three  years  in  Damascus. 
That  may  be  so.  A  careful  reading  of  the  story  leads 
me  to  the  belief  that  the  greater  part  of  that  time  was 
spent  in  Arabia,  in  quietness,  in  seclusion.  This  man, 
arrested  for  special  work,  for  further  preparation  passed 
almost  immediately  after  the  arrest,  and  the  filling  with 
the  Spirit,  into  the  lonely,  splendid  region  of  Arabia. 
What  associations  the  place  must  have  had  for  Saul! 
Under  the  shadow  of  Sinai  the  great  lawgiver  of  the 
people  to  whom  he  also  belonged,  had  spent  forty  years 
of  preparation  for  service.  In  the  same  country,  majestic 
by  reason  of  its  rugged  splendour  and  lonely  grandeur, 
he  had  received  the  law.  Moreover  it  was  from  that 
same  district  that  the  next  outstanding  figure  in  the 
history  of  the  people,  Elijah  the  prophet,  had  suddenly 
appeared.  These  two,  Moses  and  Elijah,  the  great  law- 
giver, and  the  great  reformer,  had  spoken  upon  the 
mount  with  Jesus  of  His  exodus ;  and  these  men  had  re- 
ceived the  training  of  the  desert  for  their  ministry  among 
the  multitudes. 

Some  ancient  expositors  believe  that  Saul  went  to 
Arabia  and  evangelized,  that  he  was  busy  among  the 
scattered  and  wild  peoples  inhabiting  the  district.  All 
that  is  quite  uncertain.  I  believe  that  F.  W.  H.  Myers 

[  237  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  9 : 23-30] 

came  nearer  to  the  truth  about  that  period  when  he 
wrote,  as  though  they  were  the  words  of  Paul  himself, 

"  How  have  I  seen  in  Araby,  Orion, 

Seen  without  seeing,  till  he  set  again, 
Known  the  night  noise  and  thunder  of  the  lion, 
Silence  and  sounds  of  the  prodigious  plain ! 

How  have  I  knelt  with  arms  of  my  aspiring 
Lifted  all  night  in  irresponsive  air. 

Dazed  and  amazed  with  overmuch  desiring, 
Blank  with  the  utter  agony  of  prayer !  " 

Paul  makes  two  references  to  this  period.  Both  are 
in  Galatians;  the  first  in  i:  17,  and  the  other  in  4:25. 
In  writing  to  the  Galatian  Christians  he  states  that  he 
"  went  away  into  Arabia  " ;  and  later,  in  the  course  of  the 
argument  there  is  another  incidental  reference,  merely 
geographical,  "  Now  this  Hagar  is  mount  Sinai  in 
Arabia."  Ambiguous  as  the  references  seem  to  be,  there 
is  much  light  in  them.  It  should  be  remembered  that 
this  Galatian  letter  is  one  which  reveals  the  conflict  be- 
tween Jerusalem  and  Antioch;  and  Paul's  contempt  for 
the  officialism  which  had  manifested  itself  in  the  college 
of  the  apostles  is  patent  throughout.  One  touch  shows 
how  he  felt.  Writing  of  those  whom  he  had  met  in 
Jerusalem,  in  a  parenthesis  he  described  them  as  "  they 
who  were  reputed  to  be  pillars."  Throughout  the  letter 
he  was  defending  his  apostleship,  and  his  gospel,  against 
the  influence  of  Judaizing  teachers.  With  that  back- 
ground in  mind,  notice  where  these  references  to  Arabia 
occur.  He  first  declared  to  those  to  whom  he  wrote,  that 
he  did  not  receive  his  apostleship  from  men,  that  his  ap- 
pointment to  apostleship  was  not  mediated,  but  immediate. 
He  declared  moreover  that  he  did  not  receive  his  gospel 
from  men,  but  directly  from  the  Lord  Christ.  In  order 
to  emphasize  this  fact  he  gave  the  history  of  his  mission- 
ary days,  introducing  it  with  the  word  that  showed  how 
he  recognized  the  Divine  government: 

[238] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9:23-30] 

"  When  it  was  the  good  pleasure  of  God,  Who  sepa- 
rated me  from  my  mother's  womb,  and  called  me  through 
His  grace,  to  reveal  His  Son  in  me,  that  I  might  preach 
Him  among  the  Gentiles;  immediately  I  conferred  not 
with  flesh  and  blood:  neither  went  I  up  to  Jerusalem  to 
them  which  were  apostles  before  me;  but  I  went  away 
into  Arabia." 

The  contrast  in  the  paragraph  immediately  throws  light 
upon  the  sojourn  in  Arabia.  He  did  not  confer  with 
flesh  and  blood;  he  went  into  Arabia  to  confer  with  his 
Lord.  Remembering  the  Hellenistic  atmosphere  of  his 
boyhood's  days  in  Tarsus;  the  religious  convictions 
created  by  his  Hebrew  blood  and  training ;  and  the  strange 
experience  through  which  he  had  passed  in  his  apprehen- 
sion by  the  One  Whom  he  had  thought  dead  and  dis- 
graced, but  Whom  he  had  discovered  to  be  alive  and 
glorified;  what  was  more  natural  than  that  he  should 
desire  a  period  of  reconstruction?  The  arrest  had  been 
an  earthquake,  and  the  whole  superstructure  of  past  years 
had  tottered  and  fallen,  and  lay  in  ruins  about  him.  He 
was  quite  certain  that  the  One  Whom  he  had  persecuted 
was  the  risen  Lord;  but  he  wanted  time  now  to  confer 
with  Him  alone.  We  can  follow  him  in  imagination 
back  to  the  desert,  to  the  splendour  of  its  loneliness ;  and 
see  him  entering  into  conference,  into  consultation  with 
Christ.  In  his  letters  we  find  how  often  he  referred  to 
things  he  had  received  from  Christ.  In  writing  to  the 
Corinthians  he  said,  "  I  received  of  the  Lord  that  which 
also  I  delivered  unto  you."  That  is  but  a  simple  illustra- 
tion, but  it  is  full  of  light.  I  believe  in  that  period  in 
Arabia  there  was  close,  intimate,  personal,  definite  and 
clear  conference  between  this  man  and  Christ. 

But  the  second  reference,  in  the  fourth  chapter,  is 
equally  interesting  and  illuminating.  He  wrote: 

"  Tell  me,  ye  that  desire  to  be  under  the  law,  do  ye  not 

[  239  1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  9 : 23-30] 

hear  the  law  ?  For  it  is  written,  that  Abraham  had  two 
sons,  one  by  the  handmaid,  and  one  by  the  freewoman." 

Then  he  went  back  to  Arabia,  to  Sinai,  to  the  place  where 
the  law  was  given,  to  the  place  where  the  great  founder 
of  the  nation  received  instructions  concerning  the  ritual 
of  worship.  Sinai  stood  for  Hebraism ;  and  he  went  back 
to  the  shadow  of  that  mountain,  back  into  all  the  lonely 
splendour  of  that  very  area  where  Moses  had  received 
the  law  directly  from  God.  He  went  back  to  put  Hebra- 
ism in  the  light  of  the  new  revelation.  The  result  was 
that  he  looked  at  Jerusalem,  and  declared  that  Jerusalem 
as  he  found  her,  was  in  bondage.  But  a  little  while  be- 
fore, he  had  left  Jerusalem,  the  appointed  prosecutor  of 
a  heresy  which  seemed  to  threaten  Hebraism.  Now  from 
Arabia,  looking  back  upon  Jerusalem  in  the  light  of  the 
revelation  that  had  come  to  him  upon  the  Damascene 
road,  he  saw  Hebraism  in  bondage;  but  he  saw  that  the 
Jerusalem  above,  the  mother  of  us  all,  is  free. 

In  the  argument  of  this  fourth  chapter  of  the  Galatian 
letter  we  discover  the  results  of  the  sojourn  in  Arabia. 
There,  through  the  illumination  of  that  Spirit  which  he 
had  received  in  fullness;  and  as  the  result  of  his  con- 
ference, not  with  flesh  and  blood,  but  with  the  living 
Christ  through  the  Spirit,  this  man  saw  the  old  in  the 
light  of  the  new.  In  the  figures  of  speech  which  he  em- 
ployed, and  which  mean  little  if  we  depart  from  the 
atmosphere  in  which  he  lived,  but  which  meant  very 
much  to  the  men  who  read  them  as  they  came  from  Paul's 
pen,  we  discover  the  merging  in  his  consciousness  of  the 
two  values  which  had  contributed  to  the  making  of  his 
life  before  he  met  Christ,  the  freedom  of  Tarsus,  and  the 
bondage  of  Jerusalem.  Under  the  shadow  of  Arabia's 
mountain,  in  conference  with  Christ,  in  the  light  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  the  two  things  merged.  He  still  saw  Jeru- 
salem, as  the  city  of  God,  the  city  of  government,  the 
city  of  righteousness,  the  city  of  worship;  but  he  saw 

I  240  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9:23-30] 

Jerusalem  free,  with  her  gates  open  to  the  four  points  of 
the  compass,  with  all  the  nations  of  the  world  pouring 
their  riches  into  her.  He  saw  no  longer  a  restraint  that 
destroys  essential  humanity,  but  a  redemption  that  re- 
news. All  the  forces  that  as  a  Hebrew  he  had  considered 
wrong,  he  now  saw  redeemed,  renewed,  and  incorporated 
in  the  great  purpose  of  God;  so  that  presently,  when 
correcting  Corinthian  disputes,  he  could  say,  "  All  things 
are  yours;  whether  Paul,  or  Apollos,  or  Cephas,  or  the 
world,  or  life,  or  death,  or  things  present,  or  things  to 
come;  all  are  yours;  and  ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is 
God's."  There  in  Arabia,  in  conference  with  Christ,  by 
the  illumination  of  the  Spirit,  in  the  atmosphere  in  which 
Hebraism  was  born,  he  came  to  discover  that  in  the  two 
ideals  that  he  had  always  considered  as  being  opposed  to 
each  other,  there  were  elements  of  truth ;  so  that  when  he 
wrote  to  the  Galatians  in  defence  of  freedom,  it  was  in 
defence  of  a  freedom  within  the  law  of  love  for  Christ. 
He  learned  those  things  in  the  quietness  of  Arabia;  he  saw 
the  rough  and  rugged  magnificence  of  Sinai  clothed  with 
asphodel  and  flowers ;  he  saw  the  stern  element  of  Juda- 
ism laughing  into  the  breadth  and  beauty  of  Hellenism. 
Hellenism  was  cleansed  by  Christ  from  its  impurities; 
Hebraism  was  delivered  by  Christ  from  its  austerities. 

From  Arabia  he  went  back  to  Damascus,  where 
hostility  was  stirred  up  by  the  Jews,  aided  by  the  Damas- 
cenes. The  burden  of  his  preaching  there  we  have  already 
referred  to.  It  brought  persecution  upon  him.  In  writ- 
ing his  second  letter  to  the  Corinthians  he  distinctly  as- 
serts that  those  who  guarded  the  gates  were  under  the 
order  of  the  officers  of  the  King.  But  the  disciples,  those 
very  men  whom  he  had  come  to  hale  to  prison,  helped 
him  to  escape  from  prison.  Those  whom  he  had  come 
determined  to  put  to  death,  now  aided  him  to  escape  from 
death.  These  contrasts  are  very  remarkable.  Observe 
the  indignity  of  the  method  by  which  he  left  Damascus. 
After  Arabia,  with  its  magnificence  and  revelations,  the 

[  241  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  9 : 23-30] 

apostle  to  the  Gentiles  escaped  from  Damascus  in  a 
basket,  let  down  over  the  wall.  Yet  in  that  very  contrast 
is  the  glory  of  this  story.  He  was  not  delivered  by  some 
miracle,  or  by  some  whirlwind,  although  these  were  pos- 
sible in  the  economy  of  that  God  Who  had  borne  away 
into  the  land  of  great  distances  and  silences  a  prophet  in 
a  whirlwind  of  fire;  or  Who  by  the  Spirit  had  swiftly 
transported  Philip  from  the  desert.  In  this  story  is  a 
revelation  of  the  tender  love  of  these  disciples ;  and  of  the 
fact  that  the  man  who  passes  from  a  period  of  conference 
with  Christ  may  have  to  exercise  his  work  in  the  most 
commonplace  way,  and  sometimes  find  himself  in  circum- 
stances which  lack  dignity. 

He  then  went  back  to  Jerusalem.  There  is  also  a  touch 
here  full  of  beauty.  Arrived  there,  he  sought  out  the 
disciples.  In  the  old  days  he  would  have  been  a  welcome 
guest  in  the  houses  of  the  men  of  light  and  leading.  Now 
he  did  not  seek  them,  but  the  disciples.  Their  fear  of 
him  was  perfectly  natural.  Three  years  had  passed  since 
his  conversion,  and  they  had  not  seen  him.  They  had 
however  heard  the  report  of  him,  and  were  afraid  to  re- 
ceive him ;  until  Barnabas  found  him  and  introduced  him 
to  the  little  company.  Perchance  Barnabas  had  known 
Saul  before  this;  for  he  was  a  Levite  and  a  native  of 
Cyprus,  near  to  the  coast  of  Cilicia,  where  Saul  had  been 
born.  Saul  was  thus  introduced  to  the  little  company, 
and  became  the  guest  of  Peter  for  fifteen  days,  not  to 
seek  from  him  any  authority,  but  to  confer  with  him;  as 
he  was  careful  to  state  in  his  Galatian  letter. 

Then  he  went  straight  to  the  assembly  of  the  Hellenistic 
Jews,  and  disputed  with  them.  This  word  disputed  only 
occurs  in  this  book  of  the  Acts  in  one  other  place,  in 
chapter  six,  and  verse  nine.  Stephen  disputed  with  the 
Hellenized  Jews.  Saul  had  listened  in  all  likelihood,  had 
seen  the  result  when  the  Jews  turned  upon  him,  flung 
him  out,  and  stoned  him  to  death.  He  had  watched 
Stephen  die,  himself  consenting  to  his  death.  Now  when 

[  242  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  g :  23-30] 

he  came  back  to  Jerusalem,  he  went  to  the  same  company 
of  Hellenistic  Jews,  and  did  the  same  thing  that  Stephen 
had  done.  He  took  up  the  ministry  of  the  man  to  whose 
death  he  had  consented.  The  ministry  of  Stephen  had 
been  peculiarly  an  argument  against  the  Sadducean  in- 
fluence of  the  hour.  Saul,  the  Hebrew,  had  violated  his 
deepest  religious  convictions,  when  he  had  agreed  to  the 
death  of  Stephen.  Now  arrested  by  Christ,  he  attempted 
to  make  amends  for  past  folly  and  sin,  and  so  sought  out 
the  very  place  where  Stephen  had  argued,  and  continued 
the  argument  as  he  disputed  with  them.  The  result  was 
that  he  shared  that  hostility  which  brought  about 
Stephen's  death,  for  "  they  went  about  to  kill  him." 
Later  on  in  this  book  we  find  that  Paul  tells  us  something 
about  this,  which  Luke  does  not  insert  at  this  point.  In 
the  twenty-second  chapter,  when  reviewing  his  story,  he 
says  that  the  Lord  appeared  to  him  here  in  a  trance,  in  an 
ecstasy,  and  bade  him  depart,  for  He  had  other  work  for 
him  to  do. 

Once  more,  aided  by  the  disciples,  we  see  him  leaving 
Jerusalem ;  going  back  through  Csesarea  to  Tarsus ;  back 
to  the  old  scenes  after  the  new  vision,  back  to  the  old 
atmosphere  in  the  power  of  the  new  life.  There  we 
leave  him,  until  Barnabas  presently  finds  him  and  leads 
him  back  to  Antioch. 

In  our  study  we  have  attempted  to  watch  the  movement 
as  part  of  the  whole  of  the  activity  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
through  the  Church,  in  those  early  days  of  her  history. 
We  have  seen  the  apprehension  of  this  man  as  part  of 
the  Lord's  method  for  that  new  campaign.  Jerusalem 
had  heard  the  evangel.  It  had  been  preached  in  Judcea 
and  through  Samaria.  Now  there  lay  waiting  for  the 
Gospel,  that  wider  district  of  Asia,  with  those  Asian 
cities,  and  their  strange  mixture  of  Jewish  synagogues 
and  Hellenistic  thinking.  For  the  doing  of  that  work  this 
man  was  selected  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  As  we  contemplate 
this  story,  we  see  how  the  Spirit  of  God  selects  the  right 

[  243  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  9: 23-30] 

man,  when  unhindered  by  the  pride,  arrogance,  and  self- 
satisfaction  of  men.  Here  was  a  man,  in  whose  prepara- 
tion we  can  trace  Tarsus  and  Jerusalem ;  and  more,  Rome 
also.  He  was  not  only  Hebrew  and  Greek;  he  was  also 
Roman,  with  a  passion  for  empire.  So  the  Spirit  of  God 
selects  for  peculiar  work  those  who  are  peculiarly  fitted 
for  it  by  their  first  creation. 

But  that  is  not  all  the  equipment  needed  for  the  special 
work.  He  could  not  do  the  work  that  was  to  be  done, 
because  of  Tarsus,  because  of  Jerusalem,  or  because  of 
Roman  imperialism.  He  must  first  know  the  risen  Lord. 
That  stands  forevermore  as  the  first  qualification  for 
Christian  service,  That  was  the  master  note  in  all  his 
preaching  and  teaching.  Secondly  he  must  receive  the 
Spirit's  fullness.  Then  there  must  be  Arabia,  the  desert, 
and  quietness.  The  peril  of  much  work  to-day  is  that 
of  imagining  that  any  man,  immediately  he  has  been  con- 
verted can  break  the  bread  of  life,  and  tell  out  the  deep 
things  of  God,  and  fulfil  a  great  ministry.  It  may  not 
always  be  Arabia  as  a  geographical  location,  but  God 
never  uses  for  the  great  work  of  interpreting  His  King- 
dom any  man  who  has  not  been  definitely  called  and 
spiritually  trained.  Reverently  to  illustrate  here  from 
the  life  of  our  Lord,  for  that  is  always  superlative  and 
therefore  final ;  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  preached  for  about 
three  years,  but  there  was  the  long  preparation  of  eighteen 
years  preceding  that  preaching,  in  the  carpenter's  shop. 
Even  when  He  came  to  the  hour  of  His  ministry,  He  was 
halted  again  for  forty  days  in  the  wilderness.  Saul  began 
to  preach  in  Damascus  immediately  after  his  conversion ; 
but  because  God  had  some  fuller  ministry  for  him,  he  had 
to  leave  Damascus  and  go  into  Arabia.  There  must  be 
the  preparation  that  comes  from  conference  with  Christ, 
and  waiting  upon  Him. 

What  did  this  man  leave  behind  him  ?  Both  Hebraism 
and  Hellenism.  What  did  he  carry  over  with  him  into 
the  new  life  and  ministry?  His  own  personality,  re- 

I  244  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9:31] 

deemed  and  renewed.  Henceforth  he  was  neither  He- 
brew nor  Hellenist,  but  Christian ;  a  man  who  in  fellow- 
ship with  the  character  of  Christ  had  discovered  the  value 
of  Hebraism,  and  had  sloughed  off  the  things  therein  that 
were  worthless;  a  man  who  in  fellowship  with  the  risen 
Christ,  had  grasped  the  secret  of  Hellenism,  and  flung 
away  the  things  that  were  worthless. 

So  we  leave  him  for  the  present  in  Tarsus,  presently 
to  see  him  again  upon  the  high  road  of  his  work  for  God ; 
having  seen  in  this  study  how  wondrously  the  Spirit  of 
God  selects,  equips,  prepares. 

Acts  9:31 

This  one  verse  is  of  great  importance,  because  it  marks 
a  new  departure  in  the  story  as  it  gathers  up  suggestively, 
certain  unrecorded  facts.  The  first  word  necessarily 
arrests  attention,  "So  the  Church  throughout  all  Judaea 
and  Galilee  and  Samaria  had  peace,  being  edified."  That 
simple  word  "  so,"  suggests  the  statement  of  result,  and 
the  relation  of  the  result  to  the  cause. 

The  statement  of  this  verse  is  generally  treated  as 
though  the  result  to  which  Luke  desired  to  draw  atten- 
tion was  that  of  peace,  and  as  though  the  cause  was  the 
conversion  of  Saul.  I  believe  that  the  verse  includes 
much  more  in  each  case ;  that  the  result  referred  to  is  far 
larger  than  that  of  peace,  indeed,  that  peace  was  temporary 
and  incidental.  The  essential  result  is,  "  Being  edified." 
Peace  very  soon  passed  away,  and  persecution  broke  out 
again;  but  the  edification  went  on  and  has  continued  in 
the  Church  until  this  hour.  As  to  the  cause,  it  certainly 
is  not  inaccurate  to  include  Christ's  apprehension  of  Saul 
of  Tarsus  therein,  but  a  great  deal  more  must  be  included. 
To  get  the  suggestiveness  of  this  introductory  word  "  so  " 
we  must  turn  back  in  the  story,  and  call  to  mind  ground 
which  we  have  already  traversed.  The  last  statement  of 
this  verse  is  that  the  Church  "was  multiplied."  In 
chapter  six  at  the  first  verse  we  read,  "  Now  in  these 

I  245  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  9 131] 

days,  when  the  number  of  the  disciples  was  multi- 
plying, there  arose  a  murmuring  of  the  Grecian  Jews  " ; 
and  there  follows  an  account  of  the  setting  apart  of  seven 
men  to  the  office  and  dignity  of  the  serving  of  tables  in 
the  power  and  fullness  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  After  that 
we  read  that  "  the  Word  of  God  increased ;  and  the  num- 
ber of  the  disciples  multiplied  in  Jerusalem  exceedingly; 
and  a  great  company  of  the  priests  were  obedient  to  the 
faith."  The  story  of  Stephen  occupies  the  remainder  of 
chapter  six  and  the  whole  of  chapter  seven.  At  the  com- 
mencement of  chapter  eight  we  read,  "  There  arose  on 
that  day  a  great  persecution  against  the  Church  which  was 
in  Jerusalem ;  and  they  were  all  scattered  abroad  through- 
out the  regions  of  Judaea  and  Samaria,  except  the 
apostles ;  and  devout  men  buried  Stephen,  and  made  great 
lamentation  over  him;  but  Saul  laid  waste  the  Church, 
entering  into  every  house,  and  dragging  men  and  women 
committed  them  to  prison."  We  are  familiar  with  all  the 
recorded  happenings  following  that  statement  up  to  this 
thirty-first  verse,  "  So  the  Church  throughout  all  Judaea 
and  Galilee  and  Samaria  had  peace,  being  edified."  Much, 
however,  had  happened  which  is  not  chronicled.  A 
much  wider  work  was  going  on  than  is  recorded  in  this 
book.  Certain  outstanding  and  vital  incidents  in  connec- 
tion with  the  movements  have  been  noted;  the  persecu- 
tion and  scattering  of  the  disciples,  and  its  use  by  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Our  attention  has  been  focused  upon  the  appre- 
hension of  Saul  of  Tarsus.  But  as  we  have  said,  much 
more  had  been  going  on ;  and  in  this  phrase,  suggestively 
and  remarkably,  Luke  draws  attention  to  the  much  more. 
Here  we  read  of  "  The  Church  throughout  all  Judaea 
and  Galilee  and  Samaria."  That  is  an  entirely  new  con- 
ception, not  found  in  the  book  of  Acts  before.  This  is 
the  first  occasion  on  which  the  word  "  Church  "  is  used 
in  that  spacious  sense.  When  persecution  broke  out,  the 
Church  at  Jerusalem  was  almost  wasted;  there,  as  it 
seemed,  most  havoc  was  wrought ;  and  the  disciples  were 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9:31] 

scattered  everywhere.  We  saw  the  persecution  scatter- 
ing them,  and  the  evangelization  of  the  whole  region 
round  about  which  resulted  from  the  scattering.  We 
noticed  carefully  the  apprehension  of  one  man,  the  central 
figure  Saul;  and  now  as  the  result  of  the  persecution 
which  scattered,  and  as  the  result  of  the  evangelization 
that  followed,  as  the  result  of  the  arrest  of  one  man  who 
was  leading  the  opposition  and  his  apprehension  by  Jesus 
Christ ;  "  The  Church  throughout  all  Judaea  and  Galilee 
and  Samaria  had  peace,  being  edified."  The  "  so " 
with  which  the  verse  opens  encompasses  the  whole  move- 
ment. 

From  this  verse  to  the  end  of  the  twelfth  chapter, 
Peter  again  becomes  the  central  figure.  Here  at  the  part- 
ing of  the  ways  between  that  vital  story  of  the  apprehen- 
sion of  Saul,  and  the  interesting  account  of  Peter's  work, 
we  have  a  picture  of  the  Church  such  as  has  not  appeared 
before.  The  statement  of  Luke  concerning  the  Church 
is  a  most  careful  one. 

In  examining  this  verse  we  must  bear  in  mind  its  com- 
pleteness as  a  paragraph.  It  stands  alone  in  the  record, 
rightly  placed.  Let  us,  moreover,  carefully  notice  the 
divisions  of  this  paragraph.  The  Text  of  Westcott  and 
Hort  separates  it  carefully  from  the  following  verse ;  and 
its  punctuation  divides  it  into  two  parts,  by  placing  a 
comma  after  the  word  "  edified."  The  punctuation  of 
the  Revised  Version  follows  this  idea,  though  with  Eng- 
lish fullness.  Therefore  I  find  that  this  text  has  two  dis- 
tinct parts ;  first,  "  The  Church  throughout  all  Judaea  and 
Galilee  and  Samaria  had  peace,  being  edified";  and 
secondly,  "  and,  walking  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  in 
the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  was  multiplied."  There 
are  then,  two  phases  of  revelation;  first  of  the  Church 
in  itself;  and  secondly,  of  the  Church  in  its  service. 

Let  us  first  take  time  to  consider  the  essential  meaning 
of  the  word  "  Church."  The  word  ecclesla  literally 
means  called  out.  The  picture  of  the  Church  suggested 

[  247  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  9:  31] 

by  the  word  is  that  of  a  company  of  those  who  are  sepa- 
rated from  the  nation,  and  from  the  race,  an  entirely  new 
company. 

The  use  of  the  word  is  interesting.  In  the  seventh 
chapter  of  this  book  it  is  used  in  a  way,  to  notice  which, 
will  help  us :  "  This  is  he  that  was  in  the  church  in  the 
wilderness."  That  might  be  translated  quite  accurately, 
"  the  assembly  in  the  wilderness."  The  phrase  has  ref- 
erence to  the  ancient  people  of  God;  and  in  that  verse 
we  discover  the  Hebrew  use  of  the  word.  When  Jesus 
first  made  use  of  it  at  Csesarea  Philippi,  saying  to  Peter, 
"  Upon  this  rock  I  will  build  My  Church,"  He  used  a  not 
uncommon  word.  Those  who  heard  it  were  arrested  not 
by  the  use  of  the  word  ecclesia,  but  by  the  authoritative 
and  possessive  pronoun,  "My  ecclesia,"  by  the  use  of 
which  He  indicated  something  with  which  they  were 
familiar,  and  something  with  which  they  were  entirely  un- 
familiar. The  Hebrews  understood  the  word  ecclesia  as 
referring  to  the  peculiar  people,  the  chosen  nation,  the 
Theocracy,  the  Divinely-governed  people. 

But  the  word  had  also  a  Greek  meaning,  and  in  this 
book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  it  is  used  in  the  Greek 
sense  in  the  nineteenth  chapter  and  the  thirty-second 
verse :  "  Some  therefore  cried  one  thing,  and  some 
another :  for  the  assembly  was  in  confusion."  There  the 
reference  was  to  the  special  gathering  of  the  craftsmen. 
Then  there  is  the  account  of  the  uproar  in  Ephesus,  and 
twice  the  assembly  is  mentioned,  where  the  reference  is 
to  the  Civic  Authority.  What  then  were  the  peculiarities 
of  the  Greek  ecclesia?  It  was  composed  entirely  of  free 
men,  no  slave  was  allowed  to  be  a  member  of  the  Greek 
ecclesia;  and  its  function  was  that  of  government. 

Two  ideas  are  therefore  suggested  by  the  word;  the 
Hebrew  idea  which  was  that  of  a  God-governed  people; 
and  the  Greek  idea,  which  was  that  of  a  governing  com- 
munity. When  Jesus  said  at  Csesarea  Philippi  "  My 
ecclesia,"  He  was  doubtless  perfectly  familiar  with  the 

[248  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9:31] 

two  ideas,  and  He  included  them  both.  The  word  ap- 
pears upon  the  pages  of  this  book  of  the  Acts,  and  refers 
to  the  company  of  those  who  are  following  the  name  of 
Jesus;  and  are  first,  the  God-governed  people;  and 
secondly,  the  governing  people ;  the  people  who  hold  the 
keys,  not  of  themselves,  the  Church,  but  of  the  Kingdom ; 
the  moral  interpreters,  those  who  are  to  state  the  stand- 
ards of  life,  and  who  are  to  insist  upon  the  ethical  ideas 
of  Jesus. 

Now  observe  the  enlarged  conception  at  this  point. 
The  word  "  Church "  had  occurred  only  two  or  three 
times  previously.  In  the  second  chapter  it  is  said,  "  The 
Lord  added  to  them,"  the  Authorized  Version  renders  it 
"  The  Lord  added  to  the  Church."  The  real  meaning  is 
that  He  added  to  Himself,  and  so  to  the  Church.  Then 
a  little  further  on,  in  the  fifth  chapter  we  read,  "  Great 
fear  came  upon  the  whole  Church."  In  the  eighth 
chapter,  again,  "  There  arose  on  that  day  a  great  persecu- 
tion against  the  Church.  .  .  .  Saul  laid  waste  the 
Church."  These  occasions  are  grouped  in  order  to  note 
the  fact  that  up  to  this  point  every  reference  to  the 
Church  had  been  to  the  Church  at  Jerusalem.  But  now 
it  is  employed  with  a  wider  outlook :  "  The  Church 
throughout  all  Judaea  and  Galilee  and  Samaria."  In  the 
Authorized  Version  the  passage  reads  "  the  Churches 
throughout."  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  the 
change  is  not  only  necessary,  but  vital  to  an  understand- 
ing of  this  passage.  Later  on,  there  will  be  recognition 
of  local  centres ;  but  here  a  greater,  grander  idea  than  that 
breaks  upon  the  vision.  The  preposition  is  significant, 
not  the  church  of,  but  "  the  Church  throughout."  When- 
ever we  lay  emphasis  upon  the  preposition  of,  we  wrong 
the  catholic  ideal.  The  Church  of  Scotland,  the  Church 
of  England.  There  is  really  no  such  Church.  There 
is  the  Church  throughout  Scotland,  England,  Ireland, 
the  World!  A  great  spiritual  vision  breaks  upon 
the  sight  at  this  point,  of  a  united  Church.  Mark 

[  249  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES, 
[Acts  9: 31] 

the  wonderful  comprehensiveness  of  this;  Judaea,- 
Galilee,  and  Samaria  were  included;  and  the  movement 
was  about  to  spread.  Go  back  to  the  Gospel  history,  and 
remember  how  the  men  of  Judaea  held  in  contempt  the 
men  of  Galilee,  as  they  called  it,  Galilee  of  the  Gentiles. 
Between  Judaea  and  Samaria  there  was  perpetual  feud; 
"  The  Jews  have  no  dealings  with  the  Samaritans."  Yet 
here  we  read  "  the  Church  throughout  all  Judaea  and 
Galilee  and  Samaria  " ;  not  one  for  Judaea,  one  for  Galilee, 
and  one  for  Samaria,  continuing  race  prejudice,  per- 
petuating bitterness,  establishing  local  geographical 
centres.  This  great  movement  was  sweeping  all  these 
things  away  forever.  One  ecclesia  called  out  from 
Judaea,  Galilee,  Samaria ;  brought  from  prejudice,  pride, 
and  geographical  limitation,  into  the  unity  of  the  Spirit. 
Here  then  for  the  first  time  there  appears  upon  the  page 
of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  the  spacious  catholic  con- 
ception of  the  Christian  Church. 

Then  let  us  notice  the  edification  of  that  Church.  I  am 
not  careful  to  dwell  upon  the  "  peace/'  for,  as  I  have 
said,  that  was  transitory ;  the  essential  thing  is  "  being 
edified."  This  suggests  the  incompleteness  of  the  Church. 
The  man  who  wrote  that  word  had  no  idea  that  the 
Church  was  complete!  It  was  being  built.  The  word 
also  indicates  progress;  he  saw  the  work  going  forward. 
Moreover  it  looks  to  finality ;  that  which  is  building  will 
yet  be  completed.  Luke,  as  he  wrote,  saw  not  only  the 
spiritual  conception  of  the  Church,  but  its  invincibility, 
the  fact  that  nothing  can  destroy  it.  Through  opposition 
and  persecution  he  saw  it  growing  up  into  the  holy  As- 
sembly of  the  Lord ;  and  he  saw  growing  into  that  whole 
Assembly  the  several  buildings,  the  individual  churches. 
Yet  he  lost  sight  of  the  individuality  of  the  local  churches, 
in  view  of  the  supreme  glory  of  that  ultimate  Church 
which  is  to  be  the  very  Assembly  of  the  living  God. 

Thus  these  people  are  seen  passing  away  from  the 
temple  at  a  centre,  and  becoming  themselves  the  temple 

[  250  ] 


'THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9:31] 

^vherever  they  are.  The  larger  spiritual  ideal  is  emerg- 
ing, and  being  realized,  the  ideal  expressed  by  Christ 
Himself  to  one  individual, — not  a  Hebrew,  not  even  a 
Galilean,  but  a  Samaritan,  and  more  wonderful  still,  a 
Samaritan  woman,  and  still  more  remarkable,  a  Samari- 
tan woman  who  was  a  sinner ; — "  The  hour  cometh,  when 
neither  in  this  mountain,  nor  in  Jerusalem,  shall  ye  wor- 
ship the  Father  .  .  .  the  hour  cometh,  and  now  is, 
when  the  true  worshippers  shall  worship  the  Father  in 
spirit  and  in  truth."  That  is  the  catholic  Church,  in- 
dependent of  locality,  sweeping  over  all  geographical 
boundaries. 

Where  are  we  to-day  ?  The  Church  is  still  being  built. 
If  only  we  could  remember,  that  it  is  as  we  discover  the 
simplicities,  that  we  reach  the  sublimities,  we  should 
cease  our  criticism  of  parts  of  the  Church.  No  man  has 
seen  the  Church ;  it  is  not  built,  it  is  being  built,  but  it  is 
not  completed.  Half  the  things  about  which  we  quarrel 
to-day  are  scaffolding,  rather  than  essential  building. 

We  turn  now  to  a  brief  examination  of  the  second  part 
of  the  verse :  "  And  walking  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and 
in  the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  was  multiplied."  That 
word  "  walking  "  has  certainly  no  reference  here  merely 
to  the  habits  of  life ;  it  is  a  far  prof ounder  word.  In 
Rotherham's  translation  it  is  rendered  "  the  Church 
.  .  .  going  on  its  way  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  and  in 
the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Spirit."  The  particular  word 
here  translated  "walking,"  is  one  that  always  suggests 
purpose  as  opposed  to  aimlessness.  There  is  another 
Greek  word  found  in  the  New  Testament  which  is  not 
necessarily  that  of  purpose  or  finality,  and  from  that  word 
we  have  derived  our  word  "  peripatetic,"  which  may 
describe  quite  an  aimless  walking  around.  Not  so  this 
word.  This  is  the  word  that  Jesus  made  use  of  in  the 
great  commission  recorded  by  Matthew,  "  Go  ye  therefore 
and  disciple  the  nations."  He  used  the  same  word  in  the 
commission  as  Mark  records  it,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the 

[251 1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  9:  31] 

cosmos."  At  this  point  Luke  takes  up  that  word,  a  word 
full  of  these  sacred  associations.  He  was  not  now 
describing  the  habits  of  individual  members  of  the 
Church,  but  the  service  of  the  whole  Church,  going  on  its 
way.  The  Lord's  intention  for  His  Church,  is  that  it 
should  be  an  ambassage,  a  corporation  of  living  souls, 
sent  out  upon  the  King's  business.  Luke  sees  the  Church 
fulfilling  this  function,  going  on  its  way. 

The  twofold  condition  of  that  going  is  stated.  First, 
"  Going  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  The  Lord  had  thus 
commissioned  His  Church :  "  Go  ye  therefore,  and  disciple 
the  nations,  baptizing  them  into  the  name  of  the  Father 
and  of  the  Son  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit:  teaching  them  to 
observe  all  things  whatsoever  I  commanded  you";  and 
again :  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  cosmos,  and  preach  the  gospel 
to  the  whole  creation."  The  Lordship  of  Christ  to 
those  early  disciples  was  twofold  in  its  application:  He 
was  the  Lord  of  life,  the  authoritative  and  final  one ;  and 
He  was  the  greatest  of  all  servants,  Himself  leading  those 
who  serve  in  places  of  suffering  and  toil  and  travail. 
Here  then  we  see  the  Church ;  a  spiritual  Body,  including 
all  who  believe  within  its  boundaries;  going  on  its  way 
in  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  This  meant  that  its  life  was 
yielded  to  His  dominion,  and  itself  was  forevermore  pro- 
claiming His  authority,  and  insisting  upon  it.  It  meant 
also  that  its  life  was  at  the  disposal  of  His  suffering  ones  ; 
as  it  entered  into  the  cosmos,  and  placed  itself  against 
the  wounds  and  weariness  of  humanity,  touching  the 
degradation  of  life  everywhere,  so  as  to  heal  it.  That  is 
to  "  go  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord." 

But  all  this  was  done  "  In  the  comfort  of  the  Holy 
Spirit."  The  word  "  comfort "  is  palpably  inadequate. 
The  Holy  Spirit  was  spoken  of  by  our  Lord  as  the 
Paraclete,  the  One  called  to  the  side  of  His  people  when 
He  was  about  to  leave  them.  He  came  first  for  com- 
fort, to  disannul  orphanage,  to  fill  the  gap,  to  console 
those  who  were  left  behind;  but  He  came  to  be  an  Ex- 

[  252  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9:31] 

horter,  as  well  as  Comforter,  the  Advocate  Who  should 
plead  the  cause  of  the  absent  Lord.  The  Greek  word 
here  covers  the  two  values,  and  we  may  render  it  walk- 
ing in  the  comforting  advocacy  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  In 
the  ministry  of  the  Holy  Spirit  the  Church  went  forth  to 
work.  That  ministry  was  that  of  making  the  Lord  Him- 
self real  to  the  consciousness  of  those  who  went,  for 
witness,  for  preaching,  for  insistence  upon  the  Lordship 
of  Christ ;  for  proclamation  of  His  authority  over  all  life, 
and  for  revelation  of  the  power  of  His  Saviourhood. 

In  view  of  all  this  we  are  not  surprised  to  read  the  last 
phrase,  brief  though  it  is,  that  the  Church  "  was  multi- 
plied." The  idea  is  not  merely  that  of  the  numbering  of 
units;  it  is  that  of  fullness;  the  Church  was  made  to 
abound.  The  Church  went  forth  in  abounding  power, 
itself  growing  and  multiplying  because  of  the  two  facts 
of  its  life :  the  master-principle  of  the  Lordship  of  Jesus, 
and  the  power  and  comfort  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

As  we  look  back  to  this  ancient  picture,  we  earnestly 
desire  new  realization  in  the  day  in  which  we  live. 
There  are  two  things  we  gather  from  our  examination  of 
this  verse.  First,  the  spiritual  conception  of  the  Church. 
This  is  suggested  by  the  phrase  "  the  Church  throughout." 
By  that  phrase  all  geographical  boundaries  are  ignored, 
all  race  prejudices  are  destroyed,  all  ancient  feuds  are 
ended,  all  religious  centres  are  abolished.  Nineteen 
centuries  have  gone,  and  we  still  have  our  geographical 
boundaries,  and  name  our  Churches  according  to  them; 
race  prejudices  still  divide  the  Church ;  ancient  feuds  are 
still  maintained  within  the  Church;  and  we  still  go  up 
to  some  special  centre  to  worship.  Let  us  more  care- 
fully contemplate  the  great  ideal.  In  proportion  as  our 
eyes  behold  it  and  our  hearts  desire  it,  and  we  in  indi- 
vidual life  conform  to  it;  we  shall  hasten  the  perfecting 
of  the  Church,  and  the  accomplishment  of  the  will  of 
God. 

It  is  impossible  to  read  this  verse  without  being  re- 

[  253  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  9 : 32-43] 

minded  of  the  missionary  vocation  of  the  Church.  Here 
the  Church  is  seen  going  on  its  way,  going  in  the  way  the 
Lord  commanded  it,  going  to  the  nations  to  disciple  them, 
going  into  the  cosmos  to  suffer  in  order  to  save;  and 
going  on  its  way  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  in  the  com- 
fort of  the  Holy  Spirit.  These  two  things  are  closely 
united.  The  first  part  of  the, verse  ends  "  being  edified  " ; 
the  second  part  ends  "  was  multiplied."  The  underlying 
thought  is  exactly  the  same.  Consequently  if  the  Church 
is  to  be  missionary,  she  must  be  spiritual;  and  if  the 
Church  is  to  be  spiritual,  she  must  be  missionary. 

Acts  9: 32-43 

This  paragraph  constitutes  a  link  between  the  story  of 
Saul  and  that  of  Cornelius.  It  is  complete  in  itself,  and 
yet  is  closely  related  to  that  which  has  preceded  it,  and 
that  which  is  to  follow. 

As  to  its  relation  to  the  preceding  one,  we  remember 
that  Saul  was  at  Tarsus;  and  that,  as  the  introductory 
declaration  of  this  paragraph  reveals,  Peter  was  going 
throughout  all  parts.  Saul  is  now  left  for  a  little  while 
at  Tarsus,  and  we  have  no  record  of  his  doings ;  but  are 
brought  back  again  from  this  point,  and  on  to  the  end  of 
the  twelfth  chapter,  to  Peter. 

This  paragraph  is  related  to  that  which  follows  in  that 
the  last  word  of  this  chapter  declares  that  Peter  "  abode 
many  days  in  Joppa  with  one  Simon,  a  tanner  " ;  and  im- 
mediately following  is  the  account  of  Cornelius.  Peter 
came  to  Joppa,  which  was  to  be  to  him  a  place  of  new 
and  revolutionary  vision. 

The  paragraph  to  be  considered  is  of  the  nature  of  a 
page  of  illustrations.  Peter  is  seen  travelling  everywhere, 
exercising  his  ministry.  Certain  facts  are  recorded; 
those  of  the  healing  of  ^Eneas,  and  the  raising  of  Dorcas ; 
and  finally  and  most  significantly,  that  of  Peter  lodging 
in  the  house  of  a  tanner.  These  pictures  gather  up  much 
that  has  gone  before,  and  illuminate  it.  As  we  ponder 

[  254  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9 : 32-43] 

the  pictures  there  are  three  things  impressed  upon  the 
mind,  with  which  we  may  deal  in  an  ascending  order; 
first,  the  communion  of  the  saints;  secondly,  the  opera- 
tions of  the  Spirit ;  and  thirdly,  the  victories  of  the  Lord. 
Beginning  on  the  lowest  level,  that  which  is  simplest  and 
most  apparent;  let  us  see  what  this  paragraph  reveals  of 
the  communion  of  saints ;  then  looking  behind  that  mani- 
festation, what  it  reveals  of  the  operations  of  the  Spirit ; 
and  finally  that  which  is  the  supreme  matter,  what  it  re- 
veals of  the  victories  of  the  Lord. 

First  then  as  to  the  communion  of  the  saints.  Reading 
this  story  carefully,  we  are  conscious  of  the  influence  of 
a  man  who  is  not  named.  It  is  a  simple  and  natural  ques- 
tion to  ask,  Whence  came  there  to  be  saints  at  Lydda? 
Let  us  turn  back  to  chapter  eight,  to  the  story  of  the 
Ethiopian  Eunuch,  and  all  that  followed.  The  last  verse 
reads,  "  Philip  was  found  at  Azotus ;  and  passing  through, 
he  preached  the  gospel  to  all  the  cities,  till  he  came  to 
Caesarea."  If  we  trace  Philip's  journey  from  Azotus  to 
Caesarea  on  a  map,  we  shall  find  that  the  direct  road  went 
through  Lydda.  I  think  it  is  a  fair  conclusion  that  Lydda 
was  one  of  the  cities  where  Philip  preached.  He  had 
preached  in  Samaria  and  a  Church  had  been  formed.  He 
had  preached  to  the  Ethiopian  Eunuch,  and  had  won  him 
for  Christ.  He  had  been  borne  by  the  Spirit  to  Azotus, 
and  then  started  preaching  through  the  cities.  It  is  prob- 
able that  his  preaching  in  Lydda  had  been  the  means  of 
gathering  together  a  number  of  those  who  believed  on 
Christ.  Here  then  were  the  saints  at  Lydda,  as  I  believe, 
the  result  of  Philip's  preaching. 

Then  at  Joppa  lived  Dorcas,  whose  ministry  was  that 
of  deft  fingers,  inspired  by  a  full  heart.  It  was  a  great 
ministry.  When  presently  Peter  came  into  that  chamber, 
and  the  widows  about  him  were  lamenting,  and  han- 
dling the  garments  she  had  made,  what  a  beautiful  revela- 
tion we  have  of  the  woman!  She  gave  herself  to  mak- 
ing garments  for  the  poor.  It  is  of  course  true  that  her 

[255 1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  9 : 32-43] 

work  sprang  out  of  the  mastery  of  the  Christ-love,  for 
that  is  always  anxious  to  clothe  the  naked.  I  think  how- 
ever that  here  are  results  of  Philip's  ministry.  When 
the  dispute  arose  in  Jerusalem  in  the  early  days  concern- 
ing the  distribution  of  alms,  the  Hellenist  widows  com- 
plained that  they  were  being  neglected,  and  seven  deacons 
were  elected,  men  full  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  full  of  wis- 
dom, to  set  this  matter  in  order,  Philip  was  the  second 
man  chosen.  When  he  passed  through  the  cities,  I  be- 
lieve he  not  only  preached  the  Gospel,  so  that  men  might 
be  saved,  but  he  showed  the  lines  and  directions  along 
which  the  new  Christian  life  should  be  used  for  the  bless- 
ing of  others.  I  think  there  is  proof  of  Philip's  ministry 
in  the  saints  at  Lydda,  and  in  Dorcas  and  her  beneficent 
operations  in  Joppa.  Peter  now  passed  over  the  ground, 
and  entered  into  the  result  of  Philip's  ministry.  This 
was  part  of  the  communion  of  saints.  Wherever  Peter 
went,  he  entered  into  the  labours  of  another.  Such 
ministry  as  Peter  exercised  in  Samaria  would  have  been 
utterly  out  of  place  had  it  not  been  for  the  preparatory 
ministry  of  Philip.  There  was  no  antagonism  between 
the  evangelist  and  the  apostle;  and  wherever  it  is  found 
to-day  it  is  because  either  the  evangelist  or  the  apostle  is 
out  of  harmony  with  the  Lord.  There  was  communion 
of  ministry  here. 

At  Joppa  we  have  this  wonderful  picture  of  Dorcas. 
Luke  says  concerning  her  that  she  "  was  full  of  good 
works  and  almsdeeds."  One  would  have  thought  that  the 
story  was  complete  there;  but  I  think  that  there  was 
Divine  purpose  in  the  addition  of  three  small  words 
"  which  she  did."  So  many  people  think  of  good  works 
and  almsdeeds,  and  dream  of  them;  but  she  did  them. 
She  not  only  pitied  the  poor  when  the  sharp  wind  blew ; 
she  ministered  with  deft  fingers  to  their  need.  This 
again  is  a  picture  of  the  communion  of  saints.  These 
two  phases  are  most  suggestive ;  the  communion  of  saints 
in  the  ministries  of  the  Church,  that  of  the  evangelist  and 

[256] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9 : 32-43] 

that  of  the  apostle ;  that  of  the  proclamation  of  the  first 
things  of  salvation,  and  that  of  the  man  who  instructs 
and  edifies;  that  is  the  communion  of  ministry.  Then 
we  see  that  little  homely  group  of  women,  around  one 
who  is  known  forevermore  as  the  one  who  made  coats 
and  garments  for  the  poor.  The  communion  in  each  case 
is  the  same.  The  master-principle  underlying  the  com- 
radeship between  evangelist  and  apostle  is  the  same  as 
that  which  underlies  the  companionship  that  exists  be- 
tween the  woman  of  heart  and  leisure  and  ability,  who 
makes  garments,  and  the  widows  who  in  poverty  and 
need,  wear  them. 

The  communion  of  saints  always  expresses  itself  in 
service.  Wherever  the  apostle  urges  the  saints  to  be 
true  to  the  communion,  fellowship,  the  expression  of  com- 
munion must  be  in  service  of  some  kind.  The  Church 
does  not  express  its  communion  when  it  gathers  together 
in  assembly,  and  asserts  it.  The  Church  expresses  its 
communion  when  in  all  types  and  kinds  of  its  manifold 
ministry,  it  cooperates  and  ministers  in  helpfulness  and 
love. 

Then  we  come  to  the  deeper  and  underlying  matter,  of 
which  all  that  we  have  seen  is  but  the  fruit.  Mark  the 
operations  of  the  Spirit  as  revealed  here.  The  twelfth 
chapter  of  I  Corinthians  is  an  exposition  of  this  para- 
graph. Take  these  little  pictures  of  the  condition  of 
things  in  the  early  days,  and  then  read  that  great,  and 
magnificent  statement  of  truth  concerning  the  Church's 
relation  to  its  Head,  and  its  inter-relationship,  and  we 
can  account  for  all  we  find  in  these  pictures.  Or  we  may 
account  for  the  clear  vision  of  that  statement  in  the  Co- 
rinthian letter  by  the  fact  that  it  was  written  by  a  man 
who  had  entered  into  this  great  life  of  the  communion  of 
saints. 

First  of  all  there  are  evidences  of  the  Spirit's  operation 
in  the  guidance  of  the  apostle,  as  he  went  "  throughout 
all  parts  " ;  to  the  saints  at  Lydda,  to  Joppa  by  the  invita- 

[  257  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES' 
[Acts  9  '.32-43] 

tion  of  two  men  who  represented  the  assembly  in  trouble 
because  Dorcas  was  dead ;  then  tarrying  in  the  house  of 
Simon  the  tanner.  Nothing  is  stated  about  the  activity 
of  the  Spirit.  This  man  is  travelling  throughout  all  parts, 
no  longer  because  of  persecution,  for  the  Church  at  this 
time  had  peace.  Persecution  will  attack  it  again  pres- 
ently. The  apostles  tarried  at  Jerusalem  until  they  were 
driven  out  by  persecution ;  but  the  period  of  persecution 
had  passed  for  the  moment.  Peter  went  through  Lydda, 
incidentally,  from  the  human  standpoint.  He  went  to 
Joppa  because  two  men  invited  him.  He  went  to  lodge 
with  Simon  the  tanner.  This  is  not  the  story  of  hap- 
hazard journeying.  The  Spirit  was  guiding  this  man 
throughout  all  parts.  Whence  the  liberty,  the  freedom, 
the  ability  to  pass  from  place  to  place  ?  "  Where  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  there  is  liberty."  All  the  bondage 
that  results  from  separation,  division,  as  between  Chris- 
tian people,  is  due  to  the  absence  of,  or  disobedience  to, 
the  guidance  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  operation  of  the 
Spirit  is  plainly  manifest,  and  it  becomes  the  more  beauti- 
ful when  it  is  seen  that  the  Spirit  was  guiding  the  apostle 
through  the  simplest  human  methods.  Two  men  called 
him  from  Joppa,  and  he  went,  and  entering  into  the  house 
of  Simon  the  tanner,  he  lodged  there. 

The  working  of  the  Spirit  is  manifested  in  the  exercise 
of  gifts;  the  gift  of  miracles,  the  healing  of  JEneas,  a 
man  outside  the  Church ;  the  raising  of  Dorcas,  a  disciple 
inside  the  Church.  The  gift  of  miracles  is  not  the  only 
gift  of  the  Spirit  to  be  found  there.  At  the  conclusion 
of  the  Corinthian  chapter  when  the  apostle  was  dealing 
with  the  subject  of  gifts,  enumerating  them,  among  other 
things  he  referred  to  "helps."  That  gift  is  illustrated 
in  the  case  of  Dorcas.  That  is  the  meaning  of  helps ;  to 
be  quite  simple  and  literal  it  means  gifts  of  relief.  When 
Dorcas  was  using  her  deft  fingers  to  make  garments,  she 
was  doing  it  in  the  power  of  that  gift  which  the  Holy 
Spirit  had  bestowed;  just  as  surely  as  Peter  raised 

1 258 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9 : 32-43] 

Dorcas,  and  healed  ^Eneas,  as  the  result  of  gifts  bestowed 
by  the  Spirit.  Much  of  the  force  of  Christian  testimony 
is  lost  in  the  world  because  we  forget  that  such  a  gift  as 
this  is  also  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  that  Corinthian 
chapter  the  apostle  gives  two  lists  of  the  gifts  of  the 
Spirit,  in  the  first  part  one  and  in  the  second  part  another ; 
from  the  second  some  of  those  in  the  first  list  are  absent, 
and  in  the  first  list  some  that  are  in  the  second  are  not 
named.  If  we  refer  to  other  lists  in  the  New  Testament 
of  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  we  shall  find  that  no  two  are  the 
same.  All  of  which  is  of  profund  significance.  What 
are  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit?  No  man  can  answer.  The 
Church  to-day  has  gifts  that  she  had  not  in  the  apostolic 
age.  She  had  gifts  in  the  apostolic  age  that  she  has  not 
now.  There  are  two  master  statements  in  the  Corinthian 
letter ;  the  Spirit  "  dividing  to  each  one  severally  as  He 
will " ;  and  "  God  set  the  members  each  one  of  them  in 
the  body,  even  as  it  pleased  Him."  We  have  no  business 
to  be  wasting  time  wondering  why  we  have  not  the  gifts 
that  the  early  Church  possessed.  He  giveth  as  He  will. 
If  He  withdraw  the  gift  of  healing  which  Peter  had,  I 
have  nothing  to  do  with  it,  but  to  be  thankful  that  He 
still  bestows  the  gift  of  helps.  If  we  are  tempted  to 
think  they  are  so  different;  that  the  one  is  so  small,  and 
the  other  so  great,  we  are  entirely  wrong.  While  men  are 
wondering  and  hankering  after  something  that  is  more 
spectacular,  more  likely  to  make  them  notorious,  they 
neglect  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  which  will  make  them  help- 
ful, and  they  are  hindering  the  work  of  God.  He  gives 
as  He  will.  If  He  does  not  to-day  bestow  certain  gifts, 
He  is  always  bestowing  some.  Let  us  take  the  gifts  He 
gives,  and  use  them,  and  not  sigh  for  other  gifts  that  are 
withheld  in  wisdom.  This  is  the  age  of  the  Spirit.  We 
are  to  act,  not  in  imitation  of  the  methods  of  the  apostolic 
age,  but  in  obedience  to  the  present  work  and  power  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  When  the  Spirit  of  infinite  wisdom, 
giving  as  it  pleases  Him,  bestows  a  gift  upon  a  man,  the 

[  259  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  9 : 32-43] 

simplest  of  them  all  according  to  the  language  of  human, 
incompetent  thinking;  he  makes  his  contribution  toward 
the  accomplishment  of  God's  purpose  in  the  world  by 
using  that  gift,  rather  than  by  sitting  down  and  sighing4 
for  the  possession  of  some  gift  not  bestowed.  It  may  be 
argued  that  the  apostle  finished  that  very  chapter  in  Co- 
rinthians by  saying  "  Desire  earnestly  the  greater  gifts," 
but  if  we  read  on,  he  also  wrote,  "  And  a  most  ex- 
cellent way  show  I  unto  you,"  which  was  the  way  of  love. 
Passing  through  the  thirteenth  chapter,  and  on  into  the 
fourteenth,  we  find  that  he  distinctly  announced  his  con- 
viction that  the  gift  of  tongues  is  infinitely  inferior  to 
some  of  the  simpler  gifts  which  men  have  held  to  be  of 
less  value  and  of  less  importance.  Let  us  attempt  to  free 
ourselves  from  these  false  divisions,  as  between  great  and 
small  service,  important  and  minor  work.  The  member 
of  the  great  Church  of  Christ  who  out  of  the  welling  love, 
of  her  heart  for  the  poor  and  needy,  sits  in  a  Dorcas 
meeting  making  garments  for  the  poor,  is  rendering  serv- 
ice as  sacred  as  that  of  the  man  who  ministers  to  her 
in  holy  things.  Let  us  have  done  with  this  false  idea  in 
the  Church  that  the  man  who  is  notorious  is  great.  The 
peril  of  life  is  that  of  being  conspicuous.  We  are  per- 
petually in  danger  of  losing  the  very  freshness  of  the 
Spirit,  because  of  what  men  call  great  opportunities. 
Garments  made  by  Christian  women,  members  of  the 
perpetual  Dorcas  Guild,  contribute  to  the  victories  of  the 
Christ,  and  the  enterprises  of  the  catholicity  of  the 
Church,  quite  as  surely  as  the  sermon  and  argument  in 
defence  of  the  Evangel. 

Let  us  take  one  other  glance  over  the  whole  story,  at 
that  supreme  matter,  the  victories  of  the  Lord.  It  would 
be  quite  possible  to  imagine  as  the  story  is  read,  that  we 
were  back  again  in  the  Gospels.  There  is  first  the  story 
o£  the  healing  of  the  body.  How  careful  the  apostle  was 
in  speaking  to  ^Eneas  to  make  clear  what  happened! 
'^  Jesus  Christ  healeth  thee:  arise,  and  make  thy  bed." 

[  260  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  9:32-43] 

We  hear  again  the  very  echo  of  the  voice  of  Jesus.  The 
appeal  was  to  the  will:  Arise.  The  command  was  laid 
upon  him  to  do  in  his  healing  what  he  could  not  apart 
from  the  healing,  "  Arise,  and  make  thy  bed."  There  was 
no  condition  of  faith  on  the  part  of  the  man  who  was 
healed.  It  was  a  gift  of  healing  bestowed  without  con- 
dition, except  that  he  would  rise.  He  was  only  asked  to 
exercise  his  will,  which  was  to  express  itself  in  walking. 
We  go  back  again  to  the  first  verse  of  the  book  of  the 
Acts,  "  The  former  treatise  I  made,  O  Theophilus,  con- 
cerning all  that  Jesus  began  to  do  and  to  teach."  He  said 
to  a  man,  "  Arise,  take  up  thy  bed  and  walk."  He  was 
still  doing  it  through  a  member  of  His  body,  Peter  the 
apostle. 

Then  we  come  to  the  raising  of  the  dead.  Once  again 
the  picture  is  so  like  what  Jesus  did,  that  some  of  the 
ancient  commentators  have  suggested  that  Peter  did  ac- 
tually make  use  of  the  very  words  of  Christ,  for  there  is 
but  a  letter  different.  Jesus  said,  "  Talitha  cumi." 
Peter  said,  "  Tabitha  cumi." 

The  question  may  be  asked,  How  is  it  that  men  do  not 
still  raise  the  dead?  Think  again  how  rarely  Christ 
raised  the  dead.  It  is  recorded  that  He  only  did  so  on 
three  occasions.  What  was  the  immediate  purpose  in 
His  raising  of  the  dead?  In  every  case,  the  raising  of 
the  little  damsel,  the  young  man  of  Nain,  and  Lazarus, 
there  is  one  answer.  He  raised  them  for  the  comfort  of 
those  that  mourned.  But  every  one  He  brought  back, 
came  back  to  suffering.  The  little  damsel  came  back  out 
of  peace  into  turmoil;  the  young  man  came  back  out  of 
eternal  youth,  to  grow  old;  Lazarus  came  back  out  of 
infinite  peace  to  conflict.  Thank  God  He  did  not  raise 
more;  and  we  will  not  ask  for  our  dear  ones  back. 
Notice  what  Peter  did  with  Dorcas.  He  gave  her  back 
to  the  saints  and  widows.  It  is  the  same  Lord  of  life  on 
this  side  Pentecost  as  on  the  other;  not  Peter,  not  an 
apostle,  but  the  same  Christ.  Why  does  He  not  heal  so 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  10 : 1-23] 

now?  Why  does  He  not  raise  the  dead  so  now?  The 
question  can  only  be  answered  by  Himself.  I  decline  to 
place  any  blame  for  the  withholding  of  this  gift  upon  the 
Church.  I  recognize  that  He  is  doing  His  work  in  other 
ways,  and  so  my  heart  rests  there. 

The  last  wonder  of  all  in  the  victory  of  the  Lord  is  not 
that  of  healing  the  sick,  or  raising  the  dead;  but  the 
spiritual  emancipation  of  a  disciple.  Peter  went  and 
lodged  with  one  Simon,  a  tanner.  We  know  the  abhor- 
rence the  Jew '  felt  for  a  tanner,  and  the  fact  that  the 
tanner  was  not  allowed  to  follow  his  calling  save  at  a 
set,  legally  denned  distance  from  the  city's  limits.  But 
Peter  went  in  to  lodge  with  one  Simon,  a  tanner.  That 
is  the  victory  of  Jesus  over  prejudice.  We  go  back  again 
to  a  story  on  the  other  side  of  Pentecost,  and  see  the  Lord 
going  in  to  lodge  with  the  very  kind  of  man  that  the  Jew 
hated,  the  publican,  Zacchseus;  as  the  Pharisees  said  in 
their  technical  cleanness,  which  was  of  the  essence  of 
pollution :  "  He  is  gone  in  to  lodge  with  a  man  that  is  a 
sinner."  Peter  went  in  to  lodge  with  one  Simon,  a  tan- 
ner. It  was  a  movement  toward  the  larger  vision,  which 
was  immediately  to  follow. 

So  we  leave  the  page  of  pictures,  attempting  to  gather 
up  the  great  conclusion.  The  communion  of  saints  is 
created  by  the  operation  of  the  Spirit,  and  issues  in  the 
victories  of  the  Lord.  The  operations  of  the  Spirit  are 
for  the  victories  of  the  Lord  through  the  communion 
of  the  saints.  Once  again  the  victories  of  the  Lord 
follow  the  communion  of  saints  by  the  operations  of  the 
Spirit. 

A  threefold  responsibility  is  suggested;  that  we  culti- 
vate the  communion  of  the  saints ;  that  we  do  it  by  sub- 
mission to  the  indwelling  Spirit ;  and  that  the  reason  shall 
forever  be,  our  desire  to  crown  Him  Lord  of  all. 

Acts  10:1-23 

We  now  begin  the  study  of  a  wonderful  movement  of 

[  262  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  10 : 1-23] 

inclusion.     Here  the  door  was  opened  to  the  Gentiles, 
and  the  first  representative  Gentile  entered  the  Church. 

We  cannot  affirm  that  no  other  Gentile  during  the 
eight  years  since  Pentecost  had  found  his  way  to  Christ. 
In  all  probability  others  had  been  brought  to  the  sound 
of  the  Name,  and  to  obedience  to  the  claim  of  Christ. 
This,  however,  is  the  record  of  the  particular  case  which 
arrested  attention,  provoked  controversy,  and  finally 
brought  the  apostles  and  the  Church  to  a  recognition  of 
the  larger  meaning  of  the  work  of  Christ. 

In  order  to  understand  the  wonder  which  was  created 
by  the  conversion  of  Cornelius,  we  must  appreciate  cer- 
tain facts.  The  Christian  movement  was  distinctively 
Hebrew.  Christ  Himself  after  the  flesh  was  a  Hebrew.  His 
chosen  apostles  were  all  Hebrews.  His  ministry  was  ex- 
ercised among  Hebrews.  Indeed  there  were  occasions 
when  He  made  that  very  evident  in  some  of  the  things 
He  said.  That  was  the  meaning  of  the  almost  strange 
word  He  spoke  to  one  seeking  soul :  "  It  is  not  meet  to 
take  the  children's  bread  and  cast  it  to  the  dogs."  There 
were  prophetic  exceptions  in  the  midst  of  His  ministry; 
indeed,  the  one  already  cited  was  such  an  exception ;  for 
although  He  said  that  His  ministry  was  exercised  among 
the  Hebrew  people  exclusively,  He  nevertheless  granted 
to  the  seeking  soul  the  blessing  sought.  All  His  ministry 
harmonized  with  His  understanding  that  God's  intention 
in  the  Hebrew  people  was  always  that  of  reaching  the 
people  beyond  that  race;  and  so  bringing  blessing  to  them. 
Yet  in  order  to  understand  the  prejudices  of  the  earliest 
members  of  the  Christian  Church,  we  must  remember 
that  Christianity  was  an  outgrowth  of  Judaism,  a  develop- 
ment of  Hebraism,  and  the  early  disciples  had  heard 
Jesus  speak  of  God  as  the  God  of  Abraham,  and  of  Isaac, 
and  of  Jacob.  He  had  distinctly  told  them  that  He  had 
not  come  to  destroy  the  law,  but  to  fulfil  it.  He  had 
insisted  upon  it  in  their  hearing,  that  neither  jot  nor 
tittle  of  that  law  should  pass  till  all  was  fulfilled. 

[  263  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  10 : 1-23] 

Beyond  the  Pentecostal  effusion,  the  Church  growtH 
had  been  almost  exclusively  Hebrew.  There  may  have 
been  exceptions,  as  scattered  disciples  preached  Christ 
here  and  there,  and  Gentiles  had  heard  and  obeyed.  But 
the  general  movement  had  been  Hebrew.  The  disciples 
in  Jerusalem  had  not  ceased  to  observe  the  worship  of  the 
Hebrews.  They  still  gathered  in  the  courts  of  the  Tem- 
ple. Peter  was  still  observing  the  Hebrew  habit  of  prayer 
even  in  Joppa.  He  went  up  at  the  sixth  hour  of  the  day, 
which  was  the  midday  hour  for  prayer.  Even  Cor- 
nelius, in  Oesarea  had  adopted  the  forms  of  Hebrew 
method  in  his  religious  life,  and  observed  the  ninth  hour, 
another  Hebrew  hour  of  prayer. 

There  had,  however,  been  a  gradual  approach  to  a 
wider  understanding.  The  inclusion  of  Samaria  was  re- 
markable. When  Philip  reached  Samaria  and  preached, 
and  the  news  came  to  the  apostles  that  the  Samaritans 
had  received  the  Word,  there  was  an  element  of  surprise 
in  their  attitude ;  but  they  recognized  the  movement  as  of 
God. 

Moreover  there  had  been  the  definite  reception  into  the 
fellowship  of  a  Gentile  who  undoubtedly  was  a  proselyte, 
in  the  case  of  the  Ethiopian  Eunuch.  The  future  apostle 
to  the  Gentiles  had  been  apprehended,  had  spent  those 
lonely  months  or  years  in  Arabia,  had  gone  back  to  Jeru- 
salem, had  continued  the  ministry  of  Stephen  to  the 
Hellenist  Jews,  had  been  persecuted ;  and  at  the  very  time 
was  in  Tarsus  of  Cilicia.  But  so  far,  no  Gentile,  as 
entirely  separated  from  Hebraism,  had  been  admitted  on 
apostolic  sanction  to  the  fellowship  of  the  Christian 
Church.  The  admission  of  this  man  Cornelius  rocked 
the  Church  to  its  very  centre,  threatening  to  divide  it  in 
twain.  It  was  the  beginning  of  a  long-continued  con- 
troversy, in  the  process  of  which  the  man  now  in  Tarsus 
had  to  fight  over  and  over  again  for  the  right  of  his 
apostleship,  and  for  the  larger  ministry  that  he  exercised. 

Our  present  study  is  preparatory,  and  is  occupied  with 

[  264  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  10:1-23] 

the  story  of  two  visions,  and  of  a  meeting  between  the 
men  who  had  come  from  Csesarea  and  Peter  in  the  house 
of  Simon  the  tanner.  In  this  study  we  shall  not  attempt 
to  dwell  upon  the  final  significance  of  the  vision  which 
was  granted  to  Peter,  for  he  had  not  come  to  a  full  un- 
derstanding of  it  in  the  house  of  Simon  the  tanner.  That 
broke  upon  him  later  in  the  house  of  Cornelius.  Let  us 
then  consider  these  two  visions ;  as  to  the  two  men,  and 
as  to  the  two  results  produced. 

There  is  nothing  whatever  here  to  warrant  the  view 
that  this  man  Cornelius  was  a  proselyte  in  the  full  sense 
of  the  word.  There  were  full  proselytes,  and  proselytes 
of  the  gate ;  and  the  distinction  was  a  very  real  one.  Full 
proselytes  of  Judaism  were  such  as  submitted  themselves 
entirely  to  all  its  rites  and  ordinances,  were  circumcized, 
and  thus  entered  into  all  the  privileges  of  the  covenant 
people.  Cornelius  was  not  one  of  these.  He  may  in  all 
probability  have  been  a  proselyte  of  the  gate,  but  such 
an  one  remained  a  Gentile  in  the  thinking  of  the  Hebrew. 
A  proselyte  of  the  gate  was  considered  by  the  Hebrew  as 
outside  the  covenant,  outside  the  place  of  privilege;  for 
he  had  not  submitted  to  the  ceremonial  rites,  and  ordi- 
nances, even  though  he  professed  sympathy  with  the  one 
master-idea  of  the  Hebrew  religion,  that  of  its  monothe- 
istic philosophy.  We  know  certainly  that  Cornelius  was 
a  Roman  soldier.  He  may  have  been  a  patrician  or  a 
plebeian.  There  was  a  great  Roman  family  of  the  Cor- 
nelian patricians;  and  there  was  also  a  great  family  of 
enfranchised  slaves,  Cornelii,  for  an  emperor  had  en- 
franchised a  number  of  slaves,  and  had  given  them  his 
own  name.  This  man  may  have  been  of  one  or  the  other 
family ;  which,  we  cannot  tell. 

His  religion  arrests  us.  He  was  a  centurion  serving 
under  Herod  Agrippa,  the  representative  of  Roman 
power  in  that  district.  Stationed  with  his  cohort  at 
Csesarea,  he  was  thus  the  representative  of  Rome  for  the 
quelling  of  tumults  if  they  arose,  for  the  insistence  on 

[265 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  10 : 1-23] 

order;  a  part  of  Rome's  great  police  force.  He  was  an 
officer,  moreover,  of  the  Italian  band,  that  is  of  a  band 
made  up  of  soldiers  from  Rome,  entirely  outside  the  in- 
fluence of  Judaism.  He  was  a  man  of  faith,  faith  in  the 
one  God,  which  he  expressed  in  his  life.  He  was  devout 
in  all  the  full  and  rich  sense  of  that  word.  His  faith  in 
God  was  expressed  in  his  gifts,  for  he  gave  alms  to  all 
the  people.  His  faith  in  God  was  expressed  supremely 
in  his  prayer,  for  he  was  a  man  who  prayed  alway.  Here 
then  was  a  man  outside  the  ancient  economy,  very  largely 
uninfluenced  by  it  in  all  probability  in  the  earliest  days 
of  his  life ;  himself  a  Roman,  a  centurion,  of  the  Roman 
cohort,  saturated  with  Roman  ideas  and  ideals  of  govern- 
ment ;  and  a  man  of  faith  in  the  one  God,  expressing  his 
faith  in  the  devotion  of  his  life,  in  his  almsgiving,  in  his 
prayer.  Moreover  he  was  a  man  whose  godliness  was 
such  that  the  whole  of  his  household  had  been  influenced 
thereby.  To  go  a  little  ahead  of  our  present  paragraph, 
we  find  that  revealed  in  a  remarkable  way.  When  the 
angel  visitation  came  to  him,  he  called  into  conference 
"  two  of  his  household  servants,  and  a  devout  soldier 
of  them  that  waited  on  him  continually."  Those  under 
him  shared  his  faith.  This  is  a  remarkable  picture  of  a 
little  household  governed  by  a  godly  man  outside  He- 
braism. This  man  Cornelius  stands  out,  an  interesting 
and  unique  figure,  not  to  be  accounted  for  as  we  first 
meet  him,  by  Christianity,  or  by  Judaism.  He  is  an  evi- 
dence of  the  truth  to  which  John  draws  attention  in  the 
introductory  chapter  of  his  Gospel,  that  there  is  a  "  light 
that  lighteth  every  man."  He  is  an  illustration  by  contrast 
of  the  truth  to  which  Paul  draws  attention  in  the  Roman 
epistle  when  he  charges  the  Gentiles  with  this  peculiar 
sin,  that  they  held  down  the  truth  in  unrighteousness; 
that  is,  that  they  had  not  obeyed  the  light  they  had ;  that 
whereas  in  the  creation  they  might  verily  see  the  Divinity 
and  the  wisdom  of  God,  instead  of  following  that  light 
and  worshipping  God,  they  worshipped  the  creature  more 

[  266  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  16 : 1-23] 

than  the  Creator,  made  to  themselves  images  and  wor- 
shipped these.  There  was  the  Gentile  sin.  But  here  was 
a  man  standing  in  contrast  to  that  description,  one  who 
had  been  true  to  the  light  that  was  within  him.  He  had 
followed  it,  yielded  himself  to  it,  and  had  become  a  wor- 
shipper of  the  one  true  living  God. 

But  he  had  not  passed  into  the  fullness  of  life  or  of 
light.  He  also  needed  Christ.  He  also  needed  spiritual 
enduement.  That  is  the  key  to  the  situation.  The  most 
remarkable  thing  about  this  story  is  the  wonderful  char- 
acter of  Cornelius  before  he  became  a  Christian.  Just  as 
Jesus  said,  "  Ye  must  be  born  anew  "  not  to  a  man  vile 
and  contemptible  and  notorious  in  vulgar  sin;  but  to 
Nicodemus,  the  highest  product  of  Judaism,  the  man 
who,  sincere  and  true  and  devout  and  enquiring,  was 
seeking  the  teaching  of  every  messenger  from  heaven; 
so  also  here,  the  first  Gentile  admitted  into  the  recognized 
fellowship  of  the  Christian  Church  was  a  Gentile  who 
had  come  as  far  as  he  could,  apart  from  the  evangel. 
There  is  no  suggestion  that  in  the  mind  of  the  Spirit,  and 
presently  in  the  mind  of  the  Christian  apostle,  or  in  the 
mind  of  those  early  Christian  thinkers,  Cornelius  was  all 
he  might  be.  Had  there  been  no  Christ,  no  evangel,  had 
he  never  heard  the  message,  then  he  would  have  been 
judged  by  the  light  he  had,  and  his  obedience  to  it ;  but  he 
needed  the  fuller  light,  and  his  obedience  to  the  early 
light  was  the  condition  upon  which  the  angel  came  to 
him  and  said:  Thy  prayers  and  thine  alms  are  gone  up 
for  a  memorial  before  God.  And  now  send  men  to  Joppa, 
and  fetch  one  Simon.  He  shall  tell  thee  what  to  do ;  the 
other  things  waiting  for  thee,  and  the  larger  life  opening 
its  doors  before  thee. 

To  return  to  Joppa.  Let  us  notice  the  other  man, 
Peter.  In  all  likelihood  he  might  have  said  with  Saul  of 
Tarsus,  that  he  was  "  a  Hebrew  of  Hebrews,"  of  pure 
Hebrew  parentage.  The  prejudices  of  the  past  were  still 
strong  within  him.  He  had  seen  something  wider.  II- 

[267] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  10 : 1-23] 

luminated  by  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
he  had  interpreted  the  fact  of  the  coming  of  the  Spirit 
when  he  had  said  to  the  listening  multitudes,  "  This  is 
that  which  hath  been  spoken  through  the  prophet  Joel." 
He  had  declared  that  the  Spirit  should  be  poured  upon 
"  all  flesh."  That  little  phrase  is  the  most  inclusive  possi- 
ble ;  "  all  flesh."  Had  he  yet  come  to  full  understanding  of 
the  significance  of  the  thing  he  himself  had  said?  It  is 
very  unlikely.  In  our  previous  study  we  left  him  in  the 
house  of  Simon  the  tanner;  and  that  in  itself  was  an 
evidence  of  the  fact  that  prejudice  was  being  broken 
down.  Prior  to  his  coming  to  Christ,  and  his  baptism  of 
the  Spirit,  Peter,  the  Hebrew,  would  not  have  lodged  in 
the  house  of  Simon  the  tanner.  The  trade  of  the  tanner 
was  held  in  such  supreme  contempt  that  if  a  girl  was  be- 
trothed to  a  tanner  without  knowing  that  he  followed  that 
calling,  the  betrothal  was  void.  A  tanner  had  to  build  his 
house  fifty  cubits  outside  the  city.  But  this  man  Peter's 
prejudices  were  so  far  broken  down  that  he  was  content 
to  lodge  in  the  house  of  Simon  a  tanner;  assuredly  in 
the  house  of  a  man  who  loved  Christ,  a  fellow-disciple. 
The  first  outworking  of  prejudice  was  gone;  and  yet  it 
was  still  in  his  heart.  He  still  thought  of  Hebraism  as 
so  Divine,  that  its  rites  must  be  submitted  to  by  those  who 
were  coming  into  the  larger  life  from  the  Gentile  world. 
It  was  necessary  that  he,  and  those  associated  with  him, 
should  discover  the  fact  that  the  old  economy  had  been 
swept  away  by  fulfilment ;  and  that  now  without  rite, 
ceremonial,  or  ordinance  of  Hebraism,  men  might  come 
into  living  relationship  with  Christ. 

So  the  two  men  are  seen ;  one  in  Csesarea,  the  product 
of  the  light  that  the  Gentile  had  apart  from  Judaism; 
and  one  in  Joppa,  a  man  who  had  been  brought  up  in 
Judaism,  had  been  brought  into  relation  with  Christ,  but 
had  not  yet  come  to  a  full  understanding  of  the  glory  of 
the  light  in  which  he  lived,  of  the  power  of  the  life 
which  was  throbbing  through  his  own  soul. 

[  268  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  10 : 1-23] 

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  visions  that  came  to  these  men. 
To  Cornelius  it  was  an  open  vision,  a  definite  and  actual 
visitation.  To  this  man,  an  angel  came  in  the  hour  of  his 
meditating.  That  which  is  of  supreme  importance  is 
not  the  presence  of  the  angel,  but  what  he  said.  In  the 
angel's  message  to  this  man  Cornelius,  there  was  a  recog- 
nition of  everything  that  had  gone  before.  "  Thy  prayers 
and  thine  alms  are  gone  up  for  a  memorial  before  God." 
Here  the  truth  of  a  subsequent  statement  that  "  God  is 
no  respecter  of  persons  "  is  made  manifest.  The  angel 
came  to  an  uncircumcized  Gentile,  with  no  part  in  the 
fleshly  covenant,  with  no  privileges  within  Hebraism. 
It  was  an  object  lesson  not  only  to  Peter,  but  for  all 
time.  In  the  words  of  the  angel  there  was  a  recognition 
of  the  past,  no  word  of  blame,  no  word  that  charged 
him  with  sin,  but  a  recognition  of  the  fact  that  he  had 
been  true  to  the  light  he  had  received.  "  Thy  prayers 
and  thine  alms  are  gone  up  for  a  memorial  before  God." 

But  the  angel  brought  not  only  recognition,  but  instruc- 
tion. "  Send  men  to  Joppa,  and  fetch  one  Simon,  who  is 
surnamed  Peter:  he  lodgeth  with  one  Simon  a  tanner, 
whose  house  is  by  the  seaside."  In  the  word  of  the 
angel  we  have  a  revelation  of  the  line  of  Cornelius* 
prayer.  He  shall  tell  thee  what  to  do.  That  surely  im- 
plies that  Cornelius  was  anxious,  was  enquiring,  that  he 
had  come  to  some  place  of  perplexity  in  his  life.  It 
may  have  been  he  was  hesitating  as  to  whether  he  would 
become  a  proselyte,  and  enter  into  that  religion ;  for  he 
had  discovered  that  the  God  of  the  Hebrew  was  a  mighty 
God.  It  may  have  been  that  he  also  had  come  under  the 
influence  of  Philip,  and  the  wonderful  preaching  that 
had  made  its  way  through  Samaria  and  Judea.  It  may 
be  he  was  wondering  whether  he  could  enter  into  fellow- 
ship with  that  Christ  Whom  Philip  had  preached,  save 
through  Judaism.  It  may  be  that  this  actual  problem 
was  in  his  mind  which  was  confronting  the  Church.  Be 
all  that  as  it  may,  the  fact  remains  that  to  this  man,  sin- 

[  269  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  10 : 1-23] 

cere  and  enquiring,  the  angel  came,  recognizing  his  sin- 
cerity, and  indicating  the  line  of  progress. 

In  our  return  to  Joppa  we  have  an  entirely  new  vision, 
no  longer  objective,  but  wholly  subjective.  Peter  had 
gone  to  the  housetop  at  the  hour  of  prayer,  and  there 
is  a  human  touch  in  the  story;  he  was  very  hungry,  and 
fell  into  a  trance,  into  a  condition  of  ecstasy,  for  that 
is  the  meaning  of  the  word.  While  in  that  condition  he 
saw  the  vision.  To  Cornelius  an  angel  came;  to  Peter  a 
vision  was  granted,  while  he  was  in  a  state  of  trance. 
As  this  Jew  looked  at  that  vision  he  saw  a  strange  vessel 
in  the  form  of  a  great  canvas,  filled  with  all  kinds  of 
animals.  There  would  necessarily  be  the  revulsion  of 
the  Hebrew  against  them.  Then  a  voice  sounded,  "  Rise, 
Peter ;  kill  and  eat."  His  answer  rendered,  "  Not  so, 
Lord,"  is  hardly  emphatic  enough.  It  is  not  distinctively 
Petrine.  To  translate  bluntly,  this  is  what  he  said: 
"  Lord,  by  no  means ! "  He  is  the  same  man  we  knew 
in  the  Gospel,  the  man  who  said,  "  That  be  far  from 
Thee,  Lord,"  "  Thou  shalt  never  wash  my  feet."  By  no 
means,  Lord,  I  have  never  eaten  anything  common  or 
unclean.  That  was  the  Hebrew  speaking.  Then  came 
this  remarkable  word  to  him,  "  What  God  hath  cleansed, 
make  not  thou  common."  The  voice  did  not  say,  "  What 
God  hath  cleansed  that  call  not  thou  common";  but 
"  make  not  thou  common,"  which  is  a  far  stronger  word. 
The  idea  conveyed  was  that  of  the  cleansing  of  all,  and 
therefore  the  putting  away  forevermore  of  those  cere- 
monial limitations  which  had  cursed  the  Hebrew  religion. 
Do  not  make  common,  do  not  defile  by  your  attitude 
toward  it,  that  which  God  hath  cleansed.  We  are  no 
longer  to  speak  of  animals  as  unclean,  and  put  them  into 
a  place  of  degradation,  if  God  has  cleansed  them.  We 
may  naturally  enquire  if  the  Divine  commandments  re- 
garding certain  foods  have  been  abrogated.  So  far  as 
the  commandments  against  certain  forms  of  animal  life 
were  ceremonial,  they  are  swept  away;  but  so  far  as 

[  270  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  10 : 1-23] 

they  were  laws  of  health,  they  abide.  It  should,  how- 
ever, be  remembered  that  the  laws  of  health  in  that  land 
and  in  this  may  be  different.  The  general  health  law  of 
Hebraism  is  that  of  Christianity;  that  the  body  must  be 
cared  for  as  the  property  of  God,  and  nothing  be  eaten 
or  drunk  which  harms  it,  and  makes  it  an  unfit  instru- 
ment of  the  spirit.  That  tabulation  of  clean  and  unclean 
has  now  passed  away  forever;  but  the  law  of  health 
abides.  This  is  what  astonished  Peter.  He  had  no  right 
to  call  them  unclean,  for  they  were  cleansed.  Some- 
thing had  taken  place  in  the  history  of  religion,  that 
revolutionized  all  the  habits  and  methods  of  religion. 
Henceforth  men  were  not  to  make  anything  profane 
which  God  had  now  taken  within  the  circle  of  that  which 
is  sacred. 

So  the  two  results  are  seen.  In  Csesarea  there  was 
conference  between  the  centurion  and  his  trusted  serv- 
ants, two  of  them  household  servants  and  one  a  soldier. 
There  followed  the  obedience  of  faith,  and  Cornelius  is 
seen  waiting,  while  the  men  take  their  journey  of  thirty 
miles,  tarrying  perhaps  for  a  night  at  Appolonias.  In 
Joppa  we  see  this  man  Peter,  in  his  perplexity  and  his 
open-mindedness.  While  Peter  pondered  there  on  the 
housetop,  the  Spirit  spoke  to  him.  This  was  no  longer 
a  vision,  nor  an  ecstasy.  This  is  one  of  those  almost 
amazing  declarations  of  this  book,  revealing  the  intimacy 
between  those  early  disciples  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  To 
this  man,  with  all  his  prejudices,  and  his  magnificent 
loyalty  the  Spirit  said,  "  Behold,  three  men  seek  thee. 
But  arise,  and  get  thee  down,  and  go  with  them,  nothing 
doubting."  There  was  no  explanation  of  the  vision  yet. 
Peter  was  now  about  to  tread  an  unknown  pathway,  he 
was  coming  to  new  revelation.  He  was  perplexed  with 
the  vision,  but  the  solution  awaited  him.  In  order  to 
discover  the  solution  of  this  perplexing  vision,  he  was 
commanded  not  to  be  afraid.  Then  with  the  perplexing 
vision  in  his  mind,  and  the  voice  of  the  Spirit  in  his 

[  271  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  10 : 1-23] 

soul,  he  heard  the  cry  of  the  men  outside  that  Eastern 
house,  and  he  went  down  and  said,  "  Behold,  I  am  he 
whom  ye  seek:  what  is  the  cause  wherefore  ye  are 
come  ?  "  They  then  delivered  their  message,  and  "  he 
called  them  in,  and  lodged  them." 

This  is  a  great  picture.  The  house  of  a  tanner;  and 
inside  it,  the  tanner  himself,  the  apostle  of  Christianity, 
two  household  servants  who  are  Gentiles,  and  a  soldier. 
They  all  stayed  together  that  night.  The  unifying  Spirit, 
breaking  down  barriers,  sweeping  out  prejudices,  was  at 
work  more  powerfully  than  those  men  knew.  When  the 
traveller  visits  Joppa  to-day  he  is  still  shown  the  house 
of  the  tanner.  There  it  stands,  the  waters  lapping  the 
shore  close  by.  I  think  angels  watched  that  house  that 
night,  with  the  despised  tanner  a  fellow-disciple,  the  great 
apostle,  the  three  Gentiles  as  they  lodged  there. 

As  Peter  had  not  yet  come  to  an  understanding  of  his 
vision  we  postpone  that  consideration,  confining  our- 
selves to  Cornelius,  and  the  general  values  of  the  study. 
All  that  Cornelius  was,  resulted  from  his  obedience  to  the 
light  he  had  received.  But  all  that  was  preparatory. 
Because  he  walked  in  the  light  that  had  come  to 
him,  he  was  led  presently  into  fuller  light. 

The  general  values  of  this  story  are  those  of  its  reve- 
lation of  the  progress  of  the  Divine  movement,  and  of  the 
mosaic  of  details.  Every  detail  is  part  of  the  larger 
whole.  Two  men  are  thirty  miles  apart.  They  must  be 
brought  together.  In  order  that  they  may  meet,  while 
Joppa  is  busy  with  its  trade,  and  Csesarea  with  its  great 
shipping  interests,  and  will  know  nothing  of  what  is  go- 
ing on ;  God  within  the  shadows  keeping  watch  above  His 
own,  sends  the  angel  to  Csesarea,  and  grants  the  ecstatic 
trance  in  Joppa.  Thus  they  were  brought  together. 
Presently  as  the  result  of  that  meeting,  the  infant  Church, 
with  its  lingering  prejudices,  will  be  compelled  to  a  rec- 
ognition that  in  Christ  there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile; 
that  the  Christian  movement  includes  all  who  come 

[  272  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  10:23-48] 

through  faith  in  Christ,  into  fellowship  with  Him;  and 
before  its  onward  march  pride  and  prejudice  must  for- 
ever give  way. 

Acts  10:23-48 

In  this  paragraph  we  have  an  account  of  the  things 
resulting  from  the  two  visions:  the  vision  of  an  angel 
which  came  to  Cornelius  openly;  the  vision  of  Peter, 
which  came  in  the  form  of  a  trance. 

The  vision  of  Cornelius  was  objective,  and  needed  no 
explanation,  for  the  instructions  given  to  the  Gentile 
soldier  were  perfectly  clear  and  definite.  All  that  was 
necessary  was  that  Cornelius  should  obey,  and  discover 
the  issues  of  the  revelation.  That  of  Peter,  on  the  other 
hand,  was  subjective,  and  needed  interpretation.  Herein 
then  we  have  an  account  of  what  followed  the  visit  of 
the  angel  in  the  case  of  Cornelius ;  and  the  interpretation 
of  the  trance,  which  was  granted  to  Peter. 

In  the  meeting  between  these  two  men,  the  detailed 
story  of  which  is  told  in  this  passage,  there  was  mutual 
value.  Peter's  visit,  and  the  message  he  delivered,  ex- 
plained to  Cornelius  the  reason  of  the  angel's  visit.  Cor- 
nelius' experience  explained  to  Peter  the  meaning  of  the 
trance.  When  this  Jew,  who  was  Christian  also,  came 
into  the  household  of  Cornelius,,  and  saw  all  the  things 
that  happened  there,  he  understood  the  vision  that  had 
come  to  him  on  the  housetop  in  Joppa.  We  shall  first 
consider  the  story,  and  therefrom  attempt  to  learn  the 
lessons. 

The  story  may  be  divided  into  three  parts.  First  there 
was  the  enquiry.  Peter,  arrived  at  the  house  of  Cor- 
nelius, said,  "  I  ask  with  what  intent  ye  sent  for  me  ?  " 
The  second  part  of  the  story  gives  the  evangel.  It  is 
found  in  the  address  which  Peter  commenced  to  deliver, 
for  as  we  shall  see,  he  did  not  finish  it.  The  third  part 
of  the  story  deals  with  the  enduement,  as  it  tells  of  the 
coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  Gentiles. 

[  273  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  ' 
[Acts  10:23-48] 

The  company  who  journeyed  for  those  thirty  miles 
from  Joppa  to  Csesarea  was  composed  of  ten  men;  the 
three  who  had  been  sent, — two  household  servants  and  a 
soldier;  the  apostle  himself ;  and  six  men  whom  he  took 
with  him — Christian  Jews,  who  are  designated  as  "  they 
of  the  circumcision."  In  the  taking  of  these  men,  there 
is  detected  the  anxiety  of  Peter,  his  wonder,  and  his 
perplexity.  He  had  seen  the  vision;  some  gleam  of 
light  had  broken  upon  his  mind,  and  he  was  quite  con- 
scious that  the  journey  toward  the  house  of  the  Gentile 
was  an  entirely  new  movement;  so  he  took  with  him  six 
brethren,  Hebrews,  who  were  Christians. 

The  company  waiting  for  them  consisted  of  Cornelius, 
and  his  kinsmen  and  friends.  When  Peter  arrived,  Cor- 
nelius did  him  obeisance.  The  word  "  worship  "  there 
must  not  be  misinterpreted.  It  simply  declares  that  Cor- 
nelius gave  him  full  honour,  according  to  the  custom  of 
the  East.  Peter's  refusal  becomes  more  significant  when 
we  see  it  was  not  an  act  of  worship,  but  merely  an  act 
of  obeisance.  There  was  surely  dawning  upon  him  the 
great  truth,  "  I  myself  also  am  a  man."  In  that  word  in 
which  he  refused  the  obeisance,  he  recognized  the  man- 
hood of  Cornelius. 

Peter  then  declared  in  the  presence  of  the  company 
his  difficulty  in  coming.  He  told  them  how  contrary  it 
was  to  law  and  tradition  and  custom  for  a  Jew  to  enter 
the  house  of  a  Gentile  and  eat;  and  in  that  statement 
we  see  his  lingering  prejudice.  He  still  described  him- 
self as  a  Jew,  as  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ;  but  he  had 
not  come  to  the  full  consciousness  of  what  Christianity 
really  meant,  or  he  would  never  have  said  such  a  thing. 
Cornelius  answered  his  enquiry  by  repeating  the  facts  of 
the  story  which  have  been  considered  in  our  last  study, 
of  the  visit  of  the  angel  to  him. 

Peter's  address  commenced  with  that  preliminary 
word :  "  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  Respecter  of  persons, 
but  in  every  nation  he  that  feareth  Him,  and  worketh 

[  274  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  10:23-48] 

righteousness,  is  acceptable  to  Him."  He  then  proceeded 
to  deliver  his  message.  He  began  by  admitting  that  the 
word  which  he  had  to  declare,  was  a  word  committed  to 
Israel,  but  in  the  parenthesis,  "  He  is  Lord  of  all,"  he 
revealed  the  fact  that  he  was  coming,  as  he  stood  there 
in  the  midst  of  those  circumstances  so  new  and  strange 
to  him,  to  a  fuller  understanding  of  the  meaning  of 
Christianity.  The  word  was  sent  to  the  children  of  Israel. 
The  preaching  of  peace  by  Jesus  Christ  was  to  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel.  But  the  uttering  of  the  words,  "  He  is 
Lord  of  all,"  shows  that  the  light  was  breaking  upon  his 
spirit,  and  he  was  coming  to  the  fuller  understanding  of 
the  meaning  of  his  Master's  work;  and  consequently  of 
the  Church's  responsibility.  In  the  study  of  these  dis- 
courses of  the  New  Testament,  those  of  Peter,  or  of  any 
of  the  apostles,  we  are  always  impressed  with  the  won- 
derful way  in  which  they  covered  the  whole  ground  of 
the  work  of  Jesus.  Mark  the  things  that  he  now  said. 
He  made  passing  reference  to  the  baptism  of  John,  to  the 
message  of  the  forerunner  and  herald.  He  then  named 
the  Lord,  by  that  familiar  phrase  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
which  set  Him  on  the  common  level  of  everyday  life. 
He  next  distinguished  Him  from  all  the  men  among 
whom  he  placed  Him,  by  the  remarkable  declaration  that 
God  anointed  Him  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  with  power. 
He  then  told  the  story  of  His  public  ministry,  "Who 
went  about  doing  good,  and  healing  all  that  were  op- 
pressed of  the  devil;  for  God  was  with  Him."  He  then 
referred  to  His  crucifixion,  "  Whom  also  they  slew,  hang- 
ing Him  on  a  tree  " ;  and  immediately  as  was  the  custom 
of  apostolic  preaching,  he  illuminated  the  Cross  by  the 
Resurrection,  "  Him  God  raised  up  the  third  day,  and 
gave  Him  to  be  made  manifest."  Again,  He  is  "  the 
Judge  of  quick  and  dead,"  not  merely  the  Judge  Who 
is  to  sit  upon  a  throne  in  some  dim  and  distant  time  as 
the  Judge  of  the  dead ;  but  the  Judge  to-day,  the  Criterion 
of  conduct,  the  One  before  Whose  bar  men  are  forever 

[  275  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  10:23-48] 

standing.  Finally  he  proclaimed  the  great  and  gracious 
message  of  the  evangel,  "  Through  His  name  every  one 
that  believeth  on  Him  shall  receive  remission  of  sins." 

In  the  declaration  of  the  evangel  Peter  was  careful  to 
emphasize  the  fact  that  it  was  witnessed.  "  We  are 
witnesses  of  these  things."  He  used  that  expression 
twice,  and  around  the  two  occasions  he  grouped  the  es- 
sential notes  of  the  mission  of  Jesus.  Witnesses  of  His 
life  and  death ;  of  the  anointed  Man,  the  beneficent  min- 
istry, and  the  violent  death.  Witnesses  of  His  resur- 
rection and  supremacy;  the  resurrection  itself  was  so 
definite,  that  they  sat  and  ate  and  drank  with  Him ;  His 
supremacy  was  revealed  in  the  fact  that  He  had  charged 
them  to  declare  His  Gospel.  Finally  he  said  that  to 
Him  the  whole  of  the  prophets  gave  witness. 

But  the  speech  of  Peter  was  interrupted.  He  was  not 
allowed  to  finish.  As  he  spoke,  there  fell  on  those  as- 
sembled Gentiles  the  selfsame  gift  that  the  disciples  had 
received  at  Pentecost.  The  evidence  was  in  the  gift  of 
tongues ;  glad  and  ecstatic  utterances  of  praise,  not  neces- 
sarily in  different  languages,  for  there  is  no  reference 
to  such.  The  gift  of  tongues  is  not  only  to  be  interpreted 
by  the  second  chapter  of  the  Acts,  but  also  by  the  first 
Corinthian  letter.  It  was  the  gift  of  praise.  Mark  the 
words,  "  They  heard  them  speak  with  tongues,  and  mag- 
nify God."  The  same  effect  was  produced  upon  these 
Jewish  Christians  from  Joppa  which  had  been  produced 
upon  the  Hebrew  crowd  in  Jerusalem.  They  were 
amazed  as  they  listened  to  the  utterances  of  praise,  to 
the  glad  words  that  magnified  God.  They  heard  these 
men  with  loosened  tongues  giving  utterance  to  the  fact 
of  the  new  life  which  had  come  to  them.  Observe  that 
these  men  received  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  before 
baptism  in  water,  without  the  laying  on  of  apostolic 
hands.  Some  had  received  the  Spirit  because  the  apostles 
laid  their  hands  on  them.  Some  had  received  the  gift  of 
the  Spirit  after  water  baptism.  Here  was  another  irregu- 

1 276 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  10:23-48] 

larity,  and  the  value  of  this  story  of  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  is  that  it  is  f orevermore  revealing  the  fact  that 
"  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  will."  The  Spirit  in- 
terrupted the  apostle  in  his  discourse,  falling  upon  the 
listening  men  and  women,  when  they  had  heard  enough 
of  the  message  to  believe  into  the  Christ.  So  the  Spirit 
fell;  and  they  of  the  circumcision  were  amazed  as  they 
heard  them  magnify  God. 

What  are  the  supreme  lessons  that  this  story  teaches? 
We  will  confine  our  answer  entirely  to  those  of  the  en- 
quiry and  the  evangel.  They  may  be  at  once  indicated 
by  three  points  in  the  narrative.  Peter  first  said,  "  Unto 
me  hath  God  showed  that  I  should  not  call  any  man 
common  or  unclean."  That  is  the  first  lesson  of  value. 
Again,  "  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  Respecter  of  persons ; 
but  in  every  nation  he  that  feareth  Him,  and  worketh 
righteousness,  is  acceptable  to  Him."  That  is  the  second 
lesson.  The  third  lesson  is  that  of  the  suggestiveness  of 
the  interrupted  speech  of  the  apostle. 

In  the  words,  "  Unto  me  hath  God  showed  that  I  should 
not  call  any  man  common  or  unclean  "  we  find  the  first 
significance  of  the  vision,  as  they  reveal  Peter's  under- 
standing of  the  meaning  of  the  vision  of  the  vessel  let 
down,  with  all  kinds  of  animals  therein,  which  he  was 
ordered  to  rise,  and  slay,  and  eat.  In  that  moment  the 
apostle  came  to  an  understanding  of  the  truth  that  in  the 
Christian  economy  there  was  to  be  no  race  superiority, 
and  no  religious  superiority :  "  That  /  should  call  no  man 
common  or  unclean."  Who  was  the  speaker?  He  was 
first  of  all  a  man  who  from  birth,  naturally,  and  in  some 
senses  perhaps  properly,  had  been  proud  of  his  race;  a 
man  who,  passing  away  from  Judaea  into  any  other  coun- 
try, would  everywhere,  whatever  other  men  had  thought, 
have  been  in  his  own  heart  proud  of  his  national  relation- 
ship; a  man  who  looked  upon  himself  as  of  a  superior 
race  to  all  others.  Now  God  had  said  to  him  that  this 
was  to  be  so  no  longer ;  that  there  is  no  race  superiority. 

I  277  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  10:23-48] 

But  the  speaker  was  by  religion  originally  a  Hebrew; 
and  at  the  moment  a  Christian.  Yet  Peter  was  not  to 
consider  his  religion  as  a  Jew  superior  to  the  religion  of 
Cornelius.  Peter  was  also  to  remember  that  his  religion 
as  a  Christian  gave  him  no  right  to  call  any  man  com- 
mon or  unclean. 

How  far  has  the  Church  understood  this  fact?  How 
far  have  we  learned  that  lesson?  Has  our  Christianity 
taught  us  that  our  race  relationship  gives  us  no  superior- 
ity in  the  world?  Or  do  we  not  even  yet  imagine  that 
God  has  a  chosen  people,  and  that  people  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  race?  It  is  an  appalling  heresy,  which  cuts  the 
nerve  of  Christian  work,  which  makes  impossible  full 
devotion  to  missionary  enterprise.  There  is  no  race  su- 
periority, there  are  no  inferior  races. 

But  even  beyond  that,  more  astonishing,  and  more  un- 
believable, it  is  true  that  the  Christian  preacher  or  teacher 
must  call  no  man  common  or  unclean.  He  has  no  right 
to  look  with  contempt  upon  any  man  because  he  does 
not  share  his  religious  doctrine  or  creed.  To  change  the 
word  "unclean,"  and  render  the  passage  more  literally: 
"  God  hath  showed  me  that  I  should  not  call  any  man 
common  or  uncleansed."  The  remarkable  thing  about 
the  word  "  common  "  is  that  it  is  the  root,  koinos,  from 
which  we  derive  our  rich  word  koinonia,  fellowship. 
"  God  hath  showed  me  that  I  should  not  call  any  man 
common."  Here  is  a  strange  and  apparent  contradiction. 
There  is  no  finer  explanation  of  the  word  than  that  of 
its  use  in  the  beginning  of  this  book,  "  having  all  things 
in  common."  That  means  the  ending  of  all  degrees,  the 
breaking  down  of  all  castes,  the  coming  to  a  realization 
of  the  unity  of  life.  That  is  the  true  idea  of  the  word. 
But  Peter  said,  "  God  hath  showed  me  that  I  should  not 
call  any  man  common."  In  that  statement  we  have  an 
instance  of  the  false  use  of  the  word.  The  Gentile  is 
common  clay;  we  are  a  spiritual  aristocracy!  So  the 
Hebrew  had  said  for  generations ;  and  so  says  the  Chris- 

[  278  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  10:23-48] 

tian  Church  altogether  too  often  at  the  present  hour. 
The  man  outside  is  common,  not  within  the  sacred  circle, 
shut  off  from  privileges.  Peter  said  God  had  taught  him 
that  he  should  call  no  man  common,  outside  the  circle. 

How  is  that  false  conception  of  the  meaning  of  the 
word  "  common,"  to  be  corrected  ?  By  a  discovery  of  the 
fact  that  all  men  in  the  sight  of  God,  for  some  wonder- 
ful reason  occupy  the  same  position.  Let  us  go  back  to 
the  vision.  There  was  the  vessel  let  down,  containing 
all  kinds  of  animals.  Peter,  commanded  to  slay  and  eat 
said,  "  Lord,  by  no  means,  I  have  never  eaten  anything 
that  is  common  or  unclean."  The  answer  was,  "  What 
God  hath  cleansed  make  not  thou  common."  In  that 
word  there  was  a  recognition  of  the  fact  that  there  was  a 
process  by  which  the  thing  that  was  unclean  had  been 
made  clean.  In  the  infinite  and  mysterious  and  over- 
whelming economy  of  the  grace  of  God,  by  the  Cross  of 
the  Christ,  the  whole  race  is  redeemed.  The  race  is  not 
saved.  The  New  Testament  makes  a  clear  distinction 
between  salvation  and  redemption.  Salvation  is  always 
referred  to  as  following  the  act  of  faith;  redemption 
never.  Redemption  is  independent  of  faith.  Upon  the 
brow  of  every  man  there  is  the  sign  of  the  Cross;  and 
on  every  human  life  there  rests  the  sacred  enduement  of 
the  mystery  of  sacrifice, — God's  sacrifice  wrought  out 
into  visibilit)'-  by  Calvary.  This  man  came  at  that  mo- 
ment to  the  recognition  of  the  fact  that  he  had  no  race 
superiority,  that  all  questions  of  race  were  swept  away  as 
by  a  flood,  submerged  in  the  new  fact  that  men  every- 
where are  redeemed,  and  that  therefore  there  is  no  com- 
mon man,  in  the  false  sense  of  the  world. 

That  is  the  Christian  outlook.  Paul  declared  the  same 
truth  when  he  said,  "  There  can  be  neither  Jew  nor  Greek, 
there  can  be  neither  bond  nor  free,  there  can  be  no  male 
and  female :  for  ye  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus."  By  the 
side  of  that  great  passage  we  might  put  one  of  the  prayers 
of  the  Talmud,  which  Paul  had  doubtless  said  every 

[  279  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  10 : 23-48] 

day  for  years,  "  Oh  God,  I  thank  Thee  that  I  am  not  a 
Gentile,  that  I  am  not  a  slave,  that  I  am  not  a  woman." 
Humanity  in  the  sight  of  God  stands  on  redemption 
ground;  and  when  we  perpetuate  within  the  Church  of 
God  our  race  prejudices,  or  when  we  show  to  the  world 
our  race  prejudices ;  and  imagine  that  God  is  caring  for 
the  elect  inner  circle,  and  is  careless  about  the  vast  mul- 
titudes, then  we  violate  the  first  principle  that  this  great 
lesson  teaches. 

The  second  lesson  is  but  the  enlargement  of  the  one 
idea  or  one  truth  included  within  the  first.  Peter  said, 
"  I  perceive,"  and  the  word  is  one  that  indicates  the  com- 
ing to  a  clear  comprehension.  It  is  the  very  word  Paul 
used  about  his  conversion  when  Christ  apprehended  him. 
Here  it  is  used  in  the  realm  of  the  mind.  It  indicates  the 
sudden  grasping  of  ideas.  He  had  come  to  a  new  view, 
to  a  larger  understanding,  fresh  light  had  broken  in  upon 
him.  "  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  Respecter  of  persons." 
Those  familiar  with  the  Greek  New  Testament  remem- 
ber that  "  Respecter  of  persons  "  is  one  word,  and  that  a 
very  suggestive  one.  I  am  not  sure  that  it  is  not  a  play- 
ful word,  with  a  touch  of  satire  in  it;  that  Peter  had 
now  come  to  such  revelation  of  God's  attitude  as  to  use 
the  word,  "  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  Accepter-of-a-face." 
Imagine  a  Jew  saying  that;  the  Jew  who  had  thought 
that  his  very  face  was  the  hall-mark  of  Divine  election. 
Now  he  said,  God  is  no  Respecter-of-a-face.  Of  course 
it  means  infinitely  more  than  that;  it  means  all  that  the 
thought  suggested  to  a  Jew.  "  But  in  every  nation  he 
that  feareth  Him,  and  worketh  righteousness,  is  accept- 
able to  Him."  That  is  not  the  same  verb.  It  is  a  stronger 
one ;  carrying  with  it  the  idea  of  closer  relationship  with 
men  everywhere,  who  walk  in  the  light  they  possess. 
Men  that  fear  Him,  work  righteousness.  The  apostle 
did  not  mean  to  say  that  man  is  received  upon  the  basis 
of  his  morality.  God  has  cleansed,  and  God's  reception 
of  the  race  is  based  upon  the  passion  of  God,  as  wrought 

[•ato] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  10 : 23-48] 

out  in  the  Cross,  according  to  this  great  evangel.  But 
no  man  is  to  be  saved  because  he  understands  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Atonement.  He  is  saved,  not  by  understand- 
ing it,  but  because  he  fears  God,  and  works  righteous- 
ness. Oh,  the  glad  and  glorious  surprise  of  those  ulti- 
mate days  when  we  find  that  there  will  be  those  who 
walked  in  the  light  they  had,  and  wrought  righteousness, 
and  were  acceptable  to  Him;  not  because  of  their  mo- 
rality, but  by  the  infinite  merit  of  the  Cross,  and  by  the 
fact  that  they  yielded  themselves  to  the  light  they  pos- 
sessed. The  sin  of  the  Gentile  is  not  that  he  does  not 
believe  the  thing  of  which  he  never  heard.  It  is  that  he 
holds  down  the  truth  which  he  knows,  in  unrighteousness. 
This  was  the  great  advance  for  Peter.  He  had  not  quite 
cut  loose  from  the  old  prejudices.  Paul  had  to  withstand 
him  one  day  a  little  later  on.  This  story  is  not  merely 
the  story  of  the  emancipation  of  a  man,  it  is  light  for  the 
Christian  Church  to  the  end  of  time. 

Finally  in  chapter  eleven,  Peter  in  telling  the  story  in 
Jerusalem,  of  this  visit  to  Cornelius,  said,  "  As  I  began  to 
speak,  the  Holy  Spirit  fell  on  them"  (verse  15).  One 
can  imagine  when  Peter  reached  this  point,  that  he  had 
but  laid  down  the  lines  of  his  address  and  indicated  the 
outstanding  facts,  and  that  he  was  intending  to  elaborate 
them;  but  his  was  an  interrupted  speech.  But  it  was 
yet  a  complete  speech ;  complete  in  its  matter,  for  it  spoke 
of  Christ  only,  fully,  and  clearly.  It  was  complete  in  its 
method.  It  was  a  message  delivered  in  obedience  to  the 
instruction  of  the  Spirit,  for  the  Spirit  had  said,  "  Go  with 
these  men,  nothing  doubting."  It  was  a  message  deliv- 
ered by  a  witness,  one  who  in  his  own  life  knew  of  the 
power  of  the  things  he  spoke.  It  was  a  message  accom- 
panied by  the  Spirit,  and  at  the  very  moment  when  the 
things  of  Christ  had  been  presented  by  this  Spirit-filled 
man  to  the  multitude,  the  work  was  done. 

To  read  that  address  and  note  its  interruption,  and  the 
sudden  falling  of  the  Spirit  upon  its  hearers  is  to  be  re- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  n] 

buked.  We  labour  so  hard  to  make  the  Gospel  plain. 
We  so  constantly  imagine  that  it  is  necessary  for  us  not 
to  preach  Christ  only,  but  to  defend  Christ,  and  vindicate 
Christ,  and  explain  Christ.  We  leave  so  little  room  in 
our  preaching  and  teaching  for  this  cooperative  ministry 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  a  great  and  sacred  ministry  to 
speak  only  and  briefly  of  the  ministry  of  the  Christ.  As 
we  do  so  the  Spirit  Himself  will  carry  the  message,  fall 
upon  the  multitudes ;  and  the  work  of  bringing  men  into 
fullness  of  life  be  accomplished. 


Acts  11 

This  chapter  falls  into  two  parts.  The  first  eighteen 
verses  are  almost  exclusively  occupied  with  a  recapitula- 
tion of  the  story  told  in  chapter  ten ;  the  last  twelve  deal 
with  the  growth  of  the  movement  among  the  Gentiles. 
It  is  only  necessary  to  note  the  first  part  of  the  chapter, 
as  to  its  connection  with  what  follows,  in  order  to  see 
how  it  prepares  the  way  for  that  wider  and  most  re- 
markable movement  which  commenced  at  Antioch. 

The  report  reached  Jerusalem  that  the  Gentiles  had 
received  the  Word  of  God,  and  the  attitude  of  the 
apostles  toward  the  news  is  indicated  in  the  declaration 
that  they  "  contended  with  "  Peter,  not  for  preaching  the 
Word  to  the  Gentiles,  but  for  eating  with  them.  In  the 
previous  chapter,  at  the  twentieth  verse,  these  words  oc- 
cur, "  Arise,  and  get  thee  down,  and  go  with  them,  noth- 
ing doubting:  for  I  have  sent  them."  Such  was  the  word 
of  the  Spirit  to  Peter  on  the  housetop  in  Joppa.  Again, 
In  this  eleventh  chapter,  at  the  twelfth  verse,  Peter  says, 
"  And  the  Spirit  bade  me  go  with  them,  making  no  dis- 
tinction." The  verb  "  contended  with  them  "  is  exactly 
the  same  as  that  translated  in  those  two  passages,  "  noth- 
ing doubting,"  and  "  making  no  distinction."  The  word 
doubting  is  an  insufficient  word.  The  Spirit  of  God  com- 
manded Peter  to  go  with  these  men,  without  wavering, 

[  282  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  n] 

without  discrimination,  without  making  distinction. 
When  he  came  to  Jerusalem  the  brethren  there  did  this 
very  thing.  They  discriminated  with  him,  debated  with 
him,  contended  with  him;  and  he  told  them  that  the  Spirit 
had  charged  him  to  go  with  these  men  doing  nothing 
of  the  kind.  It  is  quite  evident  that  these  men  in  Jeru- 
salem were  passing  through  the  mental  experience 
through  which  Peter  had  passed.  It  was  perfectly  nat- 
ural that  he  should  waver,  that  he  should  discriminate,  as 
between  Gentiles  and  Hebrews;  but  the  Spirit  had 
charged  him  to  make  no  such  distinction,  to  go  without 
wavering  or  contention.  When  he  came  to  Jerusalem 
he  found  that  the  apostles,  his  brethren,  were  experienc- 
ing the  same  mental  difficulty.  They  were  making  dis- 
tinctions between  themselves  and  the  Gentiles.  In  a 
word,  they  were  doing  what  the  Spirit  had  charged  Peter 
not  to  do.  In  order  to  help  them,  he  told  them  the  story 
of  the  experience  through  which  he  had  passed,  and 
by  which  he  had  been  delivered  from  making  such  dis- 
tinctions. He  told  the  story  of  his  visit  to  the  house  of 
Cornelius,  told  how  before  he  had  delivered  the  message 
he  had  intended  to  deliver,  before  he  had  fully  declared 
to  them  all  that  which  was  in  his  heart,  while  he  yet 
spoke,  without  his  intervention,  not  by  the  laying  on  of 
hands,  not  even  as  the  result  of  his  interpretation,  nor  in 
answer  to  his  intercession,  the  Holy  Spirit  fell  on  the  men 
who  listened.  Having  told  his  story  to  the  brethren  in 
Jerusalem,  Peter  said — and  the  whole  matter  was 
summed  up  in  his  enquiry — "  Who  was  I,  that  I  could 
withstand  God?" 

The  wisdom  and  graciousness  of  the  Jerusalem 
brethren  were  manifested  in  the  fact  that  when  he  said 
this,  they  held  their  peace;  their  contending  was  over. 
They  could  not  deny  the  evident  activity  of  God  Him- 
self, by  which  the  Spirit  had  been  poured  upon  these 
Gentiles;  and  therefore  they  could  no  longer  argue  for 
difference  or  distinction  or  discrimination.  They  praised 

[283 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  n] 

God  that  the  Gentiles  also  were  to  receive  like  gifts  with 
themselves. 

All  this  prepared  the  apostles  in  Jerusalem  for  coopera- 
tion with  the  wider  movement,  and  now  therefore  we  may 
turn  immediately  to  the  last  twelve  verses  of  the  chapter. 
This  paragraph  falls  into  four  clearly  marked  sections. 
In  verses  nineteen  to  twenty-one  we  have  an  account  of 
the  initiation  of  this  new  movement.  In  verses  twenty- 
two  to  twenty-four  we  see  the  confirmation  of  the  move- 
ment by  the  apostles  and  the  Church  at  Jerusalem.  In 
verses  twenty-five  and  twenty-six  is  contained  the  story 
of  the  consolidation  of  the  work.  In  verses  twenty-seven 
to  thirty  we  see  the  cooperation  of  the  new  with  the  old. 

The  story  of  continuity  is  in  the  nineteenth  verse. 
The  outstanding  words  to  note  are  these:  "scattered" 
through  "  tribulation."  That  is  the  beginning  of  the  new 
work.  Surely  God  works  in  ways  we  never  would  have 
chosen.  The  next  words  that  arrest  the  attention  are 
these :  they  "  travelled  .  .  .  speaking."  This  passage 
is  rich  in  words  descriptive  of  the  methods  by  which  the 
early  disciples  witnessed.  It  contains  no  less  than  four 
Greek  words,  and  every  one  of  them  is  significant.  This 
is  the  word  for  simple  speech,  the  common  harangue,  or 
conversation  of  travelling  people.  They  travelled,  speak- 
ing the  Word,  not  preaching  it  in  certain  acceptations  of 
that  word,  but  talking  it.  Scattered  through  tribulation, 
these  people  passed  through  all  the  regions  round  about, 
travelling  here,  there,  and  everywhere;  but  they  were 
careful  to  speak  of  this  sacred  thing  of  their  life  only  to 
Jews.  This  method  began  when  they  martyred  Stephen, 
and  Hebrew  opposition  breaking  out,  believers  were  scat- 
tered by  tribulation.  If  the  saints  are  scattered,  and  if 
they  are  Spirit-filled,  they  do  but  scatter  the  seed  of  the 
Kingdom,  which  is  the  Word  of  God. 

We  come  in  the  next  verse  to  the  new  departure.  Men 
of  Cyprus  and  Cyrene,  reaching  Antioch,  began  to  preach. 
Now  another  word  is  employed,  the  word  that  is  stamped 

[  284  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  n] 

upon  the  page  of  these  New  Testament  stories,  the  word 
euaggelizo,  the  declaration  of  the  evangel,  the  definite 
proclamation  of  the  Gospel.  These  men  of  Cyprus  and 
Cyrene  began  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  Greeks.  That  was 
the  new  beginning.  This  had  not  been  done  before. 
Stephen  had  held  disputation  with  Greek  Jews,  with  the 
Hellenists  in  Jerusalem ;  but  these  men,  reaching  Antioch, 
having  travelled  there  from  Cyprus  and  Cyrene,  talked, 
not  to  the  Grecian  Jews  only,  but  to  the  Greeks.  Antioch 
was  wealthy  and  magnificent,  and  was  described  as  one 
of  the  "  eyes  "  of  Asia,  the  third  great  city  of  the  world 
at  that  time;  Rome  being  first,  and  Alexandria  second. 
Antioch  was  the  residence  of  a  Roman  prefect  and  his 
court.  It  was  also  the  place  of  a  large  Jewish  colony. 
But  it  was  supremely  Greek.  There  was  the  grove  of 
Daphne,  and  heathenism  appeared  in  its  most  tempting 
and  debasing  form.  It  was  of  such  magnificence,  that 
its  main  street  ran  for  four  miles  through  the  length  of 
the  city.  These  men  from  Cyprus  and  Cyrene  preached 
there  to  Greeks;  not  in  an  obscure  village,  but  in  this 
great  city,  which  for  strategical  purposes  in  the  economy 
of  God  at  that  moment  was  more  central  and  available 
than  either  Alexandria  or  Rome,  and  was  free  from  the 
limitation  imposed  upon  thinking  by  Hebraism  in  Jeru- 
salem. 

The  work  in  Antioch  resulted  from  no  immediate  ac- 
tion of  the  apostles.  These  pioneers  of  the  new  mission- 
ary movement,  these  instruments  chosen  by  the  Spirit  and 
sent  to  Antioch  for  the  initiation  of  the  larger  fulfilment 
of  the  purpose  of  God,  are  unnamed.  Speculation  has 
been  busy  trying  to  name  them.  Surely  such  specula- 
tions miss  the  value  of  the  fact  that  the  names  were  not 
given.  The  teaching  of  the  passage  is  that  the  Spirit  of 
God  ever  moves  out  in  new  directions,  apart  from  all 
officialism;  a  lesson  which  always  needs  to  be  borne  in 
mind,  forgetting  which  has  often  been  our  hindrance. 
Simple  men  of  Cyprus  and  Cyrene,  unnamed  pioneers, 

[285] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  ii ] 

travelling,  found  themselves  in  magnificent,  voluptuous, 
and  sinful  Antioch;  and  they  determined,  without  con- 
sultation with  any  one,  to  preach  the  Gospel  not  merely 
to  the  Jew,  but  to  the  Greek  also.  So  began  the  new 
movement. 

The  next  few  verses  tell  the  story  of  the  confirmation 
of  that  movement  by  Jerusalem.  The  report  that  the 
Gospel  had  been  preached  to  Gentiles  reached  the  apostles. 
They  had  been  prepared,  by  Peter's  experience,  for  this 
report;  and  so  they  immediately  sent  Barnabas.  Mark 
the  wisdom  of  the  choice.  He  was  not  an  apostle,  though 
the  intimate  of  the  apostolic  band.  He  was  a  man  of 
Cyprus;  and  men  of  Cyprus  and  Cyrene  had  begun  this 
work  in  Antioch.  Yet  one  cannot  read  this  story  with- 
out feeling  that  their  sending  of  Barnabas  was  that  of 
doubt.  They  had  hardly  reached  Peter's  understanding 
that  no  distinction  was  to  be  made. 

But  when  Barnabas  reached  Antioch,  he  saw  "  the 
grace  of  God.'*  There  can  be  no  question  that  when  he 
came  into  the  midst  of  the  company  of  believing  Greeks 
in  Antioch,  into  the  fellowship  of  those  who  had  been 
gathered  about  these  men  of  Cyprus  and  Cyrene,  he  de- 
tected the  supreme  spiritual  evidences  of  the  divinity  of 
their  work  in  the  tone  and  temper  of  the  men  in  the  midst 
of  whom  he  found  himself.  A  little  later  on  in  this  book 
we  shall  come  to  an  occasion  when  Paul  came  to  Ephesus, 
and  missed  such  marks,  and  said  in  astonishment  to  the 
men,  "  Did  ye  receive  the  Holy  Spirit  when  ye  believed  ?  " 
Barnabas,  on  the  other  hand,  coming  to  Antioch  found 
the  evidences  of  grace,  a  new  tone  and  disposition,  evi- 
dences of  joy,  light,  and  happiness ;  all  that  which  char- 
acterized the  presence  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  grace  of 
God.  He  gave  these  disciples  no  apostolic  and  authorita- 
tive instruction;  but  he  exhorted  them.  This  is  yet  an- 
other word,  which  is  akin  to  the  word  Paraclete.  It  may 
•also  indicate  the  reason  why  the  apostles  gave  this  man 
his  name,  Barnabas ;  for  he  was  a  son  of  comfort,  a  son 

[  286  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  n] 

of  exhortation.  "  He  exhorted  them  all,  that  with  pur- 
pose of  heart  they  would  cleave  unto  the  Lord." 

Thus  the  work  grew  and  developed.  Barnabas  is  de- 
scribed, not  in  an  official  capacity,  for  he  had  none,  but 
as  to  his  character.  He  "  was  a  good  man,  and  full  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  and  of  faith."  We  saw  in  the  first  few 
verses  that  this  movement  was  entirely  apart  from  of- 
ficialism; now  we  see  that  there  was  to  be  no  schism  in 
the  body  of  Christ.  The  new  movement  was  not  to  con- 
tinue in  separation  from  Jerusalem.  The  independent 
beginning  was  part  of  a  spiritual  unity,  and  that  unity 
was  manifested  and  maintained.  In  this  visit  of  Bar- 
nabas to  Antioch  we  see  the  linking  of  Jerusalem  with 
Antioch,  in  the  underlying  inspiration  and  enduement  of 
the  Spirit.  The  work  in  Antioch  commenced  without 
Jerusalem;  but  Jerusalem  and  Antioch  were  united  by 
the  visit  of  Barnabas.  Thus  there  was  not  merely  the 
new  departure  in  independence  of  Jerusalem;  there  was 
also  the  new  sense  of  fellowship  in  interrelation  with 
Jerusalem. 

Next  in  order  we  have  an  arresting  picture:  that  of 
Barnabas  leaving  Antioch,  not  for  Jerusalem,  but  for 
Tarsus.  Years  before,  he  had  helped  Saul  to  escape  from 
Jerusalem  when  the  Hellenists  were  persecuting  him ;  and 
he  had  sent  him  up  the  country,  and  across  to  Tarsus. 
Since  then  Saul  had  been  in  Tarsus,  probably  travelling 
round  the  district,  and  preaching  in  Cilicia,  but  no  details 
of  such  work  are  given.  Now  Barnabas  went  to  seek 
him.  It  has  been  said  that  he  knew  where  to  seek  him. 
The  word  suggests  rather  that  he  did  not.  Quite  literally 
it  says  that  he  went  to  hunt  him  up.  Saul  had  been  wait- 
ing and  preparing  for  greater  work.  Recognizing  the 
fact  that  no  ministry  is  complete  in  itself,  that  it  must 
ever  seek  the  cooperation  of  others ;  seeing  in  that  centre 
of  Antioch  work  that  he  could  not  do,  Barnabas  was 
heroic  and  Christly  enough,  to  be  obedient  to  the  Spirit, 
and  to  seek  for  Saul. 

[287] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  n] 

There,  for  one  year  at  least,  Saul  was  the  assistant  of 
Barnabas.  They  gathered  with  the  Church,  teaching. 
Here  we  have  another  word,  which  means  quite  simply 
teaching.  As  we  look  back  on  this  work,  we  are  im- 
pressed by  that  little  group  of  people  gathered  together. 
Antioch  would  pass  and  perish  with  the  running  of  the 
centuries;  but  that  new  movement,  the  inclusion  of  the 
Greek  within  the  work  of  the  Spirit  through  the  Church 
of  Christ,  was  destined  to  spread  through  all  the  neigh- 
bourhood, and  eventually  to  capture  the  whole  world. 

It  was  at  Antioch  that  the  disciples  were  first  called 
Christians.  Professor  Lumby  has  pointed  out  that  the 
word  is  hybrid.  It  is  a  Greek  word  with  a  Latin  termi- 
nation. In  that  I  think  is  evidence  of  the  fact  that  it  was 
a  name  given  to  these  men  by  Antioch.  It  was  certainly 
not  chosen  by  the  Jew;  for  to  him  Christian  would  have 
meant  a  man  of  the  Messiah ;  and  he  would  object  entirely 
to  that  description  of  those  of  the  Nazarene  sect.  It  was 
certainly  not  a  name  chosen  by  the  Christians  themselves, 
for  they  designated  themselves  "  disciples,"  "  brethren/* 
"  those  of  the  Way."  It  has  been  said  that  it  was  a 
nickname,  and  that  it  was  given  to  them  as  a  title  of 
contempt.  That  may  be  so.  In  any  case,  the  giving  of 
the  name  in  Antioch  reveals  two  things.  It  shows  first 
that  Antioch  recognized  the  Church  no  longer  as  a  sect 
or  part  of  Hebraism,  but  as  a  new  society,  which  could 
not  be  named  by  Hebraism,  but  must  be  known  by  a 
name  of  its  own.  I  think  also  that  Antioch  named  these 
people  by  what  Antioch  saw  in  them.  They  were  the 
people  of  the  Christ,  Whomsoever  He  might  have  been. 
It  was  of  the  Christ  they  spoke,  of  the  Christ  they  sang, 
for  the  Christ  they  lived. 

In  all  this  the  free  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God  is 
again  manifested.  The  man  of  the  apostolic  confidence, 
Barnabas,  sought  the  man  born  out  of  due  season,  Saul. 
Barnabas  acted  evidently  upon  his  own  initiative,  and 
yet  in  response  to  the  indwelling  and  guiding  Spirit  of 

[  288  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  n] 

God.  On  that  action  the  seal  of  the  Divine  blessing  was 
set,  and  their  year's  work  was  formative  and  preparatory 
to  the  larger  movements  of  which  the  rest  of  this  book 
is  the  chronicle. 

In  the  last  section,  we  see  the  enlarging  cooperation. 
Agabus  was  a  prophet.  This  is  the  first  mention  of 
a  prophet  in  the  New  Testament  economy,  and  the  pre- 
dictive element  of  the  work  was  evidenced  as  this  man 
foretold  the  coming  of  a  great  famine. 

The  impressive  fact,  however,  in  this  last  paragraph 
is  that  of  its  revelation  of  the  sense  of  unity.  These 
Greeks  had  heard  and  believed  in  the  Gospel ;  and  there 
were  evidences  of  the  grace  of  God,  which  evidences 
Barnabas  had  seen.  Barnabas  and  Saul  had  been  teach- 
ing and  instructing  them,  and  they  had  been  growing  in 
grace.  When  therefore  Agabus  foretold  the  coming  of 
the  famine,  these  Christian  men  at  once  recognized  that 
the  famine  would  bring  distress  to  the  brethren  in  Judsea. 
Spontaneously  they  began  to  care  for  those  brethren,  not 
under  the  direction  of  the  apostles,  but  out  of  that  new 
life  which  has  love  at  its  heart.  So  important  did  they 
conceive  the  work  of  relief  to  be,  that  they  set  their  two 
teachers  apart  for  the  carrying  of  their  gifts  to  Jerusalem. 
This  is  a  glorious  and  gracious  revelation  of  the  con- 
sciousness of  oneness  in  the  Spirit;  obedience  to 
prophecy,  expressing  itself  in  love;  and  love  taking  the 
practical  form  of  definite  help  sent  to  those  in  Judea 
who  would  suffer  most  as  the  result  of  the  coming  famine. 

The  true  notes  of  development  are  revealed  in  this 
study.  First  there  is  the  note  of  continuity.  Every  move- 
ment is  the  outcome  of  an  earlier  one.  Secondly,  there 
is  the  note  of  an  absolute  freedom.  Every  movement  is  a 
new  departure.  Thirdly  there  is  the  note  of  an  unbroken 
unity.  Every  movement  is  part  of  one  great  whole. 
Finally  there  is  the  note  of  a  perpetual  variety. 

First,  every  movement  is  the  outcome  of  an  earlier 
one.  Stephen's  martyrdom  was  Antioch's  opportunity. 

[289] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  n] 

Through  his  martyrdom  tribulation  broke  out,  and  the 
Christians  were  scattered,  travelling  everywhere,  and 
coming  at  last  to  Antioch.  In  the  economy  of  God  we 
cannot  see  all  the  issues  of  the  thing  we  suffer,  or  the 
thing  we  do  to-day.  When  we  imagine  that  we  can,  then 
we  become  restless.  Or  again,  Peter's  vision  became  the 
Church's  eyesight.  Or  again,  Saul's  apprehension  on  the 
way  to  Damascus  was  Antioch's  supply.  Or  again, 
Antioch's  spiritual  blessing  became  Judaea's  material  suc- 
cour in  the  hour  of  famine.  These  things  of  God  are  all 
linked  together. 

But  again,  every  movement  is  a  new  departure.  Mark 
the  freedom.  Men  of  Cyprus  and  Cyrene  preached  to 
Greeks.  That  was  a  new  movement.  The  sending  of 
Barnabas  by  the  apostles  was  a  new  official  action.  The 
rinding  of  Saul  by  Barnabas  was  an  independent  action. 
Some  ecclesiastical  courts  to-day  would  have  summoned 
Barnabas  back  to  Jerusalem,  to  investigate.  The  collec- 
tion for  Judaea  was  spontaneous.  The  movement  is  al- 
ways manifesting  itself  in  a  new  way ;  linked  to  the  pre- 
ceding things  but  always  independent. 

Then  again,  every  movement  is  part  of  one  whole. 
Mark  the  unity  of  it.  We  cannot  better  express  this  than 
by  citation  of  Paul's  words  written  to  Ephesus :  "  One 
Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism ;  one  God  and  Father  of  all, 
Who  is  in  all,  and  through  all."  That  apostolic  word  is 
stamped  upon  this  paragraph.  One  Lord  is  preached, 
whether  it  be  by  the  travellers  who  talk,  or  by  men  of 
Cyprus  and  Cyrene  who  preach,  or  by  Barnabas  who 
exhorts,  or  by  Agabus  who  prophesies.  One  faith  is  ex- 
ercised, whether  it  be  the  faith  of  the  men  who  first  heard 
and  believed,  or  the  constant  faith  of  the  men  who  be- 
lieving, obeyed,  and  allowed  the  Spirit  to  lead  and  guide 
them  independently  of  all  prejudice.  One  baptism  is 
shared,  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  One  God  is 
glorified.  These  are  the  great  things  of  unity;  and  they 
are  the  things  of  unity  for  the  Church  to-day. 

[  290  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  n] 

Finally  there  was  a  great  variety  of  gifts;  the  apos- 
tolic gift,  the  evangelistic  gift,  the  prophetic  gift,  and 
the  pastoral  gift.  Paul  enumerated  these  in  that  same 
passage  in  the  Ephesian  letter,  "  He  gave  some  to  be 
apostles,  and  some,  prophets ;  and  some,  evangelists ;  and 
some,  pastors  and  teachers."  They  are  seen  at  work  here 
in  this  new  departure  and  new  movement.  There  was 
also  a  variety  of  methods.  Four  or  five  words  describe 
the  method  by  which  the  Word  was  preached. 

In  that  paragraph  we  have  the  microcosmic  revelation 
of  true  Christian  work,  and  missionary  development. 
Every  new  departure  is  a  continuation  of  something 
which  has  gone  before.  No  one  can  act  in  independence 
of  Christ  and  His  Church  in  work  for  Christ.  No  one 
man  can  win  a  soul.  How  many  prayers,  and  long  hours 
of  patient  teaching,  and  many  other  ministries,  are  needed 
to  the  making  of  one  soul  anew  ?  How  can  we  fulfil  any 
Christian  service  that  is  not  linked  to  the  magnificent 
past?  I  believe  in  the  holy  catholic  Church,  and  that 
every  piece  of  work  to-day  is  linked  to  the  things  that 
have  gone  before.  But  there  must  be  freedom  from  the 
restraint  of  the  past,  freedom  from  the  interferences  of 
hoary  and  ancient  traditions ;  for  where  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  is,  there  is  liberty.  There  must  also  be  absolute 
freedom.  Every  new  departure  is  independent,  in  that 
it  is  under  the  impulse  and  inspiration  of  the  Spirit,  and 
is  the  test  of  the  Church's  unity.  The  essential  things  of 
unity  are  not  those  of  ecclesiastical  management,  or  of 
human  creeds.  These  are  they.  One  Lord  to  be 
preached ;  one  faith  to  be  exercised ;  one  baptism,  that  of 
the  Spirit,  to  be  received;  one  God  to  be  glorified.  In 
proportion  as  we  come  to  a  recognition  of  these  under- 
lying things  we  shall  be  able  to  sing  truthfully : 

"  We  are  not  divided, 
All  one  body  we, 
One  in  hope  and  doctrine, 
One  in  charity." 
[  291  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  12] 

There  are  also  varieties  of  gifts.  The  Spirit  of  God  is 
still  bestowing  gifts.  Men  are  still  receiving  gifts  of  the 
Spirit,  for  apostolic,  pioneer  work  in  distant  lands;  for 
prophetic  declaration  of  God's  truth  to  their  own  age; 
for  evangelistic  calling  of  men  to  Christ;  or  for  the 
patient  teaching  and  training  of  the  saints.  The  Spirit 
is  with  us  yet,  and  the  method  of  His  operation  is  that 
of  diversity,  while  He  Himself  is  the  unifying  life  of  the 
Church. 

Acts  12 

This  chapter  is  supremely  interesting  because  with  it 
Jerusalem,  as  the  centre  of  the  Church's  operations, passes 
out  of  sight.  It  only  appears  twice  again  in  the  history 
of  this  book;  once  as  the  meeting-place  of  the  council 
which  set  the  Gentiles  free  from  all  the  obligations  of 
Judaism;  and  once,  when  Paul  revisited  it,  and  for  the 
saving  of  his  life  was  compelled  to  seek  the  protection 
of  the  Roman  power. 

It  is  also  an  interesting  fact  that  the  words  in  the 
seventeenth  verse,  "  Peter  departed,  and  went  to  another 
place,"  are  the  last  concerning  him  in  this  history.  In 
Galatians  there  is  an  account  of  his  contention  with  Paul ; 
and  his  letters  were  certainly  written  at  a  later  date ;  but 
here  he  passes  out  of  sight  in  Luke's  history. 

We  have  been  tracing  the  story  of  the  development  of 
the  work  among  the  Gentiles.  The  outstanding  facts  in 
that  development  were :  first  the  apprehension  of  Saul  of 
Tarsus ;  secondly  the  vision  of  Peter,  and  the  reception  of 
Cornelius;  and  thirdly,  the  establishment  of  the  new 
centre  of  operations  in  Antioch.  Antioch  will  now  be- 
come the  centre,  not  Jerusalem.  All  those  wonderful 
missionary  journeys  which  remain  to  be  considered, 
started  from  Antioch;  and  the  returning  apostles  and 
missionaries  reported  there.  It  became  God's  new  centre 
for  the  fulfilment  of  the  commission  which  Jesus  gave 
to  His  disciples,  that  they  should  be  witnesses  unto  Him, 

[  292  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  12] 

not  only  in  Jerusalem,  Judaea,  and  Samaria,  but  also 
unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth. 

The  story  contained  in  this  chapter  is  quite  simple  and 
straightforward.  The  supreme  interest  is  that  of  conflict 
between  the  godless  theocracy  and  the  new  nation.  Those 
terms  need  some  definition.  The  term  "  godless  theoc- 
racy" in  itself  is  a  contradiction.  The  nation  of  Israel 
was  created  by  God  in  order  to  be  a  theocracy,  a  people 
governed,  not  by  man,  but  by  Himself.  To  recall  the 
facts  of  the  history  of  Israel  from1  Abraham,  will  be 
sufficient  to  illuminate  the  thought; — Abraham  called, 
Abraham  answering;  the  growth  of  the  people,  their  or- 
ganization into  national  life  by  the  way  of  exodus  from 
Egypt;  the  appointing  of  the  leader  and  the  lawgiver; 
the  giving  of  the  law,  and  the  establishment  of  the  ritual. 
These  are  but  landmarks.  Then  there  came  an  hour  in 
which  they  said, — and  mark  the  profound  significance  of 
the  word,  "  Make  us  a  king  like  unto  the  nations."  In 
that  hour  God  said  to  Samuel  that  they  had  rejected 
Him  from  being  King.  That  was  the  hour  of  their  su- 
preme failure.  From  that  moment  there  was  steady 
degeneration.  God  made  the  nation  in  order  that  all 
other  nations  might  in  it  see  the  breadth,  the  beauty,  the 
beneficence  of  the  government  of  God.  The  nation  was 
to  be,  not  a  monarchy,  not  a  democracy, — and  each  is  an 
equal  tyranny, — but  a  theocracy,  a  God-governed  people. 
Luke  describes  Herod  as  king.  Those  familiar  with 
Paley's  "  Horse  Paulinas  "  will  remember  that  he  quotes 
this  reference  as  proving  the  historic  accuracy  of  Luke. 
This  man  Herod  was  king  of  the  Jews,  the  first  to  bear 
the  title  for  long  time.  He  represented  in  his  own  per- 
son, as  he  acted  on  behalf  of  the  nation,  the  theocracy 
without  God.  That  is  one  side  of  this  picture. 

On  the  other  side  was  the  new  nation;  and  again  the 
term  may  need  explanation.  It  may  be  suggested  that 
we  substitute  the  word  "  Church,"  for  nation ;  but  in  this 
connection  I  adopt  that  word  "  nation "  from  Peter's 

t  393  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  12] 

definition  of  the  Church  as  a  holy  nation.  This  reveals 
one  side  of  truth  concerning  the  Church  which  we  are 
perpetually  in  danger  of  forgetting.  I  am  inclined  to 
think  that  the  Church  has  most  signally  failed  in  that  she 
has  forgotten  she  is  God's  theocracy,  God's  nation.  What 
is  a  nation?  A  nation  consists  of  all  those  who  live  un- 
der one  sole  authority,  and  in  mutual  inter-relationships  ; 
and  the  Church  in  the  will  of  God  is  not  merely  an  elect 
race,  not  only  a  royal  priesthood,  not  only  a  people  for 
God's  possession,  not  only  a  people  having  a  heavenly 
vocation  that  can  only  be  fulfilled  in  ages  yet  unborn; 
that  is  all  true,  but  she  is  also  a  nation,  in  the  world  for 
the  same  purpose  for  which  the  Hebrew  nation  was 
created,  for  the  revelation  to  the  world  of  the  beauty, 
breadth,  and  beneficence  of  the  Divine  government. 
Here  then,  is  the  picture  of  that  nation,  with  no  earthly 
king,  and  without  a  parliament;  but  with  one  governing 
King.  These  two  forces  come  into  conflict  in  this  chap- 
ter. The  Church,  the  holy  nation,  will  come  into  conflict 
with  other  of  the  world  forces  presently.  She  has  been 
doing  so  ever  since.  Here,  however,  is  the  last  clash  of 
the  conflict  between  the  theocracy  God-created,  which 
had  failed;  and  the  theocracy  God-created,  which  was 
yet  upon  its  trial. 

In  that  way  we  will  consider  it;  dealing  with  the  op- 
position and  defeat  of  the  false;  and  the  strength  and 
victory  of  the  true.  Such  division  is  based  upon  a  recog- 
nition of  the  one  central  matter  of  the  Kingship  of  God. 
For  the  realization  and  manifestation  of  that  Kingship 
Israel  was  created.  For  the  realization  and  manifestation 
of  that  Kingship  the  Church  exists  as  to  its  earthly  re- 
sponsibility. The  supreme  matter  in  life  is  not  the  saving 
of  man's  spirit;  nor  better  dwellings.  Those  are  parts 
of  the  supreme  matter,  which  is  the  establishment  of  the 
Kingdom  of  God.  Even  that  is  a  phrase  which  I  some- 
times think  we  have  devitalized  by  using  too  commonly. 
What  is  meant  by  the  establishment  of  the  Kingdom  of 

[  294  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  12] 

God  ?  It  means  that  the  matter  of  importance  for  every 
soul,  for  every  nation,  for  the  world  is  that  God  should 
govern.  The  will  of  God  was  the  master-passion  in  the 
life  and  ministry  of  Jesus.  The  ancient  people  of  Israel 
was  created  a  nation  to  realize  that  will,  and  to  manifest 
it.  The  Church  of  God  was  created  to  realize  it,  and  to 
manifest  it. 

In  noticing  then  the  opposition  and  defeat  of  the  false, 
our  attention  is  necessarily  fixed  in  the  first  place,  upon 
this  man  Herod,  Agrippa  the  first,  a  nephew  of  that 
Herod  Antipas  who  murdered  John,  and  a  grandson  of 
Herod  called  the  Great,  the  murderer  of  the  innocents 
at  the  time  of  the  birth  of  our  Lord.  This  man  was  of 
Roman  habits,  for  he  had  lived  in  Rome  for  thirty  years, 
the  boon  companion  in  every  kind  of  vice  of  the  son  of 
an  emperor.  He  was,  however,  strangely  enough,  even 
throughout  those  days  of  dissolute  habits,  a  man  having 
Jewish  interests.  It  is  confidently  affirmed,  and  accu- 
rately undoubtedly,  in  contemporary  history,  that  it  was 
through  his  intervention  that  Caius  was  prevented  from 
setting  up  an  image  of  himself  in  the  very  Temple  of 
God.  He  had  always  been  interested  in  Jewish  people. 
Josephus  says  of  this  man: 

"  He  loved  to  live  continually  at  Jerusalem,  and  was 
exactly  careful  in  the  observance  of  the  laws  of  his  coun- 
try. He  therefore  kept  himself  entirely  pure,  nor  did  any 
day  pass  over  his  head  without  its  appointed  sacrifice." 

It  is  impossible  to  read  that  without  seeing  that  Josephus 
defended  Herod,  because  of  his  sympathy  for  that  which 
was  purely  Jewish.  Then  we  must  remember  that  there 
was  Edomite  taint  in  his  blood,  just  as  in  the  case  of  the 
Herod  with  whom  Jesus  came  into  contact.  Finally,  he 
was  a  man  of  Greek  learning.  Leaving  Jerusalem,  at  the 
end  of  this  campaign,  he  found  his  way  to  Caesarea,  and 
set  up  a  throne,  and  as  Josephus  tells  us,  sat  thereon  in 
glittering  garments  of  silver,  receiving  the  homage  of 

[  295  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  12] 

the  crowd  until  he  received  the  homage  which  put  him  in 
the  place  of  God.  This  was  the  man  who  now  stretched 
forth  his  hand  to  vex  certain  of  the  Church. 

Luke  tells  us  in  this  chapter  that  he  "  put  forth  his 
hands  to  afflict  certain  of  the  Church.  And  he  killed 
James  the  brother  of  John  with  the  sword.  And  when 
he  saw  that  it  pleased  the  Jews,  he  proceeded  to  seize 
Peter  also."  This  man  was  preeminently  a  politician ;  one 
who  had  no  strong  antagonism  to  the  Christian  move- 
ment within  his  own  country,  but  who  had  very  little 
interest  therein;  a  man  who  desired  to  retain  his  own 
position  and  footing,  and  who  in  order  to  do  it,  found 
it  was  necessary  to  hold  the  Jews  and  please  them.  So 
the  last  movement  against  Christianity  by  the  organized 
nation  of  Israel,  through  the  person  of  their  king,  was  a 
political  movement. 

All  this  is  of  no  value  save  as  it  is  set  in  the  light  of 
the  fact  that  this  was  a  people  made  for  the  exhibition  of 
the  Divine  government.  Here  was  their  last  king,  the 
sycophant  of  a  child  of  Roman  voluptuousness,  an  Edom- 
ite,  attempting  for  political  purposes  to  retain  Jewish 
power,  supremely  given  over  to  all  manner  of  Greek 
frivolity;  and  this  man  is  the  representative  of  the  peo- 
ple whom  God  had  created.  This  was  the  man  who 
stretched  forth  his  hand  to  vex  the  Church. 

In  the  activity  of  the  opposition  two  things  must  be 
noted.  First,  James,  the  brother  of  John,  was  slain  by 
the  sword.  He  was  surnamed  by  his  Lord,  Boanerges,  a 
son  of  thunder,  and  only  appears  beyond  the  Gospel  nar- 
ratives in  two  places.  He  is  named  among  the  apostles 
who  received  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost, 
and  again  in  this  one  sentence,  as  being  murdered  by 
Herod.  That  sentence  reminds  us  of  an  occasion  when 
he  and  John  found  their  way  to  Christ,  and  said,  "  Grant 
unto  us  that  we  may  sit,  one  on  Thy  right  hand,  and  one 
on  Thy  left  hand,  in  Thy  glory."  Our  Lord  said  to 
them,  "  Ye  know  not  what  ye  ask.  Are  ye  able  to  drink 

[296] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  12] 

the  cup  that  I  drink?  or  to  be  baptized  with  the  baptism 
that  I  am  baptized  with  ? "  And  they  said  that  they 
could,  little  knowing  what  they  said.  In  that  matchless 
and  infinite  grace,  which  is  ever  patient  with  His  people, 
He  did  not  laugh  at  them,  but  said  with  a  tender  note  of 
loving  sarcasm,  which  yet  thrilled  with  infinite  grace, 
"  The  cup  that  I  drink  ye  shall  drink ;  and  with  the  bap- 
tism that  I  am  baptized  withal  shall  ye  be  baptized;  but 
to  sit  on  My  right  hand  or  on  My  left  hand  is  not  Mine 
to  give:  but  it  is  for  them  for  whom  it  hath  been  pre- 
pared." Now  Herod  stretched  forth  his  hand  to  vex  the 
Church,  and  slew  James  with  the  sword.  So  he  was 
baptized  with  his  Master's  baptism.  And  what  of  John? 
He  lived  on  until  the  last  of  the  apostolic  band  had 
crossed  over.  So  we  may  be  baptized  with  the  baptism 
of  fellowship  in  the  sufferings  of  Christ  by  life,  as  well 
as  by  death.  The  opposition,  however,  fastened  upon 
James,  and  then  upon  Peter,  who  was  imprisoned  and 
guarded,  the  intention  being  to  bring  him  forth  and  slay 
him. 

Now  mark  the  end  of  the  opposition.  It  was  entirely 
baffled.  The  empty  prison  was  the  end  of  it.  In  the  fifth 
verse  of  the  chapter  we  read,  "  Peter  therefore  was  kept 
in  prison :  but  prayer  was  made  earnestly  of  the  Church 
unto  God  for  him."  There  were  the  two  forces  at  war. 
Peter  kept  in  prison  by  Herod;  a  Church  at  prayer  for 
him.  "  Simon,  Simon,  behold,  Satan  asked  to  have  you, 
that  he  might  sift  you  as  wheat:  but  I  made  supplication 
for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not."  Mark  the  continuity 
of  the  Acts.  Peter  was  kept  in  prison,  but  the  Church 
prayed.  The  empty  prison  tells  the  sequel ;  the  opposition 
failed,  and  the  Church  won.  Herod  left  Jerusalem  for 
Caesarea,  in  all  likelihood  in  anger;  and  then  within  a 
few  days,  or  weeks  at  most,  there  was  the  final  manifesta- 
tion of  his  supreme  sin ;  rebellion  against  God.  That  final 
manifestation  was  the  assumption  of  the  functions  of 
God.  This  is  no  distant  story.  These  are  living  things 

[  297  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  12] 

to-day.  If  a  man  dethrone  God  he  always  makes  himself 
God.  If  God  do  not  occupy  the  throne  of  every  life 
then  man  will  assume  for  himself  the  very  functions  of 
Deity.  So  there  was  wrought  out  in  the  person  of  Herod 
Agrippa  the  sin  that  ruined  a  nation  in  the  hour  when  he 
allowed  a  fickle  shouting  crowd  to  declare,  "  The  voice 
of  a  god,  and  not  of  a  man,"  and  received  homage  as 
such.  Swiftly  and  awfully  the  touch  of  the  Divine  wrath 
was  upon  him,  and  he  gave  up  the  ghost. 

Turn  to  the  other  side  of  this  picture.  There  are  three 
things  to  be  noted  in  considering  the  strength  and  victory 
of  the  Church:  first,  the  Divine  government  itself;  sec- 
ondly, the  instruments  made  use  of ;  and  finally,  the  issue 
of  the  conflict. 

As  this  story  is  studied,  two  things  impress  us  con- 
cerning the  Divine  government:  first,  the  mystery  of  it; 
and  secondly,  its  clear  manifestation.  It  is  impossible  to 
read  the  story  and  declare  that  God's  government  can  be 
finally  explained.  Why  did  God  permit  James  to  be 
slain,  and  deliver  Peter?  Why  did  He  allow  Herod  to 
arrest  James  and  slay  him;  and  then,  to  use  the  word 
that  is  always  indicative  of  our  human  limitation,  mirac- 
ulously deliver  Peter?  There  is  no  answer  to  these  ques- 
tions. I  also  have  seen  James  slain  when  I  thought  we 
could  not  spare  him.  I  also  have  seen  a  man  full  of 
fire  and  enthusiasm  and  force,  removed  swiftly  and  sud- 
denly, by  a  way  of  pain;  and  I  have  said,  What  is  God 
doing?  His  is  a  government  which  does  not  attempt  to 
explain  itself  finally  to  watching  men,  but  which  mani- 
fests itself  so  that  watching  men  cannot  deny  it. 

James  is  slain,  and  if  men  are  in  the  midst  of  the 
troublous  days  when  Herod  is  stretching  out  his  hands, 
they  will  say  they  are  coming  to  the  crisis  when  they 
are  powerless.  God  did  not  deliver  James,  but  imme- 
diately afterwards  He  delivered  Peter.  That  reveals  the 
fact  that  if  He  can  deliver  Peter,  He  could  have  de- 
livered James.  There  is  infinite  comfort  in  that;  the 

[298] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  12] 

comfort  of  the  revelation  of  the  fact  that  One  Who 
could  deliver  Peter,  and  in  wisdom  did  so,  was  equally 
wise  when  He  did  not  deliver  James.  Life  can  never 
be  perfectly  understood  in  the  process  of  its  living;  we 
must  wait.  Just  beyond  the  gleam  and  flash  of  the  sword, 
and  the  overwhelming  agony  of  the  moment  James  came 
to  the  explanation.  God  doeth  all  things  well;  and  the 
release  of  Peter  illuminates  the  death  of  James,  as  we 
come  to  rest  in  the  infinite  wisdom  of  the  Divine  govern- 
ment. 

The  instruments  of  the  Divine  government  revealed  in 
this  chapter  are  two:  first,  a  praying  people;  and  sec- 
ondly, ministering  angels.  A  praying  people  that  is  the 
supreme  thing,  so  far  as  human  responsibility  is  con- 
cerned. Mark  two  things  about  these  praying  people. 
They  prayed  earnestly,  and  the  word  is  a  very  strong 
one,  "without  ceasing"  it  is  translated;  "earnestly"  is 
more  accurate ;  but  still  better,  they  prayed  "  with  agony." 
He  was  not  released  until  the  very  night  before  execu- 
tion. I  think  they  prayed  through  all  the  day  and  night ; 
one  group  gathered  in  the  house  of  the  mother  of  Mark, 
and  perhaps  others  in  other  places.  Herod  Agrippa, 
pervert  of  Rome,  with  Hebrew  national  aspirations,  an 
Edomite,  and  a  Greek,  cleverest  of  all  the  Herods  in  cer- 
tain ways,  stretched  out  his  hand  to  vex  the  Church. 
What  shall  we  put  against  this  new  force?  A  praying 
Church  is  against  this  force. 

But  another  thing  about  their  praying  is  that  they 
prayed  doubtingly.  That  has  been  strenuously  denied, 
but  I  think  the  story  cannot  be  read  without  seeing  it. 
When  Peter  knocked  at  the  door,  Rhoda,  the  girl  with 
the  sweet  and  fragrant  name,  heard  his  voice,  and  she 
forgot  to  open  for  very  delight,  and  left  him  standing 
outside.  When  she  came  and  said,  Peter  is  without, 
they  said,  "  Thou  art  mad."  But  they  had  been  praying? 
Yes,  and  believing;  and  yet  wondering  how  God  could  do 
it ;  and  when  the  answer  came  they  were  surprised.  Do 

[  299  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  12] 

not  criticize  them.  I  am  thankful  for  the  story.  It  cheers 
me  in  my  praying.  I  pray,  and  God  knows  I  believe  in 
Him,  and  I  desire,  and  I  wonder  whether  He  can.  If  I 
challenge  my  unbelief,  it  vanishes.  These  people  prayed 
earnestly  and  doubtingly,  and  yet  that  force  of  earnest, 
halting  prayer  was  mightier  than  Herod,  and  mightier 
than  hell. 

Then  notice  the  ministry  of  angels.  If  we  are  tempted 
to  say  that  does  not  happen  now,  I  affirm  that  the  only 
thing  that  does  not  happen  is  the  smallest  thing  in  the 
story.  Peter  did  not  know  it  was  an  angel  who  delivered 
him,  and  did  not  know  he  was  out  of  the  prison  until  the 
angel  had  gone.  He  thought  he  was  dreaming,  and  it 
was  not  until  the  angel  had  taken  him  the  length  of  one 
street  and  had  departed, — to  use  the  word  of  Luke,  trans- 
lated differently, — he  collected  himself  together.  He 
gathered  up  all  the  impressions,  and  then  discovered  that 
the  Lord  had  delivered  him.  The  only  thing  that  does  not 
happen  now  is  the  small  thing,  the  material  part  of  the 
story,  the  chains  removed  from  the  wrists,  and  the  open- 
ing of  a  door.  Those  soldiers  did  not  see  that  angel. 
There  is  an  older  story  which  helps  us  at  this  point. 
There  was  a  servant  who  said  to  his  master,  Lo,  my 
master,  what  shall  we  do?  His  master  prayed,  "  O  Je- 
hovah, open  his  eyes."  When  his  eyes  were  opened,  lo, 
sweeping  up  the  mountain  he  saw  hosts  of  angels.  It  is 
not  well  that  we  should  see  them  to-day,  for  this  is  not 
the  age  of  sight;  it  is  the  age  of  faith.  But  they  are 
here !  Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to 
do  service  for  the  sake  of  them  that  shall  inherit  salva- 
tion? I  still  believe  in  angels,  and  many  a  prison  door 
the  angel  opens  still,  and  many  an  hour  of  darkness  is 
illuminated  by  something  that  we  do  not  understand.  It 
is  the  ministry  of  the  angels.  The  material  manifesta- 
tion may  be  denied  to-day,  but  that  only  proves  that  we 
are  living  in  a  clearer  spiritual  atmosphere,  for  when  the 
spirit  must  be  instructed  by  the  thing  that  appeals  to  the 

[  300  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  12] 

senses  it  is  because  men  are  in  the  twilight.  In  propor- 
tion as  we  rise  into  the  larger  and  higher  and  fuller  day, 
the  material  signs  will  pass ;  but  it  is  still  true  that  "  the 
angel  of  Jehovah  encampeth  round  about  them  that 
fear  Him." 

And  how  did  this  end  ?  "  And  immediately  an  angel 
of  the  Lord  smote  him,  because  he  gave  not  God  the 
glory ;  and  he  was  eaten  of  worms,  and  gave  up  the  ghost. 
But  the  Word  of  God  grew  and  multiplied,"  in  spite  of 
kings  and  peoples  and  prisons.  Then  the  chapter  ends 
with  the  little  part  of  the,  great  whole,  a  small  touch,  full 
of  beauty.  Barnabas  and  Saul  are  seen  going  over  to 
Antioch.  Behold  Jerusalem  for  the  last  time;  the  whole 
of  the  godlessness  manifested  in  Herod,  who  stretched 
out  his  hand  to  prevent  the  growth  of  this  spiritual  move- 
ment; and  this  victory  of  the  new  nation.  The  opposi- 
tion ends  in  defeat.  Who  are  these  three  men  going  off 
down  that  road?  They  have  three  hundred  miles  before 
they  reach  Antioch;  Barnabas,  Saul,  and  Mark.  Herod 
is  dead,  but  the  Word  of  God  is  living;  and  the  mes- 
sengers are  on  the  highroad. 

Let  the  story  fling  its  light  on  present  circumstances; 
on  all  oppositions,  of  kings,  peoples,  prisons. 

"  Why  do  the  nations  rage, 
And  the  peoples  imagine  a  vain  thing? 
The  kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves, 
And  the  rulers  take  counsel  together, 
Against  Jehovah,  and  against  His  Anointed, 

saying, 

Let  us  break  their  bonds  asunder, 
And  cast  away  their  cords  from  us. 
He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  will  laugh: 
The  Lord  will  have  them  in  derision. 
Then  will  He  speak  unto  them  in  His  wrath, 
And  vex  them  in  His  sore  displeasure; 
Yet  have  I  set  My  King 
Upon  My  holy  hill  of  Zion." 

[  301  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  12] 

Do  not  treat  that  as  ancient  literature;  it  is  the  matin 
of  the  morning,  it  is  the  evangel  of  eventide.  Sooner  or 
later  godlessness  assumes  the  functions  of  God,  and  then 
immediately  is  blasted  and  broken. 

Let  the  light  of  this  study  fall,  not  only  upon  all  op- 
position, but  upon  the  people  of  His  purpose.  James  is 
still  slain,  and  Peter  spared;  or  to  take  another  illustra- 
tion from  the  same  story,  a  prison  door  that  striving  men 
cannot  open,  is  opened  without  hands,  and  Peter  passes 
through.  A  house  door,  that  a  maiden  could  open,  Peter 
has  to  knock  at,  and  then  cannot  open  it.  We  are  in  the 
midst  of  these  mysteries.  God  knows  they  are  in  our 
lives.  Let  us  thank  God  that  He  Who  opens  one  door 
shuts  the  other;  and  the  door  He  shuts  is  as  great  a 
beneficence  as  the  door  He  opens.  Prayer  is  still  our 
one  and  only  resource.  Not  federation  even  among  our- 
selves, if  we  are  prayerless;  not  policy  or  art,  or  cun- 
ning, but  prayer  is  the  resource  of  the  Church ;  and  angels 
are  still  ministering  spirits;  and  the  Word  of  God  still 
grows  and  multiplies. 

Yet  is  there  not  a  warning  here?  Israel,  Jerusalem, 
Herod !  Go  back  to  the  twenty-third  chapter  of  Matthew, 
and  listen  again  to  the  words  of  Jesus,  "  Behold,  your 
house  is  left  unto  you  desolate."  There  is  a  perpetual 
principle  involved.  For  what  is  the  Church  created? 
If  we  fail,  that  word  will  be  spoken  to  us  as  surely  as  it 
was  spoken  to  Israel. 

Yet  note  the  encouragement  of  it  all.  God,  the  Church, 
and  the  Word !  Said  Paul,  when  writing  to  Timothy  near 
the  end  of  his  ministry,  "  I  suffer  hardship  unto  bonds, 
as  a -malefactor ;  but  the  Word  of  God  is  not  bound. 
Therefore  I  endure  all  things."  In  the  spirit  of  that 
government  of  God  as  revealed  in  our  study,  be  it  ours 
to  work  and  toil,  to  suffer  and  to  sing,  until  He  calls  us 
home  by  the  swift  and  sudden  call,  or  after  the  long 
day's  work  is  done;  from  the  shadows  of  eventide  into 
the  light  that  never  fails. 

[  302  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  13 :  1-3  J 
Acts  13: 1-3 

This  paragraph  is  a  brief  one,  but  of  great  importance. 
It  may  be  spoken  of  as  the  watershed  of  this  book.  We 
now  enter  upon  a  study  of  that  wonderful  movement,  of 
which  Paul  was  the  central  figure.  In  this  story,  without 
any  announcement  or  reason  given,  Saul's  name  is 
changed  to  Paul. 

These  three  verses  give  the  account  of  the  beginning 
of  the  great  missionary  movement.  In  the  first  sentence 
there  is  the  recognition  of  matters  already  considered  in 
previous  studies :  "  Now  there  were  at  Antioch,  in  the 
Church."  The  twelfth  chapter  took  us  back  to  Jerusalem, 
and  we  saw  it  pass  out  of  the  record  of  the  history  of 
the  Christian  Church.  It  is  only  seen  once  more  in  the 
course  of  this  book,  when  the  council  was  held  at  which 
the  Gentiles  were  set  free  from  all  obligations  to  Judaism. 
In  that  chapter  moreover  we  saw  the  last  national  Jewish 
hostility  to  Christianity,  centralized  in  Herod.  In  the 
story  of  the  movement  of  the  Church  of  God,  according 
to  her  Lord's  will,  toward  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth, 
chapter  twelve  is  an  interpolation,  necessary  for  the  un- 
derstanding of  the  whole  story. 

The  story  now  resumed,  takes  us  again  to  Antioch,  to 
which  we  were  introduced  in  chapter  eleven.  First  of  all 
we  saw  the  initiation  of  the  movement.  Men  of  Cyprus 
and  Cyrene  preached  the  evangel  to  the  Greeks,  turning 
aside  from  the  ordinary  custom  of  preaching  only  to  the 
Jew.  There  was  also  the  story  of  its  confirmation,  when 
the  apostles  sent  Barnabas  to  visit  the  work;  and  he, 
preaching  the  grace  of  God,  was  glad,  and  charged  them 
to  remain  steadfast  to  the  Lord.  Then  followed  the 
story  of  its  consolidation,  as  Barnabas  sought  Saul  of 
Tarsus,  and  brought  him  to  Antioch,  that  he  might  share 
with  him  in  the  work  of  teaching  and  instructing  these 
people.  We  also  had  the  account  of  cooperation,  when 
the  new  Christian  Greek  believers  in  Antioch  recognized 
their  relationship  with  their  brethren  in  Jerusalem,  and 

[  303  1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  13 : 1-3] 

ministered  to  them  in  material  things.  The  movement 
in  Antioch  was  in  continuation  of  everything  that  had 
gone  before,  but  it  was  characterized  by  a  most  remark- 
able independence.  This  work  was  not  apostolic,  if  by 
apostolic  is  meant  a  work  under  the  authority  of  apostles, 
for  they  were  not  consulted.  Men  of  Cyprus  and  Cyrene, 
unnamed  men,  began  the  great  and  gracious  work.  It 
was  characterized  moreover,  by  unity,  for  it  was  again 
the  one  Lord,  and  the  one  faith,  and  the  one  baptism,  and 
the  one  God  glorified.  It  was  finally  characterized  by 
infinite  variety,  for  in  chapter  eleven  we  have  four  dif- 
ferent words  employed  to  express  the  method  of  preach- 
ing, and  four  offices  of  the  Christian  Church  are  all  rec- 
ognized as  at  work. 

The  last  verse  of  the  previous  chapter  reads  thus, 
"  And  Barnabas  and  Saul  returned  from  Jerusalem,  when 
they  had  fulfilled  their  ministration,  taking  with  them 
John  whose  surname  was  Mark."  Paul  and  Barnabas 
had  been  to  Jerusalem,  carrying  the  gifts  of  the  Antioch 
Church  for  the  relief  of  the  suffering  saints  in  Jerusalem. 
Thence  they  had  returned,  bringing  Mark  with  them. 
From  this  point  Antioch  was  the  new  base,  the  new 
centre  of  the  Divine  operations.  From  it,  the  messengers 
were  sent  forth;  to  it  they  returned.  In  considering  the 
missionary  journeyings  of  Paul,  we  shall  see  that  in  each 
case  he  started  from  Antioch,  and  reported  there.  In 
Antioch  the  conflict  with  Judaizing  teachers  presently 
became  acute.  It  was  in  Antioch  also  that  Peter  dis- 
sembled, and  Paul  rebuked  him.  It  was  in  Antioch  that 
the  proclamation  of  Gentile  freedom  was  made,  resulting 
from  the  findings  of  the  council  in  Jerusalem. 

To  this  assembly,  this  Church  in  Antioch,  the  Spirit 
made  known  His  will;  and  in  responsive  cooperation 
this  Church  set  free  Barnabas  and  Saul,  the  messengers 
who  were  to  begin  that  great  missionary  work  through- 
out all  the  district.  Of  that  important  event  this  brief 
paragraph  gives  a  suggestive  account. 

[  304  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  13 :  1-3] 

There  are  three  lines  of  consideration  which  demand 
our  attention;  First,  that  which  is  central  in  the  para- 
graph, the  declared  activity  of  the  Spirit  of  God :  "  The 
Holy  Spirit  said,  Separate  Me  Barnabas  and  Saul  for  the 
work  wheretmto  I  have  called  them."  Secondly,  the  pre- 
liminary conditions  that  made  possible  this  activity  of  the 
Spirit.  These  are  revealed  in  the  first  phrase,  "The 
Church  in  Antioch  " ;  and  the  following  description  of 
prophets  and  teachers  ministering  to  the  Lord,  and  fast- 
ing. Thirdly  and  finally,  the  resulting  cooperation  of 
the  Church  with  the  Spirit:  "  Then,  when  they  had  fasted 
and  prayed,  and  laid  their  hands  on  them,  they  sent  them 
away." 

First  then,  as  to  the  action  of  the  Spirit.  Observe 
carefully  the  definiteness  of  this  declaration  as  to  the 
activity  of  the  Spirit :  "  The  Holy  Spirit  said."  He  made 
known  His  will  to  these  people,  so  that  they  had  neither 
doubt  nor  uncertainty  in  their  minds.  Moreover  this  is 
not  the  picture  of  a  Church  choosing  men  to  be  sent  forth 
on  missionary  enterprise.  This  is  not  the  picture  of  a 
Church  discussing  the  fitness  of  men  for  the  doing  of  any 
particular  work.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  it  would  be 
perfectly  accurate  to  say  that  the  Church  had  no  voice 
in  the  selection  of  these  men.  The  choice  was  not  left 
to  the  Church.  The  choice  was  based  upon  a  prior  fact 
in  the  activity  of  the  Spirit :  "  Separate  Me  Barnabas  and 
Saul  for  the  work  whereunto  7  have  called  them."  It 
would  be  idle  to  speculate  as  to  when  these  men  had  been 
called;  but  in  the  second  letter  to  the  Corinthians,  the 
twelfth  chapter,  in  the  first  brief  paragraph  of  four  verses 
we  have  an  account  from  the  pen  of  Paul  of  an  experi- 
ence which  he  had,  and  one  which  most  certainly  affected 
all  his  life.  He  wrote :  "  I  knew  a  man  in  Christ,  four- 
teen years  ago  (whether  in  the  body  I  know  not;  God 
knoweth)  such  an  one  caught  up  even  to  the  third  heaven 
.  .  .  and  heard  unspeakable  words,  which  it  is  not 
lawful  for  a  man  to  utter."  From  the  date  of  that  Corin- 

[  305  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  13: 1-3] 

thian  letter,  which  can  be  placed  with  comparative  ac- 
curacy, we  know  that  this  wonderful  vision  of  which  he 
never  could  speak  with  anything  like  detail,  occurred  in 
Tarsus,  before  Barnabas  sought  him.  It  may  be  that  it 
was  in  that  hour,  when  he  was  caught  into  the  third 
heaven,  and  heard  the  things  he  could  not  utter,  that  the 
Holy  Spirit  called  him  to  all  the  suffering,  the  travail, 
and  the  triumph  of  these  wonderful  missionary  journey- 
ings.  In  the  case  of  Barnabas  we  have  no  hint  as  to  the 
time  or  manner  in  which  he  was  called.  Looking  back 
over  the  ground  traversed,  there  may  be  a  clue,  in  the 
friendship  of  these  two  men.  Saul  apprehended  on  the 
way  to  Damascus,  hurrying  away  into  Arabia,  and  spend- 
ing long  time  in  solitude  and  preparation,  appeared  at 
last  at  Jerusalem.  Barnabas  was  the  man  who  welcomed 
him,  shielding  him  from  the  opposition  of  those  likely  to 
misunderstand  him.  He  took  care  of  him,  set  him  on 
his  way  back  to  Tarsus,  and  left  him  there.  Directly 
Barnabas  arrived  at  Antioch,  and  saw  the  necessities  of 
the  case,  without  consulting  the  college  of  the  apostles, 
he  went  to  Tarsus  and  sought  for  Saul.  Evidently  there 
was  an  affinity  of  mind  and  thought  and  purpose  between 
these  two  men;  and  the  Spirit  now  said,  I  have  called 
them,  separate  them  unto  Me. 

The  method  of  the  Spirit  with  the  Church,  the  as- 
sembly in  Antioch,  is  revealed  in  the  command,  "  Sepa- 
rate Me."  Thereby  He  called  the  Church  into  definite 
activity  with  Himself.  It  has  often  been  affirmed  that 
this  message  of  the  Spirit  was  one  delivered  only  to  the 
little  group  of  men  whose  names  occur  here  in  the  pas- 
sage, the  names  of  men  who  were  either  prophets  or 
teachers.  I  do  not  so  understand  the  statement.  The 
word  of  the  Spirit  was  a  word  through  the  prophet  most 
likely,  to  the  whole  Christian  assembly  in  Antioch;  but 
the  Spirit  called  the  Church  to  separate  these  men.  He 
called  the  men  to  the  work,  but  before  they  went  forth, 
He  called  the  Church  into  definite  cooperation  with  Him- 

[306] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  13:1-3] 

self  in  separating  them.  "  Separate  Me  Barnabas  and 
Saul/'  that  is,-  give  them  freedom  and  give  them  authority. 
Send  them  forth  in  the  freedom  of  My  own  call  to  them. 
Send  them  forth  under  the  authority  of  that  call,  recog- 
nized by  the  will  of  the  assembly  in  Antioch.  The 
activity  of  the  Church  was  to  be  that  of  submission  to 
the  Holy  Spirit,  not  an  independent  activity.  Their 
freedom  and  their  authority  as  they  went  were  to  be 
gained  through  their  absolute  surrender  to,  and  obedience 
to  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  There  is  one  body,  and  one  Spirit." 
The  Spirit  is  the  life  of  the  body;  the  body  is  the  in- 
strument of  the  Spirit.  The  Spirit  is  the  Holy  Spirit  of 
God ;  the  body  is  the  assembly  of  the  saints.  The  Spirit 
works  through  the  assembly;  but  the  assembly  has  no 
power  to  move  save  under  the  inspiration  and  impulse  of 
the  Spirit.  There  is  one  body,  and  the  body  must 
cooperate  with  the  Spirit  in  separating  its  members  for 
particular  service.  "  There  is  one  Spirit/'  and  that 
Spirit  must  direct,  control,  suggest,  choose,  elect,  equip, 
all  who  are  to  do  its  work. 

As  we  look  back  to  this  activity  of  the  Spirit,  we  have 
a  great  revelation  of  the  purpose  of  God  in  His  Church. 
It  is  the  picture  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  able  to  make  known 
His  will  perfectly  to  an  assembly.  It  is  the  picture  of 
an  assembly,  able  to  discover  His  will  without  doubt, 
without  uncertainty.  It  is  the  picture  of  the  Spirit  and 
the  assembly,  working  in  perfect  harmony,  and  the  results 
are  seen  in  all  the  missionary  triumphs  which  followed. 

That  immediately  leads  us  to  enquire,  What  were  the 
conditions  under  which  it  was  possible  for  the  Spirit  of 
God  thus  to  make  His  great  and  gracious  and  perfect 
will  known  ?  In  the  first  verse  three  matters  are  revealed. 
The  first  thing  is  the  Church.  "  There  were  at  Antioch, 
in  the  Church."  The  second  thing  is  that  of  the  gifts 
resident  in  the  Church,  "  Prophets  and  teachers."  The 
third  is  that  of  the  activity  of  the  Church :  "  They  minis- 
tered to  the  Lord,  and  fasted." 

[  307  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  13 : 1-3] 

The  very  phrases  carry  their  own  exposition.  What 
is  the  Church?  The  ecclesia,  the  called  out  company. 
Not  to  Antioch  could  the  Spirit  speak,  but  to  the  Church 
in  Antioch;  not  to  the  promiscuous  crowd  thronging  the 
streets  of  the  fair  and  wonderful  city,  not  to  the  mer- 
chants in  the  market-place,  not  to  the  legislators  in  their 
ecclesia — the  Greek  town  council — could  the  Spirit  speak, 
but  to  the  Christian  Church. 

How  was  the  Christian  Church  in  Antioch  constituted  ? 
Certain  men  of  Cyprus  and  Cyrene  had  preached  in 
Antioch  to  these  Greek  men  the  Gospel  of  the  Lord 
Christ;  and  these  men  hearing  the  Gospel  of  the  Lord 
Christ  had  believed,  and  had  been  baptized  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  That  company  of  men  and  women,  in  living 
union  with  the  living  Christ  by  the  baptism  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  constituted  the  Church.  There  had  been  no  con- 
secration of  a  building.  There  had  been  no  apostolic 
visitation.  The  Church  was  not  the  result  of  official 
action;  but  of  the  proclamation  of  the  Lord,  and  belief 
in  Him,  and  baptism  into  His  life,  by  the  overruling  of 
God.  The  catholic  Church  is  not  Anglican,  nor  Roman, 
nor  Greek,  nor  Free;  but  that  whole  company  of  men 
and  women  baptized  by  the  Holy  Spirit  into  living  asso- 
ciation with  the  living  Lord.  Wherever  there  is  such  a 
company  of  people,  there  also  is  the  Church.  There  was 
the  Church  in  Antioch.  Presently  they  cooperated  with 
the  Church  in  Jerusalem;  but  Antioch  was  independent 
of  Jerusalem;  and  the  Holy  Spirit  could  speak  to  the 
Church  in  Antioch. 

In  that  Church  in  Antioch  were  gifts  directly  bestowed 
by  the  Spirit;  "prophets  and  teachers."  Prophets  are 
men  of  insight  and  foresight,  who  seeing  into  the  heart  of 
truth,  and  far  on  into  the  economy  of  God,  as  the  result 
of  personal  fellowship  with  Him,  speak  forth  the  words 
of  God.  "  Teachers  "  are  men  of  understanding,  who 
having  that  understanding,  are  able  to  impart  their  knowl- 
edge to  others.  The  Lord,  when  He  ascended  on  high, 

[308] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  13 : 1-3] 

received  gifts;  "He  gave  some  apostles/' — they  are  not 
mentioned  here ;  "  Prophets,"  such  were  here  in  Antioch  ; 
"  Evangelists/' — they  are  not  mentioned  here ;  "  Pastors 
and  teachers," — such  were  here.  Whence  came  the 
gifts?  From  the  Lord  Himself.  How?  By  the  be- 
stowment  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Some  of  the  men  are  named.  Barnabas^  whom  we 
know  well,  was  a  man  of  Cyprus.  Symeon  was  called 
Niger.  Not  much  can  be  based  upon  that  designation. 
It  may  mean  that  he  was  a  Jew,  and  that  the  surname  was 
given  to  him  on  account  of  the  swarthiness  of  his  com- 
plexion. It  may  be,  as  some  believe,  that  he  was  an 
Ethiopian,  a  proselyte,  who  had  taken  a  Jewish  name. 
Lucius  was  of  Cyrene.  This  was  a  man  with  a  Latin 
name.  Manaen  was  the  foster-brother  of  the  Herod 
who  had  murdered  John.  He  was  in  this  company,  gifted 
either  as  a  prophet  or  a  teacher.  And  finally  Saul. 
What  a  fine  and  glorious  blend  there  was  in  this  com- 
pany! Thus  the  Spirit  bestows  gifts  upon  men.  In 
Judaism,  the  son  of  the  high  priest  succeeded  to  the 
priesthood.  That  is  so  no  longer.  There  is  no  succes- 
sion, because  the  living  Lord  is  always  present.  Suc- 
cession means  distance,  but  the  Lord  is  ever  in  the  midst 
of  His  Church. 

The  activity  of  the  Church  is  declared  in  the  words, 
"  They  ministered  to  the  Lord,  and  fasted/'  The  word 
translated  "ministered,"  is  a  most  suggestive  one,  being 
that  from  which  we  derive  our  word  "  liturgy."  The 
Greek  word  was  first  employed  of  civil  service  in  Athe- 
nian law.  It  came  to  be  used  in  religion  and  of  priestly 
service.  It  specially  described  eucharistic  service,  that  is, 
the  service  of  praise.  Gradually  it  became  the  word  that 
indicated  set  forms  of  worship.  The  real  thought  in  it, 
is  that  of  the  exercise  of  the  proper  functions  of  organs 
in  the  power  of  life,  the  exercise  of  the  organs  under  the 
dominion  of  the  spirit  of  man,  intellectual,  emotional, 
volitional.  These  men  in  Antioch,  not  the  prophets  and 

[  309  1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  13 : 1-3] 

teachers  only,  but  the  whole  Church,  were  engaged  in  this 
sacred  ministry  to  the  Lord.  In  the  epistle  to  the  He- 
brews (i :  14)  it  is  said  of  the  angels,  "  Are  they  not  all 
ministering  spirits;  sent  forth  to  do  service  for  the  sake 
of  them  that  shall  inherit  salvation?"  The  ministering 
is  related  to  the  service.  The  angels  are  ministering 
spirits,  that  is,  those  who  worship  and  offer  to  God ;  but 
they  are  sent  forth  from  that  worship  to  do  service. 
Isaiah  saw  the  vision  of  God  high  and  lifted  up.  He 
heard  the  chanting  of  the  seraphim.  They  were  pro- 
claiming the  holiness  of  God.  They  were  fulfilling  the 
function  of  their  angelic  life  in  praising.  Then  the  song 
of  one  of  these  angelic  beings  was  silenced ;  he  was  sent 
forth  to  do  service  to  the  man  who  needed  cleansing. 
Ministering  to  the  Lord  is  the  function  of  a  worshipping 
people.  They  recognize  that  work  is  not  everything,  but 
that  worship  is  a  prime  and  fundamental  necessity.  The 
Church  in  Antioch  had  not  lost  the  art  of  worship.  The 
outcome  of  worship  is  always  readiness  to  obey  the  Spirit 
when  He  sends  us  forth  to  work.  The  Church  is  an  in- 
stitution for  worship,  its  members  minister  to  the  Lord, 
and  then  they  are  sent  forth  to  be  of  service.  Worship 
and  work  are  always  intimately  associated.  If  we  try 
and  work  without  worship,  we  shall  disastrously  fail. 
If  we  worship  and  never  work,  we  shall  become  ritualists. 
The  attitude  to  which  the  Spirit  can  reveal  Himself  is 
that  of  worship. 

"  They  ministered  to  the  Lord,  and  fasted."  The 
word  "  fasted "  indicates  a  special  season  of  spiritual 
exercise,  in  which  the  Church,  His  body,  is  separated 
from  all  activity  save  that  of  ministering  to  the  Lord. 
To  a  Church  in  that  attitude  the  Spirit  can  speak,  and  the 
Church  will  not  mistake  His  voice. 

The  last  matter  revealed  here  is  that  of  the  resulting 
cooperation.  Luke  writes,  "Then,"  that  is  after  the 
Spirit  had  spoken,  and  therefore  in  answer  to  His  word. 
How  did  the  Spirit  speak  ?  We  ask  these  questions  still, 

[  310  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  13 : 1-3] 

and  fain  would  discover  the  answer.  One  cannot  say 
definitely  how  the  Spirit  spoke  to  the  Church  at  Antioch. 
At  the  same  time  we  may  surmise,  illustrating  the  story 
by  His  methods  on  other  occasions.  I  do  not  for  a 
moment  imagine  that  the  assembly  heard  a  voice.  That 
is  the  mistake  we  too  often  make.  We  try  to  force  our- 
selves into  ecstasies  in  order  to  hear  the  voice,  and  then 
we  imagine  we  hear  it !  That  is  not  the  suggestion  here. 
He  made  known  His  will  to  the  assembly,  probably 
through  one  spokesman,  whose  word  produced  agreement. 
We  see  now  the  reason  of  the  naming  of  the  prophets 
and  teachers  here;  Barnabas,  Symeon,  Lucius,  Manaen, 
Saul.  But  we  are  not  told  through  which  of  them  the 
Spirit  spoke.  The  method  of  the  Spirit  is  ever  that  of 
obscuring  the  instrument.  In  these  days  of  worship  and 
of  fasting,  one  of  their  number  probably  rose  and  spoke, 
and  immediately  in  the  whole  assembly  there  was  una- 
nimity, absolute  conviction  that  this  was  the  mind  of  the 
Spirit.  If  we  will  place  ourselves  at  the  disposal  of  the 
Spirit  He  will  lead  and  guide  us  to-day  in  the  same  way 
as  He  has  ever  done,  guiding  definitely,  immediately, 
positively  making  known  His  will.  "  The  Spirit  said." 
Oh  the  dignity,  the  grandeur  of  this  statement !  Are  we 
listening  for  His  voice,  as  these  men  listened? 

When  the  Spirit  had  spoken,  the  work  was  done 
decently  and  in  order.  They  fasted  and  prayed,  this  time 
for  the  men  who  were  to  be  separated ;  and  they  laid  their 
hands  on  them.  Who  laid  hands  on  them  ?  Not  apostles, 
for  there  was  not  an  apostle  amongst  them.  Consequently 
the  laying  on  of  these  hands  was  the  laying  on  of  the 
hands  of  prophets  and  teachers,  possibly  of  members  of 
the  Church  who  were  neither.  In  this  great  Church 
every  believer  stands  on  an  equality  with  every  other 
believer. 

Then  they  let  them  go.  "  They  sent  them  away  "  is  a 
faulty  translation.  In  the  next  verse  we  read :  "  So  they, 
being  sent  forth  by  the  Holy  Spirit."  That  is  not  the 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  13:4-12] 

same  word  as  in  this  statement.  What  did  they  really 
do?  They  released  them.  What  did  the  Spirit  do? 
He  sent  them.  The  Church  could  not  send  these  men 
forth.  The  Church  could  release  them,  set  them  free, 
by  caring  for  all  other  obligations,  by  taking  responsi- 
bility for  all  that  they  would  need. 

The  Spirit  still  directs  the  Church  upon  fulfilment  of 
conditions.  His  choices  are  those  of  infinite  wisdom. 
Some  must  stay  in  Antioch,  and  some  must  go.  The 
Church  can  be  directed  by  the  Spirit  on  fulfilment  of 
conditions;  and  when  directed,  her  obedience  must  be 
immediate  and  complete. 

The  final  word  is  for  the  individual.  No  man  can  go 
unless  the  Spirit  call  him.  This  is  the  high  doctrine  of 
the  ministry.  Men  cannot  make  a  minister ;  not  even  the 
Church,  nor  her  theological  halls.  He  must  be  called  of 
the  Spirit.  Unless  he  hear  that  call  sounding  in  his  soul, 
ringing  like  a  trumpet  night  and  day,  giving  him  no  rest 
until  he  is  compelled  to  say,  Woe  is  me  if  I  preach  not; 
then  in  God's  name  let  him  stay  where  he  is,  in  his 
present  calling.  But  if  he  hear  the  call,  then  let  him  re- 
member that  it  is  his  business  to  go  forward  within  the 
fellowship  and  under  the  guidance  of  the  Church. 

Acts  13:4-12 

The  method  of  Luke  from  this  point,  perhaps  even 
more  markedly  than  before,  is  that  of  selection.  Only 
occasional  incidents  are  recorded.  In  this  paragraph 
few  details  are  given.  These  men  were  sent  down  to 
Seleucia,  a  port  of  Antioch.  They  then  sailed  to  Cyprus. 
At  Salamis  they  proclaimed  the  Word  of  God  in  the 
synagogues  of  the  Jews,  and  then  they  passed  through 
the  whole  island  to  Paphos.  There  is  no  doubt  that  they 
fulfilled  their  ministry  in  every,  place  at  which  they 
touched;  but  there  are  no  details,  no  account  of  what 
they  did,  or  of  the  victories  that  were  won.  Luke  has 
selected  certain  important  incidents,  in  order  to  illustrate 

[  312  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  13:4-12] 

the  method  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  carrying  on  of  His 
work.  In  order  to  gain  the  values,  we  need  to  give 
special  attention  in  each  case  to  the  principal  event,  glanc- 
ing only  at  the  incidental  matters. 

The  first  incidental  matter  in  this  paragraph  is  that  of 
Elymas  the  sorcerer.  We  know  nothing  either  of  his 
earlier  career  or  of  what  happened  to  him  afterwards. 
The  blindness  that  came  upon  him  was  for  a  season. 
Possibly  he  came  from  that  blindness,  as  Paul  himself 
had  done,  to  fuller  and  more  glorious  light. 

Sergius  Paulus  is  also  incidental.  We  have  no  knowl- 
edge of  his  earlier  career,  nor  of  his  subsequent  history. 

The  change  of  name  from  Saul  to  Paul  occurs  in  this 
paragraph.  From  this  point  to  the  end  of  the  book  Luke 
speaks  of  him  by  the  Gentile  name,  Paul,  instead  of  the 
Jewish  name,  Saul.  At  the  point  when  he  started  forth, 
set  free  by  the  Church  at  Antioch,  sent  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  the  fulfilment  of  that  great  ministry  for  which 
he  had  been  apprehended,  and  for  which  he  had  been 
fitted  by  long  training — his  ministry  to  the  Gentiles,  Luke 
recorded  that  his  name  was  also  Paul,  and  from  thence 
he  proceeded  to  speak  of  him  by  the  Gentile  name  only. 

Another  incidental  matter  at  this  point  is  that  Paul  now 
comes  into  prominence.  His  action  when  they  came  to 
the  court  of  Sergius  Paulus  was  that  of  a  man  taking 
the  lead  in  the  great  new  movement ;  and  we  read,  "  Now 
Paul  and  his  company  set  sail  from  Paphos."  Until  that 
moment  it  had  been  "  Barnabas  and  Saul,"  but  from  now 
on,  and  until  the  end  of  the  story,  Paul  is  most  evidently 
the  leader  of  his  company ;  and  when  the  two  names  are 
put  together,  it  is  no  longer  Barnabas  and  Saul,  but  Paul 
and  Barnabas. 

There  is  still  another  incidental  matter;  that  of  the 
journeying.  They  touched  at  Seleucia,  the  port  from 
which  it  was  possible  for  them  to  sail  to  Cyprus.  Arriv- 
ing at  Salamis  they  preached  the  Gospel  to  the  Jews  in 
the  synagogues,  and  then  journeyed  through  the  whole 

[  313  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  13:4-12] 

island.  We  know  nothing  of  those  journeyings;  of  the 
trials  and  triumphs,  of  the  sadnesses  and  gladnesses  that 
came  to  them.  "  When  they  had  gone  through  the  whole 
island  unto  Paphos/'  something  happened  which  Luke  has 
carefully  chronicled. 

Let  us  then  fasten  our  attention  upon  this  central  mat- 
ter of  the  paragraph.  Two  phrases  give  us  the  key. 
The  first  is  found  in  the  fourth  verse,  "  Sent  forth  by 
the  Holy  Spirit";  and  the  second  in  the  ninth  verse, 
"  Filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit."  The  first  links  the  story 
with  all  that  has  preceded  it.  They  were  sent  forth  by 
the  Spirit,  and  released  by  the  Church  at  Antioch.  The 
context  of  this  second  phrase,  "  Paul,  filled  with  the 
Spirit,"  reveals  an  activity  of  the  Spirit  which  had  not 
been  manifested  before.  Note  the  startling  sternness  of 
the  words  he  employed  to  Elymas  the  sorcerer:  "  O  full 
of  all  guile  and  all  villany,  thou  son  of  the  devil,  thou 
enemy  of  all  righteousness,  wilt  thou  not  cease  to  pervert 
the  right  ways  of  the  Lord  ?  "  These  are  the  words  that 
follow  the  declaration  that  Paul  was  filled  with  the  Spirit. 
These  are  the  words  which  were  the  outcome  of  that 
special  filling.  This  is  something  entirely  new.  In  the 
case  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  that  swift  and  sudden  and 
awful  discipline,  the  Spirit  was  seen  to  be  a  Spirit  of  fiery 
discipline  in  the  Church.  It  was  the  first  manifestation 
of  the  fact  that  ought  to  be  the  abiding  fact,  but  which, 
alas,  is  not  an  abiding  fact,  that  the  atmosphere  of  the 
Church  of  God  should  be  one  in  which  a  lie  cannot  live. 
Here,  however,  we  have  an  activity  of  the  Spirit  which 
was  that  of  a  fiery  attack  upon  something  outside  the 
Church.  Let  us  consider  the  story  in  its  deepest  value, 
as  revealing  the  activity  of  the  Holy  Spirit;  observing 
first  the  reason  of  this  strange  and  fiery  activity;  noticing 
secondly  its  method ;  and  finally,  its  issue. 

What  was  the  reason  of  this  attack  upon  Elymas? 
The  very  words  of  Paul  rather  startle  the  age  in  which 
we  are  living.  We  are  not  accustomed  to  such  language ; 

[314] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  13:4-12] 

we  never  think  now  of  addressing  to  any  man  outside  or 
inside  the  Church,  such  words  as  these,  "  O  full  of  all 
guile  and  all  villany."  Remember  Paul  did  not  say  this 
about  him,  but  to  him.  He  looked  into  his  face,  he  fast- 
ened his  eyes  upon  him.  This  is  quite  definite.  This 
man  Paul,  contemptible  of  bodily  presence  according  to 
his  own  estimate,  looked  into  the  eyes  of  another  man,  a 
Jew,  keen,  subtle,  clever,  occult ;  and  looking  straight  into 
his  face,  said :  "  O  full  of  all  guile  and  all  villany,  thou 
son  of  the  devil,  thou  enemy  of  all  righteousness,  wilt 
thou  not  cease  to  pervert  the  right  ways  of  the  Lord?  " 
Let  us  carefully  bear  in  mind  that  this  follows  imme- 
diately upon  the  declaration  that  he  was  filled  with  the 
Spirit.  There  is  no  doubt  that  he  was  specially  filled  with 
the  Spirit  for  the  saying  of  this  very  thing.  Why  this 
anger?  Why  the  fierceness  of  these  words?  The 
answer  is  that  another  man  was  involved,  Sergius  Paulus. 
Let  us  then  look  at  this  man.  His  name  would  lead  us 
to  believe  that  he  was  a  Roman.  He  was  certainly  a 
representative  of  Roman  government,  and  for  some 
reason  not  declared,  he  was  a  man  enquiring  after  truth. 
Perhaps  he  was  weary  at  heart  of  all  the  materialism  in 
the  midst  of  which  as  a  Roman  soldier  he  lived.  His 
enquiry  for  truth  will  probably  account  for  the  presence 
of  Elymas  at  his  court.  There  were  at  that  time  very 
many  sorcerers  travelling  through  these  cities,  and  find- 
ing their  way  into  places  of  power  on  profession  of  their 
wisdom  in  things  occult,  and  their  ability  to  work  won- 
ders and  signs.  Sergius  Paulus  was  seeking  for  some- 
thing above  the  dust,  something  a  little  higher  than  the 
material  world,  asking  if  there  were  any  reality  in  the 
things  which  men  described  as  supernatural.  Then  there 
came  to  him  the  story  of  the  arrival  and  journeying 
through  the  island  of  two  men  who  claimed  to  preach 
the  Word  of  God.  He  desired  to  hear  the  Word  of  God, 
and  therefore  sent  for  Barnabas  and  Saul.  Luke  tells 
us  that  he  was  a  man  of  understanding,  that  is  quite 

[315 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  13:4-12] 

simply,  a  man  of  thought.  There  is  nothing  in  this  world 
the  devil  dreads  like  a  man  who  dares  to  think.  Such  a 
man  will  inevitably  touch  the  realm  of  the  spiritual  and 
the  supernatural.  He  may  not  come  to  certainty  on  these 
matters,  but  he  will  face  their  possibility.  Here  was  a 
man  of  thought,  therefore  Bar- Jesus  was  there,  and  there- 
fore also,  he  sent  for  Barnabas  and  Saul.  He  is  seen 
between  these  two  forces. 

Look  for  a  moment  at  Elymas.  He  was  a  sorcerer. 
The  word  may  have  a  rougher  suggestion  than  is  war- 
ranted. Like  Simon  Magus,  Bar-Jesus  was  one  of  the 
magi,  one  of  the  wise  men  of  the  time.  Things  true  and 
false  were  strangely  mixed  among  these  men.  The  ac- 
curate science  of  to-day  was  born  in  the  midst  of  them. 
Chemistry  is  the  outcome  of  their  alchemy,  as  astronomy 
is  the  outcome  of  their  astrology.  It  is  not  easy  to  dis- 
cover how  far  these  men  were  deceived,  and  how  far 
they  were  right.  Elymas  was  a  man  dwelling  on  the 
borderline  of  the  occult,  able  to  touch  it,  professing  to  be 
able  to  work  wonders  by  it. 

But  he  was  also  a  false  prophet;  and  immediately  fol- 
lowing that  statement  we  are  told  that  he  was  a  Jew. 
Here  then  was  a  man  who  had  been  brought  up  with  a 
knowledge  of  Hebrew  literature,  and  the  things  of  He- 
brew religion;  a  man  who  by  birth  and  training  had 
been  brought  into  closest  understanding  of  the  highest 
things  in  religion.  But  he  was  a  false  prophet,  he  was 
uttering  things  that  were  not  true.  Go  back  to  the  Old 
Testament,  and  discover  its  teaching  about  false  prophets, 
as  to  the  nature  of  the  sin  committed,  as  to  the  judgment 
that  fell  upon  them.  There  might  have  been  excuse  for 
Bar- Jesus  if  he  were  merely  one  of  the  magi,  for  there 
was  much  of  light  in  their  teaching,  as  well  as  error. 
But  that  a  Jew  should  become  a  false  prophet,  by  pro- 
fessing to  be  able  to  do  the  things  he  was  doing,  was  sin. 
When  Paul  looked  at  him  and  spoke  so  sternly  to  him, 
on  the  human  side  the  very  vehemence  of  what  he  said 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  13 : 4-12] 

was  born  of  the  fact,  not  that  he  was  a  sorcerer,  but  that 
he  was  a  Jew  trafficking  with  unholy  things,  in  order  to 
win  position  in  the  house  of  Sergius  Paulus. 

This  man  withstood  Barnabas  and  Saul,  and  the  word 
"  withstood  "  suggests  a  systematic  endeavour,  as  Luke 
records,  to  turn  aside  Sergius  Paulus  from  the  faith.  We 
are  immediately  brought  face  to  face  with  the  reason  for 
this  activity  of  the  Spirit.  Filled  with  the  Spirit,  Paul 
uttered  those  strange,  startling,  burning,  scorching  words, 
because  Sergius  Paulus  was  in  danger.  The  severest 
words  of  the  Bible,  Old  and  New  Testaments,  are  re- 
served for  those  who  stand  between  men  and  truth,  for 
those  who  stand  between  men  and  God.  Perhaps  the 
supreme  chapter  in  the  whole  of  the  Old  Testament  is 
that  wonderful  chapter  in  the  prophecy  of  Ezeki'el,  the 
prophet  of  the  exile,  the  prophet  of  light  and  hope  by  the 
river  Chebar,  seeing  visions  of  God,  diagnosing  the  actual 
disease  of  the  scattered  people  to  a  remnant  to  whom  he 
was  a  minister.  He  described  the  false  prophets  as  under 
the  severest  judgment  of  God.  At  the  close  of  our 
Lord's  public  ministry  He  pronounced  eight  great  woes; 
not  one  upon  sinning  men,  but  all  upon  those  who  were 
false  teachers  and  guides,  false  interpreters  of  the  will 
of  God.  Christ  never  said  anything  hard  or  severe  to  a 
sinning  man  or  woman.  His  severity  was  reserved  for 
men  who  failed  to  guide,  when  they  professed  to  do  so. 
The  noble  sarcasm  of  John  Milton  expressed  the  whole 
wrong,  when  he  described  false  shepherds  as  "  blind 
mouths."  Rusldn's  exposition  of  that  phrase  was,  that 
shepherds  should  watch,  and  they  are  blind;  shepherds 
should  feed,  and  they  only  desire  to  be  fed — "  blind 
mouths."  That  which  called  forth  the  fiery  protest  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  through  Paul  was  that  this  man,  a  Jew,  a 
prophet,  was  standing  in  the  way,  or  attempting  to  do  so, 
of  the  soul  of  a  man  finding  truth,  and  finding  life. 
That  was  the  reason  of  the  fiercely  burning  fire. 

Notice  in  the  next  place  the  method.    The  immediate 

[  317  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  13:4-12] 

equipment  of  Paul  for  this  particular  work  was  'that  he 
was  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  That  opens  the  whole 
question  of  New  Testament  terminology  concerning  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  a  most  prolific  and  interesting 
subject,  the  neglect  of  which  has  caused  infinite  con- 
fusion. These  phrases  of  the  New  Testament  are  never 
used  interchangeably;  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit,  the 
anointing  of  the  Spirit,  the  sealing  of  the  Spirit,  the  filling 
of  the  Spirit.  We  perpetually  mix  them,  and  speak  of 
baptism  as  a  second  filling,  which  the  New  Testament 
never  does.  There  are  in  the  New  Testament  two 
phrases,  very  much  alike,  and  yet  separate  in  intention. 
The  first  is  "  full  of  the  Spirit,"  and  this  indicates  that 
fullness  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  true  life  of  the  believer. 
The  normal  life  of  the  believer  should  be  that  of  being 
full  of  the  Spirit.  Paul  undoubtedly  was  at  this  moment, 
baptized  by  the  Spirit  into  living  union  with  the  Lord, 
anointed  by  the  Spirit  for  the  service  which  His  will  ap- 
pointed, sealed  by  the  Spirit  as  the  property  of  the  Lord 
unto  the  day  of  redemption,  having  the  fullness  of  the 
Spirit  for  the  living  of  all  his  life.  Then  there  came  a 
moment  when  there  was  a  special  work  to  be  done,  and 
he  was  filled,  suddenly  filled  by  the  Spirit,  in  the  sense 
of  being  specially  equipped  for  a  special  work;  specially 
prepared  for  a  special  emergency. 

What  was  the  result  of  this  filling?  Clear  discernment; 
he  knew  this  man  through  and  through,  not  by  his  own 
cleverness,  not  by  mere  intuition,  but  by  that  immediate 
filling  of  the  Spirit  which  became  illumination,  enabling 
him  to  see  to  the  very  heart  of  the  man  who  stood  con- 
fronting him.  He  described  him  in  character,  "  Full  of 
all  guile  and  all  villany,  son  of  the  devil,  enemy  of  right- 
eousness." Then  he  described  his  sin,  "Wilt  thou  not 
cease  to  pervert  the  right  ways  of  the  Lord  ?  "  So  this 
sudden  enduement  of  power  meant  discernment  and 
speech,  speech  that  was  definite,  attacking,  vehement. 
We  speak  of  the  wooing  winsomeness  of  the  Spirit,  and 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  13:4-12] 

thank  God,  we  cannot  say  too  much  thereof.  "  The  fruit 
of  the  Spirit  is  love."  The  final  and  perfected  issue  of 
the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  heart  of  man  is  love.  But 
the  Spirit  of  love  is  a  Spirit  of  fire,  and  that  for  very 
love.  Why  the  fierceness  of  this  description?  Why  the 
blunt  speech  that  fell  like  scorching  fire  upon  the  heart  of 
the  man  who  listened?  For  love  of  Sergius  Paulus; 
because  this  man  by  his  teaching,  his  greed,  and  by  his 
endeavour  to  retain  position  at  the  court,  would  "  per- 
vert the  right  ways  of  the  Lord,"  withstand  the  Word  of 
God,  attempt  to  prevent  this  man  entering  into  the  full- 
ness of  life.  For  the  sake  of  Sergius  Paulus  this  Spirit  of 
God  immediately  equipped  Paul,  so  that  he  saw  and  knew 
and  spoke,  and  became  the  instrument  of  judgment. 

Yet  there  is  a  touch  of  wonderful  tenderness  discover- 
able at  the  heart  of  the  fierce  fire.  Paul  said  to  him, 
"  The  hand  of  the  Lord  is  upon  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be 
blind,  not  seeing  the  sun  for  a  season."  The  blindness 
was  the  material  symbol  of  the  man's  spiritual  condition ; 
and  Paul,  speaking  not  of  his  own  will,  or  of  his  own 
choice,  not  pronouncing  upon  him  a  doom  which  he 
thought  he  deserved,  but  becoming  the  very  voice  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  speaking  out  of  that  sudden  equipment, 
pronounced  upon  him  that  judgment  of  blindness  "  for  a 
season."  How  long  it  lasted  no  one  knows.  What  was 
the  issue  in  the  case  of  Elymas,  no  one  can  tell.  We 
must  leave  it  at  the  point  where  it  is  left  in  the  narrative. 

What  then  was  the  issue  of  this  activity  of  the  Spirit? 
First,  the  vindication  of  truth.  Paulus  desired  to  hear 
the  Word  of  God.  For  that  reason  he  sent  for  Barnabas 
and  Saul.  The  last  thing  recorded  is  that  he  was  "  as- 
tonished at  the  teaching  of  the  Lord."  Thus  this  method 
of  the  Spirit  vindicated  the  truth  which  Paul  and  Barna- 
bas were  declaring.  But  that  is  not  the  final  word  as  to 
issue.  It  is  this — he  believed.  The  fiery  method  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  as  here  revealed  is  vindicated  in  the  fact  that 
Sergius  Paulus  was  brought  into  the  light,  and  received 

[  319  ]. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  13:4-12] 

all  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Spirit  in  Whose  power  these 
men  had  come  with  the  message  of  that  great  evangel. 

In  conclusion,  to  look  at  this  story  in  its  entirety ;  two 
things  arrest  attention;  the  new  opposition,  and  the  new 
manifestation  of  the  Spirit's  repelling  power. 

This  was  a  new  opposition.  The  opposition  in  the 
earlier  part  of  the  Acts  against  Christianity  was  not  the 
opposition  of  Elymas  the  sorcerer.  That  earlier  opposi- 
tion was  that  of  the  rationalism  that  denied  resurrection, 
spirit,  and  angel.  From  here  to  the  end  of  the  story  the 
opposition  was  of  a  different  kind.  Not  that  the  old  Sad- 
ducean  opposition  ceased,  but  that  another  antagonism  to 
the  Christian  Church  was  manifested.  The  inspiration 
of  this  opposition  was  love  of  gain;  its  weapons  were 
those  of  a  false  supernaturalism.  This  has  run  through 
all  the  centuries,  and  is  abroad  in  the  world  to-day. 
Trafficking  with  the  occult  in  the  name  of  religion  will 
always  attract  the  attention  of  men :  and  it  is  one  of  the 
grave  perils  which  at  this  hour  is  threatening  Christian 
evangelism.  The  aim  of  it  is  to  turn  men  aside  from 
the  faith.  Perchance  it  is  not  consciously  the  aim  of 
some  who  practise  that  which  is  false  in  supernaturalism ; 
but  it  is  the  aim  of  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air, 
who  worketh  through  the  children  of  disobedience,  to 
prevent  the  spread  of  the  Gospel.  Those  who  work  in 
heathen  lands  discover  the  awful  power  of  this  opposition, 
and  it  is  active  in  our  own  land  also.  There  are  hun- 
dreds who  are  being  moved  from  the  faith  delivered  to 
the  saints,  or  prevented  from  obedience  to  it,  by  the 
charm  and  the  glamour  of  a  supernaturalism  which  is 
not  according  to  the  revelation  of  the  Word  of  God. 

The  repelling  force  is  the  force  of  the  Spirit.  Elymas 
the  sorcerer  was  a  lover  of  gain ;  but  in  this  fiery  action 
of  the  Spirit  there  was  a  love  of  man.  In  the  case  of 
Elymas,  there  was  a  false  supernaturalism;  but  in  the 
case  of  the  Spirit,  there  was  the  true  supernaturalism. 
Paul  was  filled  by  the  Spirit,  and  then  conducted  a 

[  320  ] 


*  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts    13:13-41] 

definite  and  daring  warfare  against  the  thing  that  was 
false.  The  aim  of  Elymas  the  sorcerer  was  to  turn  aside 
from  the  faith;  the  aim  of  the  Spirit  in  His  repelling 
activity  was  to  establish  this  man  in  the  faith. 

The  opposition  of  the  supernatural  and  occult  is  one 
of  the  gravest  perils  threatening  the  Christian  faith.  So 
it  ever  has  been.  So  it  remains  at  this  moment.  The 
Sadducean  philosophy  which  is  popular  to-day  is  dying, 
as  it  must  die.  It  is  true  that  man  cannot  live  by  bread 
alone.  Man  cannot  be  fed  on  dust.  What  we  need  to 
fear  is  traffic  with  the  occult,  base  spiritualism,  and  all 
mental  forms  of  healing,  which  are  apart  from  the  Word 
of  God.  Men  must  be  brought  into  relationship  with  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Anything  and  everything  that  denies 
Him  as  perfect  Saviour,  while  offering  in  His  place  some 
substitute  of  spiritual  ideal  or  occult  influence,  is  the 
gravest  peril  of  all.  There  are  moments  when  it  is  neces- 
sary that  the  Spirit  of  God  should  speak  in  stern  de- 
nunciation. Let  us,  however,  remember  that  the  only 
reason  for  anything  of  this  kind  in  preaching,  and  teach- 
ing, in  speech,  must  be  the  reason  of  our  love  for  man; 
not  because  the  doctrine  is  not  ours,  not  because  the  false 
view  is  not  in  agreement  with  our  mental  convictions, 
but  because  the  false  view  is  hindering  men  and  women 
from  coming  into  relationship  with  Jesus  Christ.  It  must 
be  the  heart  that  loves  Sergius  Paulus  that  speaks  in 
anger  to  Elymas  the  sorcerer. 

Acts  13 : 13-41 

In  this  passage  we  have  Paul's  first  recorded  address, 
not  by  any  means  the  first  message  which  he  delivered, 
but  the  first  which  has  been  preserved  for  us  in  the 
records.  In  those  early  days,  after  his  apprehension  by 
Christ,  in  Damascus  he  reasoned  with  the  Jews.  Then 
later,  in  Jerusalem  he  dealt  especially  with  the  Jews  of 
the  Greek  synagogues.  When  taken  away  by  the 
brethren  from  Jerusalem  to  Tarsus,  where  he  remained 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 

[Acts  13:13-41] 

for  a  number  of  years,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  still 
continued  to  speak  of  the  things  that  had  become  more 
to  him  than  life. 

It  is  interesting  to  remember  that  when  Barnabas  dis- 
covered the  grace  of  God  in  Antioch  of  Syria,  "  He  went 
forth  to  Tarsus  to  seek  for  Saul :  and  when  he  had  found 
him,  he  brought  him  unto  Antioch."  That  is  a  statement 
that  may  be  read  easily  and  its  suggestiveness  missed. 
Dr.  Christie  has  drawn  attention  to  this,  pointing  out  that 
the  word  means  that  it  was  not  easy  to  find  Saul;  that 
when  Barnabas  arrived  in  Tarsus  he  had  to  seek  for 
him.  He  suggests  that  Paul  was  busily  occupied  with 
evangelistic  work.  Recent  investigations  prove  that 
through  all  the  region  of  Tarsus  there  are  remains  of 
Christian  Churches.  In  all  probability  during  those  years 
spent  in  Tarsus,  Paul  was  passing  through  the  villages, 
preaching  the  great  Gospel  of  his  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ.  Then  at  Antioch  in  Syria  he  had  been  for 
a  long  period  with  Barnabas,  teaching  and  instructing. 

In  this  paragraph  we  find  that  Paul  passed  through, 
from  Paphos  to  Perga  in  Pamphylia,  and  it  is  chronicled 
quite  briefly,  "  John  departed  from  them,  and  returned 
to  Jerusalem."  Luke,  with  a  fine  delicacy,  gives  no 
reason  for  the  going  of  John  Mark.  There  has  been 
much  speculation  as  to  why  Mark  left  Paul  at  that  point. 
Subsequently  he  tells  us  that  "  Barnabas  was  minded  to 
take  with  them  John  also,  who  was  called  Mark.  But 
Paul  thought  not  good  to  take  with  them  him  who  with- 
drew from  them  from  Pamphylia,  and  went  not  with 
them  to  the  work"  (15:38).  Again  no  reason  is  as- 
signed, but  that  at  least  shows  that  Paul  considered  there 
had  been  some  deflection  on  the  part  of  John  Mark  from 
the  clear  line  indicated  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  they  were 
moving  out  into  the  larger  work  that  lay  before  them. 
The  journey  from  Perga  in  Pamphylia  to  Antioch  in 
Pisidia  was  one  beset  with  much  difficulty.  No  account 
of  that  difficulty  is  given  here.  It  is  probable  that  on 

[  322  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  13:13-41] 

that  very  journey,  the  apostle  and  Barnabas,  and  per- 
chance Luke  also,  had  to  face  those  perils  of  robbers  to 
which  he  made  reference  in  one  of  his  letters.  It  may 
be  that  Mark  knew  the  peril  of  the  journey,  and  shrank 
therefrom.  It  may  be  that  Mark  had  not  yet  escaped 
from  Peter's  influence,  even  as  Peter  had  not  yet  escaped 
from  his  own  more  unworthy  self.  Be  that  as  it  may, 
there  came  a  time  when  Mark  was  restored  to  full  fellow- 
ship. In  that  final  letter  to  Timothy,  written  from  the 
last  imprisonment  in  the  Mamertime  prison,  this  man 
Paul,  from  whom  Mark  now  parted,  and  who  declined 
fellowship  with  him  a  little  later  because  he  feared  his 
fidelity,  wrote,  "  Take  Mark,  and  bring  him  with  thee : 
for  he  is  useful  to  me  for  ministering." 

Arrived  in  Antioch  of  Pisidia,  Paul  uttered  the  first 
message  which  has  been  preserved  for  us  in  outline.  It 
is  of  great  interest  in  view  of  the  fact  which  we  have 
noted  in  our  earlier  studies,  that  this  man  Paul  was  He- 
brew of  Hebrews,  and  was  also  saturated  by  early  train- 
ing, with  an  intense  sympathy  for  the  Gentile  world,  and 
for  the  Greek  method  of  thought.  The  ideals  of  He- 
braism and  Hellenism  were  both  active  in  him. 

There  are  senses  in  which  it  is  unnecessary  for  us  to 
consider  this  address  in  detail.  It  was  largely  historic. 
In  it  he  stated  God's  method  with  His  ancient  people  up 
to,  and  including,  the  coming  of  Jesus,  His  rejection, 
crucifixion,  and  resurrection.  We  are  familiar  with  the 
details.  That  which  is  of  interest  is  the  method  of  the 
grouping  of  those  details,  as  standing  in  a  Hebrew 
synagogue,  having  other  than  Hebrews  in  his  audience, 
he  delivered  this  message.  It  was  a  great  hour  in  the 
history  of  the  Church  when  Paul  rose  to  deliver  this 
message  in  the  synagogue  at  Antioch  in  Pisidia.  Let  us 
consider  first,  its  atmosphere;  secondly,  its  argument; 
and  finally  note  its  appeal. 

Antioch  in  Pisidia  was  a  city  of  Greek  origin,  founded 
by  colonists  from  Magnesia.  At  the  moment  when  Paul 

[  323  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  13:13-41] 

stood  there,  it  was  a  city  under  Roman  government,  part 
of  the  great  empire;  the  seat  of  proconsular  government. 
Moreover  it  was  a  city  having  a  Hebrew  synagogue,  in 
which  this  address  was  given.  In  that  city  the  three  great 
world-powers  and  forces  dominant  at  the  time,  were  all 
represented;  and  they  were  the  three  elements  merging 
in  the  mental  make-up  of  Paul.  There  was  the  funda- 
mental fact  of  the  Greek  mental  mood;  there  was  the 
governing  force  of  Rome ;  and  at  the  centre  there  was  the 
religious  influence  of  the  Hebrew  synagogue.  Into  that 
synagogue,  in  the  midst  of  these  forces  creating  the 
atmosphere,  came  this  man  Paul,  himself  a  Hebrew  of 
Hebrews,  in  profound  sympathy  with  Hebraism;  Paul 
of  Tarsus,  who  had  spent  his  early  years  in  the  midst  of 
Greek  ideals;  Paul,  the  Roman  citizen,  freeman  of  the 
Roman  Empire,  with  a  passion  for  government.  All 
these  forces  were  incorporated  in  his  interpretation  of 
Christianity.  This  was  the  new  missionary. 

Think  of  the  atmosphere  as  created  by  the  audience 
who  listened  to  him.  Notice  first,  his  own  company. 
The  phrase  "  Paul  and  his  company "  in  the  thirteenth 
verse  should  not  be  passed  over  lightly.  Paul  had  been 
the  assistant  of  Barnabas,  but  now  he  had  become  the 
central  figure.  Barnabas  was  there;  and  perhaps  Luke 
was  there  also,  as  Dean  Alford  suggests.  There  may 
have  been  two  or  three  others,  but  we  do  not  know  who 
they  were.  As  we  think  of  that  company,  we  are  re- 
minded of  the  words,  "  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered 
together  in  My  name,  there  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them." 
There,  in  the  Hebrew  synagogue,  was  a  Christian  Church, 
the  two  or  three  gathered  in  the  Name.  I  think  when 
Paul  delivered  this  first  message,  he  looked  at  Barnabas 
and  Luke  more  often  than  at  the  crowd.  He  spoke  in 
the  atmosphere  of  believing  souls,  in  fellowship  with  his 
Lord,  and  so  in  fellowship  with  himself. 

Then  there  were  the  men  of  Israel,  his  own  people 
after  the  flesh,  the  people  of  God,  the  men  of  privilege. 

[  324  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

{Acts    13:13-41] 

They  had  the  oracles;  to  them  pertained  the  covenants, 
to  them  were  given  the  promises.  As  the  eyes  of  this 
man,  Christ-illumined,  passed  from  the  little  company 
about  him,  and  saw  the  men  of  Israel,  he  was  looking 
into  the  faces  of  people  who  were  peculiarly  the  people 
of  God. 

But  there  were  also  others.  "  And  ye  that  fear  God." 
That  is  not  a  second  description  of  the  men  of  Israel. 
In  the  midst  of  the  address  he  again  made  a  distinction, 
"  Brethren,  children  of  the  stock  of  Abraham,  and  those 
among  you  that  fear  God"  (verse  26).  In  explanation 
of  these  two  references  we  may  glance  at  a  verse  beyond 
this  paragraph :  "  Now  when  the  synagogue  broke  up, 
many  of  the  Jews  and  of  the  devout  proselytes  followed 
Paul  and  Barnabas"  (verse  43).  There  the  other  men 
are  described  as  "  devout  proselytes."  These  were  Greeks, 
Romans  perchance,  men  who  out  of  the  midst  of  polythe- 
ism had  been  attracted  to  the  religion  of  the  Hebrew, 
because  it  was  the  religion  of  the  one  God. 

Yet  further,  in  order  to  understand  the  atmosphere, 
we  must  look,  not  only  at  the  city  of  Antioch  and  at  the 
audience,  but  at  the  preacher  also.  His  address  was 
modelled  upon  the  address  of  Stephen.  If  we  compare 
the  address  of  Peter,  delivered  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
with  this  of  Paul,  their  similarity  is  created  by  the  fact 
that  they  had  the  same  truth  to  proclaim.  Both  declared 
the  Cross.  Both  affirmed  the  resurrection.  When  that 
is  said,  however,  the  similarity  ends.  But  to  read  the  ad- 
dress of  Stephen  which  immediately  preceded  his  mar- 
tyrdom, and  then  to  read  this  address  of  Paul,  is  to  see 
that  Paul  consciously,  or  unconsciously,  modelled  his 
speech  in  this  synagogue  in  Antioch  of  Pisidia,  upon  the 
address  of  Stephen.  That  is  a  matter  full  of  interest. 
Paul  had  heard  Stephen's  defence,  and  had  never  escaped 
the  power  of  it.  Stephen,  full  of  faith,  and  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  had  passed  in  review  the  history  of  God's  ancient 
people,  until  he  had  charged  them  with  sin  and  folly,  and 

[  325  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
fActs  13:13-41] 

had  roused  their  anger.  When  they  hounded  Stephen  to 
his  death,  Saul  had  consented,  given  his  vote  as  a  member 
of  the  Sanhedrim,  had  stood,  minding  the  clothes  of  the 
men  who  stoned  him.  I  believe  that  even  then  in  the 
heart  of  Saul  the  appeal  of  Stephen  sounded  like  a  clarion 
cry.  It  was  with  him  yet;  and  its  power  and  persua- 
siveness moved  him  as  he  delivered  this  message  in  the 
synagogue  at  Antioch. 

Again  notice,  that  throughout  this  address  Paul  spoke 
from  the  standpoint  of  separation  from  Israel.  He  spoke 
to  the  men  of  Israel,  and  all  that  fear  God;  and  once  or 
twice  only  in  the  course  of  his  address  did  he  identify 
himself  with  them.  For  the  most  part  he  spoke  as 
separated  from  them.  Moreover,  he  was  in  intense 
sympathy  with  the  Greek  outlook.  But  in  Christ,  he 
stood  apart  from  Hebraism  and  Hellenism,  in  order  that 
he  might  demonstrate  the  glorious  comprehensiveness  of 
the  Christian  message  which  included  both. 

Paul  declared  two  things  in  his  argument;  first,  the 
Divine  government;  and  secondly,  the  Divine  grace. 
His  message  was  that  God  is  the  One  governor ;  and  that 
the  government  of  the  one  God  is  the  government  of  a 
continuous  and  overwhelming  grace. 

The  fact  of  the  Divine  government  was  not  argued; 
nor  was  it  presented  as  a  doctrine.  It  was,  however,  so 
constantly  referred  to,  as  to  make  the  whole  statement 
an  argument  and  a  doctrine.  He  dealt  with  the  people 
of  Israel  from  the  moment  of  their  deliverance  from 
Egypt.  He  traced  the  history  of  the  people,  showing  how 
they  came  out  of  Egypt  into  the  wilderness.  He  referred 
to  them  as  coming  into  the  land  of  promise,  and  dealt  with 
their  sojourn  in  the  land,  until  the  time  of  David.  Then 
he  omitted  entirely  their  history  from  Solomon  to  Nehe- 
miah  and  Malachi ;  but  linked  the  history  to  the  Christian 
movement  when  he  said,  "  Of  this  man's  (David)  seed, 
hath  God  according  to  promise  brought  unto  Israel  a 
Saviour,  Jesus."  That  long  period  of  degeneracy,  de- 

[  326  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts    13:13-41] 

terioration,  despair,  and  disaster,  that  dark  gulf  of  human 
failure  between  David  and  Jesus,  he  bridged  by  the  pro- 
noun "  He "  which  had  reference  to  God.  Out  of 
David's  seed  "  He,"  God,  brought  this  Man  Jesus.  In 
all  his  dealing  with  the  history  of  the  people  he  insisted 
upon  the  Divine  government.  As  to  the  coming  out  of 
Egypt,  "  God  chose  this  people,"  God  "  exalted  the 
people,"  God  "  led  them  forth."  Concerning  the  forty 
years  in  the  wilderness,  "  Suffered  He  their  manners." 
The  change  the  revisers  suggest  in  the  margin  is  possible 
by  the  alteration  of  one  letter  in  the  Greek,  and  that  form 
is  found  in  some  of  the  manuscripts.  The  weight  of 
argument  may  still  be  in  favour  of  the  rendering,  "suf- 
fered He  their  manners  " ;  but  if  the  change  be  adopted, 
then  what  Paul  said  here  was,  "  He  bare  them  as  a  nurs- 
ing Father."  We  find  the  same  tender,  compassionate 
thought  of  patience,  in  the  other  rendering,  but  which- 
ever rendering  is  taken  the  emphasis  is  upon  the  pronoun 
"  He,"  "  He  suffered  their  manners,"  "  He  bare  them  as 
a  nursing  Father."  We  see  the  people  coming  into  the 
land,  and  Paul  says,  "  He  destroyed  seven  nations  before 
them,"  and  "  He  gave  them  their  land  for  an  inheritance, 
for  about  four  hundred  and  fifty  years."  That  period  in 
which  they  were  without  a  king,  governed  in  hours  of 
crisis  by  dictators  and  judges,  he  interpreted  thus,  "  He 
gave  them  judges  until  Samuel."  Then  of  the  hour  of 
change,  at  the  commencement  of  the  breakdown  in  the 
national  history,  when  they  clamoured  for  a  king,  Paul 
says,  "  He  gave  them  Saul."  When  presently  the  history 
tells  of  this  man's  death,  Paul  says,  "  He  ...  re- 
moved him."  Next  in  the  history  we  see  David  the  king, 
and  again  he  says,  "  He  raised  up  David  to  be  their 
king:  to  whom  also  He  bare  witness."  Finally,  "He" 
the  same  God,  "  according  to  promise,  from  the  seed  of 
David,  brought  this  Man,  Jesus."  Then  these  men  of 
Israel,  because  they  did  not  understand  their  own 
prophets,  did  not  understand  Jesus  when  He  came;  and 

[  327  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  13: 13-41] 

they  slew  Him,  and  put  Him  in  the  tomb.     But  Paul  says, 
"  God  raised  Him  from  the  dead." 

Thus  the  Government  of  God  was  the  fundamental 
note  in  the  message  of  this  speech  in  the  synagogue  at 
Antioch.  God  chose,  exalted,  and  led  forth  a  people. 
God  suffered  them,  or  bare  them  as  a  nursing  Father,  in 
the  wilderness.  God  destroyed  nations  before  them,  and 
gave  them  the  land.  God  raised  up  judges  in  the  hours 
of  their  difficulty.  God  gave  them  Saul  when  they  clam- 
oured for  a  king.  God  removed  him  from  his  position. 
God  raised  up  David.  Then  came  the  history  of  Solomon, 
the  break-up  of  the  kingdom:  Judah,  Israel,  captivity, 
defeat,  and  disaster.  There  was  no  king,  no  priest,  no 
prophet.  The  remnant  of  the  people  was  living  under 
the  Roman  yoke.  God  brought  forth  Jesus.  The  one 
God  is  thus  declared  ever  moving  forward,  in  spite 
of  all  human  failure,  toward  an  ultimate  purpose  of 
blessing. 

Wonderfully  the  Divine  grace  is  also  revealed  in  this 
word  of  Paul  in  the  synagogue  at  Antioch.  This  is  the 
central  Christian  message  to  Israel,  and  to  the  Gentile. 
Human  failure  is  recognized.  Paul  recognized  the  de- 
scent as  he  reviewed  the  history  of  Israel.  First  there 
was  the  weakness  of  these  people  in  those  early  days  in 
the  wilderness,  when  He  suffered  their  manners,  or  bare 
them  as  a  nursing  Father.  Then  came  their  wayward- 
ness, when  they  clamoured  for  a  king,  and  rejected  Him. 
Lastly  their  wickedness  is  seen  when  they  asked  that 
Jesus  should  be  slain,  and  they  laid  Him  in  a  tomb.  All 
that  is  a  dark  picture,  of  the  failure  of  a  people  called, 
chosen,  and  exalted  by  God  for  privilege  and  purpose. 

But  that  is  background  only.  Paul  would  impress 
upon  these  men  of  Israel,  and  the  proselytes  gathered  in 
the  synagogue,  not  the  failure,  but  the  grace  that  was 
above  it,  beyond  it,  mastering  it,  moving  through  it  to- 
ward the  accomplishment  of  Divine  purpose.  The 
grace  was  original,  for  He  chose  them.  It  was, 

1 328 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts    13:13-41] 

patient  grace;  He  suffered  them,  or  bare  with  them  as  a 
nursing  Father.  It  was  disciplinary  grace;  He  gave 
them  Saul  that  they  might  understand  at  the  commence- 
ment the  real  meaning  of  their  failure  and  desire  for  a 
king;  and  He  gave  them  David,  who  took  hold  of  the 
kingdom,  and  represented  the  will  of  God  to  men.  It 
was  fulfilling  grace,  in  spite  of  Solomon,  in  spite  of 
Ahab,  in  spite  of  Ahaz,  in  spite  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  in 
spite  of  Assyria,  in  spite  of  Egypt,  in  spite  of  all  circum- 
stances and  forces  and  disaster  and  defeat,  He  brought 
a  Saviour.  That  is  the  infinite  music  of  the  Gospel. 
When  He  brought  the  Saviour  into  darkness  and  blind- 
ness even  among  the  people  of  His  own  choice  and  ex- 
altation and  government  they  did  not  know  Him.  They 
read  the  law  and  the  prophets,  which  led  up  to,  and 
promised  this  great  Saviour;  but  when  He  came  they 
were  blind,  and  did  not  understand  Him.  There  is  no 
more  wonderfully  illuminating  word,  revealing  at  once 
the  Divine  government  and  the  Divine  grace,  than  that 
in  which  the  apostle  declared  that  God  compelled  the 
folly  and  sin  of  these  people  to  fulfil  His  purpose.  They 
fulfilled  the  Scriptures  they  did  not  understand,  by  con- 
demning Him  Who  stood  in  their  midst,  according  to  the 
purpose  of  God.  Peter  declared  the  same  great  truth  in 
his  first  sermon  when  he  said  of  Jesus,  "  Him,  being 
delivered  up  by  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowl- 
edge of  God,  ye  by  the  hand  of  lawless  men  did  crucify 
and  slay."  Paul  said  they  "  fulfilled  them  by  condemn- 
ing Him."  Finally  it  was  accomplishing  grace;  and  by 
three  facts  he  set  Jesus  before  them,  as  fulfilling  the 
highest  expectation,  aspiration,  and  prophesying  of  the 
past.  The  second  psalm  presents  the  King.  This  is  the 
King.  Paul  then  linked  a  reference  from  Isaiah,  to  the 
sixteenth  psalm,  which  Peter  also  quoted  in  his  first 
sermon;  that  psalm  which  predicted  that  the  Holy  One 
should  never  see  corruption.  He  declared  that  by  the 
raising  of  Jesus,  He  was  demonstrated  as  the  King,  ac- 

[  329  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  13:13-41] 

cepted,  and  proved  to  be  the  hope  of  Israel  and  the 
Saviour  of  the  world.     Such  was  his  argument. 

Finally  he  uttered  his  appeal.  He  proclaimed  "  This 
Man,"  the  King,  the  crucified,  the  risen  Man.  Peter  had 
told  his  hearers  in  Jerusalem  that  there  was  remission  of 
sins.  Paul  did  the  same,  but  he  employed  another  word, 
the  word  "  justified."  Here  a  new  word  came  into  the 
language  of  the  Christian  Church.  Our  Lord  had  em- 
ployed it  in  the  parable  of  the  Pharisee  and  Publican.  It 
became  Paul's  great  word,  and  to  know  all  its  meaning 
we  must  study  his  letter  to  the  Romans.  "  Justification  " 
is  a  mightier  word  than  "  remission  of  sins."  It  is  a 
word  that  explains  remission  of  sins,  and  glorifies  that 
idea.  There  in  the  synagogue  in  Antioch  in  Pisidia,  to 
men  of  Israel,  and  to  Greeks  attracted  by  the  doctrine  of 
the  one  God,  this  man  affirmed  His  government,  and  His 
grace;  and  proclaimed  Jesus  as  fulfilling  both,  and  pro- 
viding the  possibility  of  justification  for  every  one  that 
believes. 

From  that  proclamation  he  passed  to  a  word  of  warn- 
ing. "  Beware."  He  quoted  from  the  prophecy  of 
Habakkuk,  the  prophecy  of  the  man  of  faith,  that  re- 
vealed the  principle  of  faith  as  the  one  principle  upon 
which  man  must  live.  So  he  revealed  to  these  people 
the  fact  that  it  is  by  faith  in  this  Man  that  men  are 
justified. 

To  summarize.  This  first  recorded  speech  of  the  great 
missionary  apostle  declared  the  one  God,  the  one  purpose 
of  God,  the  one  Saviour.  He  proclaimed  the  evangel, 
which  may  be  summarized  in  one  word,  justification  by 
faith.  The  proof  that  there  is  such  justification  is  in 
the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  This  proclamation  was 
for  Hebrew  and  Gentile.  Separating  himself  from  each, 
he  included  both  in  his  great  message ;  because  in  Christ 
he  was  neither  Jew  nor  Greek.  In  Christ  he  had  found 
the  One  Who  brings  the  Jew  and  the  Greek  into  life,  and 
into  harmony  with  the  will  and  purpose  of  God. 

I  330  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  13:42-52] 

Acts  13 : 42-52 

This  paragraph  contains  the  account  of  the  things 
immediately  following  upon  the  delivery  of  Paul's  address 
in  the  synagogue  at  Antioch.  It  is  the  story  of  a  strange 
commotion  in  the  city,  of  conflict,  and  of  movement ;  the 
story  of  an  emotional  manifestation,  of  an  intellectual 
difficulty,  and  of  strange  volitional  processes.  The  story 
is  bounded  by  Sabbath  days,  but  the  atmosphere  is  that  of 
strife. 

We  have  considered  the  address  of  the  apostle;  here 
we  see  the  results  of  that  address.  Imaginatively  we  can 
fill  in  those  days  between  the  Sabbaths.  We  can  under- 
stand how  these  men,  who  had  listened  to  the  message  in 
the  synagogue,  went  their  way  in  the  schools  and  in  the 
market-places,  and  among  their  friends,  talking  of  the 
strange,  remarkable,  and  arresting  words  that  they  had 
heard  from  the  lips  of  this  stranger  in  the  city.  When 
the  next  Sabbath  came,  and  this  man  was  to  deliver 
another  message,  nearly  the  whole  city  gathered  together. 
Antioch  in  Pisidia  was  stirred  to  its  very  centre.  Let  us 
attempt  to  discover  the  cause  of  the  unrest,  and  see  how 
this  conflict  illustrates  certain  great  principles  concerning 
the  preaching  of  the  evangel  of  Christ. 

What  then  was  the  cause  of  this  unrest  in  Antioch  in 
Pisidia  ?  The  forty-second  verse  reads,  "  And  as  they 
went  out " — these  people  who  had  listened  in  the  syna- 
gogue— "  they  besought  that  these  words  might  be  spoken 
to  them  the  next  Sabbath."  In  verse  forty- four,  we  read, 
"  And  the  next  sabbath  almost  the  whole  city  was  gath- 
ered together  to  hear  the  Word  of  God."  In  the  forty- 
sixth  verse  Paul,  addressing  the  Hebrews,  said,  "  It  was 
necessary  that  the  Word  of  God  should  first  be  spoken  to 
you."  The  forty-eighth  verse  reads,  "  The  Gentiles 
.  .  .  glorified  the  Word  of  God."  In  these  state- 
ments we  discover  the  secret  of  the  unrest  in  Antioch. 
A  city  was  moved  to  its  very  centre,  divided  into  con- 
flicting camps  of  thought,  emotion,  and  volition,  by  the 

33i 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  13 : 42-52] 

message  of  one  man;  a  message  characterized  in  that 
opening  verse  by  the  men  who  first  heard  it  as  "  these 
words  " ;  and  described  by  Luke  as  "  the  Word  of  God," 
that  being  a  direct  reference  to  Paul's  discourse. 

Therefore  if  we  would  understand  that  which  had  so 
profoundly  moved  Antioch  in  Pisidia,  we  must  remind 
ourselves  once  again  of  the  notes  in  that  discourse.  Its 
unargued  supposition  was  that  of  the  one  God.  Un- 
doubtedly that  was  the  note  that  attracted  and  held  the 
attention  of  the  proselytes  in  the  synagogue,  and  which 
appealed  to  the  men  of  Antioch.  The  truths  which  he 
had  affirmed  concerning  the  one  God,  were  those  of  His 
perpetual  government  and  His  unfailing  grace.  He 
traced  the  history  of  the  Hebrew  people,  from  the  original 
call  of  Jehovah,  through  their  exodus  from  Egypt,  and 
the  period  in  the  wilderness,  to  the  possession  of  the 
land,  and  the  giving  of  the  kings ;  first  Saul,  for  purposes 
of  discipline;  and  then  David,  for  purposes  of  illumina- 
tion. He  passed  over  the  whole  period  from  Solomon 
to  Nehemiah,  taking  the  story  up  again  with  the  coming 
of  Jesus. 

The  fundamental  truth  declared  was  that  of  the  one 
God,  Who  governs.  He  chose,  He  exalted,  He  bore  with 
the  patience  of  a  nursing  Father  the  waywardness  of  the 
people  He  had  created ;  He  appointed  kings  and  dethroned 
them;  and  through  the  long  and  dark  years  of  deteriora- 
tion and  degeneration  in  national  life,  He  prosecuted  His 
own  purpose,  until  at  last,  from  the  seed  of  David  after 
the  flesh,  He  brought  Jesus  the  Saviour. 

Paul  further  showed  that  the  action  of  the  one  God 
in  government  was  always  that  of  an  infinite  grace;  that 
the  inspiration  of  the  activity  of  the  throne  was  that  of 
undying  love. 

Thus  he  had  uttered  his  central  teaching;  and  if  he  had 
attracted  and  held  these  people  by  the  affirmation  of  the 
unity  of  the  Deity,  and  by  the  declaration  of  the  perpetual 
government  and  grace  of  God,  surely  he  had  strangely 

[  332  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  13:42-52] 

startled  them  as  he  had  declared  the  Cross  of  Jesus,  and 
His  resurrection.  He  explained  the  Cross  by  the  resur- 
rection. 

He  then  made  the  great  affirmation  in  the  hearing  of 
these  men  that  it  was  possible  that  they  should  have 
remission  of  sins;  and  he  used  the  word  that  occurs  for 
the  first  time  in  the  history  of  the  Church,  which  he 
subsequently  elaborated  in  his  great  Roman  letter,  the 
word  "  justified."  He  ended  with  this  note,  that  every 
one  that  believed  in  Jesus  might  receive  remission  of 
sins,  and  be  justified  freely ;  Hebrew  and  Greek,  the  peo- 
ple of  his  own  blood  relationship,  and  those  strangers, 
men  of  another  type,  and  another  method  of  mind,  and 
of  separate  convictions. 

These  were  the  things  to  which  the  men  of  Antioch  lis- 
tened in  that  first  discourse,  and  the  result  was  that  of 
conflicting  views,  conflicting  emotions,  conflicting  de- 
cisions. The  conflicting  views  are  revealed  in  the  con- 
flicting emotions. 

How  was  it  that  a  message  like  this  so  profoundly 
moved  the  city?  Because  it  was  a  message  that  touched 
the  deepest  things  of  human  life;  the  truth  about  God; 
the  question  of  an  age-abiding  life,  a  life  that  cannot  be 
destroyed,  a  life  that  persists  through  every  age  and 
possesses  it,  but  is  never  influenced  by  the  passing  of  an 
age;  the  fact  of  sin,  and  the  remission  of  sins,  justifica- 
tion. The  address  of  Paul  in  the  synagogue  was  not 
occupied  with  material  things.  He  did  not  discuss  phys- 
ical culture,  food  reform,  dress  reform,  or  housing  re- 
form. His  message  was  not  one  that  dealt  preeminently 
with  questions  of  the  intellect.  He  did  not  discuss  that 
difference  at  which  we  have  looked,  and  of  which  he  was 
conscious,  between  Hebraism  and  Hellenism.  He  en- 
tered into  no  political  discussion  as  to  the  question  of 
Roman  authority.  He  dealt  with  the  central  facts  of 
every  human  life:  God,  life,  and  sin.  I  do  not  suggest 
that  this  man  was  ignoring  the  mental  mood  in  the  midst 

[  333  1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  13:42-52] 

of  which  he  found  himself,  or  that  he  was  uninterested 
in  the  mental  processes  going  on  around  him.  He  did 
not  hold  in  contempt  the  things  of  the  material  life:  food, 
raiment,  and  dwellings.  But  he  did  not  stay  to  deal  with 
things  accidental,  and  transient,  the  things  of  every  hu- 
man life ;  but  passed  to  the  inspirational  centres.  When 
he  spoke  of  God,  of  age-abiding  life,  and  of  sins,  and 
the  possibility  of  true  remission,  he  was  dealing  with 
facts  which  forevermore  make  their  appeal  to  men,  ar- 
rest their  attention,  produce  unrest,  produce  division, 
intellectual  division,  emotional  division,  volitional  di- 
vision. These  are  the  things  that  produce  the  effects  to 
be  found  through  all  this  book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 

Let  us  observe  the  conflict  a  little  more  carefully.  First 
of  all  it  is  said  that  these  men  were  "  filled  with  jeal- 
ousy," and  then  we  read,  "  As  the  Gentiles  heard  this, 
they  were  glad."  Notice  the  difference :  "  filled  with 
jealousy,"  filled  with  gladness.  Observe  another  con- 
trast :  "  They  .  .  .  contradicted  the  things  which 
were  spoken  .  .  .  and  blasphemed " ;  "  They  .  .  . 
glorified  the  Word  of  God."  Or  again,  some  counted 
themselves  "  unworthy  of  age-abiding  life " ;  others 
"  were  ordained  to  eternal  life."  These  two  declarations 
are  mutually  interpretative.  In  the  statement,  "  As  many 
as  were  ordained  to  eternal  life  believed,"  the  word  or- 
dained has  no  reference  whatever  to  any  act  of  God.  It 
refers  to  the  attitude  of  the  men  themselves.  In  the 
"  Emphasized  Bible "  Mr.  Rotherham  has  changed  the 
word  with  great  advantage,  so  that  it  now  reads,  they 
that  were  disposed  to  eternal  life.  Finally  some  "  blas- 
phemed " ;  while  others  "  believed."  This  set  of  contrasts 
reveals  conflict,  division,  difference,  following  upon  the 
preaching  of  the  Word,  and  produced  by  the  preaching 
of  the  Word. 

What  were  the  reasons  of  refusal?  Prejudice  and 
selfishness.  The  intellectual  activity  of  the  men  who 
refused  the  Word,  ceased.  The  refusal  of  the  Word 

[  334  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  13 : 42-52] 

was  not  intellectual,  it  was  the  refusal  of  prejudice. 
They  listened  on  the  first  Sabbath ;  and  there  is  evidence 
that  they  were  objecting  intellectually.  It  is  found  in  the 
fact  that  as  Paul  drew  to  the  conclusion  of  his  sermon, 
he  said  to  them,  "  Beware,  therefore,  lest  that  come  upon 
you,  which  is  spoken  in  the  prophets :  Behold,  ye  despis- 
ers,  and  wonder,  and  perish." 

But  no  word  was  spoken  by  them  of  their  difficulty,  or 
objection,  on  the  first  Sabbath.  Indeed  it  is  written 
that  "  As  they  went  out,  they  besought  that  these  words 
might  be  spoken  to  them  the  next  Sabbath."  Why  then 
this  attitude  of  refusal?  It  was  not  the  attitude  of  in- 
tellectual difficulty,  but  the  attitude  of  prejudice.  These 
men  saw  that  the  Gentiles  also  were  listening  with  eager- 
ness, and  that  Paul  was  proclaiming  to  them  the  same 
possibility  of  privilege  as  he  was  proclaiming  to  the  He- 
brew. They  were  prejudiced,  selfish;  the  question  of 
truth  was  forgotten,  and  the  question  of  personal  privi- 
lege became  paramount.  Out  of  that  closing  of  the  mind 
against  truth,  in  favour  of  an  ancient  prejudice,  they 
counted  themselves  unworthy  of  life,  they  contradicted 
the  things  that  he  said,  they  blasphemed. 

But  look  at  the  others.  Just  as  in  the  first  case  we 
saw  that  prejudice  was  the  outcome  of  the  closing  of  the 
mind  to  truth,  so  on  the  other  side  we  see  the  open  mind. 
These  men  listened  to  the  Word  of  this  One  God,  govern- 
ing in  grace,  and  providing  a  Saviour,  and  proclaiming 
justification,  and  they  allowed  the  truth  to  make  its  appeal 
to  them.  To  these  men  truth  was  supreme,  and  there- 
fore the  true  sense  of  the  new  privilege  was  created. 
The  effect  of  truth  in  every  individual  life  is  conditioned 
by  the  opening  or  the  closing  of  the  mind.  There  is  a 
very  significant  phrase  in  the  Gospel  according  to  John, 
"  the  honest  heart."  When  there  is  the  honest  heart, 
the  open  mind,  the  willingness  to  receive  the  truth,  to 
know  truth,  to  follow  truth  at  all  costs,  the  result  of  the 
preaching  of  this  doctrine  of  the  apostle  is  always  that  of 

[  335  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  13 : 42-52] 

life.  But  where  for  any  reason  the  mind  is  closed  against 
the  truth,  where  prejudice  enters  in,  and  arguments  are 
created  as  the  outcome  of  prejudice,  then  the  result  is 
that  of  death. 

What  followed  these  things?  First,  "The  Word  of 
the  Lord  was  spread  abroad  throughout  all  the  region.'* 
Secondly,  persecution  broke  out  that  dogged  the  steps  of 
Paul  through  all  the  rest  of  his  journeyings.  Thirdly, 
the  disciples  were  filled  with  joy  and  the  Holy  Spirit. 
In  the  city  conflict,  intellectual,  emotional,  volitional ;  and 
then  the  Word  of  God  spread  through  the  whole  region. 
A  persecuting  city  may  fling  out  the  messengers,  but  it 
can  never  fling  out  the  work  they  have  done.  Left  in  the 
city  of  Antioch  in  Pisidia  was  a  little  group  of  those  who 
had  heard,  and  had  believed,  and  had  received  the  new 
gift,  and  had  been  made  members  of  the  Christ;  and 
they  were  filled  with  joy. 

Let  us  glance  back  over  the  story  for  our  own  profit. 
Observe  first  the  Christian  preachers.  The  work  of  the 
preacher  is  forevermore  to  declare  the  deepest  things  in 
the  life  of  man.  Christian  preachers  are  not  careless  con- 
cerning material  life,  or  mental  matters;  but  their  busi- 
ness is  to  bring  men  and  women  into  right  relationship 
with  God,  to  deal  with  the  essential  in  human  nature. 
Notice  also  the  work  following  the  preaching.  Paul  and 
Barnabas  urged  those  who  believed  to  continue ;  but  they 
definitely  turned  from  the  Hebrew  to  the  Gentile.  Said 
they :  "  Seeing  ye  ...  judge  yourselves  unworthy 
of  the  age-abiding  life,  lo,  we  turn  to  the  Gentiles." 
How  the  love  of  his  brethren  followed  Paul.  How  it 
sobbed  in  tears,  and  breathed  in  agony,  in  his  subsequent 
epistles.  He  never  ceased  to  love  his  brethren  after 
the  flesh,  who  never  did  anything  for  him  after  the  hour 
of  his  conversion  to  Christ,  except  persecute  him  and 
cause  him  suffering.  Yet  mark  very  carefully  his  words : 
"  It  was  necessary  that  the  Word  of  God  should  first  be 
spoken  to  you.  Seeing  ye  thrust  it  from  you,  and  judge 

[  336 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  14 : 1-20] 

yourselves  unworthy  of  eternal  life,  lo,  we  turn  to  the 
Gentiles."  The  principle  involved  in  that  statement  is 
that  when  people  have  heard  the  offer  of  the  age-abiding 
life  through  the  crucified  Christ,  if  they  will  not  accept 
it,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  prophet,  the  apostle,  the  evangelist, 
to  turn  to  others.  If  that  principle  of  Paul's  action  in 
the  synagogue  in  Antioch  of  Pisidia  were  applied  to  our 
land  to-day,  would  there  not  be  a  great  exodus  of  preach- 
ers, an  abandonment  of  pulpits,  and  of  going  to  the  dis- 
tant lands  where  men  are  eagerly  waiting  for  the  mes- 
sage? How  far  ought  this  principle  to  apply?  It  is  a 
searching  question  that  comes  to  the  soul  in  pondering 
this  story.  It  was  the  action  of  a  splendid  courage,  an 
action  that  appals  the  soul,  and  compels  pause ;  but  more- 
over, an  action  justified  by  the  results. 

Again,  note  the  effect  of  the  Christian  message;  it  is 
life  unto  life,  or  death  unto  death.  It  produces  jealousy 
or  joy,  blasphemy  or  belief ;  the  spirit  of  hell  which  per- 
secutes, or  the  Spirit  of  holiness  which  seeks  to  save. 
The  preaching  of  the  Cross  forevermore  appeals  to  the 
intellect  of  men,  and  divides  them.  It  stirs  the  emo- 
tional life,  producing  opposite  and  conflicting  emotions. 
It  storms  the  will,  and  demands  belief,  or  blasphemy. 
The  preaching  of  the  Word  divides  as  nothing  else  in 
the  wide  world  can  divide. 

What  is  the  personal  enquiry  that  grows  out  of  such 
a  meditation?  On  the  one  side  are  those  who  judge  them- 
selves unworthy  of  age-abiding  life;  on  the  other  are 
those  who  are  disposed  to  the  age-abiding  life.  These 
will  blaspheme,  these  will  believe.  On  which  side  do  I 
stand?  That  question  must  be  answered  in  the  secrecy 
of  the  soul. 

Acts  14:1-20 

In  this  paragraph  we  follow  Paul  and  his  company  to 
the  furthest  outward  limit  of  their  first  missionary  jour- 
ney. The  remainder  of  the  chapter  is  occupied  with  the 

[  337  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  14: 1-20  ] 

revisitation  of  the  churches  on  the  return  journey.  We 
follow  the  movement,  first  at  Iconium;  then  at  Lystra; 
and  then  for  a  brief  period  at  Derbe,  concerning  which 
nothing  of  importance  is  recorded,  but  which  was  evi- 
dently a  period  of  quietness  and  peace  in  the  work  of 
evangelization.  From  Derbe  they  turned  back  again, 
traversing  the  route  already  taken,  instead  of  crossing 
immediately  home,  as  they  might  have  done. 

The  chief  interest  in  this  story  for  us  centres  in  the 
continuity  of  the  work.  This  is  best  seen  in  the  observa- 
tion of  the  workers,  by  watching  Paul  and  his  little  com- 
pany as  they  arrived  at  Iconium,  and  at  last  escaped  from 
there  under  pressure,  and  found  their  way  to  Lystra, 
where  Paul  was  stoned  and  left  for  dead.  There  are 
four  matters  of  interest:  first  the  methods  of  their  min- 
istry; secondly  the  manifestations  of  power  that  accom- 
panied their  ministry,  particularly  the  fact  of  the  diversity 
of  manifestations;  thirdly  the  diversity  of  their  experi- 
ences ;  and  finally,  the  perils  that  threatened  them. 

In  order  to  observe  the  methods  of  the  ministry  of 
these  men,  we  must  get  back  into  the  atmosphere,  into  the 
actual  surroundings  where  the  work  was  carried  on.  At 
Antioch  in  Pisidia  there  was  a  large  Hebrew  synagogue 
where  the  apostle  first  preached.  He  left  Antioch  be- 
cause he  was  flung  out  of  the  city,  and  he  took  his  way 
fifty  miles  to  the  east.  There  he  certainly  found  a  syna- 
gogue, but  not  so  many  Hebrews.  He  was  coming 
gradually  into  the  more  definitely  Gentile  atmosphere. 
Hearing  there  was  a  plot  on  foot  for  the  taking  of  his 
life,  he  left  Iconium,  and  travelled  forty  miles  to  the 
southeast,  and  came  to  Lystra,  where  there  was  no  syna- 
gogue. He  had  now  come  into  the  most  pronounced  at- 
mosphere of  Gentile  life  and  thought.  Thus  we  follow 
the  movement  of  the  Christian  faith  into  an  entirely  new 
atmosphere,  being  further  removed  from  the  influences 
of  Hebraism. 

In  the  third  verse  of  this  chapter  there  is  a  phrase 

[338] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  14 : 1-20] 

which  we  must  specially  note,  "  Long  time  therefore  they 
tarried  there,"  that  is,  at  Iconium.  "  Speaking  boldly  in 
the  Lord,  Who  bare  witness  unto  the  Word  of  His 
grace."  That  was  the  one  theme  of  these  men  as  they 
travelled.  In  this  book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
wherever  that  word  Word  occurs  in  this  connection,  the 
first  letter  should  be  capitalized.  "  The  Word  of  His 
grace "  was  the  theme  of  the  preaching.  These  men 
went  into  the  new  cities  with  no  new  message,  but  with 
the  same  message ;  adapting  their  method  of  presentation, 
but  never  changing  the  truth.  They  came  to  Lystra  at 
last,  and  even  there,  as  in  Antioch  of  Pisidia,  as  in 
Antioch  of  Syria,  as  at  Jerusalem  at  the  beginning,  they 
had  one  message,  "  The  Word  of  His  grace."  The  phrase 
stands  for  all  the  facts  concerning  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
which  these  men  were  telling  as  they  went.  Presently  we 
shall  come  to  an  account  of  how  certain  men  said  of 
Paul,  Let  us  hear  what  this  babbler  says.  A  babbler  was 
a  teller  of  tales.  There  were  men  travelling  through 
those  Greek  cities  who  gained  their  living  by  telling  tales. 
They  were  public  entertainers;  they  gathered  people 
round  them,  and  told  stories  of  the  things  they  had  seen. 
Paul  was  a  teller  of  tales.  So  also  were  his  companions. 
They  told  what  we  speak  of  as  "  the  old,  old  story." 
They  told  the  story  of  the  life  of  Jesus;  they  told  the 
story  of  His  death;  they  told  the  story  of  His  resurrec- 
tion, because  by  His  resurrection  everything  else  was 
transfigured,  illuminated,  interpreted.  They  were  tellers 
of  tales ;  and  the  message  was  always  the  same,  "  The 
Word  of  His  grace." 

At  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  there  is  one  of  those 
small  words  of  the  New  Testament,  which  are  so  often 
full  of  light.  A  small  and  insignificant  word  it  appears 
to  be  at  first,  and  yet  it  is  the  light  centre  of  the  whole 
verse.  "  And  it  came  to  pass  in  Iconium,  that  they  en- 
tered together  into  the  synagogue  of  the  Jews,  and  so 
spake,  that  a  great  multitude  believed."  "  They  so. 

[  339  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  14 : 1-20] 

spake."  The  word  immediately  suggests  the  manner  of 
the  delivery  of  the  message.  It  was  not  only  the  thing 
they  said,  it  was  the  way  they  said  it.  "  They  so  spake." 
Some  expositors  in  dealing  with  this  have  laid  emphasis 
upon  the  fact  that  the  apostles  were  careful  in  prepara- 
tion. Another  lays  emphasis  upon  the  fact  of  Paul's 
logical  mind,  by  which  he  compelled  men  to  agree  to  the 
things  he  spoke.  That  little  word  "  so  "  arrests  the  spirit, 
and  grips  it,  and  says  to  all  teachers  and  preachers,  Can 
you  so  speak  that  men  will  believe?  Paul  I  think  gives 
his  own  explanation  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  "  so." 
When  writing  to  the  Corinthians,  in  his  first  letter,  speak- 
ing of  his  coming  to  them,  he  said,  "  I  came  unto  you 
.  .  .  not  with  excellency  of  speech  or  of  wisdom." 
Then  it  was  not  his  eloquence,  it  was  not  his  logical 
faculty.  "  And  I  was  with  you  in  weakness,  and  in  fear, 
and  in  much  trembling/'  Paul  was  always  a  man  in- 
trepid, courageous,  dogmatic,  daring;  but  the  intensive 
force  of  his  intrepidity  and  courage  is  there  revealed,  "  I 
was  with  you  in  weakness  and  in  fear,  and  in  much  trem- 
bling." Continuing  he  said :  "  And  my  speech  and  my 
preaching  were  not  in  persuasive  words  of  wisdom,  but 
in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power."  There  we 
discover  the  secret  of  the  "  so,"  "  They  so  spake."  That 
is  the  secret  of  the  preaching  that  prevails,  and  that  wins ; 
the  preaching  that  is  authoritative,  definite,  positive,  and 
without  apology,  as  the  result  of  a  sense  of  weakness 
and  trembling  and  fear  in  the  mind  of  the  preacher ;  but 
which  weakness  and  trembling  and  fear  are  all  over- 
come by  the  preacher's  fellowship  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 
The  true  preacher  says  the  thing  that  seems  to  have  no 
force  in  it,  and  which  carries  no  conviction  merely  as 
the  result  of  his  eloquence,  or  his  argument;  but  when 
he  says  it,  it  becomes  a  fire  and  a  searching  and  a  burn- 
ing, because  the  Holy  Spirit  catches  it  up,  and  bears  it 
in  upon  the  inner  consciousness  of  men. 

In  the  fourteenth  chapter,  and  the  early  part  of  the 

[  340  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  14 : 1-20] 

third  verse,  we  read,  "  Long  time  therefore."  Wherever 
we  find  the  word  "  therefore  "  we  enquire  "  wherefore  ?  " 
Let  us  glance  at  the  preceding  verse :  "  The  Jews  that 
were  disobedient  stirred  up  the  souls  of  the  Gentiles,  and 
made  them  evil  affected  against  the  brethren."  There- 
fore, the  apostles  stayed  for  a  long  time  in  Iconium. 
The  reason  of  the  long  tarrying  was  not  the  success  of 
the  work,  but  its  difficulties.  The  reason  why  they  stayed 
was  that  persecution  was  abroad  against  those  first  gath- 
ered disciples.  This  reveals  the  persistence  of  their 
method.  All  new  difficulties  did  but  inspire  these  men  to 
continuity  and  perseverance. 

Yet  once  again,  as  we  watch  the  methods  of  this  min- 
istry here,  we  have  one  of  the  first  illustrations  of  the 
wonderful  power  of  adaptation.  At  Lystra  we  have  the 
picture  of  these  people  desiring  to  sacrifice  to  him,  and 
the  story  of  what  happened  at  Lystra  is  an  unconscious 
but  very  powerful  evidence  of  the  authenticity  of  this 
book.  Ovid  tells  of  a  legend  of  the  coming  into  that 
very  region  of  Jupiter  and  Mercury  long  before.  That 
city  of  Lystra  had  at  its  very  gates  a  temple  erected  to 
Jupiter,  in  memory  of  the  fact  that  Jupiter  and  Mercury 
had  there  descended.  Immediately  these  people  said, 
This  is  another  epiphany  of  the  deities;  the  gods  have 
come  again,  as  our  fathers  told  us  they  came  long  be- 
fore. That  was  the  occasion  for  Paul's  speech.  In  An- 
tioch  of  Pisidia  he  had  in  the  synagogue  Jews  and  Greeks, 
men  who  in  their  hunger  for  one  God,  had  turned  to 
Hebraism.  His  speech  there  indicated  the  unity  of  Deity, 
and  the  government  of  God  in  grace.  Now  in  Lystra 
there  was  not  a  single  reference  in  his  address  to  the 
Hebrew  Scriptures,  or  Hebrew  history.  He  began  where 
the  men  of  Lystra  were,  discovered  the  elements  of  re- 
ligion present  in  their  actual  consciousness,  and  upon  that 
based  his  appeal.  His  address,  a  brief  and  wonderful 
one,  was  delivered  to  men  who  had  never  had  the  light 
of  revelation. 

[341 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  14 : 1-20] 

When  these  men  were  suggesting  to  offer  sacrifices  to 
him,  even  the  priests  of  Jupiter  bringing  sacrifices  and 
garlands,  he  said  to  them,  "  We  also  are  men  of  like 
passions  with  you."  There,  in  a  flash,  idolatry  is  re- 
vealed, in  contrast  to  the  religion  of  revelation.  All  the 
gods  that  men  worship  are  gods  of  like  passions  to 
themselves.  Think  of  all  the  systems  of  religion  that  the 
world  has,  the  highest  and  best,  as  well  as  the  lowest 
and  most  degraded;  and  the  deity  worshipped  is  of  like 
passions  with  humanity.  In  those  words  Paul  put  the 
falsity  of  idolatry  before  the  attention  of  these  men ;  and 
declared  to  them  the  living  God,  the  One  Whose  very 
Being  lies  in  a  realm  far  removed  from  the  rage  and 
jealousy  of  human  passion.  He  drew  their  attention  to 
the  fact  that  He  had  never  left  Himself  without  witness, 
even  in  their  midst;  calling  them  to  a  realization  of  the 
fact  that  if  they  had  the  light  of  Nature,  if  they  had 
taken  time  to  think,  they  might  have  discovered  the  power 
and  wisdom  of  God.  There  he  began  his  appeal;  and 
then  he  preached  to  them  "  good  tidings."  Luke,  giving 
the  record,  did  not  repeat  the  story  of  the  evangel;  but 
he  did  emphasize  the  method  of  the  apostle,  who  recog- 
nized the  element  of  religious  life  that  there  was  in  the 
basest  people,  and  endeavoured  to  correct  it,  and  so  in- 
struct the  people  toward  the  truth. 

Having  thus  glanced  at  the  methods  of  the  work,  let 
us  look  over  the  story  again,  observing  the  manifestations 
of  power.  At  Iconium  the  Lord  wrought  signs  and 
wonders  by  their  hands.  There  is  no  detailed  list  of 
these  given ;  but  the  words  employed,  "  signs  and  won- 
ders," are  familiar.  They  were  miraculous  manifesta- 
tions. We  have  no  account  of  such  signs  and  wonders 
in  Antioch  of  Pisidia.  Observe  the  diversity  of  the 
Spirit's  activity.  In  Antioch  in  Pisidia  there  was  preach- 
ing, and  nothing  else  is  recorded.  In  Iconium  there  was 
the  preaching  of  the  same  Word  of  grace,  and  an  ac- 
companiment of  signs  and  wonders.  It  may  be  said,  Why 

[  342  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  14: 1-20] 

draw  such  emphatic  attention  to  this  ?  In  order  that  we 
may  be  reminded  that  we  cannot  base  a  system  of  pro- 
cedure upon  any  single  occurrence  in  any  given  place. 
That  is  a  peril  always  threatening  the  Christian  Church. 
In  Iconium  there  were  signs  and  wonders;  therefore 
there  must  be  signs  and  wonders  everywhere.  By  no 
means.  .On  the  method  of  the  Holy  Spirit  at  any  given 
hour  and  place,  we  have  no  right  to  base  a  doctrine  of 
perpetuity.  When  men,  sincere  souls,  attempt  to  teach 
that  the  one  sign  of  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  is  the 
gift  of  tongues,  they  are  departing  from  apostolic 
history.  The  Holy  Spirit  can  surely  bestow  the  gift  of 
tongues  to-day,  so  that  a  man  can  speak  in  another  lan- 
guage; but  He  will  as  surely  supply  the  interpreter  also 
for  the  man  so  speaking.  We  supremely  need  to-day  to 
get  back  into  such  fellowship  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  as 
to  remember  that  He  can  do  what  He  wills,  giving  gifts 
as  He  pleases.  I  am  sure  that  the  gift  of  healing  is  still 
within  the  power  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  that  He  can  be- 
stow it  upon  men  for  the  purposes  of  His  will;  but  I 
believe  that  when  a  man  has  that  gift,  he  will  lay  hands 
on  men,  and  they  will  be  healed.  We  cannot  compel 
the  Spirit  of  God  to  a  line  of  activity,  which  He  takes 
upon  occasion,  and  declare  that  is  His  perpetual  method. 
At  Lystra  there  was  another  revelation.  Paul  was 
preaching,  and  in  his  audience  there  was  a  cripple.  Paul 
spoke  to  him,  and  commanded  him  to  stand  up  because  of 
what  he  saw  in  his  face.  He  saw  that  he  had  faith  to  be- 
lieve. Two  things  are  revealed  in  that  story:  the  faith 
of  the  man  created  by  the  preacher,  as  listening  to  the 
story  of  the  risen  Christ  he  applied  that  story  to  his  own 
peculiar  need ;  and  a  preacher  interpreting  the  faith  in  the 
face  of  his  listener.  Every  preacher  knows  the  man  who 
listens,  and  who  looking  through  the  preacher,  sees  the 
truth,  grasps  it,  begins  to  apply  it;  the  light  of  it  is  in  his 
eye,  eagerness  is  manifested  in  his  face.  There  was  a 
great  and  magnificent  irregularity  in  Paul's  preaching. 

[  343  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  14 : 1-20] 

He  dared  to  stop,  and  say  to  the  man,  "  Stand  upright 
on  thy  feet."  Then  the  man  leaped  up  and  walked.  The 
men  of  Lystra  looked  upon  it  as  a  great  material  miracle, 
but  the  deeper  fact  was  the  spiritual  miracle  that  lay  be- 
hind it;  that  man's  apprehension  of  the  truth,  and  the 
application  of  it  to  his  own  case;  the  preacher's  knowl- 
edge of  it,  and  his  keenness  of  sight  in  the  man's  opera- 
tion of  faith  in  the  living  Lord.  That  was  the  wonderful 
thing. 

Then  "  they  stoned  Paul,  and  dragged  him  out  of  the 
city,  supposing  that  he  was  dead  " ;  and  to  the  astonish- 
ment of  his  own  company,  presently  he  rose  and  walked 
back  into  the  city.  Do  not  miss  the  miraculous  here. 
It  may  be  said  he  swooned  and  recovered.  That  may  be 
true:  but  the  men  of  Lystra  and  the  disciples  took  him 
for  dead.  As  the  stones  fell  thick  and  fast  upon  him,  I 
think  he  remembered  Stephen.  Personally  I  think  he 
was  dead;  and  quite  literally  and  actually  was  restored 
to  life,  and  had  a  positive  resurrection,  in  order  to  the 
fulfilment  of  his  life's  work. 

Looking  over  the  ground  once  more,  we  mark  the  di- 
versity of  the  apostle's  experiences.  How  differently  God 
deals  with  His  workers.  From  Antioch  Paul  was  allowed 
to  escape,  and  was  preserved.  At  Iconium  God  over- 
ruled circumstances,  he  was  warned,  and  escaped.  But 
he  did  not  escape  from  Lystra.  We  cannot  say  that  God 
took  care  of  him  at  Antioch,  and  at  Iconium,  and  that  He 
did  not  take  care  of  him  at  Lystra.  That  would  be 
blasphemy.  Paul  was  writing  to  Timothy,  the  young 
minister,  his  last  letter,  and  said  to  him,  You  know  the 
persecutions  I  endured  at  Antioch,  at  Iconium,  at  Lystra, 
but  out  of  them  all  the  Lord  delivered  me.  At  Antioch 
and  Iconium  He  delivered  him  by  saving  him  from  the 
stones.  At  Lystra  He  delivered  him  through  stoning. 
How  often  we  are  tempted  to  say:  God  delivered  in  the 
past,  but  He  has  not  done  so  this  time.  Calamity  has 
come,  we  are  bruised  and  broken.  Wait  a  little.  Pres- 

[  344  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  14 : 1-20] 

ently  we  shall  be  able  to  say,  Out  of  them  all  He  delivered 
me.  Sometimes  the  only  deliverance  God  can  work  for 
us  is  by  the  way  of  the  stones,  and  by  furnace  experi- 
ences. 

We  note  finally  the  perils  threatening  these  men. 
There  were  the  perils  of  opposition.  Disobedience  pro- 
duced the  spirit  of  opposition;  hatred,  plotting,  stoning. 
But  the  gravest  peril  threatening  these  men  was  that 
which  came  to  them  in  the  hour  when  men  suggested  that 
they  should  worship  them.  That  is  the  supreme  peril  to 
the  Christian  worker.  It  would  have  been  so  easy  to 
gain  power  and  notoriety;  to  take  this  worship,  and 
abandon  the  pathway  of  persecution  and  of  the  stones. 
That  is  the  peril  of  the  prophet.  When  men  bring  gar- 
lands to  worship,  when  men  suggest  his  deification,  he 
is  in  extreme  danger.  If  men  would  help  the  prophet, 
they  should  pray  that  he  may  never  accept  the  garland, 
or  the  worship  of  men.  This  was  a  most  insidious  hour. 
I  would  not  suggest  that  there  was  any  trembling  on  the 
part  of  Paul.  He  was  not  seduced,  because  he  was  living 
in  such  fellowship  with  his  Lord  that  it  was  impossible. 

This  is  the  end  of  the  first  missionary  journey  on  the 
outward  march.  As  we  look  over  the  movement  we  are 
impressed  by  the  fiery  sword  of  the  Christian  evangel. 
Wherever  these  men  came  they  brought  a  disturbing, 
dividing  force.  Every  city  was  shaken  to  its  centre,  and 
men  driven  into  opposite  camps.  As  we  watch,  we  re- 
member the  word  of  Jesus,  "  Think  not  that  I  came  to 
send  peace  on  the  earth :  I  came  not  to  send  peace,  but  a 
sword ! "  Unless  the  Christian  evangel  of  to-day  is  a 
fiery,  dividing,  separating  influence,  flinging  men  into 
opposite  camps,  it  is  not  the  evangel  of  the  apostles.  It 
is  always  a  disturbing  element,  because  it  makes  no  com- 
promise. This  evangel  comes  into  human  life,  and  re- 
moves and  casts  out  the  devil  in  human  life.  This 
evangel  has  no  soft  phrases  for  sin,  no  rose-water  method 
with  iniquity.  It  is  the  evangel  of  blood  and  fire;  and 

[  345  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  14 : 21-28] 

those  who  object  to  such  terminology  are  those  who  are 

without  the  evangel. 

Moreover  we  are  impressed  with  the  fiery  spirit  of  the 
evangelists.  Authority,  insistence,  courage,  invincibility. 
They  came  to  no  city  to  discuss  philosophies,  but  they 
came  to  preach  Christ.  They  came  into  the  midst  of 
all  forms  of  religious  life  to  recognize  the  elements  of 
truth,  but  not  to  leave  men  in  gloom.  They  came  to 
correct  the  mistake,  to  redeem  the  truth  from  error,  and 
to  set  men  upon  the  highway.  They  were  great  intrepid 
daring  fiery  spirits ;  and  it  is  only  thus  that  the  kingdom 
is  ever  to  be  won  for  our  God  and  His  Christ. 

Acts  14:21-28 

This  is  the  story  of  the  return  journey,  after  the  first 
missionary  campaign  of  Paul.  The  last  place  visited  in 
his  outward  march  was  Derbe.  I  think  we  are  warranted 
in  supposing  that  his  work  there  was  characterized  by 
quietness  and  peace.  No  details  are  preserved,  but  it  is 
recorded  in  the  first  verse  of  this  paragraph,  that  when 
they  had  preached  the  Gospel  to  that  city,  and  had  made 
many  disciples,  they  returned.  From  other  writings  we 
know  that  in  Derbe  the  apostle  gained  a  friend,  a  com- 
panion, a  fellow-helper,  in  Gaius.  Up  to  this  point  the 
whole  journey  had  been  characterized  by  stress  and 
strain.  It  may  be  that  the  persecuting  Jews  did  not  know 
where  Paul  and  his  company  had  gone.  Certainly  they 
do  not  seem  to  have  followed  him  to  Derbe. 

From  Derbe  the  great  eastern  road  ran  through  the 
passes  of  the  Taurus  range  of  mountains  straight  to 
Tarsus,  from  whence  Paul  and  his  company  could  have 
taken  ship,  and  crossed  quickly  over  to  Seleucia,  and  so 
would  have  arrived  at  Antioch  in  Syria.  That  was  the 
easy  way  back  to  the  Church  that  had  sent  them  forth. 
That  would  have  been  the  most  speedy  and  safe  method 
of  return;  most  speedy  certainly,  for  the  distance  was 
very  little  in  comparison  with  the  route  now  taken.  In- 

346 1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  14:21-28] 

stead  of  that  they  traversed  the  twenty  miles  back  to 
Lystra,  the  forty  on  to  Iconium,  the  sixty  on  to  Antioch ; 
and  then  came  along  the  southern  coast.  The  crossing 
of  swollen  rivers  and  the  presence  of  robbers  might  have 
made  the  mountain  passes  dangerous.  Nevertheless  perils 
from  robbers  and  rivers  are  always  easier  than  perils 
from  antagonistic  fanatics.  Along  the  way  by  which 
they  had  come,  they  had  left  companies  of  angry  men 
in  every  city,  determined  to  deal  with  them,  and  if  pos- 
sible to  put  them  to  death.  Instead  of  taking  what  ap- 
peared to  be  the  speedy  and  safe  way  Paul  turned  back 
again,  called  at  Lystra,  and  tarried  there,  how  long  we 
do  not  know;  moved  on  to  Iconium,  tarried  there,  doing 
definite  and  specific  work;  went  back  again  to  Antioch 
in  Pisidia,  journeyed  down  through  Pisidia,  and  stayed  to 
preach  at  Perga.  From  thence  he  took  ship,  and  sailed 
home. 

The  fact  of  this  backward  journey  is  significant.  The 
outward  journey  had  been  one  of  missionary  enterprise; 
it  was  the  journey  of  a  pioneer,  the  going  into  new  terri- 
tory, with  a  new  evangel.  He  created  division,  bringing 
the  sword  wherever  he  came,  dividing  cities  and  men  into 
two  camps,  believers  and  blasphemers,  men  full  of  jeal- 
ousy, men  filled  with  joy.  Let  us  then  survey  this  jour- 
ney back;  considering  first  the  fact  of  that  journey;  sec- 
ondly, its  values;  and  finally,  its  consummation,  as  they 
rehearsed  to  the  Church  all  the  things  that  had  been  ful- 
filled. 

As  we  think  of  the  fact  of  that  backward  journey,  the 
courage  of  it  impresses  us ;  and  we  are  driven  to  enquire 
its  cause.  First  of  all  Paul  went  from  Derbe,  the  place 
of  peaceful  work,  over  the  twenty  miles  of  "  wild  and 
dusty  plain,"  to  Lystra,  the  place  of  the  stones.  At  this 
long  distance  of  time  from  the  actual  happenings  we 
are  in  danger  of  forgetting  all  the  facts  of  the  case.  The 
end  of  his  previous  work  in  Lystra  is  very  briefly  told; 
they  stoned  him  and  left  him  for  dead.  So  far  as  Lystra 

[  347  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  14:21-28] 

was  concerned,  that  was  the  end  of  his  ministry.  It  is 
easily  read,  but  to  understand  it  a  little  exercise  of  the 
imagination  is  necessary.  Twenty  years  after,  the  mem- 
ory of  that  stoning  was  with  him  still :  "  Once  was  I 
stoned."  Such  an  experience  was  one  that  undoubtedly 
left  its  stamp  upon  him  physically,  to  the  end  of  his 
days.  The  journey  completed,  Derbe  being  evangelized 
in  peace  and  in  power,  there  was  the  short  way  home 
through  the  Taurus  ranges,  by  Seleucia,  to  Antioch.  But 
he  did  not  take  it,  he  went  back  to  the  place  of  the  stones, 
back  to  the  place  of  the  suffering,  back  to  the  places 
where  the  hatred  of  his  fellow  countrymen,  and  the  op- 
position of  the  new  men  whom  he  was  seeking  to  lead  to 
light,  had  broken  out  into  fierceness,  where  they  had 
rained  stones  upon  him,  and  left  him  for  dead. 

Then  he  went  back  still  further  forty  miles,  to  Iconium. 
He  had  left  that  city  in  haste.  There  had  been  perils 
and  dangers  in  Iconium  from  the  first  of  his  preaching 
there;  and  he  had  tarried  a  long  while  because  of  the 
perils  and  the  dangers.  At  last  his  friends  had  discov- 
ered there  was  a  plot  hatching  to  end  his  life,  and  under 
their  advice  he  left  in  haste.  Because  the  plot  had  failed 
when  he  was  there  before,  it  was  not  at  all  likely  that 
those  men  had  lost  their  resentment. 

Once  again,  he  went  still  further  back  to  Antioch,  over 
another  sixty  miles,  through  all  the  perils  of  that  strange 
and  wild  country  of  Lycaonia,  among  men  of  strange 
speech.  That  was  the  city  from  which,  at  the  end  of 
his  ministry,  he  had  been  cast  out.  He  had  to  leave 
Antioch  because  Antioch  would  have  him  no  longer. 

We  cannot  read  this  paragraph,  then,  without  seeing 
the  wonderful  courage  of  this  man  and  his  little  com- 
pany. If  there  was  no  good  cause  for  this  backward 
journey,  it  was  the  courage  of  foolhardiness.  Why  did 
he  thus  go  back?  The  answer  is  to  be  found  in  the  dis- 
covery of  what  he  did.  He  went  back  to  Lystra  to  find 
the  little  group  of  disciples ;  back  to  Iconium  to  see  those 

[348] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  14:21-28] 

who  had  believed;  back  to  Antioch  for  the  same  pur- 
pose.   He  went  back,  confirming,  exhorting,  organizing. 

Paul  was  driven  back  first  by  his  consciousness  of  the 
importance  of  the  truth  which  he  had  declared,  the  great 
Gospel  of  which  he  was  not  ashamed,  which  he  knew  to 
be  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation.  The  first  visit 
through  these  cities  had  been  that  of  proclamation;  but 
in  all  the  things  he  had  said  there  were  implications 
and  applications,  which  it  was  necessary  these  early  dis- 
ciples should  understand.  He  had  passed  through  these 
cities  preaching  two  things  supremely:  first,  the  risen 
Christ;  and  secondly,  the  possibility  of  man's  justification 
by  faith  in  the  risen  Christ.  These  were  great  truths, 
arresting  men,  compelling  attention,  constraining  belief  in 
certain  cases,  and  blasphemy  in  others. 

But  those  who  had  been  won  by  the  words,  constrained 
by  them,  and  had  believed,  did  not  understand  the  full 
value  of  them.  There  were  implications  in  the  doctrines 
of  resurrection  and  of  justification.  If  these  little  groups 
of  men,  situated  in  an  atmosphere  so  antagonistic  to  life, 
were  not  to  be  overcome,  and  devastated,  it  was  neces- 
sary that  they  should  be  instructed.  It  was  his  passion 
for  truth,  and  for  its  perfect  understanding,  that  drove 
him  back  over  the  way.  When  years  later,  from  prison 
he  wrote  the  greatest  of  his  letters — letters  we  had  never 
had  humanly  speaking,  apart  from  the  limitation  of  the 
prison  house — one  thing  he  repeatedly  said,  in  writing  to 
his  children  in  this  very  region,  in  Ephesus,  Colossse,  and 
Philippi,  was  that  the  supreme  passion  of  his  heart  for 
them  was  always  that  they  might  have  full  knowledge. 
Full  knowledge  makes  faith  mightier,  and  hope  burn 
more  brightly,  and  love  more  profound.  On  the  outward 
way  he  proclaimed  the  central  verities,  and  gathered  men 
in  the  first  act  of  faith ;  but  he  went  back,  in  order  that 
the  truth  might  have  its  full  triumph  in  the  lives  of  those 
who  had  believed. 

Then  he  was  drawn,  not  only  by  passion  for  truth, 

[  349  1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  14 : 21-28] 

but  by  the  fellowship  of  the  saints.  There  in  the  cities 
were  the  companies,  the  assemblies,  of  separated  souls. 
Think  of  those  little  groups  in  the  different  cities.  In 
Lystra  they  had  left  the  apostle  for  dead ;  but  there  were 
disciples  there,  among  them  probably  Timothy.  At 
Iconium  was  another  group,  so  much  alone,  Jew  and 
Gentile  alike  hating  them.  At  Antioch  were  those  prose- 
lytes of  the  gate,  and  those  Hebrews  who  had  dared  to 
enter  the  larger  life,  very  much  alone.  The  lure  of  the 
lonely  saints  compelled  him  to  turn  his  back  upon  the 
Taurus  passes,  and  the  quick  way  home,  to  tramp  the 
long  distances,  that  he  might  minister  a  new  courage  to 
them.  And  what  courage  he  must  have  brought  when  he 
came  and  stood  in  the  midst  of  that  little  group  at  Lystra, 
and  they  saw  the  brands  of  the  Lord  Jesus  upon  his 
face,  the  brutal  bruising  of  the  stones  still  there.  I  think 
the  fellowship  of  the  saints  drew  him  the  long  way  home 
again. 

But  we  do  not  touch  the  deepest  note  until  we  hear  one 
word  falling  from  his  lips  in  the  course  of  his  confirma- 
tion and  exhortation.  He  charged  them  that  they  should 
"  continue  in  the  faith ;  and  that  through  many  tribula- 
tions we  must  enter  into  the  Kingdom  of  God."  The 
master  passion  of  all  his  work  is  disclosed  in  the  words : 
"  the  Kingdom  of  God."  The  way  into  the  Kingdom  of 
God  was  declared,  it  is  the  way  of  tribulation.  The 
meaning  of  that  declaration  is  not  that  through  tribula- 
tions individual  men  enter  into  the  Kingdom  of  God.  It 
is  rather  that  through  tribulation  we  realize  the  Kingdom 
of  God,  set  up  the  Kingdom  of  God.  This  man,  in  com- 
mon with  all  the  great  seers  of  God,  recognized  that  the 
Kingdom  of  God  is  already  established,  but  needing  to 
be  realized.  The  Kingdom  of  God  is  established,  and 
no  man  escapes  it.  We  do  not  understand  the  buffeting 
of  the  tempest,  and  the  mystery  of  the  battle,  and  the 
strange  perplexities  in  conflict  of  the  saints  as  they  march 
toward  the  ultimate ;  but  we  know  that  it  is  all  within  the 

[  350  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  14:21-28] 

Kingdom  of  God.  No  army  marches  across  the  face  of 
the  world,  but  that  He  marshalls  the  battalions,  and  over- 
rules the  movement.  But  to  enter  the  Kingdom,  and 
bring  men  into  relation  with  it,  to  establish  it  in  the  world, 
to  cast  out  the  forces  that  spoil,  can  only  be  done  through 
tribulations.  Did  not  this  man  know  now,  as  he  had  not 
known  before,  that  the  Kingdom  of  God  was  established 
through  the  tribulations  of  the  Lord  Christ  Himself? 
Only  through  tribulations  can  God  enter  into  His  King- 
dom, and  realize  it  in  this  world,  with  its  sin  and  suffer- 
ing and  sorrow.  Paul  himself  had  felt  the  stones  raining 
on  him  at  Lystra,  the  physical  agony  and  the  mental  dis- 
appointment; but  he  knew  that  by  the  process  of  that 
pain,  he  was  helping  to  establish  the  Kingdom.  It  was 
the  passion  for  the  Kingdom  that  drove  him  on  the  out- 
ward journey  through  perils  oft.  It  was  the  passion 
for  the  Kingdom  that  drove  him  back  with  fine  states- 
manship and  consecration,  to  strengthen  the  little  com- 
panies of  men,  who  in  their  turn,  through  trial  and  tribu- 
lation should  cooperate  with  God  for  the  establishment 
o'f  the  Kingdom.  This  was  the  courage  of  faith,  and  of 
a  great  knowledge;  courage  born  of  a  true  conception  of 
the  methods  by  which  God  would  establish  His  Kingdom. 

The  values  of  that  journey  back  to  the  Churches  may 
be  expressed  in  three  words:  confirmation,  exhortation, 
and  organization. 

Confirmation  means  reestablishment,  or  perhaps  even 
better,  further  support.  He  went  back  to  give  further 
support  to  these  Churches,  to  interpret  to  them  the  mean- 
ing of  their  life  in  Christ;  a  most  important  part  of  all 
Christian  enterprise.  Having  seen  the  flaming  glory,  and 
heard  the  wooing  winsomeness  of  the  infinite  music  of 
the  evangel  of  a  risen  Lord,  and  of  justification,  the 
young  child  of  God  must  be  taught  the  meaning  of  life 
in  Christ.  Paul  went  back  to  further  establish,  to  sup- 
port, to  confirm. 

But  he  went  back  for  exhortation.    He  exhorted  them 

[  351  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  14:21-28] 

to  continue  in  the  faith.  In  those  cities  the  seen  things 
were  antagonistic.  Go  back  to  Lystra,  Iconium,  Antioch 
in  Pisidia,  get  right  into  the  midst  of  the  city,  and  look 
around,  and  you  will  see  temples,  idols,  shrines,  lascivi- 
ousness,  lust,  luxury.  That  is  a  description  of  all  cities, 
ancient  and  modern.  Cities  never  change.  These  people 
were  living  in  the  midst  of  these  things.  Oh,  this  lure 
of  the  near.  How  is  a  man  to  be  victor  over  the  things 
that  can  be  seen  and  touched  and  handled,  of  which  he  is 
quite  sure?  By  faith,  which  is  the  assurance  of  the  un- 
seen things.  Faith  is  the  venture  that  steps  off  the  tangi- 
ble; and  in  the  doing  of  it,  demonstrates  to  its  own  soul 
the  reality  of  the  intangible.  Paul  said  to  these  men  as 
he  went  back,  Do  not  look  at  the  seen  things  in  Lystra, 
Iconium,  and  Antioch ;  continue  in  the  faith.  This  is  the 
great  word  that  ever  needs  to  be  uttered  for  the  estab- 
lishment of  Christian  life.  He  exhorted  them  to  patience 
in  tribulation,  because  that  was  the  way  of  victory. 

Then  organization.  He  appointed  elders,  or  presbyters, 
in  all  the  Churches,  by  prayer  with  fasting,  in  the  com- 
pany of  the  Church.  Finally  he  commended  them,  Church 
and  elders,  to  the  Lord  in  Whom  they  had  believed.  This 
was  the  first  organization  of  the  Church  outside  the  area 
of  Judaism. 

So  far  all  the  emphasis  of  the  declaration  has  been 
upon  the  Church.  Was  there  any  value  in  the  return 
journey  to  the  apostle?  That  return  journey,  and  all 
such  return  journeys,  gave  him  an  exposition  of  the  very 
doctrines  which  he  had  preached.  Paul  did  not  study 
theology  before  he  began  preaching,  but  learned  his 
theology  as  he  preached.  It  was  when  he  had  seen  the 
effect  produced  by  the  evangel  on  life  that  he  knew  what 
justification  and  sanctification  really  meant.  Seeing  the 
effect  of  the  Gospel  on  the  lives  of  men,  he  came  to  an 
understanding  of  its  power  and  method ;  and  it  was  after 
such  observation  that  he  was  able  to  say,  "  I  am  not 
ashamed  of  the  Gospel,  because  it  is  the  power  of  God." 

[  352  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  14:21-28] 

The  return  journey  was  thus  also  one  of  confirmation 
of  his  own  Gospel.  He  saw  its  power,  and  was  growingly 
convinced  of  its  value.  He  was  also  confirmed  in  his 
purpose  to  continue  in  the  great  work. 

I  think  there  was  also  another  value.  When  he  had 
confirmed  and  exhorted  and  organized  at  Lystra,  Ico- 
nium,  and  Antioch,  and  after  he  had  preached  in  Perga, 
and  reached  Attalia,  there  emerged  another  value  of 
the  long  journey  home.  Watch  the  progress  of  that  little 
ship  along  the  coast,  to  the  north  of  Cyprus,  and  observe 
that  man  on  deck,  bruised  and  battered,  weakened  phys- 
ically by  the  perils  of  the  journeys,  and  the  brutality  and 
cruelty.  Look  at  his  eyes,  sore  eyes,  weak  eyes  per- 
chance ;  but  eyes  through  which  on  that  sea  voyage  there 
flamed  the  glory  of  a  triumph.  I  think  the  quiet  rest- 
fulness  of  that  sea  voyage  was  great  gain.  Thank  God 
this  apostle  was  a  man,  who  knew  the  weariness  of  work; 
and  there  was  great  value  to  him  in  the  longer  journey 
by  sea,  as  he  took  his  way  back. 

One  brief  glance  at  the  consummation  of  the  journey. 
The  Church  at  Antioch  had  commended  him  to  the  grace 
of  God.  They  had  sent  him  forth  with  Barnabas  to  the 
work  whereunto  the  Holy  Spirit  had  called  them.  There 
at  Antioch  they  had  waited  for  his  return,  and  had  prayed. 
At  last  he  came  back  to  them,  the  work  fulfilled,  and 
they  awaited  the  report. 

That  was  a  wonderful  meeting  when  the  Spirit  had 
said,  "  Separate  Me  Barnabas  and  Saul  " ;  and  the  Church 
had  separated  them,  and  sent  them  on  their  way.  This 
also  was  a  wonderful  meeting,  full  of  expectation,  and 
the  glory  of  a  new  enterprise.  The  men  they  had  sepa- 
rated are  there;  one  of  them  is  bruised  and  weakened; 
he  is  carrying  the  brands  of  Jesus  in  his  body.  What 
will  they  talk  about?  "  They  rehearsed."  Did  they  tell 
about  the  difficulties,  the  stones  and  the  bruises?  Yes, 
but  how  did  they  tell  them?  Listen  to  the  brief  ring  of 
triumph.  "  They  rehearsed  all  things  that  God  had  done 

[  353  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  14:21-28] 

with  them,  and  how  that  He  opened  a  door  of  faith 
unto  the  Gentiles."  Their  view-point  was  that  of  the 
Divine  activity.  Other  things  were  out  of  sight,  or  set 
in  relation  to  it.  But  the  supreme  thing  they  said  to  the 
Church  was  this,  that  "  God  had  opened  a  door  of  faith 
unto  the  Gentiles,"  That  was  the  report. 

As  we  close  this  meditation  there  is  one  sentence  of 
supreme  value  to  all  Christian  men  and  women. 
"  Through  many  tribulations  we  must  enter  into  the 
Kingdom  of  God."  The  form  and  fashion  of  the  tribu- 
lations change  with  changing  years,  but  the  principle 
abides.  The  places  of  suffering  are  the  places  of  power. 
Lystra,  the  place  of  stones,  is  the  dynamic  centre,  "  I. 
will  tarry  at  Ephesus  until  Pentecost;  for  a  great  door 
and  effectual  is  opened  unto  me,  and  there  are  many  ad- 
versaries" That  is  the  reason  why  he  stayed,  The  place 
of  power  is  where  the  adversaries  are,  and  the  stones, 
and  the  tribulations.  It  is  the  process  of  tribulation  that 
brings  the  victory. 

"  Far  down  the  ages  now, 
Her  journey  well-nigh  done, 
The  pilgrim  Church  pursues  her  way 
In  haste  to  reach  the  crown. 
The  story  of  the  past 
Comes  up  before  her  view ; 
How  well  it  seems  to  suit  her  still, 
Old,  and  yet  ever  new ! 

"  'Tis  the  same  story  still, 
Of  sin  and  weariness  ; 
Of  grace  and  love  still  flowing  down 
To  pardon  and  to  bless : 
No  wider  is  the  gate, 
No  broader  is  the  way, 
No  smoother  is  the  ancient  path, 
That  leads  to  light  and  day. 

t  354  J 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  15:1-35] 
"  No  sweeter  is  the  cup, 
No  less  our  lot  of  ill ; 
'Twas  tribulation  ages  since, 
'Tis  tribulation  still: 
No  slacker  grows  the  fight, 
.     No  feebler  is  the  foe, 

No  less  the  need  of  armour  tried 
Of  shield  and  spear  and  bow. 

"  Thus  onward  still  we  press, 
Through  evil  and  through  good, 
Through  pain  and  poverty  and  want, 
Through  peril  and  through  blood ; 
Still  faithful  to  our  God, 
And  to  our  Captain  true; 
We  follow  where  He  leads  the  way, 
The  Kingdom  in  our  view." 

Acts  15 : 1-35 

This  has  sometimes  been  called  the  story  of  the  first 
council  of  the  Christian  Church.  To  that  description  of 
the  gathering  in  Jerusalem  Farrar  in  his  "  Life  and  Work 
of  St.  Paul  "  objected,  for  excellent  reasons.  He  showed 
that  the  council  in  Jerusalem  was  not  a  convention  of 
delegates,  but  a  meeting  of  the  Church  at  Jerusalem,  to 
receive  a  deputation  from  the  Church  at  Antioch,  and  to 
consider  a  subject  of  grave  importance  in  the  matter  of 
missionary  enterprise.  He  pointed  out  moreover,  that 
this  gathering  in  Jerusalem  was  for  purposes  of  con- 
sultation, and  not  for  final  and  dogmatic  decision.  Yet 
it  may  be  good  to  retain  the  name  of  council,  if  we  would 
understand  what  a  council  should  be,  and  see  wherein  the 
grave  errors  of  many  subsequent  councils  have  consisted. 

Almost  all  councils  subsequent  to  the  first  have  at- 
tempted to  fix  some  habit  of  ritual,  or  to  give  final  form 
to  the  expression  of  some  great  truth.  Neither  of  these 
things  was  attempted  in  the  gathering  in  Jerusalem. 
The  true  function  of  a  council  as  herein  revealed,  is  that 
of  considering  an  immediate  subject,  and  finding  an  im- 

[  355  1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  15 : 1-35] 

mediate  application  of  principle.  Nevertheless  such  con- 
sideration and  such  rinding  must  necessarily  have  a  most 
important  bearing  on  future  development.  When  the 
council  met  in  Jerusalem,  it  gathered  to  consider  a  prob- 
lem that  was  immediate,  which  was  created  at  Antioch, 
the  new  centre  of  missionary  enterprise;  a  problem  cre- 
ated by  the  arrival  there  of  men  of  Judaea,  who  were 
charging  these  new  Gentile  converts, — mark  this  most 
particularly, — not  that  they  should  be  circumcized;  but 
that  unless  they  were  circumcized  they  could  not  be 
saved.  The  council  met  to  consider  this  matter,  to  hear 
the  report  of  those  who  were  sent  by  the  Church  at 
Antioch ;  not  in  order  to  learn  what  the  Church  at  Jeru- 
salem had  to  say  authoritatively  and  finally,  in  order  that 
it  should  be  obeyed ;  but  for  purposes  of  conference,  and 
that  the  larger  fellowship  of  Christian  people  might  be 
taken  into  account  when  facing  so  grave  a  situation. 

Luke's  picture  must  be  interpreted  by  Paul's  letter  to 
the  Galatians.  Without  suggesting  that  either  account 
is  untrue,  it  is  quite  certain  that  if  they  be  read  together 
we  shall  catch  a  different  tone.  There  is  a  touch  in 
Paul's  account  of  the  story,  which  reveals  how  keenly 
he  felt  certain  attitudes  taken  up  toward  him,  even  on 
the  part  of  the  apostolic  band.  We  cannot  read  Paul's 
account  of  the  council,  and  of  its  findings,  without  see- 
ing that  had  they  been  other  than  they  were,  he  would 
not  have  obeyed  them.  He  was  not  seeking  the  authority 
of  the  Church  at  Jerusalem.  He  was  not  asking  for  an 
expression  of  truth  by  James  or  by  Peter,  ex  cathedra. 
He  was  there  for  purposes  of  consultation ;  and  had  the 
finding  been  one  that  put  the  Gentiles  into  bondage,  he 
would  have  broken  with  Jerusalem,  and  all  the  apostles, 
in  the  interests  of  truth.  There  are  evidences  in  his  ac- 
count of  the  story,  of  the  fact  that  there  was  a  good  deal 
of  dissension,  and  difference,  and  argument,  before  final- 
ity was  reached. 

But  when  the  history  is  read  as  Luke  has  recorded  it, 

1 356 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  15 : 1-35] 

then  we  discover  not  so  much  the  details  of  difference,  as 
the  ultimate  harmony  of  decision.  The  story  becomes 
the  more  interesting  when  we  recognize  these  two  things ; 
when  we  see  that  in  the  first  assembly,  and  in  subsequent 
discussions,  there  were  very  many  differences,  and  some 
touch  perhaps  of  bitterness.  Yet  at  last,  there  came  a 
great  and  holy  and  wonderful  moment,  when  that  as- 
sembly of  Christian  believers,  with  different  opinions, 
after  discussion,  based  upon  a  master-principle,  were 
able  to  say,  "  It  seemed  good  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  to 


us." 


Let  us  first  observe  the  story  of  the  council,  and  then 
attempt  an  application  of  its  findings  to  our  own  day. 

It  is  well  that  we  should  first  enquire  what  the  differ- 
ence of  opinion  was,  that  gave  rise  to  the  council.  When 
we  have  discovered  it,  we  may  consider  the  discussion 
that  ensued,  and  finally  look  briefly  at  the  decision  ar- 
rived at.  To  get  back  into  the  atmosphere  is  to  under- 
stand the  naturalness  of  the  difficulty.  To  the  Jew,  Chris- 
tianity was  the  fulfilment  and  continuity  of  the  old  econ- 
omy. Therein  he  was  distinguished  entirely  in  his  mental 
attitude  from  the  mental  attitude  of  the  new  converts  in 
Antioch,  Iconium,  Lystra,  and  throughout  that  district. 
The  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  mind  of  the  Hebrew 
believing  into  Him,  was  not  a  religion  that  destroyed 
the  religion  of  his  fathers,  but  fulfilled  it.  The  religion 
of  Jesus  Christ  had  grown  out  of  the  religion  of  his  fa- 
thers, was  the  continuity  of  one  Divine  movement.  Paul's 
address  in  the  synagogue  at  Antioch  in  Pisidia  dealt  with 
the  great  doctrines  of  the  unity  of  God  in  order  to  cap- 
ture the  mind  of  the  Greek;  but  he  spoke  also  of  the 
whole  Hebrew  movement,  and  saw  its  fulfilment  in  Christ 
and  in  His  evangel. 

But  the  new  movement  in  Antioch  of  Syria  was  a 
movement  not  influenced  by  that  tradition.  Indeed,  the 
movement  at  Antioch  had  not  even  an  apostolic  tradition 
behind  it;  it  began  with  Christ,  and  the  men  of  Antioch 

[  357  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  15 : 1-35] 

therefore  were  quite  careless  as  to  the  things  preceding, 

and  had  no  interest  in  them. 

Mark  these  differences.  The  Christian  Jew,  looking 
upon  his  Christianity  as  the  direct  outcome,  continuity, 
and  fulfilment,  of  the  august  religion  of  his  fathers,  came 
to  Antioch  and  into  all  these  cities;  and  found  Greek 
Christians,  who  had  no  relation  with  the  Hebrew  re- 
ligion or  tradition;  whose  Christianity  began  in  their 
knowledge  of  Christ.  Immediately  we  see  the  natural- 
ness of  the  difficulty.  These  men,  many  of  them  per- 
fectly sincere,  said  that  these  Greek  Christians  could  not 
be  saved  by  beginning  in  the  middle  of  a  process ;  that  it 
was  not  enough  that  they  began  with  Christ.  They  must 
also  be  brought  to  everything  that  prepared  the  way  for 
the  Christ.  They  must  conform  to  the  law  of  Moses, 
and  the  ritual  of  Moses. 

This  difficulty  was  serious,  for  it  was  one  which  would 
be  repeated  in  new  centres.  It  would  accentuate  within 
the  Christian  fact,  a  conflict  between  Hebraism  and  Hel- 
lenism, which  had  been  so  profound  and  bitter  in  the 
years  prior  to  that  fact.  When  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  ap- 
prehended by  Jesus  Christ  for  a  special  purpose,  it  was 
the  apprehension  of  a  man  in  whom  the  two  ideals  of 
Hebraism  and  Hellenism  met,  in  whom  they  had  been 
at  conflict  until  Christ  found  him,  but  in  whom  they 
were  now  merged  into  one  great  Christian  mental  atti- 
tude. He  was  Hebrew  of  Hebrews,  but  he  was  Saul  of 
Tarsus.  The  idea  of  bondage  and  denial  and  sacrifice, 
was  the  idea  of  Hebraism;  the  idea  of  liberty  and  cul- 
ture and  the  fulfilment  of  life,  was  the  idea  of  Hellenism. 
In  Christ  he  had  found  that  through  bondage  men  come 
into  liberty ;  that  through  death  men  come  into  life ;  that 
through  all  that  Hebraism  stood  for,  men  realize  all  that 
Hellenism  suggests.  That  was  the  victory  won  in  Saul 
of  Tarsus.  Now  if  through  these  new  Churches  in  the 
midst  of  Hellenism,  Hebraism  was  to  reassert  certain  of 
its  old  rites,  there  would  be  cleavage  in  the  Christian 

[358] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  15 : 1-35] 

movement.  That  was  the  peril  of  the  situation.  If  these 
teachers  from  Judaea  had  been  victorious,  then  through 
those  earliest  years,  lasting  until  now,  there  would  have 
been  division  between  the  Hebrew  Church  of  Christ,  and 
the  Gentile  Church  of  Christ;  and  the  bitterness  caused 
by  such  division  would  have  been  mutually  destructive, 
and  the  testimony  of  Christ  to  the  world  would  have  been 
lost.  So  that  it  was  not  merely  a  dispute  about  a  rite 
or  ceremony,  but  something  far  profounder  that  gave  rise 
to  this  council  in  Jerusalem. 

Before  passing  from  this  contemplation  of  the  diffi- 
culty, having  touched  upon  its  naturalness  and  its  serious- 
ness, there  is  yet  another  element  to  be  noticed  in  the 
danger  that  threatened  the  Church.  Circumcision  in  the 
original  purpose  of  God  was  ordained  for  the  cure  of 
self-righteousness.  It  was  an  outward  and  visible  sign 
or  symbol  of  the  fact  that  this  people  was  separated  to 
God,  and  dependent  upon  God;  that  all  they  were,  and 
were  able  to  do  in  the  world,  arose  from  the  activity  and 
the  government  of  God.  At  once  we  see  wherein  the 
Hebrew  people  in  the  process  of  the  ages  had  entirely 
missed  the  meaning  of  the  rite,  for  which  they  were  now 
prepared  to  fight.  Circumcision  was  now  being  made  the 
instrument  of  self-righteousness.  That  which  was  in- 
tended to  mark  its  destruction,  or  to  indicate  its  absence, 
had  become  the  sign  and  the  cause  of  its  possession. 
Circumcision,  and  all  the  rites  and  ceremonials  of  He- 
brew observance,  had  become  evasions  of  the  true  pur- 
pose of  God;  opiates  by  the  use  of  which  men  drugged 
their  souls  to  the  clamant  cry  of  righteousness.  That  is 
always  the  danger  of  ritualism.  The  religion  of  the  most 
high  God  had  been  made  subservient  to  the  observance 
of  external  rites.  Paul  saw  the  peril  of  grafting  a  ritual 
on  to  the  Christian  Church,  putting  a  rite  or  a  ceremony 
in  the  place  of  essential  spiritual  life  and  communion. 
That  was  the  inspiration  of  his  anger  and  passion;  and 
presently,  of  his  strong  and  stern  denunciation  of  Peter, 

[  359  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  15 : 1-35] 

when  subsequently  to  the  council,  Peter  went  down  to 
Antioch  and  dissembled.  These  were  not  small  matters. 
They  were  fundamental  matters.  This  was  a  difference 
involving  the  very  genius  of  religion,  as  to  the  profound- 
est  things  of  Christianity. 

Concerning  the  discussion,  the  two  passages,  this 
fifteenth  chapter  of  the  Acts,  and  Paul's  story  in  Gala- 
tians,  are  mutually  interpretive.  Evidently  Paul  and  Bar- 
nabas were  graciously  received  by  the  Church.  Evidently 
also  there  was  a  private  conference  between  Paul  and 
Barnabas  and  the  elders.  That  is  admitted  in  the  sixth 
verse  of  this  fifteenth  chapter,  "  And  the  apostles  and 
elders  were  gathered  together  to  consider  of  this  matter." 
It  is  quite  briefly  stated  by  Luke.  What  happened  in 
that  conference  we  are  not  told,  but  it  was  a  quiet  and 
private  conference.  The  deputation  from  Antioch  in 
Syria  consisted  of  Paul,  Barnabas,  and  Titus,  and  per- 
chance two  or  three  others.  The  story  of  their  reception 
is  told  in  verse  four :  They  "  were  received  of  the  church 
and  the  apostles  and  the  elders,  and  they  rehearsed  "  in 
Jerusalem  what  they  had  been  doing  all  the  way.  They 
told  how  they  had  left  Antioch  rejoicing  in  the  triumphs 
won;  they  told  the  story  of  Perga  and  Attalia.  Arrived 
in  Jerusalem,  they  simply  rehearsed  the  triumphs  of  the 
Gospel,  they  did  not  raise  the  difficulty. 

In  the  Galatian  letter  Paul  is  careful  to  state  what 
happened  at  this  point.  In  the  second  chapter  and  second 
verse  he  says,  "  I  went  up  by  revelation ;  and  I  laid  before 
them  the  Gospel  which  I  preach  among  the  Gentiles,  but 
privately  before  them  who  were  of  repute,  lest  by  any 
means  I  should  be  running,  or  had  run,  in  vain."  That 
is  Paul's  account  of  what  happened  when  the  apostles 
and  the  elders  were  gathered  together  with  the  deputa- 
tion, the  church  not  being  present.  Paul  laid  before 
them,  not  the  story  of  his  triumphs,  but  his  Gospel.  At 
the  first  reception  he  rehearsed  the  story  of  all  God  had 
been  doing  in  the  district;  but  to  that  smaller  select  com- 

[360] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  15 : 1-35] 

pany,  he  rehearsed  the  Gospel,  he  told  what  he  had  been 
preaching,  he  went  over  the  ground  of  the  truth  he  had 
been  proclaiming. 

Having  discussed  his  Gospel  with  the  apostles,  and 
having,  as  we  learn  in  Galatians,  won  the  approval  of 
Peter,  James,  and  John,  the  church  assembled  again ;  and 
there  followed  the  discussion  in  the  council.  In  this  there 
are  three  things  to  notice:  first,  the  address  of  Peter; 
secondly,  the  address  of  Barnabas  and  Paul  (which  was 
the  speaker  it  is  impossible  to  say,  for  the  speech  is  not 
reported)  ;  and  finally,  the  address  of  James. 

Peter  contributed  two  things  to  the  discussion :  a  fact, 
and  a  deduction.  The  speech  of  Peter  is  not  that  of  the 
theologian.  He  was  not  arguing  about  a  doctrine.  He 
was  not  entering  into  the  delicate  and  difficult  discussion 
as  to  rites  and  ceremonies.  Peter,  bold,  blunt,  and  mag- 
nificent, said  in  effect,  Here  is  a  fact,  and  here  is  a  de- 
duction. The  fact  was  that  God  had  sent  him  to  the 
Gentiles,  and  gave  to  the  Gentiles  in  the  house  of  Cor- 
nelius the  Spirit  of  God,  "  making  no  distinction."  The 
deduction  he  made  was  that  they  should  not  tempt  God. 
On  the  sin  of  tempting  God  there  is  light  in  the  history  of 
the  Old  Testament;  there  is  light  in  Hebrews  and  in 
Corinthians;  and  supremely  there  is  light  in  the  tempta- 
tion of  our  Lord  in  the  wilderness.  To  tempt  God  is  to 
refuse  to  follow  His  guidance.  Said  the  tempter  to 
Jesus,  "If  Thou  art  the  Son  of  God,  cast  Thyself 
down  " ;  and  Jesus  said,  "  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord 
thy  God  " ;  that  is,  thou  shalt  not  refuse  to  wait  for  His 
guidance  and  direction,  thou  shalt  not  initiate  adven- 
tures in  order  to  see  whether  or  not  He  will  help  in  cir- 
cumstances which  are  not  of  His  will.  Said  Peter,  Here 
is  the  fact,  God  has  already  given  the  Gentile  all  grace 
without  ceremony,  ritual,  rite,  and  observance.  Here  is 
the  deduction:  do  not  be  afraid  to  follow  God,  even 
though  He  seems  to  be  breaking  through  things  dear  to 
our  heart;  do  not  tempt  God,  by  refusing  His  guidance. 

i  361 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  15 : 1-35] 

Paul  and  Barnabas  simply  rehearsed,  saying  in  effect 
that  Peter's  fact  had  been  multiplied  by  facts  throughout 
all  these  cities.  They  had  been  sent  by  that  Church  in 
Antioch,  upon  which  some  men  now  would  superimpose 
a  bondage  and  a  yoke,  through  Seleucia,  and  Cyprus, 
from  Salamis  to  Paphos,  from  Perga  in  Pamphylia  into 
the  new  Antioch  in  Pisidia,  away  on  through  Iconium 
and  Lystra,  to  Derbe;  and  everywhere  facts  had  been 
multiplied,  God  had  given  the  gifts  of  grace,  and  the 
gift  of  the  Spirit,  without  rite  and  without  ceremony. 

The  final  speaker  was  James.  He  first  referred  to 
Peter's  fact,  admitting  it,  reemphasizing  its  importance 
and  value.  "  Symeon  hath  rehearsed."  He  then  showed 
how  Peter's  fact,  and  the  facts  of  Paul  and  Barnabas 
were  in  perfect  harmony  with  prophetic  foretelling.  He 
quoted  the  great  word  from  the  prophecy  of  Amos,  in 
which  it  is  predicted  that  through  the  triumph  and  res- 
toration of  Israel  the  Gentiles  also  should  receive  bless- 
ing;— a  prophecy  not  perfectly  fulfilled  even  until  this 
hour;  to  be  fulfilled  undoubtedly,  in  the  economy  of  God; 
— a  prophecy  fulfilled  in  principle  on  the  day  of  Pentecost 
when  that  little  Hebrew  community  became  the  true 
Israel  of  God;  and  immediately  following,  when  the 
prophetic  promise  was  fulfilled  in  the  experience  of  the 
Gentiles.  Then  James  said,  "  Wherefore  my  judgment 
is,  that  we  trouble  not  them."  Before  proceeding  to  con- 
sider the  judgment,  note  the  particular  emphasis  of  that 
word.  To  translate  quite  literally,  James  said,  "  Where- 
fore I  decide,"  or  "  I  think  " ;  and  we  must  interpret  the 
word  decide  by  the  word  think.  Much  has  been  based 
upon  that  "  I  decide  "  of  James.  It  has  been  said  that 
he  was  the  bishop  of  Jerusalem,  that  he  was  in  authority 
over  the  Church  in  Jerusalem ;  but  there  is  not  a  vestige 
of  proof  in  the  narrative  itself,  and  for  the  traditions  that 
have  gathered  round  the  story,  I  am  bound  to  say  I  have 
no  respect.  It  has  been  pointed  out  that  the  pronoun 
"  I,"  "  /  decide  "  is  emphatic  in  the  Greek.  An  emphatic 

[  362  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  15 ;  1-35] 

pronoun  depends  after  all  upon  the  tone  and  emphasis. 
The  emphatic  /  must  be  interpreted  in  harmony  with  the 
rest  of  the  New  Testament  and  the  Bible.  Jt  is  absurd 
to  believe  that  James  at  this  moment  gave  his  personal 
opinion  as  the  final  word,  from  which  there  could  be  no 
appeal.  He,  the  practical  man,  the  writer  of  the  epistle, 
the  brother  of  the  Lord,  spoke  last ;  and  in  his  speaking 
gave  with  due  reserve,  and  with  a  consciousness  of  the 
importance  of  the  views  of  others,  his  strong  opinion. 
The  very  emphasis  on  the  I  shows  that  he  was  only 
expressing  a  personal  conviction.  Nevertheless  with  that 
opinion  the  Church  agreed.  The  decision  to  which  they 
came  was  not  the  decision  of  a  man,  It  was  such  a  de- 
cision that  when  they  registered  it  and  wrote  it  and  sent  it 
to  Antioch,  they  did  not  say,  After  consultation,  James, 
the  bishop,  speaking  ex  cathedra,  has  decided,  They  said 
something  far  more  full  of  dignity,  "  It  seemed  good 
to  the  Holy  Spirit  and  to  us." 

The  decision  was  first  of  all  characterized  by  una- 
nimity. It  was  the  expression  of  the  conviction  of  the 
apostles  and  the  elders  and  the  Church;  and  the  secret 
of  the  unanimity  was  that  of  the  presidency  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  the  assembly,  "  It  seemed  good  to  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  to  us." 

The  terms  of  the  decision  may  be  stated  in  other  lan- 
guage, because  this  record  is  so  much  the  language  of  that 
particular  time.  The  decision  immediately  was  that  they 
would  not  trouble  the  Greek  Christians  any  further,  but 
that  they  charged  them  concerning  things  they  were  not 
to  do.  The  decision  for  all  time  was  first,  that  no  cere- 
mony is  needed  to  make  men  Christ's ;  and  secondly,  that 
observances  are  necessary  on  the  part  of  men  who  are 
Christ's.  They  would  not  trouble  them  further,  would 
not  harass  them,  crowd  them,  jostle  them,  press  them, 
put  them  into  difficulty,  with  habits  and  observances 
which  were  not  essential  to  salvation, — 'the  things  of 
ritual,  Nevertheless  they  charged  them  that  being 

1 363 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  15 : 1-35] 

Christ's  men,  they  must  observe  the  attitudes  and  habits 
of  loyalty  to  His  moral  standards ;  they  must  abstain  from 
the  pollution  of  idols,  from  fornication,  from  things 
strangled,  and  from  blood.  Such  were  the  decisions. 

What  then  were  the  results  ?  They  may  thus  be  sum- 
marized: rest  in  Antioch;  and  a  period  of  preparation 
for  future  work.  This  council  came  between  the  first 
and  second  missionary  journeys  of  the  apostle,  and  con- 
stituted a  necessary  pause,  the  passing  of  a  difficulty  that 
had  risen,  its  settlement  once  and  forever,  so  that  when- 
ever Judaizing  teachers  in  days  to  come  should  pass 
through  that  district  and  teach  these  doctrines,  they  would 
be  known  as  not  having  apostolic  or  Christian  authority. 
It  was  an  important  decision,  one  that  affects  the  whole 
history  of  the  Church  from  that  moment  unto  this. 

In  conclusion,  what  are  the  applications  of  this  story 
to  ourselves  ?  There  is  something  we  do  well  to  consider 
in  the  method  of  the  findings.  The  supreme  word  flames 
with  light  upon  this  page :  "  It  seemed  good  to  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  to  us."  It  marks  a  progression  or  development 
from  a  centre  to  something  external.  Communion  with 
Christ  by  the  Holy  Spirit  lies  at  the  very  root  of  that 
word.  The  second  thing  is  the  outcome  of  the  first ;  that 
of  the  unity  of  the  Church  by  the  Spirit.  The  final  thing 
is  that  of  the  unanimity  of  the  Spirit  and  the  Church. 
There  will  never  be  unanimity  unless  it  be  based  on  unity. 
There  never  will  be  the  realization  of  unity  save  in  re- 
sponse to  a  fundamental  union;  a  union  between  the 
members  of  the  Church  and  the  living  Lord  by  the  Holy 
Spirit.  This  picture  of  the  council  in  Jerusalem  is  that 
of  a  company  of  men  and  women,  sharing  the  life  of 
Christ,  desiring  only  to  know  the  mind  of  the  Lord,  hav- 
ing no  selfish  views  for  which  to  contend.  These  are  the 
conditions  upon  which  it  is  possible  for  any  such  as- 
sembly to  say,  "  It  seemed  good  to  the  Holy  Spirit  and  to 
us."  The  Church  does  not  seem  to  be  able  to  say  it  to- 
day, either  a  local  church,  or  the  great  councils  of  the 

[  364] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  15 : 1-35] 

Church.  We  must  freely  admit  we  very  seldom  hear  this 
language.  We  do  read  that  a  matter  was  carried  by  an 
overwhelming  majority,  but  that  is  a  very  different  thing. 
An  overwhelming  majority  often  leaves  behind  it  a 
minority  disaffected  and  dangerous.  We  shall  come  to 
unanimity  when  we  are  prepared  to  discuss  freely, 
frankly,  our  absolute  differences,  on  the  basis  of  a  com- 
mon desire  to  know  the  mind  of  the  Lord.  If  we  come 
to  a  meeting  of  diaconate  Or  Church,  a  Christian  council, 
having  made  our  minds  up  that  so  it  must  be,  then  we 
hinder  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  make  it  impossible  for  Him 
to  make  known  His  mind  and  will.  But  if  we  come,  per- 
fectly sure  in  our  minds,  but  wanting  to  know  what  the 
Lord's  mind  is,  then  ere  the  council  ends,  to-day  as  yes- 
terday, the  moment  will  come  when  we  shall  be  able  to 
say  with  a  fine  dignity  and  a  splendid  force,  It  seems 
good  to  the  Holy  Spirit  and  to  us. 

If  that  be  the  lesson  of  the  method  of  the  findings, 
what  is  the  message  of  the  findings?  What  has  this 
council  of  the  long  ago  to  say  to  us  to-day?  Its  first 
lesson  is  that  the  Christian  man  and  the  Christian  Church 
is  free  from  the  bondage  of  Hebraism.  There  is  a  sense 
in  which  we  are  not  influenced  by  Hebraism.  There  is  a 
sense  in  which  Judaism  makes  no  appeal  to  us.  There- 
fore to  state  the  principle  in  other  words:  nothing  is 
necessary  to  salvation,  other  than  faith  in  Christ,  and 
consequent  life  m  the  Spirit;  neither  baptism,  nor  the 
Lord's  Supper,  nor  the  observance  of  any  ordinance,  or 
ceremony.  Let  us  decide  as  did  this  council,  that  we  will 
trouble  men  no  further,  that  we  will  no  more  insist  upon 
this  rite  or  that  ceremony  in  order  to  salvation. 

The  second  lesson  is  that  of  the  necessity  for  bondage 
to  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life.  There  must  be,  on  the 
part  of  all  Christian  souls,  abstention  from  the  haunts  and 
the  habits  of  idolatry;  abstention  from  many  practices, 
not  in  themselves  unlawful,  in  order  to  a  testimony  of 
separation ;  and  the  observance  of  the  laws  of  humanity. 

[  365  1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  15 :  36-16 : 10] 

These  Gentiles  must  abstain  from  things  strangled,  and 
from  blood.  That  was  not  Hebraism.  That  was  not  the 
law  of  Moses.  It  was  said  long  before  Moses.  In  the 
covenant  of  God  with  Noah,  when  humanity  started  out 
again  upon  a  new  movement,  the  law  was  given.  So  for 
these  Judaizing  teachers,  James'  quotation  was  one  full 
of  wisdom.  He  stepped  outside  the  Hebrew  economy, 
and  referred  to  the  laws  that  regulated  human  life,  apart 
from  Hebraism,  and  said  these  people  were  to  observe 
the  human  law. 

So  the  findings  of  the  council  which  have  perpetual 
application  are  those  of  freedom  from  rites  and  cere- 
monies as  means  of  salvation;  observance  of  all  habits 
that  mark  us  as  separate  from  idolatry,  and  from  the 
practices  of  idolatry ;  and  devotion  to  the  Divine  ideal  of 
human  life,  and  to  the  keeping  of  the  laws  for  the  well- 
being  of  human  life. 

Acts  15: 36-16: 10 

It  is  quite  evident  that  there  is  a  gap  in  the  history  be- 
tween verses  thirty-five  and  thirty-six.  The  last  words  in 
the  previous  paragraph  declared  that  "  Paul  and  Bar- 
nabas tarried  in  Antioch,  teaching  and  preaching  the 
Word  of  the  Lord,  with  many  others  also."  That  gap 
is  supplied  by  a  brief  paragraph  in  the  Galatian  letter 
(2:  11-21).  Peter  visited  Antioch,  and  when  he  came, 
acted  in  the  true  spirit  of  the  findings  of  the  council,  in 
that  he  sat  at  meat  with  the  Gentiles,  making,  to  use  his 
own  words,  "  no  distinction."  Evidently  a  little  later  on 
there  came  down  from  Jerusalem  men  influenced  by  the 
Judaizers.  When  they  came,  they  were  not  told  of  the 
dispute,  but  Peter — to  use  Paul's  very  strong  word — 
"  dissimulated,"  in  that,  in  the  presence  of  these  men  he 
ceased  to  eat  with  the  Gentiles.  Against  that  activity,  in 
which  Barnabas  evidently  sympathized  for  the  moment, 
Paul  made  the  vigorous  protest  recorded  in  the  Galatian 
passage.  The  ending,  however,  was  evidently  one  of 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  15 :  36-16 :  10] 

peace.  Rebuked  by  Paul,  the  dissimulation  of  Peter 
ended,  and  no  bitterness  remained  in  the  heart  of  either. 

When  the  difficulty  was  settled,  and  the  future  line  of 
action  was  clearly  defined,  Paul  began  to  prepare  im- 
mediately for  further  journeyings,  and  work.  The  sub- 
ject of  supreme  interest  in  the  second  missionary  journey 
of  Paul  is  that  of  the  invasion  of  Europe.  Once  again 
the  circle  widens,  and  we  see  the  apostle  crossing  the 
boundary  line  into  Europe.  The  call  of  the  man  of 
Macedonia  was  answered,  and  the  evangel  carried  yet 
further  afield. 

In  this  paragraph  we  finally  reach  Troas,  full  of  his- 
toric interest ;  Troas  on  the  coast  line,  washed  by  that  sea 
which,  at  its  other  extremity,  touches  the  Continent  be- 
yond; Troy,  the  historic  battleground  between  Europe 
and  Asia.  The  story  of  those  battles  we  have  read  in 
Homer  and  in  Virgil.  It  was  to  that  point  the  great 
apostle  came  at  the  end  of  the  present  paragraph. 

That  invasion  of  Europe  was  not  in  the  mind  of  Paul, 
but  it  was  evidently  in  the  mind  of  the  Spirit.  He  did  not 
start  from  Antioch  on  this  second  journey  with  any  in- 
tention of  going  to  Europe.  The  closing  words  of  the 
paragraph  read  thus :  "  And  when  he  had  seen  the  vision, 
straightway  we  sought  to  go  forth  into  Macedonia,  con- 
cluding that  God  had  called  us  to  preach  the  Gospel 
unto  them."  That  little  word  "  concluding "  is  full  of 
interest  and  value.  It  marks  the  ultimate  result  of  proc- 
esses. Paul  began  the  journey  by  desiring  to  revisit 
churches  already  founded.  He  ended  at  Troas  with  a 
vision,  a  surprise,  a  new  call,  an  open  door,  and  vast  ex- 
panses stretching  out  before  his  eyes,  of  the  possibility 
of  new  work,  and  with  the  conviction  that  this  was  the 
mind  of  the  Lord. 

The  period  of  time  covered  by  this  paragraph  (15  :  36- 
16 : 10)  must  have  been  considerable ;  but  in  reading  the 
condensed  narrative  of  Luke,  it  is  evident  that  everything 
leading  up  to  the  vision  was  tentative,  preliminary,  and 

[367 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  15 : 36-16 :  10] 

that  some  greater  movement  was  ahead.  The  "  conclu- 
sion "  referred  to  in  the  final  words  was  the  result  of  all 
the  preceding  incidents. 

An  analysis  of  the  passage  brings  into  prominence  cer- 
tain separated  incidents  of  personal  experience.  There 
is  the  story  first,  of  contention  and  of  the  separation  be- 
tween Paul  and  Barnabas.  Then  follows  the  account  of 
how  Paul  started  on  his  journey  in  the  comradeship  of 
Silas,  and  found  Timothy  at  Lystra.  Then  we  have  the 
record  of  a  further  movement,  on  to  Troas,  and  we  see 
Paul  and  the  man  of  Macedonia.  The  supreme  value  of 
the  paragraph,  however,  is  to  be  found  in  synthesis,  rather 
than  analysis.  When  we  look  at  these  separated  inci- 
dents in  the  light  of  certain  declarations  concerning  the 
guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  we  shall  see  the  strange  and 
contradictory  and  troublesome  events  merging  into  a 
mosaic,  until  the  pattern  stands  clear  and  beautiful  upon 
the  page,  of  the  Divine  overruling  and  the  Divine  govern- 
ment. 

Let  us  therefore  consider  the  paragraph  in  these  two 
ways,  glancing  at  the  incidents  of  human  experience,  and 
endeavouring  particularly  to  observe  the  unifying  Divine 
guidance.  This  is  the  great  value  of  this  paragraph. 
There  is  something  full  of  conflict  here.  The  smooth 
and  rhythmic  movement  of  the  earlier  part  of  the  book 
for  a  moment  seems  to  end.  Here  are  cross-currents, 
and  difficulties,  dissension  between  two  men  whose  union 
had  been  one  full  of  value,  and  force.  Then  purposes 
were  frustrated,  intentions  thwarted;  Paul  wanted  to  re- 
visit those  cities  to  which  he  had  already  been  with  Bar- 
nabas ;  but  he  never  reached  them  on  this  journey.  He 
did  visit  cities  where  the  Gospel  had  been  preached,  but 
not  the  cities  where  he  had  founded  churches.  Instead 
of  following  a  course  through  Perga  and  Pamphylia,  he 
was  driven  through  Syria  and  Cilicia.  When  presently, 
that  work  being  accomplished,  he  crossed  through  the 
Taurus  ranges,  and  came  to  Derbe  and  Lystra,  then  he 

[  368 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  15 :  36-16 : 10] 

fain  would  have  moved  in  a  certain  direction,  but  the 
Spirit  hindered  him,  and  drove  him  yet  another  way. 
When  again  his  face  was  set  toward  the  northern  country 
of  Bithynia,  and  he  would  have  evangelized  there,  the 
Spirit  again  drove  him  in  another  direction.  The  sweep 
of  the  river  is  troubled,  but  it  moves  forward  in  the 
counsel  of  God.  The  spiritual  value  of  the  paragraph  is 
evidently  that  of  its  revelation  of  the  guidance  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  by  the  hindrances  of  the  people  of  God. 

To  glance  at  the  incidents  first.  It  was  Paul's  purpose 
to  return  to  the  cities  already  visited,  to  see  how  they 
fared.  Concern  for  his  children  was  in  his  heart,  but 
infinitely  more  than  that.  He  had  concern  for  those 
churches  because  they  were  centres  from  which  the  Gos- 
pel was  to  be  sent  yet  further  afield.  It  was  an  eminent 
teacher  who  once  said  that  he  would  rather  perfect  one 
saint  to  the  work  of  ministering1,  than  call  hundreds  of 
people  to  the  beginnings  of  Christian  life.  This  man  also 
felt  the  enormous  importance  of  making  the  Church  what 
it  ought  to  be  in  any  given  centre,  in  order  that  the  Church 
might  fulfil  its  true  function  in  that  centre.  The  under- 
lying passion  of  the  apostle  was  not  merely  to  see  his 
brethren,  but  to  see  how  the  churches  fared,  because  of 
his  conception  of  the  importance  of  their  work.  As  they 
were  about  to  start,  there  occurred  the  contention  be- 
tween Paul  and  Barnabas ;  and  we  must  not  smooth  this 
down  and  say  that  it  was  a  quiet  discussion.  The  Greek 
word  translated  "  contention "  is  the  word  from  which 
we  derive  our  word  paroxysm.  I  am  greatly  comforted 
whenever  I  read  this.  I  am  thankful  for  the  revelation 
of  the  humanity  of  these  men.  If  I  had  never  read  that 
Paul  withstood  Peter  to  the  face,  and  that  Paul  and  Bar- 
nabas had  a  contention,  I  should  have  been  afraid.  These 
men  were  not  angels,  they  were  men.  It  is  very  interest- 
ing to  study  the  differing  opinions  as  to  who  was  to  blame. 
There  are  most  eloquent  defences  of  Paul  and  of  Bar- 
nabas, as  to  who  was  right,  and  who  was  wrong.  Amid 

[  369  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  15 : 36-16 : 10] 

differing  opinions,  a  man  may  have  one  of  his  own.  My 
own  sympathy  is  entirely  with  Barnabas,  notwithstanding 
the  fact  that  the  Church  at  Antioch  sent  Paul  and  Silas 
out  by  the  grace  of  God;  and  the  account  does  not  say 
that  they  gave  a  benediction  to  Barnabas  and  Mark.  Per- 
haps they  were  both  right.  Paul  was  severe,  because 
Mark  had  failed  them  once,  and  he  felt  that  no  man 
could  go  to  this  work,  who  having  put  his  hand  to  the 
plough  had  looked  back.  Mark  had  gone  away  from 
them  when  their  faces  were  set  toward  the  difficulties  of 
Perga  and  Pamphylia.  He  had  not  gone  with  them  to 
the  work.  Barnabas  felt  that  Mark  should  have  another 
chance.  Perhaps  there  is  a  sense  in  which  Paul  and 
Barnabas  were  both  right.  Mark  profited  by  the  actions 
of  both.  Mark  sailed  away  to  Cyprus  with  Barnabas, 
and  they  pass  out  of  the  story  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 
We  do  know  something  more  of  Mark.  When  he  had 
been  with  Barnabas  some  time,  he  was  restored  to  Paul's 
fellowship ;  for  when  Paul  wrote  to  the  Colossian  Church, 
he  spoke  of  him  as  his  "  fellow- worker,"  commended  him 
to  the  Church ;  and  in  his  last  hours,  besought  that  Tim- 
othy would  bring  him  with  him.  The  last  thing  we  know 
about  Mark,  the  "  servant  of  Jesus,"  whom  Paul  for  a 
time  would  not  trust,  but  to  whom  Barnabas  gave  a  sec- 
ond chance,  is  that  it  was  he  who  wrote  the  Gospel  of 
the  perfect  Servant.  Perhaps  his  moral  courage  was 
stiffened  by  Paul's  severity,  and  confirmed  by  the  tender- 
ness of  Barnabas. 

Paul  now  went  forward  to  the  churches  of  Syria  and 
Cilicia.  We  have  had  no  account  of  the  planting  of  any 
churches  in  Cilicia.  Tarsus  was  the  chief  city  of  Cilicia. 
Paul  may  have  planted  them  in  those  years  before  Bar- 
nabas found  him.  At  any  rate  he  went  there  now,  con- 
firming the  churches  of  Cilicia. 

So  we  reach  the  second  incident.  It  is  evident  that 
Paul  moved  away  from  Cilicia,  from  Tarsus,  through 
those  Taurus  ranges,  and  went  to  Derbe.  It  is  difficult 

[  370  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  15 :  36-16 : 10] 

to  measure  the  journeys  by  time  limits,  but  it  was  prob- 
ably five  years  since  he  was  at  Derbe,  the  place  of  peace- 
ful evangelism,  at  the  end  of  a  troublesome  campaign. 
No  details  are  given. 

At  last  Paul  came  to  Lystra,  the  place  of  the  stones, 
the  scars  of  which  were  still  upon  his  body ;  the  memories 
of  the  day  when  they  beat  fast  and  furiously  upon  him 
were  still  with  him.  At  Lystra  he  found  Timothy.  How 
often  God's  servants  return,  after  years  of  absence,  to 
some  rough  and  rugged  place  of  battle,  and  of  blood,  and 
of  agony,  and  find  the  fruitage.  When  did  Timothy  be- 
come a  disciple?  The  question  cannot  be  answered  dog- 
matically, but  the  probability  is  that  he  became  a  disciple 
in  those  days  of  Paul's  previous  visit.  Paul  had  once 
been  a  young  man,  and  had  watched  the  stoning  of  a  saint 
called  Stephen,  minding  the  clothes  of  such  as  stoned 
him.  He  had  heard  the  dying  prayer,  and  the  vision  of 
the  face  of  Stephen  had  fastened  like  goads  in  his  heart 
and  life.  At  Lystra  he  had  gone  through  Stephen's  ex- 
perience ;  and  perchance  another  man  had  seen  the  stones 
hurled.  Now  he  went  back  to  find  Timothy  in  the  place 
of  stones,  and  from  that  moment  there  was  formed  that 
rare  and  beautiful  friendship,  the  friendship  of  an  old 
man  for  a  young  man. 

Timothy  was  the  son  of  a  Jewess.  His  father  was  a 
Greek,  We  have  seen  how  in  all  this  movement,  the 
ideals  of  Hebraism  and  Hellenism  were  merged  and  ful- 
filled in  the  teaching  of  Jesus.  Paul  had  now  found  a 
man  in  whose  very  blood  the  two  fires  mingled,  in  whose 
mental  calibre  the  two  ideas  were  found,  a  man  by  nature 
at  once  Hebrew  and  Greek ;  and  by  grace  he  was  well  re- 
ported of  by  the  brethren.  From  that  moment  a  com- 
panion was  found  for  Paul ;  and  he  was  found  at  Lystra, 
the  place  of  the  stones. 

We  know  certain  facts  concerning  his  service.  Two  of 
Paul's  letters  were  addressed  to  him.  Six  of  Paul's  let- 
ters have  this  man  associated  with  him  in  the  superscrip- 

[371 1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  15 :  36-16 :  10] 

tion,  those  of  the  second  epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  Philip- 
pians,  Colossians,  the  first  and  second  letters  to  the  Thes- 
salonians,  and  Philemon.  Timothy  was  with  him  on  this 
second  missionary  journey.  Timothy  was  at  Ephesus 
with  him  in  the  days  of  strife.  Timothy  accompanied 
him  on  his  last  journey  to  Jerusalem.  Timothy  was  with 
him  in  his  first  imprisonment.  For  Timothy  he  sent,  in 
the  loneliness  of  the  second  imprisonment.  He  became 
his  son,  his  child,  his  comrade  in  the  fight,  and  so  the 
stoning  of  years  ago  now  blossomed  into  this  great  bene- 
diction of  a  new  comrade  in  the  work  that  lay  before 
him. 

So  they  passed  on.  Here  we  might  dwell  upon  the 
apparently  strange  act  of  Paul  in  taking  this  man  Timo- 
thy, and  submitting  him  to  the  rite  of  circumcision.  No- 
tice carefully  what  immediately  followed.  After  the  rite 
Timothy  and  Silas  went  with  him  through  the  churches, 
taking  the  decrees  of  the  council  at  Jerusalem,  which 
provided  that  the  Gentiles  were  not  to  be  compelled  to 
submit  to  circumcision  as  necessary  to  salvation.  This 
is  surely  an  illustration  of  the  wonderful  adaptability  of 
this  man.  Paul  has  been  criticized  for  this  action,  but  I 
do  not  believe  that  such  criticism  is  justified.  This  was 
a  case  of  expediency,  in  order  to  the  fulfilment  of  min- 
istry. Paul  knew  that  the  Jew  would  criticize.  Very 
well  then,  not  for  his  sake,  but  for  the  sake  of  his  be- 
coming all  things  to  all  men,  if  by  any  chance  he  may 
win  some,  let  this  man  who  had  been  brought  up  in  the 
Hebrew  religion,  submit  to  the  rite  of  the  Jew,  and  so 
create  his  opportunity  for  speaking  to  the  Jew  also. 

So  we  come  to  the  last  incident,  and  to  the  things  im- 
mediately preceding  it.  Paul  was  prevented  from  preach- 
ing by  the  action  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  would  have 
preached  in  proconsular  Asia,  one  of  the  provinces,  and 
he  was  prevented.  The  Holy  Spirit  forbade  him.  He 
therefore  turned  in  the  other  direction,  and  went  through 
the  region  of  Phrygia  and  Galatia.  That  was  the  begin- 

[  372  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  15:36-16:16! 

ning  of  the  work  in  Galatia.  In  the  Galatian  letter,  in 
chapter  four,  we  have  the  account  of  how  he  first  came 
to  preach  in  Galatia :  "Ye  know  that  because  of  an  in- 
firmity of  the  flesh  I  preached  the  Gospel  unto  you  the 
first  time."  Luke  says  the  Holy  Spirit  forbade  him 
preaching  in  Asia,  and  he  preached  in  Galatia.  Paul  says 
because  of  an  infirmity  of  the  flesh  he  came  first  to 
Galatia.  In  this  letter  we  have  that  which  was  local  and 
incidental.  In  Luke's  account  there  is  the  recognition  of 
the  government  and  driving  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  not  neces- 
sary for  us  to  imagine  that  Paul  heard  the  voice  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  forbidding  him.  That  was  not  the  method 
of  the  Divine  government  or  guidance.  The  local  and 
the  incidental  fact  was  some  affliction,  some  illness,  which 
made  it  impossible  for  him  to  travel  through  proconsular 
Asia,  and  which  turned  him  aside,  perchance  for  rest  and 
quietness,  with  the  issue  that  he  preached  in  Galatia. 

Then  presently  they  again  moved  forward,  and  their 
hearts  were  set  on  Bithynia,  where  they  fain  would  have 
preached.  Then  the  phrasing  alters,  not  that  they  were 
forbidden  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  by  the  Spirit  of  Jesus. 
This  was  not  another  Spirit.  It  is  but  another  way  of 
referring  to  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  truth  declared  is  that 
these  men,  in  fellowship  with  Christ,  simply  could  not  go 
to  Bithynia.  They  were  driven  on.  There  are  many  who 
will  understand  this  story  from  their  own  experience. 
Paul  wanted  to  preach  in  Bithynia,  but  somehow  he  could 
not.  The  Spirit  of  Jesus  drove  him  on.  There  seemed  no 
value  in  this  long  journey,  striking  west.  The  north  was 
luring  him.  Bithynia  with  its  scattered  tribes,  was  there. 
He  would  fain  preach,  but  he  could  not.  So  he  was 
driven  west,  until  he  came  to  Troy.  There  was  given  to 
him  the  vision  of  a  man  of  Macedonia,  and  at  Troy  Luke 
joined  him,  for  there  the  language  of  the  narrative  passes 
from  the  singular  to  the  plural.  Paul  saw  the  vision,  and 
straightway  hastened  toward  Macedonia.  I  sometimes 
wonder  whether  Luke  was  not  the  man  of  Macedonia, 

[  373  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  15 :  36-16 : 10] 

whether  he  did  not  come  to  call  him,  and  ask  that  he 
would  join  him.  I  do  not  deny  the  vision.  Peter  saw  a 
vision,  and  then  saw  the  real  man.  Perchance  the  vision 
of  the  night  was  granted  to  this  man  at  Troy,  and  then 
came  Luke  the  actual  man.  Now  the  whole  journey  was 
explained.  The  new  door  was  opened.  Such  are  the 
incidents. 

I  think  we  shall  miss  the  value  of  the  story  entirely  if 
we  commence  with  the  declarations  of  the  guidance  of 
the  Spirit.  When  Luke  wrote  the  book  he  put  in  those 
declarations,  and  he  was  quite  right;  but  if  we  get  back 
into  the  actual  atmosphere  of  this  paragraph  we  shall 
surely  see  Paul  strangely  puzzled.  Quarrelling  with  Bar- 
nabas, parting  from  him,  he  wanted  to  preach  the  Gospel ; 
and  so  he  passed  through  Syria  and  Cilicia,  and  came 
to  Derbe  and  Lystra,  and  there  he  met  Timothy.  Then 
he  fain  would  go  on  to  proconsular  Asia,  and  he  could 
not  do  it ;  he  was  sick,  he  was  ill,  an  infirmity  of  the  flesh 
was  upon  him ;  and  he  could  not  go  on.  It  was  necessary 
that  he  should  take  another  direction,  and  he  went  into 
Galatia,  and  preached  there.  Then  he  turned  back  again. 
There  was  no  reason  that  he  could  understand.  It  is  a 
picture  of  cross  currents,  of  difficulty,  perplexity,  and 
darkness.  Then  he  felt  the  lure  of  Bithynia,  and  he 
would  go  there.  No,  he  must  go  west,  and  on  he  went, 
perplexed.  Then  came  the  vision  of  the  man  of 
Macedonia;  and  when  he  talked  it  over  with  Luke  in 
other  days,  and  Luke  would  write  the  story,  he  told  that 
which  at  the  moment  he  did  not  know.  The  Spirit  forbade 
him  preaching  in  Asia.  The  Spirit  of  Jesus  drove  him 
ever  and  ever  on  toward  Troas.  Thus  upon  the  para- 
graph there  is  stamped  first  the  fact  of  the  guidance  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  The  fact  for  us  is  demonstrated  by  all 
that  follows — Philippi,  Thessalonica,  Bercea,  Athens, 
Corinth.  All  these  resulted.  If  this  man  had  preached 
in  proconsular  Asia,  had  gone  up  to  Bithynia,  what  of 
Philippi,  what  of  Thessalonica,  what  of  Bercea,  what  of 

[  374  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  15 : 36-16 : 10] 

Athens,  and  what  of  Corinth?    The  guidance  of  the 
Spirit  was  subsequently  recognized  by  these  men. 

Notice  too,  that  the  declarations  concerning  the  driving 
of  the  Spirit,  and  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit,  are  put  in 
at  the  points  of  supreme  difficulty,  where  the  guidance  of 
the  Spirit  conflicted  with  their  own  intentions.  Here  is 
a  wonderful  outlook  on  life.  A  man  can  look  back  and 
say :  There  was  the  point  where  I  desired  to  go  a  certain 
way,  and  circumstances  prevented.  But  these  men  say 
the  Holy  Spirit  prevented.  Here  was  a  moment  when  I 
was  moved  to  a  service  that  drew  me  north,  and  I  could 
not  go;  something  forbade  me.  But  these  men  say,  the 
Spirit  of  Jesus  drove  me  against  my  own  inclination. 

The  supreme  value  of  this  story  is  its  revelation  of  the 
fact  of  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit,  when  there  is  no  reve- 
lation of  the  method  of  that  guidance.  In  our  attempt  to 
interpret  what  seems  to  be  the  supreme  value,  our  only 
peril  is  lest  we  try  and  explain  the  method,  whereas  as  a 
matter  of  fact  the  method  is  hidden. 

How  far  can  we  see  the  method?  Only  so  far  as  to 
know  no  method  is  revealed.  The  Spirit  overruled  the 
separation  between  Paul  and  Barnabas.  With  what  is- 
sues? The  separation  gave  two  missionaries  for  work, 
for  their  revisiting  of  the  churches,  and  the  regions  be- 
yond. The  Spirit  guided  through  Paul's  illness,  which 
necessitated  his  taking  another  direction.  The  Spirit 
guided  by  the  consciousness  of  this  man's  fellowship 
with  Jesus,  so  that  he  was  driven  in  that  fellowship  in  a 
westerly  course.  The  Spirit  guided  by  the  vision  of  the 
man  of  Macedonia.  Here  is  the  revelation  of  the  fact 
that  the  Spirit  guides,  not  by  flaming  visions  always,  not 
by  words  articulate  in  human  ears ;  but  by  circumstances, 
by  commonplace  things,  by  difficult  things,  by  dark  things, 
by  disappointing  things.  The  Spirit  guides  and  moulds 
and  fashions  all  the  pathway. 

The  important  thing,  however,  is  that  the  man  whom 
the  Spirit  will  guide  is  the  man  who  is  in  the  attitude  in 

[  375  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  15 :  36-16 :  10] 

which  it  is  possible  for  the  Spirit  to  guide  him.  So  we 
look  again  at  this  man,  and  we  find  an  attitude  of  life 
revealed.  It  is  that  of  loyalty  to  the  Lord,  faith  in  the 
guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  constant  watchfulness. 
There  is  where  we  too  often  fail.  It  is  when  a  man  is  in 
fellowship  with  the  Lord  that  he  sees  that  the  disappoint- 
ment and  the  difficulty  are  also  under  the  guidance  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  the  watcher  for  the  Lord  who  sees 
the  Lord.  If  we  make  up  our  minds  that  the  way  of 
guidance  is  the  way  of  flaming  vision,  and  rolling  thun- 
der, and  an  articulate  voice,  and  a  lifting  to  a  height  of 
ecstasy,  then  we  may  never  be  guided.  But  if  we  are 
watching  for  Him,  we  shall  find  Him  guiding  us  in  the 
day  of  difficulty  and  the  day  of  disappointment,  and  the 
day  of  darkness;  when  it  seems  as  though  the  rhythmic 
and  majestic  flow  of  the  river  has  ceased,  and  we  are  in 
cross  currents,  and  are  tempest-tossed.  The  Holy  Spirit 
forbade  proconsular  Asia,  by  permitting  the  apostle  to  be 
so  sick,  that  he  had  to  travel  another  way.  What  we  need 
then,  is  confidence  in  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit  in  the 
hours  when  no  voice  is  heard,  and  no  vision  is  seen.  If 
we  will  follow  then,  the  hour  of  vindication  will  come, 
there  will  come  the  vision,  there  will  come  the  man  of 
Macedonia.  His  voice  will  be  distinctly  heard,  and  then 
we  shall  conclude  that  God  would  have  us  go  into 
Macedonia.  Then  we  shall  understand  the  strange  ex- 
periences. Why  does  He  drive  us  west  when  we  would 
go  north?  I  do  not  know.  At  the  limit  of  the  west  so 
far  as  land  is  concerned,  a  man  of  Macedonia  came  to 
him.  Then  he  understood  the  denial,  the  pressure,  and 
the  disappointment,  and  why  he  could  not  go  to  Bithynia. 
The  beauty  of  this  paragraph  for  us  is  that  it  presents 
conditions  with  which  we  are  most  familiar.  It  shows 
how  the  Holy  Spirit  guides  still  in  the  line  of  the  Divine 
purpose,  even  when  we  see  no  supernatural  sign.  Faber 
sang  a  song  of  truth  that  he  is  the  greatest  of  victors  who 
knows  that  God  is  on  the  field  when  He  is  most  invisible. 

[376] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  16: 11-24] 

Whether  it  be  that  the  individual  life  is  filled  with  sor- 
rows, or  whether  the  perplexity  of  life  is  overwhelming, 
or  whether  the  strife  of  national  crisis  is  about  us,  God's 
in  His  heaven,  and  He  is  overruling  and  guiding,  and  out 
of  the  chaos  He  is  bringing  the  cosmos.  The  Spirit  leads 
men  and  women  who  look  and  watch  and  wait  and  follow. 
It  was  a  time  of  groping  and  uncertainty.  Ways  which 
they  desired  were  shut  against  them.  It  was  a  time  of 
direction  and  a  time  of  certainty.  The  route  was  marked 
in  the  economy  of  God  to  Troas,  to  Macedonia,  Philippi, 
Thessalonica,  Bercea,  Athens,  Corinth.  If  Paul  had  gone 
to  Bithynia  he  might  have  stayed  there.  Oh,  to  go,  not 
where  I  may  choose,  even  by  my  love  of  the  Lord,  but 
where  I  am  driven  by  the  Lord's  command.  Circum- 
stances of  difficulty  are  opportunities  for  faith,  and  the 
measure  of  our  perplexity  in  service  and  in  Christian  life 
is  the  measure  of  our  opportunity.  Let  us  follow  the 
gleam,  though  the  darkness  threaten  to  envelop.  Let  us 
be  true  to  the  inward  monitor,  and  if  in  being  true,  sud- 
denly illness  prevent,  and  we  cannot  follow,  then  rest  in 
the  Lord  in  the  darkness,  and  know  that  God's  shortest 
way  to  Troas  may  be  athwart  our  inclinations  and  pur- 
poses. It  is  better  to  go  to  Troas  with  God,  than  any- 
where else  without  Him. 


Acts  16: 11-24 

This  paragraph  constitutes  the  first  page  in  the  history 
of  all  that  resulted  from  the  strange  method  of  the  Spirit 
in  preventing  and  hindering,  and  so  guiding  Paul.  Im- 
mediately following  the  vision  of  the  man  of  Macedonia, 
Luke  says :  "  Setting  sail  therefore  from  Troas,  we  made 
a  straight  course  to  Samothrace."  "  A  straight  course  " 
is  a  nautical  phrase,  meaning  quite  literally,  sailing  before 
the  wind.  The  voyage  occupied  two  days  only,  because 
the  wind  was  with  them.  A  little  later  on,  we  shall  find 
that  this  same  voyage  occupied  five  days,  against  a  con- 

[  377  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  16: 11-24] 

trary  wind.     Sometimes  upon  the  King's  business,  tKei 
wind  is  with  us,  and  sometimes  it  is  against  us. 

Beginning  with  this  statement,  we  find  that  the  con- 
trast to  everything  in  the  last  study  is  remarkable.  We 
have  seen  this  man  hindered,  perplexed,  driven,  buffeted, 
and  the  first  word  now  is  that  "  we  sailed  before  the 
wind."  Thus  the  wind  blowing  ever  where  it  listeth,  co- 
operated with  that  Spirit  of  Whom  it  is  the  symbol,  in 
driving  the  missionaries  on.  The  change  in  method  and 
experience  is  marked,  but  it  is  the  same  Spirit  Who  per- 
plexed and  hindered  him,  and  so  gave  opportunity  for  the 
activity  of  faith,  Who  is  now  seen  cooperating,  even  in 
the  direction  of  the  wind,  as  it  drives  these  men  along 
the  pathway  of  the  Divine  appointment. 

This  consciousness  that  the  very  forces  of  Nature  were 
helping  the  purposes  of  grace,  must  have  illuminated 
for  these  men  the  mystery  of  those  strange  days  in  which 
they  were  so  thwarted  and  hindered.  So  they  came  to 
Samothrace,  an  island  of  the  JEgean,  and  so  they  came 
to  Neapolis,  the  port  of  Philippi.  From  thence  they 
passed  to  Philippi  itself,  a  journey  of  about  eight  miles, 
full  of  historic  associations,  and  at  that  time  remarkably 
suggestive  of  the  new  atmosphere  into  which  Paul  was 
coming  with  this  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  There  at 
Philippi  were  evidences,  some  of  them  remaining  even 
until  this  hour,  but  then  most  patent,  of  that  great,  de- 
cisive epoch-marking,  historic-making  battle  between 
Brutus  and  Cassius  on  the  one  side,  and  Mark  Antony 
and  Augustus  on  the  other;  the  battle  in  which  Augustus 
had  defeated  Brutus,  and  had  planted  in  Philippi  a  colony. 
Luke,  in  dwelling  upon  these  details,  refers  to  them  sug- 
gestively when  he  says  Philippi  was  the  first  city  of 
Macedonia,  and  a  colony.  We  are  not  to  understand  that 
Philippi  was  a  colony  in  our  sense  of  the  term.  A  Roman 
colony  was  founded  by  colonists  sent  immediately  from 
Rome;  who  marched  in  and  took  possession.  Having 
arrived,  they  reproduced  Rome  in  miniature,  that  is,  so 

378 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  16: 11-24] 

far  as  its  government  and  habits  of  life  were  concerned. 
A  colony  protected  Rome  on  the  frontiers  of  the  empire. 
It  was  in  perpetual  and  close  touch  with  Rome,  because 
its  magistrates  were  appointed,  not  from  among  its  citi- 
zens, but  immediately  from  Rome. 

Thus  Paul  found  himself  nearer  than  ever  before  to  the 
great  centre  of  earthly  government.  This  man  was  him- 
self a  Roman  citizen,  and  looked  with  longing  eyes  toward 
the  capital,  desiring  to  reach  it  and  possess  it.  He  said, 
"  I  must  see  Rome  also  " ;  and  his  desire  to  see  Rome 
was  not  the  desire  of  the  tourist,  it  was  the  passion  of 
the  missionary.  It  is  noticeable  how  in  his  missionary 
journeys,  he  perpetually  settled  at  strategic  centres,  places 
from  which  the  roads  ran  out  into  far  distances.  That 
was  his  reason  for  desiring  to  reach  Rome.  He  knew 
that  from  Rome  the  great  highways  ran  throughout  the 
whole  known  earth ;  and  this  dreamer  of  dreams,  seer  of 
visions,  this  man  who  by  nature  was  a  maker  of  empire, 
saw  the  importance  of  capturing  great  centres  for  Christ, 
not  merely  that  they  themselves  might  be  Christianized, 
but  because  from  such  centres,  the  pioneers,  the  mission- 
aries, the  messengers  of  Jesus,  might  reach  wider  areas. 

Paul  arrived  in  Philippi  about  twenty  years  after  the 
foundation  of  the  Church  at  Jerusalem,  after  the  Pente- 
costal effusion.  How  little  the  world  knows  of  the  Divine 
movements.  Rome  had  small  idea  that  day,  that  the  van 
of  the  army  of  its  ultimate  Conqueror,  had  taken  posses- 
sion of  one  of  its  frontal  defences.  On  the  day  when 
Paul  hurried  from  Neapolis,  over  the  eight  miles  up  to 
Philippi, — and  came  into  the  city,  and  made  arrangements 
for  his  own  lodging,  and  with  the  quiet  dignity  and  rest- 
fulness  that  always  characterizes  the  great  worker,  was 
content  to  spend  a  few  days  doing  nothing, — the  flag 
was  planted  in  a  frontier  colony  of  Rome,  which  even- 
tually was  to  make  necessary  the  lowering  of  her  flag,  and 
the  change  of  the  world's  history.  That  is  what  happened 
when  Paul,  with  Luke,  and  Timothy,  and  perchance 

[  379  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  16: 11-24] 

Silas  and  a  few  others,  arrived  that  day  in  Philippi.  If 
Rome  and  the  world  did  not  know,  to  put  the  whole 
truth  bluntly,  the  Lord  knew,  and  the  devil  knew,  and 
the  present  study  reveals  the  respective  results  of  these 
two  facts. 

The  story  centres  round  two  women,  Lydia  of  Thya- 
tira,  and  the  maid  of  divination.  It  is  one  of  two  remark- 
able victories  won  by  the  forces  of  Jesus  Christ,  under 
the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  the  interests  of  the 
Kingdom  of  God.  The  first  victory  was  the  capture  of  a 
vantage  ground,  the  open  heart  of  one  woman.  The  sec- 
ond victory  was  the  vanquishing  of  Satan  along  two 
lines  of  attack.  His  first  method  was  that  of  an  attempt 
at  alliance  with  the  forces  of  Jesus;  and  he  was  over- 
come. His  second  method  was  that  of  direct  and  brutal 
hostility  to  the  soldiers  of  Jesus ;  and  again  he  was  over- 
come. These  are  the  only  two  methods  of  which  the 
devil  is  capable;  first  an  attempt  at  alliance,  and  then 
antagonism. 

First  then,  as  to  this  capture  of  the  vantage  ground. 
The  occasion  was  the  Sabbath  day.  Before  that,  Paul 
and  his  companions  had  tarried  certain  days.  There  is 
great  force  in  the  word  "  tarrying."  It  means  that  they 
rested,  quietly  observing,  and  doing  nothing  else.  With 
the  dawn  of  the  Sabbath  they  sought  for  the  place  of 
prayer,  turning,  as  Paul  always  did,  to  seek  for  his 
brethren  after  the  flesh.  In  this  statement  we  have  an 
important  revelation  of  the  condition  of  Philippi.  There 
was  no  strong  Hebrew  element  in  the  city.  The  "  place 
of  prayer"  is  a  technical  phrase.  Jewish  places  of 
prayer  were  found  throughout  all  these  cities,  where  no 
synagogues  were  built.  They  were  almost  invariably 
placed  by  the  side  of  a  river;  sometimes  they  consisted  of 
a  circle  enclosed  by  some  kind  of  wall,  and  yet  under  the 
open  sky;  sometimes  without  any  outward  sign  of  en- 
closure. That  was  "  the  place  of  prayer,"  and  there,  in 
cities  where  no  synagogue  was  built,  the  Hebrews 

380] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  16: 11-24] 

gathered  on  Sabbath  for  prayer.  That  is  the  great 
significance  of  the  opening  verse  of  the  one  hundred  and 
thirty-seventh  psalm: 

"  By  the  rivers  of  Babylon, 
There  we  sat  down,  yea,  we  wept." 

That  is  the  picture  of  the  exiled  Jews  gathering  to  the 
place  of  prayer.  We  discover  clearly  the  position  of  the 
Hebrew  people  in  Philippi,  in  the  fact  that  Paul  found 
only  women  at  the  appointed  place.  There  were  not 
even  ten  Hebrews  of  eminence,  or  there  would  have  been 
a  synagogue.  There  was,  however,  a  little  group  of 
women,  recognizing  their  relation  to  God,  gathered  to  the 
place  of  prayer  in  Philippi,  the  centre  of  idolatry,  under 
Roman  rule.  There  the  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  sought 
and  found  vantage  ground  for  the  carrying  on  of  his 
campaign. 

The  woman  whose  heart  was  opened  was  a  woman  of 
Thyatira,  which  was  one  of  the  cities  that  he  was  com- 
pelled to  omit  as  he  passed  on  to  Troas.  The  first  con- 
vert which  Paul  made  in  Europe  was  a  woman  of  Asia, 
a  Jewish  proselyte  perhaps,  or  a  woman  of  true  Jewish 
blood,  who  had  been  born  in  Thyatira.  She  was  a  busi- 
ness woman  in  Philippi.  If  we  had  desired  to  open  up 
missionary  operations  in  a  Roman  colony,  should  we  have 
found  such  vantage  ground  as  that?  God  is  always  sur- 
prising us  when  He  is  about  to  do  some  great  and  wonder- 
ful work. 

In  that  assembly  of  women  Paul  spake,  and  that  again 
is  an  arresting  fact.  Paul  was  a  Pharisee,  who  through 
the  long  years  of  his  early  life  had  daily  repeated  such 
words  as  these,  "  O  God,  I  thank  Thee  that  I  am  neither 
Gentile,  nor  slave,  nor  woman."  The  man  who  presently 
wrote,  "  In  Christ  there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile,  bond 
nor  free,  male  nor  female,"  thus  contradicted  the  false 
view  of  the  thanksgiving  that  had  passed  his  lips  for 
years.  He  now  abandoned  the  Jewish  and  Pharisaic 

[381  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  16: 11-24] 

contempt  for  a  woman.  The  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ 
found  no  man  in  the  place  of  prayer,  but  the  old  con- 
tempt had  gone,  and  to  the  women  assembled,  he  spoke. 
He  dared  to  do  so  because  the  Gospel  had  changed  his 
intellectual  conception,  and  entirely  transformed  him. 

Then  we  read  that  the  Lord  opened  the  heart  of  Lydia, 
constraining  her  to  attention.  He  touched  the  emotional 
nature  of  this  woman,  and  Lydia  listened  and  obeyed. 
She  thus  became  the  Lord's  vantage  ground  in  Philippi, 
the  point  from  which  He  could  proceed  with  His  cam- 
paign. The  opened  heart  of  one  woman  in  a  great  city 
is  foothold  for  God,  and  if  it  but  be  yielded  wholly  to 
Him,  from  that  vantage  ground,  from  that  base  of  opera- 
tions, He  can  proceed  to  wonderful  victories. 

Lydia  constrained  the  apostle  and  his  company  to  ac- 
cept her  hospitality, -"and  the  word  "  constrained "  is 
peculiarly  Luke's  word.  It  only  occurs  in  one  other  place 
in  the  New  Testament,  and  that  is  in  his  Gospel,  in  that 
matchless  story  of  the  last  chapter,  of  the  two  who  walked 
to  Emmaus;  they  constrained  Jesus  to  stay  with  them. 
They  said,  The  day  is  far  spent,  come  in,  and  abide  with 
us.  They  offered  Him  hospitality,  saying  to  Him  in 
effect,  Here  is  an  open  house  for  thee,  O  stranger,  abide 
with  us,  the  day  is  far  spent,  the  road  stretching  beyond 
is  one  infested  by  robbers,  let  us  take  care  of  thee  till 
morning.  This  is  the  same  word,  suggesting  hospitality 
offered.  So  a  house  was  opened  to  Jesus  in  Philippi. 
Christ  needs  vantage  ground  in  Philippi,  on  which  He 
can  stand,  and  proclaim  His  evangel,  from  which  He  can 
send  His  messengers  forth  to  capture  the  city,  and  all  the 
region  beyond,  for  Himself.  He  finds  a  woman's  heart, 
and  a  woman's  home.  The  victory  may  not  seem  a  very 
great  one.  But  turn  to  the  Philippian  letter,  and  note 
two  or  three  verses : 


"  I  thank  my  God  upon  all  my  remembrance  of  you, 
always  in  every  supplication  of  mine  on  behalf  of  you  all 

[  382 1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  16:11-24] 

making  my  supplication  with  joy,  for  your  fellowship  in 
furtherance  of  the  Gospel  from  the  first  day  until  now  " 

(1:3). 

What  was  that  first  day?  The  day  when  Lydia's  heart 
Was  opened. 

"  Ye  yourselves  also  know,  ye  Philippians,  that  in  the 
beginning  of  the  Gospel,  when  I  departed  from  Mace- 
donia, no  church  had  fellowship  with  me  in  the  matter  of 
giving  and  receiving,  but  ye  only;  for  even  in  Thessa- 
lonica  ye  sent  once  and  again  unto  my  need  "  (4: 15). 

What  happened  then?  There  was  gathered  in  Philippi 
a  fellowship  of  souls,  that  Paul  always  seems  to  have 
looked  upon  as  the  chief  joy  and  crown  of  his  ministry. 
The  church  in  Philippi  was  evidently  most  dear  to  him. 
Thus  in  Philippi  there  was  a  growing  fellowship  of  faith- 
ful souls,  a  base  of  operation  widening  and  broadening, 
ever  helping  this  man  with  his  work.  This  began  when 
Lydia's  heart  was  opened,  and  she  opened  her  home  for 
Jesus  Christ.  Do  not  miss  the  naturalness  of  these 
stories,  the  homeliness  of  these  records,  for  in  these 
things  the  infinite  value  of  them  is  found.  We  are  told 
sometimes  to-day  that  the  Church  is  full  of  women,  that 
there  are  no  men  going  to  church.  I  contradict  the  state- 
ment whenever  I  hear  it  made.  But  the  measure  in 
which  it  is  true,  is  the  condemnation  of  men ;  and  let  the 
men  who  are  becoming  Christless  and  Churchless  lament 
if  the  hour  should  ever  come  when  their  women  cease  to 
worship.  The  women  whose  hearts  are  opened,  whose 
homes  are  open,  are  ever  Christ's  vantage  ground.  That 
was  the  first  victory  in  Philippi. 

Immediately  following,  we  have  the  account  of  the 
victory  over  Satan,  in  the  deliverance  of  the  damsel 
possessed  with  the  spirit  of  divination.  Her  will  was 
possessed  by  an  evil  spirit,  and  therefore  she  was  pos- 
sessed by  mercenary  men  who  were  making  use  of  her 

1 383 1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  16: 11-24] 

for  their  own  enrichment.  Following  Paul,  this  maiden 
cried  out:  "These  men  are  servants  of  the  Most  High 
God,  which  proclaim  unto  you  the  way  of  salvation." 
Now  what  she  said  was  absolutely  true.  Paul,  Luke, 
Timotheus,  Silas,  perchance  a  few  others,  had  arrived  in 
the  city.  They  had  proclaimed  the  evangel  to  a  handful 
of  Jewish  women  in  the  place  of  prayer.  One  woman, 
and  perhaps  a  few  others,  had  obeyed.  Suddenly  this 
girl,  possessed  with  the  spirit  of  divination,  soothsaying, 
and  sorcery,  began  to  follow,  and  what  she  said  in  the 
hearing  of  the  crowd  would  necessarily  impress  the 
crowd.  The  devil  was  then  using  the  one  weapon  that 
is  really  dangerous  against  the  Church  of  God.  When 
the  devil  tells  the  truth  about  the  Church  a  peril  is 
created ;  and  it  is,  that  she  may  accept  his  testimony,  and 
hope  to  win  victories  thereby.  What  a  chance  there 
seemed  to  be  in  this  for  Philippi.  It  was  a  little  common- 
place to  have  to  go  to  the  river-side,  and  talk  to  a  hand- 
ful of  women.  Here  was  a  girl  with  a  spirit  of  divina- 
tion, who  had  been  soothsaying,  and  men  by  crowds  had 
listened  to  her.  She  was  telling  the  truth  now.  Why 
not  let  her  continue?  Truth  must  win,  whoever  utters 
it.  That  is  the  master  lie  that  has  cursed  the  Church  of 
God  for  nineteen  centuries.  The  apostle  refused  this 
testimony.  A  strong  word,  a  word  throbbing  with  agony 
is  used  here :  He  was  "  sore  troubled/'  and  his  trouble 
was  caused  because  the  girl  was  telling  the  truth,  and 
because  the  same  Spirit  of  Jesus  Who  drove  him  toward 
Troas,  was  with  him  still.  In  the  Gospel  narratives — 
by  Mark  at  the  beginning  of  the  ministry  of  Jesus,  and  by 
Luke  at  a  later  stage — it  is  recorded  how  demons  told 
the  truth  about  Him.  "  Thou  art  the  Son  of  God  "  said 
the  demon,  when  all  men  were  denying  it.  On  each  oc- 
casion Jesus  commanded  the  demon  to  silence,  ordering 
him  out  of  the  man;  exorcising  the  evil  spirit;  refusing 
the  testimony  when  uttered  by  a  demon.  Paul  was  now 
in  fellowship  with  Jesus,  and  he  knew  Philippi  well,  and 

1 384 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  16: 11-24] 

recognized  that  this  was  the  devil's  method  of  alliance. 
If  the  devil  can  once  be  permitted  to  cooperate,  he  will 
tell  the  truth.  But  the  apostle,  and  the  Lord  of  the 
apostle,  will  not  accept  the  testimony  of  evil,  even  though 
its  words  be  the  words  of  truth.  A  grave  error  in  the 
history  of  the  Christian  Church  has  been  that  she  has  been 
content,  again  and  again,  to  admit  the  testimony  of  evil 
men,  because  the  testimony  in  itself  was  true.  God  will 
have  no  testimony  of  truth  which  is  not  spoken  by  those 
who  are  true,  for  behind  the  method  there  is  a  motive, 
and  the  motive  is  not  that  of  helpfulness,  but  of  destruc- 
tion. Admit  the  devil  into  the  fellowship  of  this  propa- 
ganda of  the  Gospel,  and  ere  long  he  will  twist  his  fingers 
round  the  Gospel  and  distort  it,  until  it  becomes  a  deadly 
and  damnable  heresy.  Has  he  not  done  so  ?  Is  not  that 
the  story  of  all  that  has  cursed  the  Church,  and  hindered 
her  progress  in  the  ages?  It  requires  a  man  strong  in 
fellowship  with  Jesus  Christ,  to  decline  the  testimony  of 
truth,  simply  because  it  is  uttered  by  the  spirit  of  evil. 
It  is  possible  to  hear  the  mutterings  of  demons  in  London. 
One  can  consult  them,  sometimes  in  places  set  apart  for 
the  business.  Do  not  make  the  foolish  mistake  of  imagin- 
ing that  there  is  nothing  in  spiritualism.  Do  not  say 
that  there  is  no  message  from  the  unseen  and  hidden 
world.  There  are  such  messages,  but  they  are  the  mes- 
sages of  hell;  and  even  though  they  be  the  messages  of 
truth  concerning  Jesus,  they  are  not  to  be  listened  to. 
We  are  to  refuse  the  patronage  of  hell,  when  it  attempts 
to  tell  the  truth  about  our  Christ.  Alliance  with  evil  is 
the  most  subtle  peril  that  confronts  the  Church  at  any 
time.  The  hour  of  gravest  peril  for  the  Gospel  in 
Philippi  was  not  the  hour  when  they  put  Paul  in  prison  ; 
it  was  the  hour  when  the  damsel  with  the  spirit  of  divina- 
tion told  the  truth.  In  fellowship  with  the  Lord,  he  im- 
mediately exorcised  the  evil  spirit. 

Then  immediately  the  devil  adopted  the  method  of  an- 
tagonism, and  passed  out  of  sight,  but  he  was  still  there. 

[385 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  16: 11-24] 

He  was  now  active  behind  the  world,  and  the  great  secret 
is  blazed  upon  the  holy  pages  of  inspiration,  "the  hope 
of  their  gain  was  gone."  Immediately  these  men,  when 
the  hope  of  their  gain  was  gone,  because  the  damsel  was 
free  from  the  evil  spirit,  and  could  no  more  be  a  sooth- 
sayer, became  hostile.  They  did  not  come  out  into  the 
open,  and  say,  You  have  robbed  us  of  money.  They 
said,  "  These  men,  being  Jews,  do  exceedingly  trouble  our 
city."  They  did  not  care  for  the  law.  They  only  cared 
because  the  hope  of  their  gain  was  gone.  Satan,  de- 
feated in  his  attempt  to  form  an  unholy  alliance  with  the 
apostles  in  order  ultimately  to  weaken  them,  hid  himself 
behind  the  law,  and  breathed  through  the  spirit  of  law. 
Again  the  devil  was  defeated.  The  devil  is  always  de- 
feated when  he  imprisons  a  Christian  man.  That  is  the 
hour  of  his  defeat.  The  place  of  the  cross  is  the  place  of 
the  crown,  to  a  servant  of  Christ.  When  the  devil  and 
the  world  combine  to  persecute  a  Christly  soul,  they  put 
him  on  the  throne  of  power.  We  shall  see  more  of  that 
when  we  return  to  this  story  of  Philippi.  Put  Paul  and 
Silas  in  the  prison;  let  the  lictors  lay  the  stripes  upon 
them  until  they  are  bleeding  and  bruised  and  brutally 
treated;  give  them  to  an  inhuman  jailer,  who  will  heap 
upon  them  indignity,  until  he  puts  them  into  the  inner 
prison,  and  puts  their  feet  in  the  stocks !  Then  what  ? 
Listen,  do  you  hear  the  singing?  Or  presently,  when 
Paul  reached  Rome,  as  a  prisoner,  what  did  he  do  ?  He 
hired  a  house,  and  preached  the  Kingdom  of  God  in  the 
centre  of  Rome's  imperial  magnificence.  Or  bring  him 
back  to  Rome  a  second  ti'me,  and  put  him  in  the  prison, 
down  in  the  deep  dungeon.  Deny  him  the  privilege  of 
the  hired  house,  and  what  will  he  do?  He  will  write 
letters,  the  thunder  and  the  force  of  which  will  rever- 
berate through  centuries,  and  make  an  empire  mightier 
than  the  empires  of  earth.  Or  put  John  Bunyan  in 
prison,  and  he  will  see  visions,  and  write  of  celestial 
truths,  and  celestial  glories,  which  will  abide  with  the 

386  j 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  16:11-24] 

Church,  messages  second  only  to  the  messages  of  the 
Bible.  What  a  fool  the  devil  is!  How  slow  he  is  to 
learn  the  lesson.  He  does  learn  it  every  now  and  then, 
and  goes  back  to  the  only  way  in  which  he  can  ever  hope 
to  be  successful,  that  of  alliance.  That  is  his  successful 
method  to-day.  The  devil  of  the  middle  ages  was  a 
being  with  horns  and  hoofs  and  flaming  fire,  at  which  we 
smile  to-day.  But  he  is  not  dead,  he  has  not  gone  out  of 
business.  He  is  not  imprisoning  us  now.  He  does  not 
imprison  men  where  the  light  of  the  Gospel  is  shining. 
His  business  here  is  that  of  alliance,  and  the  supreme 
trouble  with  the  Church  of  God  is  that  it  is  not  quite 
strong  enough  to  say  to  the  devil:  Hands  off,  we  will 
have  no  testimony  that  patronizes  Christ.  We  want  no 
patronage  of  Christ,  but  submission  to  Him. 

Looking  again  at  the  paragraph  as  a  whole,  we  notice 
the  small  beginnings  of  great  movements.  A  woman's 
heart  opened,  and  how  wonderful  the  victories  which  fol- 
lowed. Do  not  let  us  be  looking  for  the  highway  of  God 
in  the  conspicuous  places.  While  men  are  building  their 
monuments  to  Brutus  defeated,  and  singing  over  the 
glory  of  Augustus,  the  Christian  apostle  is  making  his 
way  up  to  Philippi.  He  will  have  to  pay  for  his  lodging 
for  two  or  three  days,  and  presently  one  woman  will 
have  her  heart  opened,  and  will  believe  his  message. 
This  is  the  place  where  God  is  acting.  Where  is  God 
acting  to-day?  I  do  not  know,  and  I  am  not  going  to 
attempt  to  find  out,  but  God  helping  me,  I  will  try  and  be 
a  man  at  His  disposal.  It  may  be  from  something  I  say 
that  some  woman's  heart  will  be  opened,  that  she  will 
presently  be  the  prophet  for  whom  we  are  waiting,  the 
pioneer  for  the  further  campaigns  of  the  army  of  the 
King.  Do  not  let  us  be  enslaved  by  statistics.  We  know 
nothing.  One  woman's  heart  in  Philippi,  and  Rome  was 
doomed  to  lower  its  flag,  that  the  banner  of  the  Cross 
might  be  supreme. 

The  devil's  methods  of  opposition  are  those  of  alliance 

[387] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  16:25-40] 

and  antagonism,  and  the  only  serious  one  is  the  first. 
Let  us  beware  of  it.  Do  not  let  us  imagine  that  we  can 
take  into  our  fellowship  and  enlist  under  one  banner, 
men  who  simply  affirm  truth  about  Jesus,  unless  in  their 
own  lives  there  is  an  absolute  loyalty  to  the  Lord  Christ. 
Antagonism  is  the  creation  of  force  for  the  Kingdom  of 
God.  Put  a  man  in  prison  for  Christ's  sake,  and  the 
earthquake  will  surely  follow,  and  the  work  will  spread. 

Acts  16:  25-40 

In  this  paragraph  we  have  an  account  of  Paul's  first 
work  in  Europe.  He  and  Silas  were  fulfilling  that  ulti- 
mate command  of  Jesus,  "Ye  shall  be  My  witnesses." 
We  are  tracing  a  great  movement,  and  therefore  are  not 
merely  interested  in  that  which  is  local.  There  are  three 
matters  of  interest  in  this  new  beginning;  first,  the  wit- 
nesses and  God;  secondly,  the  witnesses  and  the  jailer; 
and  finally,  the  witnesses  and  the  magistrates. 

The  three  pictures  merge  into  each  other.  In  the  first 
we  see  these  two  men  in  prison,  worshipping  and  praising, 
that  is,  the  witnesses  in  their  relation  to  God.  Then  im- 
mediately we  watch  them  in  their  method  with  the  jailer 
and  in  the  issues  following  that  method.  Finally  we  see 
them  in  their  dealing  with  the  magistrates  in  Philippi. 

They  were  in  the  inner  prison,  their  feet  fast  in  the 
stocks.  They  had  been  publicly  whipped,  and  were 
bruised  and  lacerated.  It  is  only  as  in  sympathetic  im- 
agination we  see  these  men  as  they  were,  that  we  can  at 
all  understand  this  story. 

With  that  background  in  mind,  we  are  immediately 
arrested  by  their  occupation.  They  were  praying  and 
singing  hymns.  The  translation  here  may  mislead  us. 
There  is  no  suggestion  of  petition  in  the  word  here  trans- 
lated "  praying."  It  is  the  word  which  indicates  the  at- 
titude of  adoration  and  of  worship.  We  are  not  war- 
ranted in  believing  that  these  men  were  asking  for  any- 
thing at  this  moment,  for  the  word  "praying"  is  im- 

[388] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  16:25-40] 

mediately  qualified  by  the  word  "  hymning,"  which  we 
have  rendered  "  singing  "  hymns.  These  were  exercises 
of  spiritual  joy.  Again  remember  the  surroundings. 
They  were  in  the  inner  prison,  dark  and  deadly  and  dis- 
mal; their  feet  were  fast  in  the  stocks,  so  that  there  would 
be  no  physical  comfort  through  the  hours  of  darkness; 
the  smart  and  pain  and  agony  of  the  rods  of  the  lictors 
were  still  with  them.  Yet  they  were  worshipping  in  the 
singing  of  hymns;  engaged  in  the  exercises  of  spiritual 

joy- 

The  other  prisoners  were  listening.  The  sound  of  the 
singing  had  reached  others  than  themselves.  The  Re- 
vised Version  helps  us  here.  It  does  not  say,  as  the 
Authorized  Version  did,  that  "  they  prayed  and  sang  "  as 
though  they  did  so  once.  They  were  praying  and  sing- 
ing; it  was  a  continuous  activity,  and  the  prisoners  were 
listening.  The  word  "  listening "  here  is  the  strongest 
possible.  They  were  attentively  listening. 

What  hymns  were  these  men  singing?  We  cannot  tell. 
Perhaps  some  new  hymn  of  the  Church,  perhaps  some 
ancient  psalms.  Whatever  the  songs  were,  the  prisoners 
listened  attentively,  marvelling  surely  that  prisoners  in  an 
inner  prison,  with  feet  fast  in  the  stocks  could  sing  at 
all. 

Then  immediately  came  the  earthquake,  the  opening  of 
prison  doors,  and  the  events  following. 

The  revelation  of  supreme  value  to  us  in  the  story  is 
that  first  of  the  power  of  Christ  to  overcome  the  bitter- 
ness of  difficult  circumstances.  It  was  not  a  song  of 
deliverance  that  these  men  were  singing,  but  the  song  of 
perfect  content  in  bondage.  That  is  the  supreme  marvel 
of  the  Christian  consciousness  and  the  Christian  triumph. 
Any  man  can  sing  when  the  prison  doors  are  open,  and 
he  is  set  free.  The  Christian  soul  sings  in  prison.  I 
think  that  Paul  would  probably  have  sung  a  solo,  had  I 
been  Silas ;  but  I  nevertheless  see  the  glory  and  grandeur 
of  the  spirit  that  rises  superior  to  all  the  things  of  diffi- 

[  389  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  16:25-40] 

culty  and  limitation.  Madame  GuVon  spent  ten  years  of 
her  life  in  French  prisons,  from  1695  to  1705.  Here  is 
a  song  she  wrote  in  prison : 

"  A  little  bird  am  I 

Shut  from  the  fields  of  air ; 
And  in  my  cage  I  sit  and  sing 

To  Him  Who  placed  me  there; 
Well  pleased  a  prisoner  to  be 
Because,  my  God,  it  pleaseth  Thee. 

"  Nought  have  I  else  to  do  ; 

I  sing  the  whole  day  long; 
And  He  Whom  most  I  love  to  please, 

Doth  listen  to  my  song; 
He  caught  and  bound  my  wandering  wing, 
But  still  He  bends  to  hear  me  sing. 

"  Thou  hast  an  ear  to  hear ; 

A  heart  to  love  and  bless; 
And,  though  my  notes  were  e'er  so  rude,; 

Thou  wouldst  not  hear  the  less; 
Because  Thou  knowest,  as  they  fall, 
That  same,  sweet  Love,  inspires  them  all. 

"  My  cage  confines  me  round ; 

Abroad  I  cannot  fly; 
But  though  my  wing  is  closely  bound, 

My  heart's  at  liberty. 
My  prison  walls  cannot  control 
The  flight,  the  freedom  of  the  soul. 

"  Oh,  it  is  good  to  soar 

These  bolts  and  bars  above, 
To  Him  Whose  purpose  I  adore, 

Whose  providence  I  love; 
And  in  Thy  mighty  will  to  find 
The  joy,  the  freedom  of  the  mind." 

I  think  that  is  the  kind  of  song  they  sang  in  the  prison 
at  Philippi ;  not  a  song  of  deliverance,  but  a  song  of  con- 

[  390  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  16:25-40] 

tent.  Content  with  perfect,  unfettered,  and  unbroken 
fellowship  with  God.  "They  prayed  and  sang  hymns 
unto  God,"  and  they  knew,  as  Madame  Guyon  knew  later, 
that  He  listened,  and  that  the  song  was  music  in  His 
ears.  That  is  the  supreme  triumph  of  Christian  experi- 
ence. We  cannot  shut  a  Christian  man  or  woman  out 
from  fellowship  with  God;  and  therefore  when  such  an 
one  as  Paul  goes  back  again  to  prison  presently,  no 
longer  in  Philippi,  but  in  Rome,  and  back  again  to  the 
Roman  prison  a  second  time;  in  all  his  letters  referring 
to  his  imprisonments,  he  never  spoke  of  himself  as  a 
prisoner  of  Rome,  or  of  Nero,  or  of  an  emperor.  He 
was  always  the  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  this  con- 
sciousness of  fellowship  with  God,  which  creates  the 
song. 

The  story  not  only  reveals  the  power  of  Christ  to  over- 
come the  bitterness  of  difficult  circumstances,  but  also  the 
power  of  Christ  to  deliver,  where  such  action  will  tend  to 
the  accomplishment  of  His  purpose.  The  earthquake — 
whether  caused  by  the  touch  of  His  hand  upon  the  earth, 
shaking  it,  until  the  staples  left  the  walls,  and  the  chains 
hung  loose,  and  the  doors  were  opened;  or  whether 
merely  in  His  overruling,  coincident  with  their  need  of 
liberty,  matters  nothing; — was  the  means  of  their  being 
set  free.  The  prison  fails  to  imprison.  When  presently 
this  man  was  imprisoned  again  in  Rome,  he  did  the 
mightiest  work  of  his  whole  life.  Not  even  his  mission- 
ary journeyings  are  to  be  compared  with  the  marvellous 
influence  resulting  from  the  writing  of  his  letters,  and  the 
finest  and  the  most  wonderful  of  them  were  letters 
written  in  prison. 

So  down  the  centuries  the  story  is  always  the  same. 
When  Satan  attempts  alliance  with  Christianity  he  puts 
Christianity  in  grave  danger ;  and  there  the  Church  needs 
to  be  most  on  her  watch-tower;  but  where  Satan  is  an- 
tagonistic, he  puts  the  Church  under  a  debt  to  him,  for 
he  but  helps  her^ 

[  391  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  16:25-40] 


Like  Moses*  bush  she  mounts  the  higher, 
To  flourish  unconsumed  by  fire." 


We  turn,  however,  from  this  matter  of  the  witnesses  in 
their  relationship  to  God,  triumphing  over  difficulties,  to 
glance  at  the  witnesses  in  their  dealing  with  the  jailer. 
He  appears  before  us  as  a  man  brutalized,  quite  careless 
of  their  wounds,  when  they  were  delivered  to  his  charge. 
Plunging  them  into  the  inner  prison,  he  added  quite  un- 
necessary brutality  in  making  their  feet  fast  in  the  stocks  ; 
and  all  this  without  one  touch  of  emotion,  without  one 
thought  of  them,  without  any  care  for  their  suffering ;  for 
mark  this,  he  went  to  sleep,  and  it  required  an  earthquake 
to  waken  him.  The  picture  is  graphic  enough ;  it  is  that 
of  a  man  so  brutalized  that  prisoners  smarting  from  the 
Roman  rods  can  be  handed  over  to  him,  and  he  will  not 
minister  to  their  need,  but  will  thrust  them  into  the  inner, 
deadly,  dark  prison,  and  fasten  them  in  the  stocks,  and 
chain  and  lock  and  bolt  doors,  and  then  himself  go  to 
sleep. 

The  earthquake  followed,  and  then  we  have  this  man's 
panic  and  his  plea.  There  was  a  certain  amount  of  brutal 
heroism  about  him,  heroism  in  keeping  with  the  atmos- 
phere of  the  day  in  which  he  lived.  When  he  awoke, 
hardly  knowing  what  had  happened,  seeing  the  opened 
prison  doors,  and  fearing  that  the  prisoners  had  all 
escaped,  he  attempted  suicide.  With  the  brutal,  animal 
heroism  that  marked  the  age,  he  would  take  his  life, 
and  escape  the  penalty  from  others. 

Then  it  was  that  a  voice  sounded  out  of  the  darkness, 
"  Do  thyself  no  harm :  for  we  are  all  here."  It  was  the 
quiet  voice  of  the  man  who  a  little  while  ago  was  singing, 
The  jailer  had  not  heard  the  song.  He  was  asleep.  Now 
what  did  he  say?  He  said  "Lords," — "Sirs"  is  our 
translation  but  it  is  exactly  the  same  word  that  Paul  used 
a  little  later  when  he  said,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus." — 
It  was  the  supreme  term  of  respect,  and  he  was  con- 

[  392  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  16:25-40] 

scious  of  the  fact  that  he  was  in  the  presence  of  his 
superiors.  "  Lords,  what  must  I  do  to  be  delivered  ?  " 
There  was  no  evangelical  faith  in  this.  He  did  not  mean, 
What  must  I  do  to  be  eternally  saved?  He  had  not  got 
nearly  as  far  as  that.  It  was  fear,  panic ;  and  his  own 
solution  of  his  difficulty  was  suicide ;  but  the  voice  of  the 
apostle  said,  "  Do  thyself  no  harm,  for  we  are  all  here  " ; 
the  prisoners  have  not  escaped  as  you  imagine.  Then 
filled  with  fear,  he  went  into  the  presence  of  the  men,  one 
of  whom  could  so  speak  to  him,  and  bowing  down,  he 
said,  "  Lords,  what  must  I  do  to  be  delivered  ?  "  He  was 
simply  a  man  stricken  with  panic,  and  wondering  what 
was  the  next  thing.  The  evangelical  values  were  coming, 
but  they  did  not  come  out  of  that  poor  panic-stricken 
heart.  They  came  in  answer  to  its  cry,  from  the  great 
apostle :  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  thou  shalt  be 
saved."  All  the  evangelical  values  are  in  that.  The  in- 
finite music  of  the  Gospel  is  thrilling  through  it  like  an 
anthem.  This  man  did  not  understand  it,  not  even  then ; 
but  it  was  an  answer  to  be  explained.  You  have  called 
us  lords ;  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  only  Lord 
of  human  life.  You  have  asked  what  you  shall  do  to  be 
saved,  and  your  feeling  is  one  born  of  fear,  and  desire  to 
be  saved  from  this  hour  of  difficulty.  Believe  on  this 
Lord,  and  you  shall  be  saved  from  this  hour,  and  from  all 
hours  of  difficulty. 

Then  "  they  spake  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  him,  with 
all  that  were  in  his  house."  Here  was  a  man  arrested, 
and  the  great  apostle  is  seen  taking  time  to  teach  him.  It 
was  Voltaire  who  said,  speaking  of  philosophers,  "  We 
have  never  cared  to  enlighten  cobblers  and  maidservants. 
That  is  the  work  of  apostles." 

Thank  God  it  is !  There  is  the  supreme  difference  be- 
tween all  philosophy  apart  from  Christ,  and  the  Christian 
evangel.  Paul,  just  between  midnight  and  the  first  flush 
of  dawn  upon  the  sky,  took  time  to  teach  that  brutalized 
jailer,  the  man  who  came  in  an  unworthy  panic,  saying, 

[  393  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  16:25-40] 

"  Lords,  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ? "  The  answer  came 
quick  and  sharp;  and  vibrant  with  music  that  the  listening 
man  knew  not  of :  "  Believe  on  the  one  Lord  Christ." 
Then  he  got  this  man,  with  all  his  house,  and  he  taught 
them,  he  told  them  the  story,  and  revealed  its  meaning, 
and  made  its  application.  It  is  a  picture  for  all  time. 
Philosophers  do  not  care  to  enlighten  cobblers  and  maid- 
servants ;  but  apostles  never  speak  of  cobblers  and  maid- 
servants. They  speak  of  men  and  women  in  the  image 
and  likeness  of  God;  and  it  is  always  worth  while  to 
spend  time  with  them,  to  explain  to  them  the  mightiest 
things  of  the  universe.  That  is  the  picture  of  Chris- 
tianity. There  is  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  move- 
ment in  Europe,  so  far  as  Paul  was  concerned.  He  was 
an  apostle,  with  a  mind  mightier  than  that  of  Voltaire, 
and  while  his  back  was  still  bleeding  and  bruised  and  un- 
washed, he  took  time  to  teach  that  man. 

Was  it  all  worth  while  ?  Read  the  story  to  the  end,  and 
look  at  the  man.  See  what  he  did.  He  washed  their 
stripes,  he  took  them  up  into  his  own  house,  the  place 
where  he  lived  over  the  prison.  The  marginal  reading 
here  is  a  little  more  accurate,  if  a  little  more  blunt :  "  he 
spread  a  table  before  them."  That  reminds  us  of  what 
God  does,  "  Thou  preparest  a  table  before  me  in  the 
presence  of  mine  enemies."  This  brutalized  Philippian 
jailer  is  doing  what  God  does.  He  washed  their  stripes 
and  spread  a  table  before  them.  That  is  the  one,  final, 
unanswerable  argument  for  Christianity.  That  is  the 
Christian  miracle.  I  see  the  jailer  in  Philippi,  washing 
their  stripes,  who  but  last  night  had  plunged  them  into 
the  inner  prison,  caring  nothing  for  bleeding  wounds,  and 
who  went  to  sleep  till  the  earthquake  woke  him.  It  was 
not  the  earthquake  that  produced  this  result.  It  was  that 
patient  teaching,  and  the  consequent  belief  into  Jesus 
Christ,  so  that  the  very  life  of  God  possessed  his  soul, 
and  he  began  the  activities  of  God,  the  activities  of  the 
eternal  compassion. 

[  394  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  16:25-40] 

But  the  apostle  had  not  yet  finished  his  work.  There 
was  further  instruction  given  to  the  whole  household,  and 
there  was  the  sacred  and  initial  rite  of  baptism  admin- 
istered to  the  whole  household.  Then  they  rejoiced,  hav- 
ing believed  in  God. 

Concerning  the  action  of  the  magistrates  the  next 
morning,  there  is  nothing  in  the  story  to  tell  us  the  reason 
of  what  they  did.  It  may  be  that  the  rumour  of  the 
earthquake  and  the  open  prison  doors  had  reached  them, 
although  that  is  hardly  probable.  It  may  be  that  they 
had  come  to  the  consciousness  during  the  night  that  they 
had  overstepped  the  mark  in  beating  these  men ;  for  it  is 
wonderful  what  an  effect  a  night  will  have  upon  a  man, 
and  how  differently  in  the  dawning  of  the  morning  the 
action  of  the  day  before  will  appear.  We  do  not  know, 
but  this  we  do  know,  that  with  a  touch  of  contempt  they 
sent  a  message,  "  Let  those  men  go."  The  phrase  "  those 
men  "  seems  to  indicate  contempt.  It  appeared  an  easy 
way  out  of  the  difficulty ;  when  law  had  been  violated,  and 
righteousness  wronged,  just  to  send  the  men  away. 

Will  this  Christian  apostle  go?  Will  he  say  that  his 
citizenship  is  in  heaven,  and  that  he  has  no  interest  in  the 
State?  Will  he  say  that  it  is  not  his  business  to  resist 
evil,  and  go  out  quietly?  Nay,  he  had  not  so  learned 
Christ.  Mark  the  consecration  of  his  Roman  citizenship 
by  his  Christian  citizenship.  He  refused  to  allow  the 
magistrates  who  had  violated  law  an  easy  way  of  escape. 
"  They  have  whipped  us  publicly,  uncondemned,  being 
Romans."  That  was  the  sharp,  clean-cut,  incisive  dec- 
laration of  wrong  committed  by  the  civic  authorities. 
Every  phrase  was  an  indictment :  "  whipped  us  publicly  ; 
uncondemned;  men  that  are  Romans."  We  are  not 
to  be  lightly  set  free.  Let  them  come  themselves, 
and  bring  us  forth.  Let  their  apology  be  as  public 
as  was  the  wrong  they  inflicted.  I  do  not  believe  that 
Paul  was  standing  on  his  own  dignity,  or  seeking  the 
vindication  of  his  personal  rights.  He  might  have  done 

[  395  1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  16:25-40] 

that  long  before.  When  the  whips  were  falling  upon 
him,  he  might  have  said,  I  am  a  Roman  citizen,  but  he 
did  not  use  his  rights  to  save  himself.  Now  for  the  sake 
of  the  Christian  citizens  in  Philippi,  for  the  sake  of  the 
little  community  of  believers  there,  he  drew  attention  to 
the  wrong  done,  and  insisted  upon  it  that  magistrates 
shall  not  violate  law  with  impunity.  It  was  the  assertion 
of  the  fact  that  if  the  Christian  needs  to  render  to  Caesar 
the  things  that  are  Caesar's;  then  Caesar  must  render  to 
the  Christian  citizen  the  things  that  are  of  right  and  of 
truth.  There  was  a  fine  dignity  in  this  attitude  of  the 
apostle,  the  dignity  of  service  to  the  Christian  com- 
munity, and  to  the  city  itself ;  the  refusal  to  stand  in  the 
presence  of  violated  law,  without  solemn  protest. 

Mark  well  the  sequel.  The  magistrates  came  and  be- 
sought them  to  come  out,  and  to  leave  the  city.  But  they 
did  not  immediately  leave  the  city.  They  were  quite 
willing  to  cooperate  with  the  powers  that  be,  in  quelling 
disturbance.  And  so,  with  leisure,  and  at  their  pleasure, 
they  left  the  city,  after  they  had  visited  the  house  of 
Lydia,  and  comforted  the  brethren.  By  the  form  of  the 
narrative  it  is  evident  that  Paul  left  Luke  behind  him 
here,  for  from  this  point  Luke  in  his  story  speaks  of  the 
company  as  "  They  "  until  in  the  twentieth  chapter  we 
find  that  he  had  rejoined  them. 

Thus  Paul's  work  in  Europe  was  commenced.  These 
witnesses  were  men  with  messages  to  deliver  to  Lydia 
and  a  handful  of  women,  and  also  to  a  brutalized  jailer, 
with  whom  philosophers  will  take  no  time.  Theirs  was 
the  great  experience  of  joy  that  triumphs  over  prison,  and 
sings  at  midnight.  The  Christian  campaign  was  that  of 
delivering  the  messages,  and  conserving  the  victories. 
The  Christian  conscience  inspired  the  correction  of  the 
magistrates  when  they  violated  law,  and  created  condi- 
tions in  which  it  was  possible  that  there  should  be  perfect 
freedom  for  the  worship  of  God. 

Look  at  Europe  to-day  in  spite  of  all  its  desolation. 

[  396  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  17: 1-15] 

Think  incidentally  of  her  architecture.  Blot  out  the 
temples  erected  to  the  worship  of  Christ,  and  what  re- 
mains? Go  into  her  picture  galleries,  and  destroy  the 
paintings  inspired  by  the  Christian  fact,  and  what  will  be 
left?  Go  into  her  halls  of  music,  and  destroy  all  that  is 
inspired  by  the  story  of  the  Messiah,  and  how  much  is 
left  that  is  worth  while?  Examine  her  literature,  and 
destroy  all  that  has  been  made  possible,  and  inspired  by 
the  Christian  movement,  and  what  will  abide  ?  Those  are 
all  incidental  things.  Essentially  the  measure  of  Europe's 
freedom  is  the  measure  in  which  she  has  obeyed  the 
principles  of  Christianity.  The  measure  of  her  purity  is 
the  measure  in  which  she  has  obeyed  the  word  to  the 
jailer,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  .  .  . 
be  saved."  The  chains  and  wrongs  that  abide  remain 
because  she  has  been  disobedient  to  the  heavenly  vision. 
The  work  is  not  accomplished,  but  it  is  the  same  great 
work,  and  we  have  the  same  evangel.  We  can  only 
carry  it  as  we  have  the  same  consciousness,  and  as  we 
realize  that  when  the  day  is  darkest,  and  the  prison  bars 
are  firmest,  then  is  the  day  for  song,  for  God  cannot  be 
overcome  ultimately  by  the  things  of  evil. 

Acts  17:1-15 

In  our  previous  study  we  considered  the  first  victories 
of  Christianity  through  Paul  in  Europe,  those  won  in 
Philippi.  In  this  paragraph  the  movement  is  carried 
forward.  Through  trial  and  persecution,  it  was  necessary 
for  the  apostle  to  leave  Philippi.  In  all  probability  leav- 
ing Luke  behind  him  there,  Paul  travelled  a  hundred 
miles  to  Thessalonica,  and  on  the  way  passed  through 
two  cities,  apparently  without  preaching  or  bearing  any 
testimony.  He  went  through  Amphipolis,  which  was  a 
military  station,  a  journey  of  three-and-thirty  miles  from 
Philippi,  and  through  Apollonia,  thirty  miles  still  further; 
until  he  came  to  Thessalonica,  seven  and  thirty  miles 
further  yet. 

[  397  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  17:1-15] 

One  wonders  why  he  passed  through  Amphipolis  and 
Apollonia.  Perhaps  on  the  human  side  the  most  probable 
answer  is  that  there  were  no  synagogues  in  those  towns ; 
and  even  though  Paul's  mission  was  now  distinctively  to 
the  Gentiles,  he  still  observed  the  invariable  rule  of 
preaching  to  the  Jew  first,  wherever  he  came.  All  that, 
however,  is  merely  speculation.  In  the  passing  of  these 
cities  we  recognize  the  constantly  varying  guidance  of 
the  Spirit  of  God.  One  is  growingly  impressed  in  our 
study  of  the  book,  that  we  cannot  tabulate  rules  or  regu- 
lations as  to  spiritual  conduct  therefrom.  Underlying 
principles  are  revealed  on  every  page,  and  in  every  move- 
ment. Matters  of  supreme,  permanent,  and  abiding 
value  to  the  work  of  the  Church  and  the  Christian  mis- 
sionary, and  the  testimony  of  the  Word,  are  revealed  by 
the  apparently  most  accidental  and  unimportant  events. 
Things  upon  which  we  in  this  age  are  apt  to  lay  great  em- 
phasis are  either  wholly  absent,  or  perpetually  changing. 

In  this  paragraph  then,  the  story  of  the  work  in  Europe 
gathers  round  two  places,  Thessalonica  and  Beroea;  and 
in  each  it  is  the  same  story  of  triumph  and  travail,  which 
we  beheld  in  Philippi,  and  which  we  have  observed  in  the 
whole  of  the  apostolic  work. 

Let  us  first  study  the  story;  and  then  let  us  gather 
certain  lessons  therefrom  of  permanent  value  and  im- 
mediate application. 

There  is  a  difference  between  these  two  places,  not 
merely  between  the  Jews  inhabiting  them,  but  between 
the  two  places  themselves,  Thessalonica  and  Beroea. 
Thessalonica  was  on  the  highway ;  Bercea  was  on  the  by- 
way. Thessalonica  was  on  the  ordinary  route  of  travel. 
Having  landed  where  Paul  did,  and  calling  at  Philippi, 
Amphipolis  and  Apollonia  were  practically  in  a  direct 
line  of  march  along  the  great  and  well-known  Roman 
road,  and  so  also  was  Thessalonica.  Beroea  was  on  a 
byway.  It  is  an  interesting  fact  which  Farrar  records^ 
about  Cicero,  when  he  tells  us  that : 

[398] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  17 : 1-15] 

".  .  .  In  his  passionate  philippic  against  Piso,  he 
says  to  Piso  that  after  his  gross  maladministration  of 
Macedonia,  he  was  so  unpopular  that  he  had  to  slink  into 
Thessalonica,  incognito  and  by  night;  and  that  from 
thence,  unable  to  bear  the  concert  of  wailers,  and  the 
hurricane  of  complaints,  he  left  the  main  road,  and  fled 
to  the  out-of-the-way  town  of  Beroea." 

That  is  an  interesting  fragment  of  profane  history,  but 
it  illuminates  this  story.  To  Thessalonica  Paul  came, 
and  he  came,  not  slinking  in,  but  quite  openly  and  def- 
initely. By  night  he  quietly  escaped  from  Thessalonica, 
and  as  Piso  had  done,  he  went  to  an  out-of-the-way  place, 
off  the  main  line. 

Therefore  in  this  paragraph  we  have  the  revelation  of 
triumph  and  travail  upon  the  highway  of  a  definite  line 
of  progress ;  and  have  the  account  of  triumph  and  travail 
on  the  byway,  in  the  unexpected  place ;  the  place  to  which 
it  would  appear  Paul  did  not  come  for  the  specific  pur- 
pose of  missionary  enterprise,  but  for  an  escape  into 
solitude  for  a  little  from  the  persecuting  spirit  of  the 
Jews. 

Paul  first  paused  at  Thessalonica.  He  went  to  the 
synagogue  of  the  Jews.  What  wonderful  fidelity  to 
principle  is  manifested  in  this  fact.  Think  of  all  that  we 
have  already  considered,  of  his  experiences  in  those  Asian 
cities  on  the  first  missionary  journey.  He  had  gone  in 
town  after  town,  first  to  the  Jews ;  sometimes  he  had  to 
turn,  with  determination  and  proclamation  from  them  to 
the  Gentiles  because  of  their  hostility.  All  the  persecu- 
tions that  followed  this  man  through  those  Asian  cities 
were  due  to  the  Jews.  Here  was  a  new  beginning.  He  had 
left  behind  him  that  first  chapter  of  his  work.  He  had 
followed  the  vision  of  the  man  of  Macedonia.  He  had 
crossed  from  Troas  to  Philippi,  and  at  Philippi  where 
there  was  no  synagogue,  he  had  gone  to  the  Jewish  place 
of  prayer  by  the  river.  What  an  opportunity  for  break- 
ing a  tradition  that  had  been  so  costly  to  him.  Having 

I  399  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  17: 1-15] 

followed  that  method  throughout  the  cities  of  Asia,  he 
was  now  in  Europe,  and  remembering  the  persecutions 
of  the  past,  he  might  have  avoided  them  by  going  straight 
to  the  Gentiles.  But  he  who  presently  wrote  his  Roman 
letter,  and  called  God  to  witness  that  he  had  continual 
sorrow  and  heaviness  of  heart  for  his  brethren  after  the 
flesh,  went  even  in  Thessalonica,  in  spite  of  all  the  ex- 
periences of  the  past,  to  the  Jew  first. 

So  we  find  him  in  the  synagogue,  and  that  for  three 
Sabbaths.  His  messages  therein  were  taken  "  from  the 
scriptures."  That  of  course  means  the  Scriptures  of  the 
Old  Testament.  There  was  no  New  Testament  in  the 
hand  of  the  apostle  as  he  went  on  his  journeyings. 
Whether  there  were  any  of  the  Gospel  narratives  extant, 
as  authentic  stories,  who  shall  tell?  The  Scriptures  that 
he  would  use  in  the  Jewish  synagogue  would  be  the  Scrip- 
tures of  the  Old  Testament.  The  words  "  opening  and 
alleging,"  reveal  his  method.  The  word  "  opening  "  here 
is  Luke's  word,  only  occurring  in  one  other  place  in  the 
New  Testament,  and  that  in  his  Gospel  the  twenty- fourth 
chapter,  when  he  records  that  Jesus,  after  His  resurrec- 
tion, opened  the  Scriptures  to  the  men  walking  to  Em- 
maus.  Paul  now  did  exactly  the  same  thing  in  that 
synagogue  in  Thessalonica.  The  word  simply  means 
making  plain,  expounding,  giving  an  exposition.  "  Alleg- 
ing "  is  a  word  which  may  mislead,  and  while  this  is  a 
technical  matter,  we  must  nevertheless  note  it,  for  it  is 
important.  The  word  does  not  mean  stating  dogmatically. 
It  means  setting  out  in  order,  and  displaying.  Paul  took 
up  the  Scriptures,  and  opened  them,  and  explained  them ; 
and  he  did  so  by  a  sequence  of  arrangement,  laying  out 
before  them  the  relation  of  this  part  to  that,  and  of  that 
to  the  other ;  of  the  law  to  the  prophets,  and  of  the  law 
and  the  prophets  to  the  hagiographa,  the  psalms,  or  de- 
votional writings. 

Two  facts  he  declared  in  that  synagogue.  He  first  de- 
clared that  according  to  their  Scriptures,  Messiah  must 

[  400  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  17:1-15] 

suffer  and  rise.  Taking  up  the  Old  Testatment,  he  showed 
them  that  their  own  Scriptures  declared  that  their  own 
Messiah  must  die  and  rise  again.  That  was  the  first  burden 
of  his  teaching.  The  order  in  which  it  is  stated  here  re- 
veals to  us  the  fact  that  before  he  told  the  story  of  Christ, 
he  made  them  see  what  their  own  Scriptures  taught  about 
their  own  Messiah;  and  this  was  exactly  what  the  Jew 
had  entirely  failed  to  grasp,  or  had  completely  forgotten. 
With  the  ancient  prophecies  in  our  hands,  with  the  one 
prophecy  of  Isaiah  for  instance,  it  seems  as  though  it  were 
impossible  for  men  ever  to  have  studied  them  without 
seeing  that  the  pathway  of  the  Servant  of  God  toward 
His  triumph  must  be  that  of  travail;  but  the  Jew  had 
failed  to  see  it.  There  were  in  those  days  interpreters  of 
the  prophecies,  scribes  and  teachers,  rabbis,  who  had  dis- 
covered a  difficulty,  and  who  were  teaching  that  two 
Messiahs  would  come  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  ancient 
ideal ;  one  who  should  be  a  suffering  Messiah ;  and  another 
who  should  be  a  Messiah  winning  battles,  and  establish- 
ing the  throne.  That  view  possibly  lurked  behind  John's 
question  to  Jesus  upon  one  occasion :  "Art  Thou  He  that 
cometh,  or  look  we  for  another  ? "  It  did  not  reveal  John's 
ignorance  of  the  prophetic  writings,  but  his  familiarity 
with  them,  and  his  sense  of  difficulty.  While  he  had  de- 
clared Jesus  to  be  the  Christ,  he  heard  of  no  mighty  mani- 
festations of  power  by  which  the  sceptre  should  be 
wrested  from  the  Roman  government.  He  had  expected 
to  hear  of  these  things,  and  in  prison  he  thought  to  him- 
self, Are  these  rabbis  right  after  all  ?  Must  there  be  two 
Messiahs  ?  "  Art  Thou  He  that  cometh,  or  look  we  for 
another  ?  "  Is  there  to  be  a  second  ?  That  was,  I  think, 
the  meaning  of  his  question. 

Paul's  work  was  now  to  declare  to  these  Jews  that  the 
Scriptures  taught  that  the  Messiah  must  suffer,  and  that 
He  must  rise  again.  One  wonders  what  particular  pas- 
sage he  took,  whether  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  or  those 
still  more  mystic  and  profound  words  in  Hosea.  Could 

40i 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
(Acts  17:1-15] 

he  possibly  have  omitted  that  sixteenth  psalm,  which 
Peter  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  definitely  quoted  as  ap- 
plicable to  the  resurrection  of  Jesus? 

"  Thou  wilt  not  leave  My  soul  to  Sheol  ; 
Neither  wilt  Thou  suffer  Thine  holy  One  to  see  cor- 
ruption," 

and  which  Paul  himself  quoted  at  another  place?  Or 
did  he  do  that  which  his  Master  did,  after  resurrection; 
commencing  at  Moses  and  the  prophets  and  the  psalms 
or  hagiographa,  open  to  them  the  whole  of  the  Scriptures  ? 
Be  that  as  it  may,  we  know  that  the  first  part  of  his  work 
was  to  show  these  people  what  their  own  Scriptures  really 
taught,  that  their  long-looked- for,  and  hoped-for,  and 
longed-after,  and  waited-for  Messiah,  must  die  and  rise 
again. 

Then  he  declared  that  the  One  Who  fulfilled  that  por- 
traiture of  their  ancient  Scriptures  was  Jesus  Himself. 
He  preached  to  them  concerning  the  Kingdom,  for  they 
charged  him  with  preaching  another  King,  one  Jesus,  and 
when  he  wrote  to  the  Thessalonians,  he  comforted  them 
because  they  were  suffering  for  their  loyalty  to  the 
Kingdom  principle.  He  preached  the  Kingship  of  Christ, 
and  showed  Him  to  be  Messiah  to  the  Jews.  The  reve- 
lation of  Paul's  method  in  Thessalonica  is  that  the  true 
understanding  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  must 
issue  in  proof  of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus.  So  he  pre- 
sented Christ  to  them. 

There  was  triumph  in  Thessalonica.  Some  of  the  Jews 
believed,  convinced  against  their  prejudice;  devout 
Greeks  believed  in  numbers,  convinced  without  prejudice ; 
and  some  of  the  chief  women,  attracted  by  the  new  light 
that  flashed  from  this  great  evangel  upon  them,  who  were 
so  largely  without  light  and  without  hope,  were  also  per- 
suaded. The  words  here  "  were  persuaded,"  signify  con- 
vinced by  the  argument  of  the  teacher.  They  consorted 
with  the  apostles,  joined  the  community,  and  in  that  hour 

[  402  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  17: 1-15] 

we  see  the  birth  of  that  Church  in  Thessalonica,  to  which 
two  letters  were  presently  sent  by  Paul. 

But  the  work  in  Thessalonica  was  not  one  o£  triumph 
only.  It  was  one  of  trial,  springing  out  of  the  jealousy  of 
the  Jews.  The  word  "  jealousy  "  is  a  very  awkward  word 
here.  It  should  read  springing  out  of  the  zeal  of  the 
Jews ;  for  it  is  the  very  word  that  Paul  used  concerning 
them  in  his  Roman  letter,  "  I  bear  them  witness  that  they 
have  a  seal  for  God,  but  not  according  to  knowledge." 

These  Jews  stirred  up  "  certain  vile  fellows  " ; — if  we 
would  translate  in  the  actual  language,  which  is  some- 
what colloquial, — they  stirred  up  the  loafers  of  the  mar- 
ket-place, gathered  a  multitude,  and  caused  an  uproar. 

The  charge  brought  against  these  preachers  was  first 
a  charge  of  revolution,  but  in  its  form  it  is  a  wonderful 
revelation  of  the  victories  already  won.  "  These  that 
have  turned  the  world  upside  down  are  come  hither  also." 
The  central  charge,  however,  was  that  of  high  treason 
against  Caesar ;  that  they  were  preaching  "  that  there  is 
another  King,  one  Jesus." 

With  the  result  we  are  familiar.  The  apostle  left 
Thessalonica ;  but  the  victory  there  must  be  measured  by 
the  Thessalonian  letters.  It  became  a  centre  from  which 
the  Gospel  sounded  out  through  the  whole  region,  even 
after  the  apostle  had  left;  and  the  Thessalonians  them- 
selves are  revealed  in  his  description,  "  Ye  turned  unto 
God  from  idols,  to  serve  a  living  and  true  God,  and  to 
wait  for  His  Son  from  heaven."  Paul  and  Silas  were 
sent  away.  Jason  the  man  into  whose  house  the  apostle 
went,  the  man  whom  they  arrested,  and  bound  over  to 
keep  the  peace,  helped  the  apostle  to  escape.  He  was 
a  man  of  Thessalonica;  we  know  him  by  just  a  few 
graphic  touches,  for  we  never  hear  of  him  again,  except 
perchance  he  may  be  referred  to  in  the  sixteenth  chapter 
of  Romans  as  Paul's  kinsman. 

So  they  passed  to  Bercea,  and  there  again  to  the  syna- 
gogue of  the  Jews  they  came.  Undoubtedly  the  process 

[  403  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  17:1-15] 

of  preaching  was  identical,  but  notice  the  difference. 
These  people  were  more  noble  than  those  in  Thessalonica,: 
in  that  they  searched  the  Scriptures  daily,  examining 
them,  sifting  the  evidence.  In  what  did  their  nobility 
consist?  We  generally  say  in  reading  the  story,  that 
they  were  more  noble  in  that  they  manifested  greater 
readiness  to  receive.  That  is  so,  but  in  what  did  that 
readiness  consist?  In  that  they  were  determined  to  find 
out.  It  was  not  quick  belief  that  made  them  noble,  for 
they  were  sceptical;  but  their  scepticism  was  accom- 
panied by  determined  anxiety  to  find  out.  The  noble 
hearer  is  not  the  man  who  immediately  says  Yes,  to  the 
interpretation  of  the  preacher.  The  noble  hearer  is  the 
man  who  appeals  again  and  again  to  the  Scriptures  them- 
selves, to  find  out  if  these  things  be  true.  I  sometimes 
think  that  the  great  advantage  that  the  Beroeans  had  was 
that  they  lived  on  the  byway,  and  not  on  the  highway. 
We  who  live  in  cities  come  to  strange  conceits,  that  all  the 
intelligence  is  in  the  cities.  By  no  means.  Some  men 
have  an  idea  that  to  preach  in  a  London  pulpit  is  the  most 
difficult  thing.  It  is  by  no  means  necessarily  so.  Among 
the  mountains  of  Wales,  and  in  the  highlands  of  Scot- 
land, are  men  and  women  who  will  make  the  preacher 
preach  as  it  is  by  no  means  necessary  that  he  should  al- 
ways do  in  London;  men  who  will  get  their  Bibles  down, 
and  say,  Is  this  man  right?  That  is  nobility.  It  is  not 
the  nobility  of  readiness  to  believe  anything.  It  is  the 
nobility  of  being  determined  to  find  out  if  human  inter- 
pretation is  in  accord  with  the  actual  Scripture.  Paul  in- 
terpreted the  Scripture  before  the  Beroeans,  and  they 
listened  with  a  sceptical  and  honest  enquiry,  a  determina- 
tion to  seek  and  know  and  examine,  and  they  made  the 
Scriptures  the  test  of  the  interpretation.  It  is  an  inter- 
esting fact  that  the  word  used  for  the  belief  of  those  in 
Thessalonica  is  not  the  word  used  for  the  belief  of  those 
in  Beroea.  The  root  significance  is  the  same,  but  in  the 
very  difference  of  the  words  there  is  a  shade  of  meaning. 

[  404  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
f  [Acts  17 : 1-15] 

The  Revisers  have  changed  the  word  in  the  case  of  the 
Thessalonians.  With  a  fine  accuracy  they  render  it  that 
those  in  Thessalonica  were  persuaded,  and  that  those  in 
Bercea  believed.  The  word  used  of  those  in  Thessalonica 
means  persuaded  by  argument.  The  word  used  of  those 
in  Bercea  means  that  fullness  of  belief  which  is  not  only 
persuasion  by  argument,  but  full  spiritual  apprehension. 
The  men  who  were  not  so  noble,  needed  persuasion,  and 
came  into  belief  on  the  ground  of  persuasion;  but  the 
men  who  sifted  for  themselves,  and  were  sceptical,  came 
to  find  a  larger  faith  their  own. 

Then  we  may  expect  that  these  men  more  noble,  in  the 
out-of-the-way,  quiet  village,  Bercea,  will  become  a  great 
company,  and  we  shall  hear  much  of  them  later  on. 
There  is  never  a  word!  And  we  might  imagine  that 
Thessalonica,  with  its  faith  following  upon  persuasion, 
would  never  be  heard  of  again !  But  it  was  not  so.  There 
are  two  letters  sent  to  the  Thessalonians  and  Paul  de- 
clared that  the  Word  sounded  out  from  them  through  the 
whole  region.  Does  that  mean  then  that  the  Church  in 
Thessalonica  was  a  finer  one  than  that  in  Bercea?  By  no 
means.  Often  the  people  and  the  churches  about  which 
least  is  said  are  the  mightiest. 

The  story  of  this  paragraph  is  but  a  continuation  of  the 
whole  book.  Every  page  reveals  the  relation  between 
travail  and  triumph  in  the  Christian  campaign.  This 
great  movement  with  which  Paul  is  now  so  closely  iden- 
tified, commenced  when  the  persecution  in  Jerusalem 
broke  out,  and  the  witnesses  were  scattered  from  Jeru- 
salem, through  Judea  and  Samaria.  Out  of  the  travail 
came  the  triumph ;  but  triumph  produces  travail.  Every 
new  victory  is  a  new  baptism  in  blood.  Every  new  vic- 
tory is  a  new  era  of  persecution  in  some  form.  But 
travail  always  leads  to  triumph,  and  so  the  ceaseless  cycles 
run;  triumph  unto  travail;  travail  back  into  triumph. 
Let  the  principle  be  applied  to  our  own  lives.  The  meas- 
ure of  our  triumph  in  work  for  God  is  always  the  meas- 

[  405  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  17 : 1-15! 

ure  of  our  travail.  No  propagative  work  is  done  save  at 
cost;  and  every  genuine  triumph  of  the  Cross  brings 
after  it  the  travail  of  some  new  affliction,  and  some  new 
sorrow.  So  we  share  the  travail  that  makes  the  Kingdom 
come. 

We  notice  also  the  value  of  the  Scriptures  in  the  Chris- 
tian campaign.  The  method  of  the  preachers  at  Thessa- 
lonica  is  the  method  of  the  preacher  for  all  time.  The 
one  work  of  preaching  is  the  opening  and  alleging,  or 
displaying  of  the  teaching  of  the  Scriptures  about  Christ; 
the  presentation  of  Christ  as  fulfilling  these  Scriptures. 
At  Bercea  we  learn  the  true  attitude  of  the  hearers.  Two 
things  are  stated :  they  heard,  that  is  the  open  mind ;  they 
examined,  that  is  the  mind  of  caution.  Those  are  needed 
to-day.  First,  the  open  mind.  God  have  mercy  on  us  if 
we  have  closed  the  mind,  so  that  no  new  light  can  come 
in.  But  God  have  mercy  on  us  if  we  open  windows  and 
doors  to  anything  that  claims  to  be  light.  There  needs  to 
be  the  cautious  mind.  "  Take  heed  how  ye  hear." 

The  final  note  of  the  paragraph  is  its  revelation  of  the 
lines  of  victory  in  the  Christian  campaign.  What  are  the 
most  difficult  conditions  with  which  preachers  have  to 
deal?  Religious  prejudice  and  religious  pride.  What 
are  the  most  hopeful  conditions  as  here  revealed?  The 
heart  and  mind  open,  as  in  the  case  of  these  Greek 
women.  In  that  is  a  revelation  of  the  glory  and  beauty 
of  the  Gospel.  "What  comfort  was  there  for  a  Greek 
woman  in  the  cold  gray  eyes  of  Athene,  or  the  stereo- 
typed smile  of  the  voluptuous  Aphrodite  ?  "  What  was 
there  in  Greek  religions  or  philosophic  thought  for  a 
woman?  I  am  not  surprised  to  read  that  these  Greek 
women  turned  readily  to  the  great  Gospel.  What  is  there 
in  the  world  to-day  for  womanhood  other  than  this  great 
evangel?  Let  there  be  no  undervaluing  of  the  meaning 
of  this.  The  women  of  high  and  noble  estate,  the  con- 
vinced daughters  of  Greek  culture,  sick  at  heart  because 
of  the  degradation  of  womanhood,  as  the  result  of  Greek 

[  406  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  17 : 16-34] 

philosophy,  turned  to  this  great  evangel  with  its  broad 
and  spacious  outlook,  with  its  light  flashing  and  shining 
upon  them.  These  were  great  victories. 

But  the  Greek  men  also  listened,  and  were  eager;  be- 
cause their  religion  was  dead.  In  the  times  in  which 
Paul  lived,  there  were  Greek  proselytes  crowding  to  Juda- 
ism by  the  hundreds.  They  were  tired  of  false  religion, 
tired  of  the  philosophies  that  had  no  satisfaction  for  the 
soul.  They  had  turned  to  Judaism  because  it  brought 
them  the  doctrine  of  one  God;  but  they  were  without 
the  Jewish  prejudice  and  pride,  and  when  this  great  Word 
came  to  them,  the  Word  of  the  one  God,  and  the  one  God 
manifest,  and  the  one  God  winning  victory  by  death, 
some  of  the  profoundest  secrets  of  their  own  mysteries 
were  drawn  into  the  light  and  redeemed.  The  greatest 
triumphs  of  the  Gospel  to-day  are  not  won  among  the 
people  who  are  religiously  proud  and  prejudiced.  The 
hardest  place  in  which  the  Gospel  has  to  win  its  victory 
is  a  congregation  hardened  to  its  message,  and  satisfied 
with  its  external  forms  of  religion.  With  what  perfect 
understanding  one  reads  that  there  were  occasions  when 
Paul  turned  from  the  people  of  religious  pride  and  prej- 
udice, to  reach  the  people  with  hearts  and  minds  hungry 
and  ready  for  the  Gospel. 

These  after  all,  are  preliminary  revelations  of  the  great 
message  to  Europe.  The  complete  unveiling  came  at 
Athens. 

Acts  17 : 16-34 

In  certain  respects  there  is  no  more  fascinating  story  in 
the  book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  than  this  of  Paul 
in  Athens.  The  very  conjunction  of  names  is  arresting 
and  interesting; — Athens,  "the  most  sacred  shrine  of  the 
fair  humanities  of  paganism  " ; — Paul,  the  most  faithful 
incarnation  of  the  Christian  temper  and  passion. 

Our  business  is  with  Paul  in  Athens.  Pursued  by  Jews 
from  Thessalonica,  the  apostle  was  conducted  by  loving 

[  407  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  17: 16-34] 

disciples,  who  had  been  gathered  in  Bercea ;  they  accom- 
panied him  on  that  journey  of  two  hundred  miles  to 
Athens,  and  then  left  him.  Luke  had  been  left  behind 
in  Thessalonica.  Silas  and  Timothy  had  remained  at 
Bercea.  The  first  declaration  of  this  passage  is  that  he 
was  waiting  in  Athens.  That  in  itself  is  an  arresting  and 
suggestive  word,  for  it  reminds  us  that  we  shall  see  how 
a  Christian  man  waits  in  a  godless  city.  Therein  is  the 
whole  value  of  this  scene. 

The  story  may  be  divided  into  two  parts.  First  of  all, 
beginning  with  the  sixteenth  verse,  and  ending  in  the 
twenty-first,  we  have  what  may  be  described  as  the  first 
mutual  impressions ;  the  impression  that  Athens  made  on 
Paul,  and  the  impression  that  Paul  made  on  Athens. 
Then  immediately  following,  beginning  with  the  twenty- 
second  verse,  and  on  to  the  end  of  the  chapter,  we  have 
the  second  part  of  the  narrative,  which  we  may  describe 
as  the  final  mutual  impressions.  Here  we  first  find  the 
final  impression  which  Paul  made  on  Athens,  and  then 
the  final  impression  which  Athens  made  on  Paul.  It  is 
the  story  of  a  Christian  man  in  a  decadent  pagan  city, 
for  Athens  was  then  long  past  its  highest  and  its  best. 

Notice  first  the  impression  that  Athens  made  on  him. 
He  was  provoked  in  spirit.  Notice  the  impression  that 
he  first  made  upon  Athens ;  he  preached  of  Jesus  and  the 
resurrection;  and  the  Epicurean  and  Stoic  philosophers 
were  interested,  and  asked  him  to  tell  them  something 
more  definitely. 

There  are  three  things  to  note  as  to  the  impression 
which  the  city  made  on  Paul.  First  it  aroused  his  inter- 
est; secondly,  it  stirred  his  emotion;  and  thirdly,  it  in- 
spired his  service,  and  drove  him  to  attempt  even  there 
also,  to  discharge  that  great  debt  which  he  referred  to  in 
his  Roman  letter,  in  the  words,  "  I  am  debtor  both  to 
Greeks  and  to  Barbarians." 

The  city  aroused  his  interest.  We  are  familiar  with  a 
criticism  of  Paul,  which  declares  that  he  passed  through 

I  408  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  17 : 16-34] 

all  these  Greek  cities,  and  even  came  to  Athens,  and  never 
by  word,  or  speech,  or  in  letter  afterwards  written,  did  he 
seem  to  have  taken  the  slightest  notice  of  the  things  which 
principally  attracted  other  men.  We  are  impressed  with 
the  fact  that  he  was  not  impressed  by  things  which  would 
impress  other  men.  All  that  splendid  history  of  Athens, 
running  back  at  least  four  centuries  before  he  came  to 
the  city,  to  those  wonderful  days  when  Socrates  stood 
on  Mars'  Hill,  perhaps  almost  exactly  where  he  stood, 
was  ignored.  Of  the  whole  of  the  outstanding  names  of 
Greek  thought,  Paul  hardly  referred  to  one,  save  to  cer- 
tain poets,  not  among  the  finest,  the  highest,  or  the  no- 
blest. One  writer  declared  that  it  was  easier  to  find  in 
Athens  a  god  than  to  find  a  man ;  which  was  a  reference 
to  the  fact  that  Athens  was  filled  with  statuary  of  the 
most  wonderful  and  the  most  beautiful  kind.  It  was  the 
very  home  of  art,  but  there  was  no  reference  to  the  art 
of  Athens  by  Paul.  It  was  the  centre  of  philosophy. 
He  did  come  into  contact  with  certain  of  the  Epicurean 
and  Stoic  philosophers;  but  it  is  a  very  remarkable  fact 
how  in  his  dealing  with  them,  he  ignored  their  peculiar 
philosophies,  or  only  referred  to  them  to  show  their  folly. 
Here  was  a  man  indifferent  to  the  very  things  which  had 
peculiarly  arrested  attention,  to  the  very  things  which  had 
caused  other  men  to  write  at  length  of  their  beauty. 
There  was  another  traveller  who  came,  perhaps  only  fifty 
years  later,  certainly  less  than  a  century  later  than  Paul, 
— Pausanias  the  traveller.  He  gave,  in  the  six  volumes 
of  his  descriptions  of  Greece,  more  room  to  Athens  than 
to  any  other  city.  His  descriptions  were  detailed,  and 
very  remarkable.  He  described  how,  landing  at  Piraeus, 
and  riding  up  from  the  port  into  the  city,  one  encountered 
temples  to  Demeter;  and  how,  scattered  through  the  city, 
there  were  statues  of  every  kind,  in  stone,  in  marble,  in 
wood,  in  gold,  in  silver.  One  cannot  read  Pausanias 
without  feeling  the  artistic  magnificence  of  Athens.  But 
this  man  Paul  saw  everything,  and  Luke  summarizes  his 

[  409  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  17:  16-34] 

outlook  upon  all  these  things  by  one  phrase  "  full  of 
idols  " !  The  brilliant  Frenchman,  Renan,  says  that  the 
ugly  little  Jew  abused  Greek  art  by  describing  the  statues 
as  idols.  This  man  was  unimpressed  by  the  things  which 
impressed  others.  These  very  things  of  history,  of  art, 
of  philosophy,  when  Paul  and  Pausanias  came  to  Athens, 
were  not  alive ;  they  were  dead.  Let  me  quote  some  brief 
sentences  in  description:  "At  that  time  these  men  of 
Athens  were  trading  on  the  memory  of  achievements  not 
her  own."  So  much  for  her  history.  What  of  her 
philosophy  ?  She  was  "  repeating  with  dead  lips  the  echo 
of  old  philosophies."  What  of  her  art  and  her  glory? 
"  Her  splendour  was  no  longer  an  innate  effulgence,  but  a 
lingering  reflex." 

So  when  we  are  inclined  to  criticize  Paul  because  he 
was  not  impressed,  though  he  was  in  the  midst  of  things 
of  art  and  philosophy,  we  should  remember  that  they 
were  not  living,  but  dead.  Notwithstanding  the  splendour 
that  remained,  there  was  lack  of  life  everywhere  in 
Athens  when  he  came  to  the  city. 

But  what  did  Paul  see  in  Athens?  Two  things  im- 
pressed him.  First  the  city  was  full  of  idols;  secondly, 
one  altar  arrested  his  attention,  an  altar  that  bare  an  in- 
scription, "  TO  AN  UNKNOWN  GOD."  In  that  little  phrase 
"  full  of  idols  "  is  packed  everything  that  Pausanias  gave 
in  detail.  Pausanias  described  the  temples,  and  said  that 
as  he  moved  up  to  the  centre  of  Athens  there  were  altars 
on  every  hand.  He  declared  that  there  were  altars  de- 
voted to  Philosophy  and  Beneficence,  to  Rumour  and 
Shame.  The  Athenians  were  deifying,  not  only  men,  but 
ideas  and  capacities.  In  every  niche  in  the  city  there 
was  some  representation  which  these  men  were  worship- 
ping. Pausanias  also  tells  us  that  there  were  altars  to  an 
unknown  God ;  and  Paul  discovered  one  of  these,  "  I 
found  also  an  altar  with  this  inscription,  TO  AN  UNKNOWN 
GOD."  These  were  the  things  that  arrested  his  attention; 
the  idols,  and  this  one  altar. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  17:16-34] 

What  was  the  effect  produced  upon  him  by  what  he 
saw  ?  "  His  spirit  was  provoked  within  him."  Do  not 
soften  that  word  "provoked."  The  Greek  word  is  the 
one  from  which  we  derive  our  word  paroxysm.  "  His 
spirit  was  provoked  within  him."  In  the  midst  of  the 
beauty  and  the  glory  and  the  art  and  the  philosophy  and 
the  history  of  Athens,  proud  and  wonderful  Athens,  this 
man  Paul  was  in  a  rage,  was  provoked.  The  emotion 
produced  was  not  piquant  and  passing,  the  emotion  of  a 
tourist.  His  spirit  was  provoked  within  him,  he  was 
angry,  he  was  in  a  rage,  and  that  because  every  idol  he 
saw  demonstrated  the  capacity  of  the  man  who  built  it, 
for  God;  and  because  all  the  idols  demonstrated  the 
degradation  of  that  selfsame  capacity.  He  was  pro- 
voked because  he  knew  that  these  idols  and  temples  and 
altars  all  meant  that  these  men  were  made  for  worship, 
and  for  God ;  and  he  knew  that  these  idols,  temples,  and 
altars  issued  in  that  diffusion  of  devotion  that  had  broken 
up  the  individual  man,  disorganized  society,  and  made 
Athens  what  she  was.  Pausanias  was  a  tourist,  looking  at 
the  art  and  things  of  beauty  in  the  city.  Pausanias  did 
not  understand  the  slavery  that  was  beneath ;  he  seems  to 
have  been  entirely  indifferent  to  the  heartache  and  agony 
that  was  expressing  itself  in  the  degenerate  philosophies 
which  men  were  teaching.  But  this  little  Jew,  this  great 
Christian,  had  no  time  for  a  description  of  art,  of  paint- 
ing, and  the  things  of  beauty,  because  his  heart  was  hot 
and  angry  in  the  consciousness  of  the  degradation  of 
humanity,  issuing  from  humanity's  false  attempts  to 
satisfy  its  profoundest  need,  that  of  God,  with  all  its 
idols  and  its  temples,  its  worship  of  Athene,  the  mother 
of  the  air,  its  worship  of  Demeter,  the  mother  of  the 
earth,  its  worship  of  Zeus,  the  god  of  force;  these  altars 
to  Shame,  to  Rumour,  and  Philanthropy;  these  idols 
everywhere.  Men  were  worshipping  everything,  and 
therefore  were  worshipping  nothing.  At  last  the  little 
Jew,  the  great  Christian,  found  one  altar  to  an  unknown 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  17 : 16-34] 

God,  and  that  altar  for  him  was  the  focussing  of  a 
tragedy.  Paul  saw  and  read  into  it  the  ultimate  agony 
of  idolatry;  that,  unable  to  satisfy  itself  with  its  many 
gods,  restless  by  the  very  diffusion  of  devotion,  it  travels 
out  beyond  and  knows  nothing,  and  yet  is  sure  that  in 
the  beyond  is  the  thing  it  wants ;  and  it  erects  an  altar  to 
the  unknown  God. 

Therefore  a  paroxysm,  a  rage,  and  a  driving,  and  a 
fire,  and  a  flaming  passion,  in  the  heart  of  the  man.  It 
was  the  rage  of  truth  with  a  lie,  it  was  the  anger  of  the 
constructive  against  the  destructive.  It  was  the  passion 
of  a  man  who  found  in  Athens  capacity  for  God,  and 
that  capacity  degraded  and  spoiled  for  lack  of  God.  So 
the  first  impression  that  Athens  made  upon  him  was  that 
of  the  arousing  of  his  interest,  and  the  second  was  that 
of  the  stirring  of  his  emotion. 

But  it  also  inspired  his  service.  He  began  his  work, 
first  in  the  synagogue,  and  then  in  the  market-place,  the 
Agora,  where  perchance  Socrates  four  hundred  years  be- 
fore had  stood!  That  sermon,  that  wonderful  address, 
so  full  of  instruction  for  all  missionary  enterprise,  is  not 
the  sermon  he  preached  in  the  market-place.  Luke  has 
given  us  no  details  of  the  preachings.  He  does  not  re- 
cord what  Paul  talked  about  in  the  market-place,  and  to 
the  groups;  because  he  did  not  imagine  any  man  would 
need  to  be  told.  Presently  we  find  out,  because  of  what 
the  Epicurean  and  Stoic  philosophers  said.  The  burden 
of  his  talking  had  been  that  of  Jesus  and  the  resurrection, 
and  that  had  startled  them,  "  May  we  know  what  this  new 
teaching  is?"  Think  of  the  fitness  of  it;  it  was  the 
gospel  for  a  dead  city ;  Jesus  and  the  resurrection.  Paul 
was  not  the  Philistine  some  people  imagine  him  to  have 
been.  He  saw  the  beauties,  he  felt  the  irresistible  appeal 
of  the  glamour  of  Athens;  and  therefore  in  the  midst 
of  the  death  of  its  history,  and  of  its  art,  and  the  moribund 
condition  of  its  philosophy,  he  preached  Jesus  and  the 
resurrection.  He  knew  full  well  that  by  that  risen.  One 

[  412  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  17:16-34] 

alone,  could  Athens  arise  from  the  ashes  of  her  dead 
self  to  higher  and  to  nobler  things. 

What  impression  did  Paul  first  make  upon  Athens? 
He  went  to  the  synagogue,  but  there  is  no  word  of  any 
impression  made  there.  An  argument  from  silence  may 
be  dangerous,  and  yet  it  is  noticeable  that  there  is  no 
record  of  their  receiving  his  message,  as  they  had  done 
in  other  places.  Neither  is  there  any  record  of  their 
objecting.  These  Jews  were  living  and  worshipping  in 
a  city  that  was  always  listening  to  new  things.  There- 
fore they  would  be  more  likely  to  listen  to  him  when  he 
talked  of  what  seemed  to  them  to  be  a  new  thing.  On 
the  other  hand  they  would  be  less  likely  to  persecute 
him,  or  they  would  have  had  Athens  on  his  side. 

An  impression  was  made  in  the  market-place,  and  made 
principally  upon  these  philosophers,  Epicureans  and 
Stoics.  The  Epicureans  were  those  who  declared  that 
the  highest  good  is  pleasure.  The  Stoics  were  those  who 
declared  the  highest  good  is  virtue.  And  yet  when  Paul 
came  to  Athens,  these  philosophies  were  degenerate. 
The  philosophy  of  the  Epicureans  as  then  taught,  and  as 
then  practised,  was  degenerate.  Epicurus  had  declared 
that  the  highest  in  life  was  pleasure,  but  by  that  he  had 
meant  something  far  higher  and  nobler  than  the  men 
understood  in  the  day  in  which  Paul  came  to  Athens.  He 
had  lived  the  garden  life ;  and  according  to  his  teaching, 
pleasure  consisted  in  freedom  from  physical  pain,  and 
mental  unrest;  and  the  way  in  which  he  declared  free- 
dom from  physical  pain  and  mental  unrest  to  be  possible, 
was  the  way — to  borrow  a  modern  phrase — of  the  simple 
life.  The  ideal  of  Epicurus  was  high  and  noble,  but  the 
whole  philosophy  was  degenerate;  and  the  interpretation 
of  the  meaning  of  the  declaration  that  the  highest  good  is 
pleasure,  was  at  fault.  The  whole  story  may  be  told  in 
one  word.  The  Epicurean  philosophy  in  practice,  habit, 
and  experience,  when  Paul  came  to  Athens,  was  lust,  in 
its  most  degrading  form. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  17 : 16-34] 

The  Stoic  philosophers  had  declared  that  the  highest 
good  was  virtue,  but  that  idea  also  was  degenerate. 
There  was  theory  without  practice.  There  was  the  as- 
sumption, and  the  profession  of  indifference  to  the  things 
which  the  Epicureans  taught,  but  there  was  insincerity; 
and  beneath  the  profession  there  was  the  most  degrading 
form  of  evil;  and  the  ultimate  word  of  the  Stoic  was 
suicide.  Yet  these  were  the  men  who  listened  to  this 
man  preaching. 

The  impression  he  made  on  them  was  not  the  same  in 
all  cases.  There  were  those  who  spoke  of  him  with  con- 
tempt. They  said,  "  What  would  this  babbler  say  ?  "  this 
seed-pecker,  this  man  who  is  content  to  have  picked  up 
something  here  and  there,  and  to  go  round  reciting  it; 
this  man  who  gets  his  living  by  telling  tales,  this  igno- 
ramus, this  babbler.  To  understand  it  we  have  only  to 
listen  to  the  way  in  which  some  men  still  treat  the  gospel 
preacher.  But  there  were  others  who  said,  "  He  seemeth 
to  be  a  setter  forth  of  strange  gods."  There  was  a  gleam 
of  light.  These  men  were  really  so  ignorant  of  what 
Paul  meant  that  they  said  Resurrection  was  one  god ;  and 
Jesus  another ;  they  deified  an  idea.  These  men  were  im- 
pressed that  Paul  was  speaking  in  the  realm  of  religion. 
"  He  seemeth  to  be  a  setter  forth  of  strange  gods."  Then 
the  conception  created  curiosity,  for  when  we  read, 
"  They  took  hold  of  him/'  we  must  not  think  of  any 
violent  action  on  their  part.  They  brought  him  to  Mars' 
Hill,  and  said,  "  May  we  know  what  this  new  teaching 
is,  which  is  spoken  by  thee  ?  "  They  placed  him  on  what 
Pausanias  described  as  the  stone  of  impudence,  where 
men  had  to  defend  their  facts  while  the  listeners,  sat 
round.  That  is  the  first  impression  he  has  made  on 
Athens :  contempt ;  a  question  as  to  whether  there  is  not 
perhaps  some  prof  ounder  claim ;  and  a  dilettante  curiosity 
to  hear  what  he  said. 

We  are  far  from  the  Athens  of  Paul  and  of  Pausanias. 
Yet  sometimes  I  think  how  near  we  are.  History  is 

[  414  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  17:16-34] 

interwoven  with  the  influence  of  Christ,  and  men  are  for- 
getting Him.  Art  has  been  glorified  by  making  Christ  its 
supreme  subject,  and  is  drifting  away  from  Him.  Phi- 
losophy has  been  permeated  with  the  conceptions  of 
Christ,  and  is  now  inclined  to  ignore  Him.  We  are 
largely  living  in  the  past,  and  our  cities  are  as  full  of  idols 
as  was  Athens.  The  influence  of  Christ  has  made  im- 
possible the  erection  of  material  altars,  or  the  putting  up 
of  images  that  we  worship,  but  the  spirit  of  idolatry  is 
still  with  us ;  and  I  very  much  question  whether  one  can 
find  any  temple,  or  altar  or  idol  in  Athens,  that  cannot  be 
reproduced  in  the  great  cities  of  to-day.  We  are  still 
worshipping  Athene,  in  the  deification  of  the  mental ;  and 
Demeter  too,  the  earth  mother,  in  the  apotheosis  of  the 
physical ;  and  Zeus,  the  god  of  force,  even  until  this  hour. 
We  also  have  our  altars  reared,  even  to  philosophy,  most 
certainly  to  rumour.  Rumour,  the  base  goddess,  has  had 
her  scriptures  issued  morning  by  morning  until  the  very 
life  of  man  is  made  restless  by  her  lying.  We  are  wor- 
shipping shame ;  there  are  altars  to  shame  upon  our  high- 
ways everywhere.  We  are  still  idolaters.  The  Epicurean 
is  with  us  still ;  indifferent.  The  Stoic  is  here  still,  gath- 
ered into  so-called  ethical  societies.  Where  are  the  Chris- 
tian men  and  women  of  the  city?  We  shall  find  them 
and  know  them  by  the  paroxysm  of  their  unrest.  But 
that  is  not  the  ordinary  stamp  of  Christian  men  and 
women.  They  are  quiet,  content,  reverent,  worshipful. 
No;  if  there  be  no  paroxysm,  no  force,  no  agony,  no 
heart-break,  no  sacrifice,  they  are  pagans  and  not  Chris- 
tians. F.  W.  H.  Myers  was  a  poetic  interpreter  of  Paul, 
and  so  of  the  Christian  experience.  Here  is  the  story 
of  every  Christian  man  in  a  great  city. 

"  Oft  when  the  Word  is  on  me  to  deliver 

Lifts  the  illusion,  and  the  truth  lies  barey 
Desert  or  throng,  the  city  or  the  river 
Melts  in  a  lucid  paradise  of  air. 

[415 1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  17 : 22-34] 

"  Only  like  souls  I  see  the  folk  thereunder 

Bound  who  should  conquer,  slaves  who  should 

be  kings. 

Hearing  their  one  hope  with  an  empty  wonder 
Sadly  contented  with  a  show  of  things. 

"  Then  with  a  rush,  the  intolerable  craving 

Shivers  throughout  me,  like  a  trumpet  call, 
Oh,  to  save  these,  to  perish  for  their  saving, 
Die  for  their  life,  be  offered  for  them  all ! " 

That  is  Christianity.    May  we  know  it  experimentally. 

Acts  17 : 22-34 

In  our  previous  study  we  considered  the  first  impres- 
sion which  Athens  made  on  Paul,  and  the  first  impression 
which  Paul  made  on  Athens.  In  this  paragraph  we  have 
the  result  of  that  contemptuous  curiosity  which  the 
Athenians  manifested,  in  the  account  of  Paul's  answer 
delivered  on  Mars'  Hill. 

This  is  the  final  scene  in  Athens,  so  far  as  the  New 
Testament  is  concerned.  There  is  no  further  reference 
to  it.  In  writing  to  the  Thessalonians  Paul  reminds  them 
that  he  sent  Timothy  from  Athens  to  them ;  and  we  may 
imaginatively  fill  up  much  by  that  reference.  After  Paul 
had  waited  a  while,  Timothy  came  to  him.  He  did  not 
however  retain  him,  but  sent  him  back  to  Thessalonica. 
Paul  departed  from  Athens  alone. 

We  are  now  to  see  him  in  the  Areopagus,  that  is,  in 
the  midst  of  the  council.  Mars'  Hill  was  the  place  of 
the  Supreme  Court.  The  interpretation  of  the  passage 
which  supposes  that  Paul  stood  there  as  a  prisoner,  is  not 
warranted  by  the  story.  I  believe  these  Stoic  philoso- 
phers took  him  away  to  the  greater  quietness  and  seclu- 
sion of  the  Areopagus,  that  they  might  hear  what  he  had 
to  say  more  particularly.  He  stood  there,  in  all  prob- 
ability upon  the  stone  of  impudence,  which  Pausanias 
described  so  particularly,  perhaps  in  the  very  place  where 
Socrates  had  stood,  a  prisoner.  Athens  was  not  so  much 

416 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  17:22-34] 

in  earnest  in  Paul's  day  as  it  had  been  in  that  of  Socrates. 
These  were  decadent  days  in  Athens.  All  around  were 
the  signs  and  symbols  of  departed  greatness.  Philoso- 
phers were  bandying  words  with  each  other,  but  making 
no  application  of  their  philosophy  to  life.  Art  was 
practically  dead,  save  as  the  city  was  full  of  things 
artistic,  all  having  come  from  a  departed  age.  Four 
centuries  had  passed  since  Socrates  had  stood  there ;  and 
now  there  Paul  stood ;  but  Athens,  having  lost  its  earnest- 
ness, had  not  arraigned  him.  He  was  not  on  trial.  The 
word  made  use  of — "  they  took  hold  of  him  " — does  not 
suggest  violence,  but  courtesy.  They  led  him  there. 
There  was  no  passionate  protest  in  the  mind  of  these 
Athenian  philosophers.  That  would  have  been  a  far 
more  healthy  condition  of  affairs.  Paul  never  hope- 
lessly abandoned  a  centre  of  persecution,  but  he  aban- 
doned this.  These  men  were  indulging  in  dilettante  fool- 
ing with  philosophies  and  religions,  and  they  wanted  to 
hear  what  he  had  to  say,  this  babbler,  this  seed-pecker, 
for  they  "  spent  their  time  in  nothing  else,  but  either  to 
tell  or  to  hear  some  new  thing." 

It  was  a  great  moment,  and  a  great  location.  There  at 
his  feet  as  he  stood  on  that  stone  of  impudence,  was  the 
Theseum,  the  wonderful  Doric  temple,  which  abides  even 
until  this  hour,  one  of  the  most  perfect  examples  of  art. 
On  his  right  stretched  the  upper  city,  the  Akropolis ;  and 
there,  in  all  its  significance,  the  Parthenon  devoted  to  the 
worship  of  Athene.  Everywhere  were  altars  and  temples 
and  images;  statuary  the  most  beautiful  and  perfect,  in 
marble,  in  stone,  in  gold,  in  silver,  in  bronze,  and  in 
wood. 

Still  further  let  it  be  remembered,  as  we  said  before, 
this  address  was  not  Paul's  preaching  of  the  evangel. 
This  was  his  defence  of  his  preaching,  under  circum- 
stances that  were  peculiar,  to  the  place  and  occasion. 
When  he  tarried  and  waited,  and  saw  the  city  given  to 
idols,  when  his  spirit  was  provoked  within  him,  swept  by 

[417 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  17 : 22-34] 

a  paroxysm  of  rage,  the  rage  of  truth  with  a  lie,  the 
protest  of  the  constructive  passion  against  the  destructive 
element,  then  he  preached  his  evangel  to  individuals  and 
groups  in  the  busy  market-places.  To  this,  the  Epicurean 
and  Stoic  philosophers  had  listened,  and  they  said, 
"  What  would  this  babbler  say  ?  other  some,  He  seemeth 
to  be  a  setter  forth  of  strange  gods :  because  he  preached 
Jesus  and  the  resurrection."  The  address  delivered  on 
Mars'  Hill  was  Paul's  answer  to  that  enquiry. 

We  shall  now  only  attempt  to  gather  from  this  address 
the  final  mutual  impressions,  and  deduce  therefrom  some 
lessons  of  permanent  value.  We  will  notice  first,  the 
impression  that  Paul  now  made  upon  Athens,  in  the 
person  of  these  Epicurean  and  Stoic  philosophers,  as 
they,  having  challenged  him,  he  answered  their  challenge  ; 
and  secondly  the  final  impression  Athens  made  upon  Paul. 

To  discover  the  impression  which  Paul  made  on 
Athens  we  need  to  consider  first  his  method,  then  his 
actual  teaching,  and  finally  the  result. 

There  can  be  no  study  of  this  address  of  Paul  on 
Mars'  Hill  that  does  not  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  his 
method  was  conciliatory.  There  is  no  single  sentence  or 
phrase  that  has  in  it  anything  of  harshness.  In  the  Eng- 
lish Revised  Version  the  twenty-second  verse  reads, 
"  Paul  stood  in  the  midst  of  the  Areopagus,  and  said,  Ye 
men  of  Athens,  In  all  things  I  perceive  that  ye  are  some- 
what superstitious."  The  marginal  reading  suggests  the 
substitution  of  the  word  "  religious  "  for  "  superstitious." 
The  Greek  word  was  certainly  sometimes  used  in  the 
sense  of  superstitious,  and  sometimes  in  the  sense  of  re- 
ligious. I  believe  however  that  the  American  revisers 
were  right  when  they  translated  thus :  "  Ye  men  of 
Athens,  in  all  things  I  perceive  that  ye  are  very  religious." 
Paul  really  began  with  the  note  of  conciliation,  and  from 
beginning  to  end  there  was  nothing  calculated  to  offend, 
or  drive  away  the  men  whom  he  desired  to  gain.  In  this 
address  he  recognized  their  religious  instincts.  Every 

1 418 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  17:22-34] 

idol  proved  capacity  for  God.  Every  temple  demon- 
strated man's  need  of  worship.  The  idols  did  not  prove 
that  men  would  find  God.  The  temples  did  not  give 
evidence  of  the  fact  that  through  them  men  would  dis- 
cover the  central  place  of  worship.  But  these  things  did 
reveal  the  religious  capacity  of  the  men  who  made  them; 
and  that  capacity  the  apostle  recognized. 

He  found  the  open  door  to  their  mind  in  one  of  their 
own  altars.  He  discovered  as  he  looked  at  the  city,  one 
altar  with  the  strange  inscription,  TO  AN  UNKNOWN  GOD. 
He  made  that  altar,  not  one  which  he  had  erected,  but  one 
which  belonged  to  their  own  city,  the  open  door  through 
which  he  proceeded. 

He  also  cited  their  own  poets.  .  He  quoted  from  Aratus 
and  Cleanthes.  Aratus,  by  the  way,  was  also  of  Cilicia. 
With  these  writings  in  all  probability  this  man  Paul, 
brought  up  in  Tarsus,  would  be  familiar.  The  whole 
address  is  characterized  by  the  spirit  of  conciliation,  of 
courtesy,  of  kindness.  He  would  capture  these  men  by 
an  attitude  before  he  proceeded, — as  he  did  ere  he  had 
done, — to  denounce  their  activities,  to  show  the  unutter- 
able folly  of  their  methods,  and  finally  to  proclaim  to 
them  the  great  evangel. 

Again,  his  method  was  apologetic,  in  the  true  sense  of 
that  word.  In  answer  to  criticism  he  took  up  one  of 
their  own  words.  Compare  here  verses  eighteen  and 
twenty-three : 

"  Certain  also  of  the  Epicurean  and  Stoic  philosophers 
encountered  him.  And  some  said,  What  would  this 
babbler  say?  other,  He  seemeth  to  be  a  setter  forth 
of  strange  gods,"  of  foreign  gods. 

"  As  I  passed  along,  and  observed  the  objects  of  your 
worship,  I  found  also  an  altar  with  this  inscription,  TO 
AN  UNKNOWN  GOD.  What  therefore  ye  worship  in 
ignorance,  this  set  I  forth  unto  you." 

"He  seemeth  to  be  a  setter  forth  of  strange  gods." 

[  419  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  17 : 22-34] 

No,  said  the  apostle,  I  am  not  a  setter  forth  of  a  foreign 
god ;  I  am  here  to  set  forth  the  God  to  Whom  you  have 
already  erected  an  altar.  His  word  was  an  answer  to 
theirs,  and  this  use  of  a  word  had  in  it  the  force  of  an 
arresting  argument. 

His  speech  was  apologetic  moreover  in  that  it  was  a 
defence  of  their  own  truth.  Their  poets  had  said,  We 
are  the  offspring  of  God.  Paul  would  defend  their  own 
truth  against  their  abuse  of  it.  Being  the  offspring  of 
God  we  ought  not  to  degrade  God  by  making  Him  of 
gold,  or  silver,  or  wood.  The  poets  of  Athens  had  de- 
clared that  men  are  offspring  of  Deity;  and  yet  the  men 
of  Athens  had  made  images  less  than  themselves.  That 
action  was  the  result  of  a  false  deduction  from  their  own 
truth.  If  these  men  made  something  less  than  them- 
selves, and  worshipped  that,  they  were  degrading  the 
truth  that  their  poets  had  sung  to  them.  They  ought  to 
worship  the  God  of  Whom  they  were  the  offspring;  not 
the  workmanship  of  their  own  hands  which,  at  best,  were 
base  imitations  of  themselves.  So  he  attempted  to  re- 
deem their  own  truth  from  misapprehension  and  misap- 
plication. 

And  finally,  it  was  apologetic,  in  that  it  was  an  exposi- 
tion of  their  own  problems.  In  that  inscription  was  dis- 
covered the  final  problem,  not  of  Athens  only,  but  of  all 
paganism.  To  AN  UNKNOWN  GOD;  that  was  the  margin, 
the  end  of  everything.-  All  philosophies  were  silent  there. 
No  temple  answered  that.  No  idol  cut  and  devised  by 
craft  and  cunning  of  skilful  workmen  could  solve  that 
riddle.  Athens  knew  that  there  was  such  a  problem,  that 
of  the  unknown  God.  The  apostle  said  in  effect :  All  the 
unutterable  agony  of  your  need  is  focussed  and  em- 
phasized in  that  one  inscription,  TO  AN  UNKNOWN  GOD; 
and  I  declare  that  God  to  you.  Thus  in  answer  to  their 
criticism,  in  defence  of  their  own  truth,  and  in  exposition 
of  their  own  problems,  he  delivered  his  message. 

But  his  method  was  not  only  that  of  conciliation  and 

[  420  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  17:22-34] 

apology,  it  was  also  that  of  positivism,  of  authority — his 
was  a  dogmatic  statement.  To  summarize  the  whole 
authoritative  declaration  of  this  apostle  on  Mars'  Hill ;  it 
was  first  affirmed  of  God;  and  that  secondly,  in  order  to 
the  reclamation  of  man;  and  so  finally  leading  up  to  the 
proclamation  of  the  central  fact  of  the  Christian  evangel. 
He  affirmed  God.  He  did  it  in  order  to  the  reclamation 
of  man  from  false  conceptions  of  God,  and  false  ideals 
concerning  his  own  life.  He  thus  gradually  moved  by 
this  masterly  method,  to  the  declaration  of  the  evangel. 

This  he  introduced  by  saying,  "  The  times  of  ignorance 
God  overlooked."  The  temples  to  Demeter,  Athene, 
Zeus;  the  idols;  the  altars,  were  the  pride  of  Athens. 
But  there  was  that  one  altar  to  the  unknown  God,  and 
that  was  the  symbol  of  the  time  of  their  ignorance! 
Thus  with  one  word  the  Christian  apostle  dismissed  the 
whole  fact  of  paganism,  it  was  "  ignorance."  Yet  there 
was  nothing  unkind  in  the  word,  and  he  distinctly  de- 
clared that  "  The  times  of  ignorance  God  overlooked," 
but  he  went  on  to  say  that  a  new  day  had  come,  a  new 
era  had  dawned,  created  by  the  Christian  evangel  which 
he  at  once  proclaimed. 

Looking  at  the  teaching  of  the  apostle  then  we  find  in 
it  theology,  philosophy,  and  religion. 

What  was  the  theology  that  he  preached  on  Mars'  Hill 
to  these  Epicurean  and  Stoic  philosophers?  He  de- 
clared that  God  is  Creator,  that  He  is  Sovereign,  that  He 
is  Governor.  If  these  truths  have  become  commonplace, 
because  of  our  Christian  atmosphere  and  thinking,  re- 
member what  these  things  meant  as  he  uttered  them 
there ;  how  in  the  courteous  and  yet  positive  statement  of 
the  Christian  apostle  he  was  denying  the  whole  theology 
of  the  men  who  had  asked  him  to  speak  to  them.  The 
Stoics  were  Pantheists,  and  the  final  reduction  of  the 
Epicurean  view  of  the  universe  was  that  of  Atheism. 
Paul  declared  that  the  God,  to  Whom  some  of  them  had 
erected  an  altar,  and  called  unknown,  was  the  God  he  set 

[  421  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  17 : 22-34] 

forth  to  them.  He  declared  Him  to  be  the  Creator,  the 
Sustainer;  not  the  sum  and  substance  of  all  things,  but 
the  Cause  and  Creator  of  all  things.  He  declared  that 
God  cannot  be  expressed  in  the  sum  total  of  the  things  of 
which  men  are  conscious.  He  lies  far  out  beyond  the 
ultimate  bound  of  the  most  stupendous  universe  of  which 
man  has  become  conscious.  He  is  the  Creator. 

Yet  further  he  declared  Him  to  be  the  Sovereign  Lord. 
He  is  no  impersonal  abstraction,  no  mere  tendency  run- 
ning through  all  things,  but  the  Sovereign  Master  of  all ; 
not  One  Who  is  imprisoned  in  the  creation,  and  the  slave 
of  the  creation,  but  the  One  through  Whom  all  created 
things  came,  and  Who  upholds  them  by  the  word  of  His 
power. 

Therefore  finally  he  announced  that  He  is  the  Supreme 
Governor  of  the  universe :  "  He  made  of  one  every  nation 
of  men  for  to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth,  having 
determined  their  appointed  seasons,  and  the  bounds  of 
their  habitation."  Thus  he  declared  that  the  cycles  and 
the  centuries  are  all  of  God,  as  well  as  the  things  material. 
As  the  writer  of  the  letter  to  the  Hebrews  also  wrote, 
God  fashions  the  ages.  Thus  he  reminded  them  that 
they  were  not  living  in  Athens  as  the  result  of  some 
fortuitous  accident;  but  that  God  had  fixed  the  bounds 
of  human  habitation.  He  claimed  that  God  was  the 
sovereign  Lord  and  Master,  that  therefore  He  was  tran- 
scendent, and  more  than  all  the  rest. 

Therefore  he  argued  that  temples  are  useless  to  Him, 
for  He  "  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  by  hands  " ;  that 
all  altars  are  in  some  sense  worthless,  for  altars  are 
places  to  which  men  bring  gifts  to  God.  He  cannot  be 
served  by  gifts.  He  does  not  require  anything  men  can 
offer  Him.  If  men  are  His  offspring,  do  they  imagine 
that  these  things  that  have  no  breath,  no  emotion,  no 
intellect,  which  men  have  to  carry  and  place  and  fix,  and 
which  never  move  when  placed,  can  express  God? 
Surely  these  Epicurean  and  Stoic  philosophers  had  a 

[  422  J 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  17:22-34] 

vision  of  greater  and  nobler  things,  as  Paul  talked  to 
them. 

The  philosophy  of  all  this  is  discovered  in  his  insistence 
upon  the  fact  that  God  is  transcendent,  above,  beyond  all, 
and  yet  that  He  is  immanent.  "  In  Him  we  live,  and 
move,  and  have  our  being."  This  was  the  startling  chal- 
lenge he  flung  out  to  these  Greeks.  Discover  God  by 
attaining  to  what  you  are  in  yourselves.  You  are  His 
offspring.  Why  then  try  to  express  Him  in  these  idols 
which,  at  their  best,  are  poor  and  feeble  and  foolish 
imitations  of  yourselves?  Paul  had  seen  all  their  things 
of  artistic  beauty,  those  idols  in  gold,  and  silver,  but  he 
set  up  against  those  golden  images  one  Athenian  man, 
and  the  gold  was  seen  to  be  dross.  That  is  always  the 
Christian  outlook.  We  call  to  mind  the  fine  sarcasm  of 
Peter's  word,  you  were  not  redeemed,  "  with  corruptible 
things,  with  silver  or  gold."  This  man  Paul  stood  there 
in  the  midst  of  Mars'  Hill,  and  said  to  these  men,  If  you 
really  want  to  find  God,  do  not  degrade  yourselves  in 
erecting  images  of  gold  and  silver.  Listen  to  the  deepest 
fact  of  your  own  being;  be  silent  in  the  presence  of  the 
mystery  of  what  you  are;  and  then  look  out  beyond  to 
that  unknown  God  Whom  I  declare  to  you. 

The  final  thing  in  the  teaching  was  that  of  religion. 
"  The  times  of  ignorance  God  overlooked ;  but  now  " ! 
A  new  hour  had  struck  on  the  horologue  of  eternity,  and 
men  in  time  were  arrested,  for  a  new  day  had  dawned. 
What  is  this  new  day  ?  "  Now  He  commandeth  men  that 
they  should  all  everywhere  repent."  Why  ?  "  Inasmuch 
as  He  hath  appointed  a  day,  in  the  which  He  will  judge 
the  world  in  righteousness  by  the  Man  Wh^m  He  hath 
ordained ;  whereof  He  hath  given  assurance  unto  all  men, 
in  that  He  hath  raised  Him  from  the  dead."  Into  those 
few  sentences  the  whole  fact  of  the  Christian  religion  is 
condensed.  The  great  word  is  the  first,  "  Repent."  The 
central  thing  the  apostle  declared  on  Mars'  Hill  was  that 
God  had  appointed  a  day  in  which  He  would  judge  the 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  17 : 22-34] 

world  in  righteousness.  How  were  men  to  know  that 
this  was  true  ?  He  has  "  given  assurance  unto  all  men, 
in  that  He  hath  raised  Him  from  the  dead."  That  is  the 
proof. 

The  duty  was  declared  in  the  word  "  Repent."  The 
times  of  ignorance  God  had  overlooked.  God  had  seen 
those  proud  temples  in  Athens.  God  had  seen  those 
altars  and  those  idols,  but  He  had  overlooked  them  in 
pity  and  compassion.  But  a  new  hour  had  now  come. 
God  had  appointed  a  Man  by  Whom  He  will  judge  the 
world  in  righteousness.  That  was  not  a  reference  to  a 
final  day  of  judgment.  It  was  a  declaration  that  God  had 
not  only  willed  that  ultimately  the  whole  world  should  be 
governed  upon  principles  of  righteousness,  He  had  done 
more;  He  had  ordained  the  Man  Who  is  to  be  King. 
The  government  of  the  world  in  righteousness  would  be 
brought  about,  not  by  an  idol,  not  by  an  altar,  not  by  an 
abstraction,  not  by  a  philosophy,  but  by  a  Man.  Of  that 
God  had  given  assurance  in  that  He  had  raised  Him  from 
the  dead.  To  deny  that  resurrection  is  to  have  no 
evangel,  and  no  Christian  religion;  and  all  talk  of  the 
judgment  of  the  world  in  righteousness  is  futile  unless  it 
be  true  that  this  Man  was  raised  from  the  dead. 

What  then  was  Athens  to  do?  Repent,  change  its 
mind,  think  over  again,  reconsider  its  position;  get  away 
from  the  false  conceptions,  that  had  issued  in  false  con- 
duct, that  had  issued  in  false  character.  That  is  the  key 
word  of  the  evangel.  Think  again  in  the  light  of  the 
day  when  God  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness  by 
the  Man  Whom  He  hath  ordained. 

What  was  the  result?  When  they  heard  of  the  resur- 
rection, some  mocked,  and  others  postponed.  Humanity 
is  the  same  in  every  age.  These  are  not  dead  things  at 
which  we  are  looking.  When  did  they  begin  their  mock- 
ery and  decide  for  postponement?  At  the  point  of  resur- 
rection? No,  that  was  the  excuse.  Where  then?  At 
the  point  of  moral  application.  While  Paul  discussed 

[  424  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  17:22-34] 

round  their  altar  the  doctrine  of  an  unknown  God,  while 
he  enunciated  philosophies,  even  though  his  enunciations 
contradicted  their  philosophies,  they  listened;  but  when 
he  said,  "  Now  He  commandeth  men  that  they  should  all 
everywhere  repent:  inasmuch  as  He  hath  appointed  a 
day,  in  the  which  He  will  judge  the  world  in  righteous- 
ness," they  mocked.  Men  often  find  an  intellectual  ex- 
cuse for  refusing  to  be  moral  when  God  demands 
morality.  Paul,  discussing  an  altar  and  a  theory  of  a 
God,  will  fail  unless  he  say,  "  But  now  .  .  .  repent." 
That  is  the  point  where  men  begin  to  mock,  and  post- 
pone. 

But  there  was  another  result.  Dionysius,  Damaris, 
and  others,  believed.  From  Church  history  we  know  that 
there  were  wonderful  results  in  Athens.  In  the  next 
century  that  Church  at  Athens  gave  to  the  Christian 
Church  Publius,  Quadratus,  Aristides,  Athenagoras,  and 
others,  bishops  and  martyrs ;  and  in  the  third  century  the 
church  there  was  peaceable  and  pure.  In  the  fourth 
century  the  Christian  schools  of  Athens  gave  to  the  Chris- 
tian Church  Basil  and  Gregory.  Men  cannot  wholly 
mock  the  Christian  fact  out  of  existence.  Men  cannot 
entirely  postpone.  The  apostle  may  pass,  his  work  being 
done,  but  he  always  leaves  behind  him  Dionysius  and 
Damaris.  Christ  always  wins  a  vantage-ground. 

What  was  the  final  impression  which  Athens  made  on 
Paul?  Two  sentences  tell  the  story,  one  in  this  para- 
graph and  one  in  the  first  verse  of  the  next  chapter. 
"  He  went  out  from  them.  .  .  .  He  departed  from 
Athens."  When  men  were  angry  with  him,  he  argued 
with  them,  and  triumphed  over  them.  When  men  per- 
secuted, he  went  back  again  to  the  place  of  persecution. 
But  for  intellectual  flippancy  and  moral  dishonesty  this 
man  had  no  further  word.  That  is  the  true  attitude. 
It  was  the  attitude  of  his  Master  before  him.  It  should 
be  the  attitude  of  the  Christian  preacher  to-day. 

From  every  system  of  false  religion  there  is  an  open 

[  425  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  18 : 1-22] 

door  into  the  true.  Men  often  decline  to  take  the 
journey  through  that  open  door.  The  fault  is  with  the 
men.  Our  evangel  is  that  of  the  risen  Man,  and  it  is 
only  as  we  lead  men  to  Him  that  they  begin  to  find  the 
value  of  those  true  things  in  their  own  false  systems. 
Let  us  be  solemnly  warned  lest  we  imagine  that  the  men 
who  are  in  the  midst  of  false  systems,  will  one  day  find 
their  way  into  truth,  because  there  are  elements  of  truth 
in  their  systems.  It  is  well  also  to  remember  that  we 
must  always  begin  with  the  open  door,  but  not  end  there. 
Our  message  is  never  complete  until  we  have  proclaimed 
to  men  the  risen  Man,  and  the  necessity  for  repentance. 

Acts  18:1-22 

This  paragraph  chronicles  the  events  of  the  last  part 
of  the  second  missionary  journey  of  Paul.  "  After  these 
things  he  departed  from  Athens,  and  came  to  Corinth." 
If  Athens  was  a  centre  of  clouded  light,  Corinth  was  a 
centre  of  corrupt  life.  If  Athens  was  full  of  idolatry, 
Corinth  was  full  of  sensuality.  The  apostle's  work  in 
Corinth  being  completed,  he  left  without  any  ostensible 
reason.  It  seems  to  have  been  the  one  place  he  left  in 
quietness  and  peace  on  this  journey.  He  left  with  his 
face  set  toward  Jerusalem  and  Antioch.  Making  a  brief 
halt  in  Ephesus,  he  went  on,  leaving  Priscilla  and  Aquila 
there.  Then  he  travelled  away  by  sea  to  Csesarea,  and 
so  on  to  Jerusalem,  where  his  reception  was  so  cold,  that 
Luke  dismissed  the  story  in  a  few  words,  "  He  went  up 
and  saluted  the  church,  and  went  down  to  Antioch." 

The  principal  interest  of  the  paragraph  is  centred  in 
Corinth.  The  other  matters,  from  Paul's  departure  from 
Corinth  to  his  arrival  in  Antioch,  are  incidental;  the 
places  visited  will  appear  again,  and  in  fuller  detail  later 
on. 

Corinth  was  at  this  time  the  political  capital  of 
Southern  Greece,  and  the  residence  of  the  Roman  Pro- 
consul. Thus  while  a  Greek  city,  it  was  under  Roman 

I  4*6] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  18: 1-22] 

rule.  There  was  a  strange  mixture  of  men  in  Corinth. 
It  had  become  a  great  commercial  centre,  and  Dean 
Farrar  describes  the  commodities  that  were  found  in  its 
markets : 

"  Arabian  balsam,  Egyptian  papyrus,  Phoenician  dates, 
Libyian  ivory,  Babylonian  carpets,  Cilician  goats'-hair, 
Lycaonian  wool,  Phrygian  slaves." 

There  was  a  strange  mixture  of  wealth  and  of  poverty 
there;  and  the  life  of  the  wealthy  was  a  life  of  volup- 
tuous luxury,  and  of  frivolous  disquisitions.  One  must 
read  with  great  carefulness  the  Corinthian  letters  in  order 
to  see  Corinth  as  Paul  saw  it,  not  merely  to  see  the 
church,  not  merely  to  see  the  apostolic  method  of  dealing 
with  the  church,  but  to  see  Corinth  itself.  Everything 
which  he  denounced  within  the  church  was  a  reflection  of 
the  corruption  of  the  city.  In  his  first  letter,  he  first 
corrected  their  attempt  to  form  societies  around  emphases 
of  Christian  truth.  That  was  a  reflection  of  what  was 
going  on  in  Corinth.  Men  were  splitting  hairs,  even  in 
the  realm  of  their  own  philosophies,  and  forming  schools 
around  different  emphases  or  views.  So  when  he  passed 
to  the  graver  matters,  so  far  as  moral  conduct  was  con- 
cerned, we  again  see  the  picture  of  Corinth;  the  rich 
living  in  voluptuous  luxury,  given  over  to  every  manner 
of  evil.  It  has  been  said  that  Corinth  at  this  time 

"  was  the  Vanity  Fair  of  the  Roman  Empire,  at  once 
the  London  and  the  Paris  of  the  first  century  after 
Christ." 

The  masses  of  the  people  were  infected  by  this  influence. 
They  were  debauched  and  degraded.  There  were  shows 
of  all  kinds,  and  a  vulgar  and  ostentatious  display  of 
wealth,  mingled  with  the  most  corrupt  and  indecent 
practices.  All  these  things  were  affecting  the  people  who 
were  not  wealthy,  the  corruption  had  permeated  even  to 
the  slaves. 

[  4*7  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  18 : 1-22] 

It  was  a  city  of  abounding  immorality.  It  was  pro- 
verbial for  its  debauchery.  Men  of  the  time,  when  de- 
siring to  describe  utter  corruption,  said,  "  They  live  as 
they  do  at  Corinth."  In  the  great  dramatic  entertain- 
ments, Corinthians  were  almost  always  introduced  as 
drunk.  The  most  terrible  phase  of  the  corruption  was 
that  the  religion  of  Corinth  had  become  the  centre  and 
the  hotbed  of  its  pollution.  In  that  one  splendid  and  yet 
awful  temple  of  Aphrodite,  there  were  a  thousand  sacred 
to  shame.  It  is  significant  that  it  was  from  this  city  that 
Paul  wrote  his  Roman  letter;  and  when  one  reads  his 
description  of  Gentile  corruption  in  that  Roman  letter, 
one  has  almost  certainly  a  mirror  of  what  he  found  in 
Corinth. 

"  Professing  themselves  to  be  wise,  they  became  fools, 
and  changed  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible  God  for  the 
likeness  of  an  image  of  corruptible  man.  .  .  .  God 
gave  them  up  in  the  lusts  of  their  hearts  unto  unclean- 
ness,  that  their  bodies  should  be  dishonoured  among 
themselves.  .  .  .  God  gave  them  up  unto  vile  pas- 
sions :  for  their  women  changed  the  natural  use  into  that 
which  is  against  nature.  .  .  .  God  gave  them  up 
unto  a  reprobate  mind,  to  do  those  things  which  are  not 
fitting;  being  filled  with  all  unrighteousness,  wickedness, 
covetousness,  maliciousness :  full  of  envy,  murder,  strife, 
deceit,  malignity,  whisperers,  backbiters,  hateful  to  God, 
insolent,  haughty,  boastful,  inventors  of  evil  things,  dis- 
obedient to  parents,  without  understanding,  covenant 
breakers,  without  natural  affection,  unmerciful." 

With  that  dark  background  in  mind  we  pass  to  the 
attitude  of  the  Lord  Himself  toward  this  city :  "  I  have 
much  people  in  this  city."  That  was  the  word  of  the 
Lord  spoken  in  the  inner  sanctuary  of  the  spirit-life  of 
His  servant  concerning1  a  corrupt  city.  That  is  the  flam- 
ing word  of  the  paragraph.  All  the  other  things  are  in- 
cidental, gathered  about  it,  revealing  the  marvellousness 

[  428  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  18 : 1-22] 

of  that  word :  "  I  have  much  people  in  this  city."  He 
knew,  and  communicated  to  His  servant,  this  secret  con- 
cerning Corinth.  He  knew  the  heartache  and  the  agony 
of  many  in  Corinth.  He  knew  that  the  restlessness  of 
Corinth  was  the  outcome  of  the  longing  of  many,  inar- 
ticulate, not  understood,  for  exactly  that  which  he  had 
to  minister  and  to  give.  He  knew  that  throughout  the 
city,  notwithstanding  its  obscenity  and  its  corruption, 
there  was  a  spirit  of  enquiry,  a  spirit  of  eagerness,  a 
spirit  of  wistfulness.  He  knew  that  it  was  but  to  have 
His  great  evangel  proclaimed  there  for  very  many  to  hear 
and  to  respond.  Paul  entered  Corinth  alone,  and  at 
once  became  keenly,  acutely  conscious  of  the  corruption 
of  the  city.  He  came  into  Corinth,  without  a  saint  of 
God;  and  yet  at  last,  after  a  period  of  patient  work  and 
preparation,  this  was  the  word  of  the  King,  "  I  have  much 
people  in  this  city." 

So  the  Lord  speaks  of  every  great  city  long  before  the 
people  to  whom  He  refers  are  manifest  to  others.  Do 
not  put  this  out  of  its  historic  relation.  This  word  was 
not  said  when  the  church  had  been  formed.  This  was 
not  said  of  those  whom  we  call  saints  in  Corinth.  It  was 
said  at  the  point  when  this  man  seemed  to  be  at  the  end 
of  his  work,  and  was  filled  with  fear,  and  with  trembling 
of  soul,  even  though  there  had  been  a  measure  of  success. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  Paul's  fear  is  not  chronicled,  but  it 
is  revealed  in  the  word  of  Christ.  The  Lord  knew  the 
lurking  fear  in  the  heart  of  His  servant,  a  fear  born  of 
his  overwhelming  sense  of  the  corruption  of  the  city,  of 
the  almost  impossibility  of  doing  anything  there  that  was 
worth  the  doing.  Yet  to  him  He  said,  "  I  have  much 
people  in  this  city."  I  think  from  that  moment  as  this 
man  passed  through  the  streets,  or  talked  in  the  house  of 
Titus  Justus,  or  looked  at  the  curious  crowd  who  came 
to  him,  he  was  forevermore  looking,  hoping  that  he 
might  see  beneath  the  exterior  that  repelled  him,  because 
it  was  so  unlike  his  Lord,  those  whom  his  Lord  numbered 

[  429  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  18:1-22] 

among  His  own.  "  I  have  much  people  in  this  city." 
What  an  inspiration  for  the  Christian  worker  in  a  great 
city  given  over  to  corruption. 

Then  mark  the  revelation  of  His  power  in  a  corrupt 
city  in  His  protection  of  His  servant,  "  No  man  shall  set 
on  thee  to  harm  thee."  Then  remember  also  the  method 
by  which  he  was  protected,  through  the  instrumentality 
of  Gallic.  Gallio  is  one  of  the  much  abused  men  in  the 
New  Testament.  "  Gallio  cared  for  none  of  these 
things  "  has  been  quoted  to  prove  that  he  was  indifferent 
to  Paul.  That  is  not  what  the  sentence  means.  Read 
the  story  of  Gallio,  the  brother  of  Seneca,  as  it  has  been 
written  in  profane  history;  and  the  description  of  him  is 
that  of  one  of  the  sweetest,  gentlest,  and  most  lovable  of 
men.  Gallio  had  recently  been  appointed  to  Achaia,  and 
when  the  change  was  made,  the  Jews  thought  that  they 
had  their  opportunity  to  get  rid  of  Paul.  Gallio  stood 
throughout  that  movement  in  defence  of  Paul.  When 
Gallio  declined  to  listen  to  the  case,  because  they  were 
disputing  about  words,  he  was  speaking  within  the  proper 
limits  of  his  jurisdiction.  He  cared  nothing  for  the 
wildness  of  the  attack  upon  Paul;  or  that  the  Greeks, 
glad  that  the  Jews  had  been  defeated  in  their  desire  to 
interfere  with  Paul,  seized  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue, 
Sosthenes.  Do  not  imagine  that  there  was  neglect  on 
the  part  of  Gallio,  that  he  ought  to  have  interfered,  and 
did  not.  This  is  a  picture  of  the  proconsul  declining  to 
do  injustice,  and  handing  the  matter  of  the  dispute  over 
to  those  who  had  raised  it.  By  that  overruling  of  Gallio, 
Paul  was  protected  from  the  onslaught  of  the  mob.  Ere 
that  onslaught  the  Lord  had  said,  "  Be  not  afraid  .  .  . 
for  I  am  with  thee,  and  no  man  shall  set  on  thee  to  harm 
thee."  So  we  see  the  Lord  Christ  overruling  the  forces 
that  would  hinder  the  proclamation  of  His  Word,  and 
holding  them  in  check,  as  He  preserved  His  servant. 

This  is  in  the  first  chapter  of  Church  history,  but  it  is 
not  the  last  chapter,  nor  is  this  the  last  story  of  its  kind. 

I  430  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  18: 1-22] 

We  know  very  little  of  it  in  this  land,  because  we  do 
not  preach  in  the  midst  of  peril  as  did  these  men.  Talk 
to  the  men  in  the  great  centres  of  heathen  darkness 
to-day,  and  they  will  tell  you  how  wonderfully  they  have 
often  been  protected.  Not  always !  Paul  was  not  always 
protected;  for  he  had  been  stoned  and  left  for  dead. 
But  within  the  compass  of  His  purpose,  within  the 
economy  of  His  power,  where  necessary,  the  Lord  holds 
in  check  the  forces  against  His  servants,  and  sets  them 
free  for  the  proclamation  of  His  Word.  Such  is  the 
power  of  our  Lord,  even  in  a  corrupt  city. 

His  power  acted  in  the  deliverance  of  all  those  who 
seeking  for  truth,  life,  and  purity,  obeyed  the  Gospel; 
and  in  the  ultimate  doom  of  those  who  disobeyed  that 
Gospel.  "  I  have  much  people  in  this  city."  That  word 
must  not  be  misinterpreted,  as  though  the  heart  of  the 
Lord  were  only  set  upon  those  who  ultimately  yielded  to 
Him,  and  formed  the  Christian  community  in  Corinth. 
His  heart  was  set  upon  every  man,  woman,  little  child, 
and  slave  in  Corinth,  no  matter  how  corrupt.  But  only 
to  those  who,  in  obedience  to  the  word  when  they  heard 
it,  turned  to  Him,  was  He  able  to  communicate  the  power 
of  a  new  life,  to  regenerate  and  to  remake. 

When  Paul  began  his  work  in  Corinth,  he  joined 
Aquila  and  Priscilla,  and  laboured  at  tent  making.  When 
we  read  his  letters  we  shall  discover  his  reason.  At 
Thessalonica  he  had  done  the  same  thing,  and  at  Ephesus ; 
and  for  a  brief  period  it  was  absolutely  necessary  in  a 
city  wholly  given  to  commercial  enterprise,  that  he  should 
demonstrate  the  fact  that  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  was 
not  commercial.  So  he  contented  himself  for  a  period 
with  preaching  only  on  the  Sabbath  day  in  the  synagogue 
to  Jews,  and  also  to  Greeks,  while  he  wrought  with  his 
own  hands  during  the  week. 

Then  Timothy  and  Silas  arrived,  and  they  brought 
help  from  Philippi.  The  proof  of  that  is  to  be  found  in 
his  own  reference  in  his  letter.  Immediately  that  help 

[431 1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  18 : 1-22] 

came,  ministered  to  by  another  church,  he  abandoned  the 
toil  with  his  hands,  and  gave  himself  under  the  constraint 
of  the  Word,  to  constant  preaching  in  Corinth.  When 
the  Jews  set  themselves  in  battle  array  against  him, — for 
such  is  the  force  of  the  word, — he  resolutely  turned  from 
them,  and  preached  to  the  Greeks,  and  many  believed  and 
were  baptized. 

Then  came  an  hour  of  haunting  fear.  Luke  does  not 
record  it,  save  through  the  word  of  the  Lord.  "  Be  not 
afraid,"  said  Jesus,  and  through  that  word  of  Christ  we 
know  that  the  apostle  was  filled  with  fear.  Perhaps  the 
very  success  of  his  ministry,  the  fact  that  many  hearing, 
believed  and  were  baptized,  rilled  him  with  fear.  He 
knew  the  seductions  of  the  city,  the  corruption  of  the  city, 
the  consequent  peril  of  those  who  so  eagerly  were  listen- 
ing, who  apparently  so  readily  were  believing,  who  with 
such  eager  haste  were  being  baptized.  We  enter  into 
sympathy  with  him.  He  had  preached  to  the  Jew,  and 
the  Jew  had  refused;  and  with  stern  words  he  had  said, 
"  Your  blood  be  upon  your  own  heads ;  I  am  clean : 
from  henceforth  I  will  go  unto  the  Gentiles " ;  and 
eagerly  the  Gentiles  had  heard,  believed,  and  were 
baptized;  and  so  he  became  filled  with  fear.  Then 
it  was  that  the  Lord  said  to  him,  "  Be  not  afraid, 
but  speak,  and  hold  not  thy  peace:  for  I  am  with  thee, 
and  no  man  shall  set  on  thee  to  harm  thee:  for  I  have 
much  people  in  this  city."  Do  not  be  afraid  of  those  who 
hearing,  are  eagerly  believing,  and  being  baptized.  Do 
not  doubt  the  sincerity  of  those  who  are  coming  to  you. 
I  have  much  people  here.  The  thing  you  have  seen,  I 
have  known  ere  you  saw  it.  Your  coming  here  has  also 
been  within  My  Divine  arrangement.  Trust  these  new 
converts.  When  presently  Paul  rebuked  them  with  stern- 
ness for  their  derelictions  in  spiritual  life,  there  was 
nevertheless  in  his  heart  a  great  love  for  them,  a  great 
confidence  and  belief  in  them.  He  wrote  to  them  as  the 
saints  of  God,  in  spite  of  all  their  failure,  in  spite  of  the 

[  432  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  18: 1-22] 

fact  that  they  had  yielded  to  the  seductions  of  corrupt 
Corinth.  .When  the  Lord  said  to  him,  "  I  have  much 
people  in  this  city,"  there  came  a  new  courage  into  his 
heart,  which  enabled  him  to  face  success. 

Yet  surely  there  was  also  in  his  heart  a  haunting  fear 
of  the  hostility  that  he  knew  was  working.  He  had  seen 
the  movement  which  presently  broke  out,  and  appealed 
to  the  bema,  or  judgment  seat  of  Gallic.  It  is  often  in 
the  moment  of  success  that  the  heart  becomes  cowardly. 
It  was  immediately  after  Elijah's  victory  on  Carmel  that 
he  ran  away  from  Jezebel.  It  is  often  in  the  hour  of 
success,  that  the  fear  of  opposition  and  hostility  is  born. 
This  man,  beaten,  bruised,  and  stoned,  bearing  in  his  very 
body  the  brands  of  Jesus,  knew  what  was  going  on  in 
Corinth,  against  him,  and  he  was  filled  with  fear.  The 
Lord  came  to  him  with  no  rebuke,  with  no  harsh  word, 
but  with  words  of  ineffable  comfort,  "  Be  not  afraid,  but 
speak,  and  hold  not  thy  peace."  He  was  almost  inclined 
to  give  up  preaching.  "  Hold  not  thy  peace :  for  I  am 
with  thee,  and  no  man  shall  set  on  thee  to  harm  thee." 
The  haunting  fear  in  the  presence  of  success,  merged  into 
cowardice  in  the  presence  of  hostility.  Perhaps  one 
other  element  contributed  to  the  fear  in  his  heart,  that  of 
the  overwhelming  sense  of  the  vastness  of  the  work. 
How  often  to-day  one  pauses  in  the  midst  of  work,  and 
feels  as  by  comparison  with  the  thing  to  be  done,  that  the 
thing  being  done  is  nothing.  The  Lord  still  says,  Be  not 
afraid,  speak,  hold  not  thy  peace,  I  am  with  thee,  and  I 
have  much  people  in  this  city.  Do  not  measure  My 
victory  by  the  things  seen.  Do  not  measure  My  victory 
by  the  statistics  taken  and  read.  I  have  much  people, 
says  the  King,  in  this,  and  in  all  cities,  never  yet  seen, 
never  yet  known.  Abide  in  My  strength ;  I  am  with  thee, 
speak,  be  not  afraid. 

From  that  moment  the  heart  of  the  man  was  filled  with 
a  new  courage.  He  dwelt  there  a  year  and  six  months, 
teaching  the  Word  of  God  among  them;  and  when  the 

[  433  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  18 : 1-22] 

Gallio  incident  occurred,  he  still  continued.  I  am  with 
thee,  said  his  Lord  to  him.  Mark  the  effect  upon  the 
Word.  Was  he  afraid  of  the  success ?  "I  am  with 
thee,"  and  in  a  moment  he  knew  that  if  it  was  His  work, 
however  much  he  might  fear  its  instability,  this  Lord  was 
able  to  preserve  the  work  that  he  saw  begun.  Was  he 
afraid  of  the  hostility?  If  his  Lord  was  with  him,  the 
fear  was  at  once  banished.  Was  he  afraid  of  the  over- 
whelming sense  of  the  vastness  of  the  work?  If  his 
Lord  was  with  him,  he  would  be  content  to  do  the  piece 
of  work  that  he  had  to  do,  and  to  leave  the  issues  with 
Him. 

A  wonderful  page  is  this,  but  the  words  out  of  it  that 
abide,  that  will  sing  their  song  in  life  and  service  for 
many  a  day,  are  these,  "  I  have  much  people  in  this  city." 
Said  He  in  the  days  of  His  public  ministry,  "  Other  sheep 
I  have,  which  are  not  of  this  fold:  them  also  I  must 
bring."  This  man  in  Corinth  was  finding  some  of  them. 
Still  in  the  days  of  His  public  ministry  it  was  written  of 
Him  "  that  He  might  also  gather  together  into  one  the 
children  of  God  that  are  scattered  abroad."  Paul  was 
finding  some  of  them  in  Corinth.  The  most  hopeful 
things  in  humanity  to-day  are  its  restlessness,  its  inten- 
sity, its  disgust.  These  are  open  doors  for  the  Christian 
preacher.  Corinthian  habits,  Corinthian  words,  and  all 
the  restlessness  of  the  city,  it  matters  not  how  it  is  mani- 
fested, create  the  open  door  for  the  evangel  of  Jesus 
Christ.  What  is  the  Gospel  for  the  corrupt  city?  The 
Cross  and  the  Resurrection,  and  none  other.  Are  we  at 
His  disposal,  as  this  man  was  at  His  disposal  in  Corinth  ? 
If  so,  He  is  at  our  side,  and  we  need  not  fear  the  success 
or  the  hostility  or  the  vastness  of  the  work;  but  be  con- 
tent to  do  that  piece  of  work  which  God  has  given  to  us, 
in  the  consciousness  of  our  fellowship  with  Him,  and  His 
fellowship  with  us.  As  we  look  and  serve,  let  us  look 
for  saints,  remembering  that  He  is  saying  to  us  in  the 
midst  of  all  that  tends  to  dishearten,  "  I  have  much  people 

I  434  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  18 :  24-19 :  7] 

in  this  city."     Let  us  look  for  them,  find  them,  and  lead 
them  to  Him. 

Acts  18 : 24-19 : 7 

We  now  commence  that  portion  of  the  book  of  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles  which  tells  the  story  of  Paul's  work  in 
Ephesus.  In  the  New  Testament  narrative,  Ephesus  is 
the  outstanding  and  representative  church,  to  which  two 
letters  are  addressed.  Even  if  Paul's  letter  was  a  cir- 
cular letter  intended  for  other  churches  in  the  district,  it 
is  quite  certain  that  aniong  them  it  was  intended  also  for 
the  church  at  Ephesus.  There  is  also  the  letter  of  the 
Lord  to  Ephesus,  the  first  of  the  seven  in  the  book  of  the 
Revelation. 

In  writing  to  Ephesus  Paul  reached  the  summit  of  his 
system  of  teaching.  It  was  to  this  church  he  was  able 
to  write  of  those  profound  matters  concerning  the  ulti- 
mate vocation  of  the  Church  of  God.  In  writing  to  the 
Romans  he  laid  the  foundation  truths  concerning  salva- 
tion, broadly  and  forever.  In  writing  to  the  Corinthians 
he  corrected  a  condition  of  affairs  which  issued  in  failure 
to  fulfil  its  function  in  a  heathen  city,  on  the  part  of  the 
Church.  But  in  writing  to  Ephesus  he  soared  far  above 
all  these  matters  of  minor  and  local  importance,  and  wrote 
of  the  sublimest  truths  concerning  the  Church,  dealing 
first  with  its  predestination  to  character  and  the  service 
of  God;  then  with  its  edification  in  the  processes  of  time, 
in  order  that  it  may  fulfil  its  true  vocation;  and  finally 
with  its  vocation.  Then  he  revealed  how  such  doctrine 
should  affect  the  lives  of  men  and  women,  members  of 
that  Church,  in  all  human  inter-relationships.  When  we 
turn  to  the  letter  of  our  Lord  to  the  church  at  Ephesus, 
we  find  a  church  fair  and  beautiful  in  very  many  respects, 
and  yet  we  have  revealed,  that  first  peril  that  ever  threat- 
ens the  Church  of  God :  the  loss  of  first  love. 

This  story  of  Paul's  coming  to  Ephesus  must  be  of 
special  interest,  because  of  the  place  that  Ephesus  thus 

[  435  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  18 : 24-19 :  7] 

occupies  in  the  New  Testament  revelation  of  the  Church. 
Here  also  we  are  considering  the  last  part  of  the  work  of 
Paul  in  liberty.  Not  that  he  was  never  free  again  after 
his  imprisonment  in  Rome,  for  personally  I  have  no  doubt 
that  he  was  set  at  liberty,  and  that  he  visited  these 
churches  again.  It  may  be  that  he  visited  Spain,  and 
perchance  came  to  Britain.  But  so  far  as  this  record  is 
concerned,  we  here  see  the  last  work  of  Paul  at  liberty. 
Presently  we  shall  see  him  a  prisoner. 

Ephesus  was  a  city,  notorious  for  idolatry;  in  some 
senses,  the  very  centre  of  the  great  idolatries.  There  was 
the  temple  of  Artemis  or  Diana;  and  there  religion  and 
commercial  life  had  entered  into  a  remarkable  alliance, 
for  the  great  merchantmen  made  the  temple  of  Artemis 
their  banking  house ;  so  that  anything  of  purity  or  virtue 
that  there  might  have  been  in  the  Greek  ideals  of  worship 
was  corrupted,  because  receiving  the  patronage  of  the 
merchantmen.  Moreover  it  was  a  city  at  that  moment 
given  over  largely  to  demonism,  to  sorcery,  to  witchcraft, 
to  magic.  Here  the  apostolic  work  was  accompanied  by 
special  signs. 

In  this  paragraph  we  have  two  accounts  merging  into 
one,  put  together  because  of  their  intimate  connection; 
the  story  of  Apollos  and  his  ministry,  and  the  story  of 
the  coming  of  Paul  to  Ephesus.  It  will  be  seen  by  glanc- 
ing at  the  nineteenth  and  twenty-first  verses  in  this  chap- 
ter that  Paul  had  already  been  in  Ephesus. 

"  They  came  to  Ephesus,  and  he  left  Priscilla  and 
Aquila  there :  but  he  himself  entered  into  the  synagogue, 
and  reasoned  with  the  Jews.  And  when  they  asked  him 
to  abide  a  longer  time,  he  consented  not;  but  taking  his 
leave  of  them,  and  saying,  I  will  return  again  unto  you, 
if  God  will,  he  set  sail  from  Ephesus." 

That  was  about  a  year  before  this  coming  to  the  city,  for 
Luke  has  given  us  no  detailed  account  of  the  apostolic 

436  j 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  18:24-19:7] 

labours,  but  only  such  incidents  as  serve  to  teach  spiritual 
lessons  for  all  time. 

During  that  year  something  had  happened  in  Ephesus, 
which  is  chronicled  in  the  closing  part  of  the  eighteenth 
chapter:  the  coming  of  Apollos.  Let  us  look  at  this 
story,  observing  two  things:  the  man  himself,  and  the 
ministry  that  he  exercised. 

Apollos  was  a  Jew,  an  Alexandrian,  a  learned  man, 
mighty  in  the  Scriptures.  We  have  dwelt  upon  the  fact 
that  the  apprehension  of  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  a  wonderful 
evidence  of  the  presidency  of  the  Lord  Himself  over 
the  affairs  of  His  Church,  and  of  the  guidance  of  the 
Spirit.  The  work  among  the  Gentiles  had  to  be  done  in 
cities  where  two  great  influences  obtained  in  matters  of 
religion,  the  influence  of  the  Jewish  synagogue,  and  the 
influence  of  Greek  culture.  When  Saul  of  Tarsus  was 
apprehended,  it  was  the  apprehension  of  a  man  who  was, 
to  quote  his  own  words,  "  A  Hebrew  of  Hebrews  " ;  but 
he  was  also  Saul  of  Tarsus.  He  was  at  once  Hebrew 
and  Hellenist.  The  two  great  ideals  combining  in  him, 
made  him  the  power  he  was  through  these  Greek  cities. 
In  this  man  Apollos  the  same  two  great  ideals  merged. 
He  was  a  Jew,  but  also  an  Alexandrian.  Alexandria  was 
the  centre  of  Greek  learning  and  culture  at  this  time; 
where  the  Jews  were  all  under  the  influence  of  Philo; 
where  the  influence  of  the  Greek  method  of  culture  of 
that  day  invaded  the  Hebrew  method  of  the  study  of  their 
own  Scriptures  and  writings.  This  man  Apollos  then 
was  one  in  whom,  in  some  senses  perhaps  even  more 
remarkably  than  in  Paul,  the  two  ideals  merged.  He 
was  learned,  eloquent.  He  was  an  orator,  and  yet  an 
orator  through  whose  speech  there  was  manifest  the 
fact  of  his  culture  and  his  refinement. 

The  last  word  of  the  description,  "  mighty  in  the  Scrip- 
tures," does  not  merely  mean  that  he  knew  them;  nor 
had  ability  to  deal  with  them  and  to  present  them;  but 
that  he  had  the  ability  to  master  them,  to  understand 

[  437  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  18 : 24-19 : 7] 

them.  That  word  of  description  is  that  of  a  special  and 
specific  gift  that  this  man  possessed  by  nature.  We  can- 
not say  this  was  a  spiritual  gift  in  the  Church  sense  of 
the  word,  for  as  yet  he  had  not  come  into  union  with 
that  Church,  for  he  had  not  received  the  Spirit  by  endue- 
ment.  Here  was  a  man  gifted  naturally.  The  Spirit 
always  bestows  His  special  gift  upon  a  man  already 
gifted  by  nature  to  receive  it.  That  may  be  a  dogmatic 
statement  which  some  would  like  to  challenge.  The  in- 
stance quoted  against  it  very  often  is  that  of  Dwight 
Lyman  Moody.  Yet  his  experience  proves  its  accuracy. 
If  he  had  never  been  a  Christian  man,  he  would  have 
been  a  mighty  orator,  and  a  leader  of  men.  If  a  man 
has  no  gift  of  speech  by  nature,  do  not  imagine  God 
wants  that  man  for  a  preacher,  because  He  does  not. 
He  may  have  equally  important  work  for  him  to  do,  but 
a  preacher  is  born,  not  made.  This  man  Apollos  was 
mighty  in  the  Scriptures,  and  was  gifted  by  nature  with  a 
gift  which  every  man  does  not  possess.  It  was  a  distinct 
ability,  a  natural  power  to  know  the  Scriptures,  and  to  see 
their  inter-relationships.  He  was  familiar  with  all  their 
parts  and  their  bearings.  He  had  a  familiarity  with  the 
Scriptures  which  enabled  him  to  impart  to  others  that 
which  he  knew.  This  man,  therefore,  by  birth  and  train- 
ing, was  singularly  fitted  for  work  in  these  Greek  cities. 
His  ministry  in  Ephesus  was  not  distinctly  Christian. 
Mark  his  equipment.  "This  man  had  been  instructed 
in  the  way  of  the  Lord,"  which  does  not  mean,  in  the  way 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  all  the  fullness  of  that  de- 
scription. "  Being  fervent  in  spirit,  he  spake  and  taught 
carefully  the  things  concerning  Jesus,  knowing  only  the 
baptism  of  John."  Mark  the  distinction  carefully.  In 
the  third  chapter  of  the  Gospel  according  to  Matthew,  we 
have  the  account  of  the  ministry  of  John. 

"  In  those  days  cometh  John  the  Baptist,  preaching  in 
the  wilderness  of  Judeea,  saying,  Repent  ye ;  for  the  King- 

[438] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  18 : 24-19 :  7] 

dom  of  heaven  is  at  hand.     For  this  is  he  that  was  spoken 
of  by  Isaiah  the  prophet  saying, 
The  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness, 
Make  ye  ready  the  way  of  the  Lord/' 

Apollos  had  been  instructed  "  in  the  way  of  the  Lord,: 
knowing  only  the  baptism  of  John."  Apollos  was  a  dis- 
ciple of  John,  and  "  the  way  of  the  Lord  "  referred  to 
here  is  that  referred  to  in  Matthew,  and  is  a  direct  quo- 
tation from  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  in  its  fortieth  chap- 
ter, and  second  verse.  To  understand  this  we  must  get 
back  into  the  atmosphere  of  that  great  prophecy.  The 
fortieth  chapter  opens,  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye,  My 
people."  It  is  the  beginning  of  the  great  ministry  of 
peace,  resulting  from  judgment.  The  thirty-fifth  chap- 
ter of  Isaiah,  the  last  of  the  first  prophetic  portion,  ended 
with  the  promise  of  ultimate  peace.  This  is  all  Hebrew. 
Apollos  was  a  Jew.  This  chapter  in  Isaiah  ended  with  a 
picture  of  an  ultimate  peace ;  first  desolation,  and  beyond 
it,  restoration.  That  was  the  vision  of  the  prophet,  as  he 
spoke,  while  Sennacherib's  armies  were  melting  away. 
The  great  declaration  was  that  Jehovah  would  prepare  a 
way  for  His  people  back  into  peace.  Omitting  the  his- 
toric portion  (36-39)  we  come  to  that  fortieth  chapter; 
and  the  message  is  that  the  people  of  God  are  to  prepare 
a  way  for  Jehovah.  Mark  the  link  between  the  two. 
John  came,  as  Isaiah  had  foretold,  the  ascetic,  the  hard, 
the  stern,  the  pure,  the  righteous,  and  he  proclaimed  "  the 
Way  of  the  Lord/'  which  was  to  be  prepared  for  by  re- 
pentance. Apollos  had  been  instructed  in  "  the  way  of 
the  Lord,"  in  that  sense,  had  been  instructed  in  the 
Messianic  prophecy,  and  purpose.  He  was  a  disciple  of 
John,  and  in  obedience  to  John  had  been  baptized  unto 
repentance,  and  to  expectation  of  the  coming  of  Messiah ; 
but  he  did  not  know  the  meaning  of  the  Cross.  He  was 
not  acquainted  with  the  fact  of  resurrection.  He  was 
not  familiar  with  the  truth  of  the  outpoured  Spirit.  His 
view  was  Hebrew  on  the  highest  and  purest  and  best 

[  439  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  18 :  24-19 :  7] 

level,  as  interpreted  by  John.  He  was  fervent  in  spirit, 
fiery-spirited,  having  inherited  from  John,  or  under  the 
influence  of  other  teachers  perhaps,  that  fiery  note. 

This  man  therefore  who  came  to  Ephesus  between 
Paul's  first  and  second  visits,  Apollos,  a  man,  a  disciple 
of  John,  taught  them  "  the  things  concerning  Jesus,"  so 
far  as  John  had  revealed  them.  His  method  in  Ephesus 
was  that  "  He  spake  and  taught  carefully  the  things  con- 
cerning Jesus,"  and  "  began  to  speak  boldly  in  the  syna- 
gogue." 

But  there  were  two  people  in  .Ephesus  who  knew  much 
more  about  Jesus  than  he  did :  a  woman  and  a  man.  The 
order  of  the  names  is  significant,  "  Priscilla  and  Aquila." 
These  two  had  been  left  in  Ephesus  by  Paul,  and  had 
been  there  a  year.  They  knew  Christ  experimentally,  be- 
cause they  were  of  the  Christ  by  the  work  of  the  Spirit. 
They  heard  Apollos,  and  they  took  him,  and  instructed 
him  more  carefully;  and  that  ended  his  ministry  in 
Ephesus.  One  of  the  most  beautiful  touches  about 
Apollos  is  the  revelation  of  the  fact  that  he  was  willing 
to  let  two  members  of  the  congregation  who  listened  to 
him,  and  who  knew  more  than  he  did,  teach  him.  They 
took  him,  this  persuasive,  eloquent,  sincere,  burning  soul ; 
and  opened  to  him  the  truth,  with  the  result  that  he  passed 
on  from  Ephesus  to  Corinth. 

Very  little  is  recorded  concerning  his  ministry  there. 
He  was  commended  by  these  people  in  Ephesus,  for  his 
natural  ability,  for  his  zeal,  and  for  that  simplicity  of 
character  which  had  been  revealed  in  his  willingness  to 
learn.  We  simply  read  about  him  in  Corinth,  that  "  he 
helped  them  much  which  had  believed  through  grace." 
Whether  the  words  "  through  grace  "  refer  to  "  believed," 
or  to  "helped  them  much,"  cannot  finally  be  deter- 
mined. I  prefer  to  believe  that  they  belong  to  the 
"helped  them  much."  We  find  also  from  Paul's  letter 
to  the  Corinthians  that  they  had  made  him  the  head  of  a 
sect,  some  saying,  "  We  are  of  Apollos."  That  does  not 

[  440  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  18 : 24-19 :  7] 

reflect  upon  him  at  all,  because  they  did  the  same 
about  Paul.  But  there  is  one  little  illuminative  word  in 
the  Corinthian  letter.  Paul  says,  "  I  planted,  Apollos 
watered."  That  is  the  brief  story  of  a  ministry  which 
lasted  for  some  considerable  period  in  all  likelihood.  In 
the  second  letter  to  the  Corinthians  it  is  evident  that 
Apollos  had  left  Corinth  on  account  of  these  difficulties, 
and  declined  to  go  back  again.  We  see  him,  however, 
going  from  Ephesus,  instructed  by  Priscilla  and  Aquila, 
with  the  larger  view,  the  more  perfect  understanding,  the 
fuller  enduement  of  spiritual  power;  and  Luke  says, 
"  He  helped  them  much,"  and  Paul  says,  "  I  planted, 
Apollos  watered." 

Now  it  was  to  Ephesus  that  Paul  came,  after  the  de- 
parture of  Apollos.  This  nineteenth  chapter,  and  the  first 
seven  verses,  one  of  the  most  familiar  paragraphs  in  the 
whole  book,  is  a  most  constantly  misinterpreted  passage. 
It  needs  careful  consideration.  Let  us  notice  first  Paul's 
investigation  and  his  instruction;  and  then  observe  the 
things  that  immediately  followed. 

Paul  found  a  little  group  of  about  twelve  men,  and  he 
asked  them  this  question,  "Did  ye  receive  the  Holy 
Spirit  when  ye  believed?"  The  word  "since,"  "Have 
ye  received  the  Holy  Spirit  since  ye  believed  "  creates  an 
entire  misrepresentation  of  the  question  he  asked.  That 
is  something  to  be  stated  emphatically,  because  it  is  on 
the  presence  of  that  word,  that  the  misinterpretation  of 
this  passage  has  been  based.  The  tense  of  the  verbs 
"  receive  "  and  "  believe  "  is  the  same,  so  that  it  may  be 
rendered,  "  Received  ye  the  Holy  Spirit  when  ye  be- 
lieved ?  "  Not,  Have  ye  received  since ;  as  though  there 
were  a  belief  at  some  time,  and  a  subsequent  reception 
of  the  Spirit;  which  in  the  terminology  of  our  own  day 
is  described  as  a  "  second  blessing."  Paul  asked  no 
such  question. 

Now  mark  their  answer.  "  Nay,"  they  said,  "  we  did 
not  so  much  as  hear  whether  the  Holy  Spirit  was  given." 

[  441  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  18 : 24-19 :  7] 

I  think  perhaps  no  better  word  can  be  substituted  for  the 
word  "  given."  As  a  matter  of  fact  there  is  no  word  in 
the  text.  It  is  introduced  for  the  purpose  of  interpreta- 
tion. They  said,  "  We  did  not  so  much  as  hear  whether 
the  Holy  Spirit  was."  As  to  what  word  should  follow 
the  "  was,"  it  is  not  easy  to  say.  Probably  none.  They 
might  have  meant  that  they  did  not  know  of  the  existence 
of  the  Spirit.  But  that  is  not  likely  for  they  were  dis- 
ciples of  John,  possibly  as  the  result  of  the  preaching 
of  Apollos.  What  then  had  they  heard  ?  What  was  the 
ministry  of  John  ?  John  had  said,  "  I  indeed  baptize 
you  with  water  unto  repentance:  but  He  that  cometh 
after  me  is  mightier  than  I,  Whose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy 
to  bear;  He  shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Spirit  and 
with  fire."  The  baptism  of  John  had  included  a  declara- 
tion of  its  own  limitation,  and  the  affirmation  of  a  fuller 
baptism  to  come,  not  through  his  ministry,  but  through 
the  ministry  of  Another.  John  had  distinctly  foretold 
the  coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit;  and  these  men  therefore 
were  not  likely  to  have  meant,  We  have  never  heard 
anything  about  the  Holy  Spirit;  but  rather:  We  know 
that  the  Spirit  was  promised  by  the  great  prophet  John, 
but  we  do  not  know  whether  He  is  yet  given,  whether 
He  has  yet  come. 

The  apostle  then  asked  them,  "  Into  what  then  were  ye 
baptized  ? "  and  they  replied :  "  Into  John's  baptism." 
That  is  why  they  had  not  heard  whether  the  Holy  Spirit 
was  given.  They  had  only  proceeded  as  far  as  John  had 
been  able  to  take  them ;  to  the  place  where  Apollos  was, 
when  he  came  to  Ephesus. 

The  reason  for  Paul's  -question  to  them  is  not  declared. 
It  may,  however,  be  surmised  upon  the  basis  of  the  gen- 
eral observation  of  the  story.  When  he  met  those  men 
he  may  have  felt  there  was  something  lacking;  that  they 
were  sincere,  honest,  but  there  was  something  lacking, 
something  of  fire,  something  of  emotion. 

He  then  gave  them  instruction,  and  revealed  to  them 

[  442  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  18 : 24-19 :  7] 

the  fact  that  the  baptism  of  John  was  preparatory,  and 
that  the  teaching  of  John  vindicated  the  necessity  for  go- 
ing beyond  him  to  Jesus.  He  then  began  to  tell  them  all 
that  they  did  not  know  of  the  Christ ;  of  the  resurrection 
and  Pentecostal  effusion ;  of  the  fact  that  through  Pente- 
cost men  .were  brought  into  living  union  with  Jesus. 
When  they  heard  that,  "  they  were  baptized  into  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus." 

Then  Paul  laid  his  hands  upon  them,  and  they  received 
the  Holy  Spirit.  Then  all  that  Paul  had  missed,  was  im- 
mediately manifest.  They  "  spake  with  tongues,"  they 
began  to  prophesy.  Their  enkindled  emotion  expressed 
itself  in  ecstatic  utterances  of  praise,  for  tongues  were 
bestowed,  not  for  edification,  but  always  for  adoration. 
If  the  tongues  witnessed  to  enkindled  emotion,  the 
prophesying  witnessed  to  enlightened  intelligence;  and 
they  became  martyrs,  witnesses;  for  in  that  moment 
they  became  Christian.  This  was  not  a  second  blessing, 
but  the  first  blessing,  as  the  baptism  and  reception  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  always  is. 

I  believe  there  are  multitudes  of  people  in  Church 
membership  who  are  not  Christian  in  the  New  Testament 
sense  of  the  word,  who  have  come  to  John's  baptism,  and 
have  come  no  further.  That  is  what  Paul  found  when 
he  came  to  Ephesus.  They  were  honest  men,  obedient, 
sincere,  who  had  followed  the  light  as  far  as  it  had  come 
to  them;  but  there  was  fuller  light,  and  a  brighter  and 
larger  life ;  and  to  that  Paul  introduced  them. 

What  are  the  values  of  this  study?  As  I  look  at  this 
page  I  learn  that  men  can  only  lift  other  men  to  the  level 
on  which  they  live ;  can  only  lift  other  men  to  the  level  to 
which  they  themselves  have  come.  Apollos,  a  Jew,  an 
Alexandrian,  learned,  mighty  in  the  Scriptures,  fervent  in 
spirit,  careful  in  his  teaching,  bold  in  his  utterance,  could 
only  take  the  people  as  far  as  he  had  come  himself,  not 
one  yard  beyond  it,  not  one  foot  above  it.  His  disciples 
will  know  only  the  baptism  of  John.  Paul  came,  and 

[  443  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  18:24-19:7] 

not  because  he  was  a  better  man  than  Apollos,  but  be- 
cause he  had  fuller  knowledge,  a  fuller  experience,  he 
lifted  these  same  twelve  men  to  the  higher  level,  until 
the  cold  and  beautiful  accuracy  of  their  honest  morality 
was  suffused  wjth  the  passion  and  fire  of  the  coming  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  Apollos  could  not  bring  them  there  until 
he  himself  had  reached  that  position.  When  Apollos 
came  to  the  fuller  light  and  experience,  he  could  pass  to 
Corinth,  and  do  for  Paul  in  Corinth  what  Paul  did  for 
him  in  Ephesus.  Paul  can  do  his  planting  in  Corinth, 
and  be  very  successful ;  and  Apollos  waters.  When  Paul 
comes  to  Ephesus  he  will  find  the  planting  of  Apollos,  and 
will  water  it. 

If  we  are  preachers  and  teachers  we  can  only  help  men 
to  the  level  to  which  we  have  come.  The  declaration  is 
full  of  solemnity.  The  Holy  Spirit  always  needs  the 
human  instrument.  That  is  what  the  book  of  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles  emphasizes.  There  are  many  ways  of 
telling  the  story  of  this  book.  God  the  Holy  Spirit  cannot 
do  without  men  and  women.  He  must  have  them  to  do 
His  work.  That  is  the  whole  genius  of  missionary  en- 
deavour. God  the  Holy  Spirit  can  only  bring  the  mes- 
sage of  the  crucified  and  risen  and  glorified  Christ  to  any 
part  of  the  world  through  men  and  women  who  know  the 
power  of  these  things. 

But  mark  the  law.  The  fit  instrument  is  always  found. 
The  operation  of  the  Spirit  is  limited  by  the  instrument. 
Is  it  any  wonder  when  Paul  came  to  write  his  letters  to 
Christians,  that  the  great  burden  was  not  that  they  should 
believe,  nor  that  they  should  love,  nor  that  they  should 
hope.  He  thanked  God  for  faith  and  hope  and  love,  but 
he  prayed  that  they  might  have  full  knowledge  (epig- 
nosis).  We  have  no  right  to  send  men  out,  and  think 
they  can  do  the  full  work  of  the  ministry,  either  apostolic, 
or  prophetic,  or  evangelistic,  or  the  work  of  pastor  and 
teacher ;  without  full  knowledge.  I  do  not  mean  academic 
knowledge  only,  Apollos  had  that,  and  failed.  I  mean 

[  444  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  19:8-20] 

spiritual  knowledge  and  discernment.  This  can  only 
come  by  the  illumination  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  by 
patient  training. 

Lastly  mark  the  diversities.  How  did  these  twelve 
men  enter  into  the  larger  life  ?  They  heard  the  teaching, 
they  obeyed,  they  were  baptized  into  the  name  of  Jesus. 
Then  Paul  laid  on  his  hands,  and  they  received  the  Holy 
Spirit.  In  the  tenth  chapter  we  find  Peter  was  talking  to 
Cornelius,  and  he  received  the  Spirit  immediately,  and 
was  baptized,  not  before,  but  after  receiving  the  Spirit. 
The  Spirit  bloweth  where  He  listeth.  We  must  not  take 
any  illustration  in  this  book,  and  make  it  an  abiding  rule, 
for  if  so,  there  will  be  as  many  schools  as  there  are  stories 
in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  We  cannot  base  a  doctrine 
of  the  Spirit's  methods  upon  any  one  story.  Upon  the 
whole  of  them  we  can  base  the  doctrine  of  the  Spirit's 
method,  and  that  may  be  stated  thus.  Not  according  to 
human  ideas,  or  human  laws  formulated  by  any  story; 
but  in  many  ways,  through  the  laying  on  of  hands,  and 
without  such  laying  on ;  in  answer  to  water  baptism,  be- 
fore water  baptism ;  so  comes  the  Spirit.  The  important 
matter  is  that  we  have  this  Spirit,  without  Whose  pres- 
ence and  illumination  we  cannot  preach  this  Christ,  or 
teach  Him.  May  it  be  ours  to  press  to  the  highest  height, 
and  the  fullest  knowledge,  that  we  may  lift  all  those 
whom  we  teach  on  to  this  highest  level. 

Acts  19 : 8-20 

During  all  the  varied  and  long-continued  ministry  of 
Paul,  he  remained  longer  at  Ephesus  than  at  any  other 
centre.  This  particular  paragraph  gives  the  account  of 
that  sojourn ;  and  refers  to  two  periods ;  first,  a  period  of 
three  months,  during  which  he  reasoned  in  the  synagogue ; 
and  secondly,  one  of  two  years,  during  which  he  reasoned 
in  the  school  of  Tyrannus. 

In  our  study  of  the  earlier  part  of  this  chapter,  we  saw 
the  beginnings  of  the  work  in  Ephesus.  The  paragraph 

f  445  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  19 : 8-20] 

following  this  (19: 21-41)  gives  an  account  of  the  uproar 
in  Ephesus,  which  eventuated  in  the  apostle's  departure. 
Consequently  in  this  brief  paragraph  (verses  8-20)  we 
have  the  only  detailed  account  of  that  work. 

Luke  has  given  us  a  group  of  incidents,  all  related  to 
each  other,  and  enabling  us  to  understand  the  work  of 
those  two  years,  especially  if  we  illuminate  this  page  of 
incident  by  apostolic  words  found  in  his  address  to  the 
elders  at  Miletus,  and  by  some  references  in  his  own 
letter  at  a  later  period.  The  incidents,  while  few,  are 
significant ;  and  the  final  statement  of  the  paragraph  gives 
us  the  "key  to  its  interpretation,  "  So  mightily  grew  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  and  prevailed."  All  the  paragraph  is 
needed  for  the  interpretation  of  that  "  So."  We  have  the 
account  of  Paul's  entering  the  synagogue ;  of  the  "  hard- 
ened and  disobedient "  among  those  who  listened  to  him 
there;  of  his  turning  from  them  to  the  school  of  Tyran- 
nus;  of  his  continuation  there  for  two  years,  reasoning 
and  teaching;  of  the  sounding  forth  of  the  Word  through 
all  Proconsular  Asia;  of  those  special  and  marvellous 
manifestations  of  miraculous  power,  the  mastery  over 
evil  spirits;  and  of  the  attempt  at  imitation  on  the  part 
of  certain  Jewish  exorcists,  with  the  central  special  illus- 
tration of  the  defeat  of  these  men,  in  the  case  of  the 
sons  of  Sceva.  When  the  group  of  incidents  has  been 
noted,  the  paragraph  significantly  closes  with  these  words, 
"  So."  That  is,  by  these  actions,  by  this  means,  in  this 
way,  "  So  mightily  grew  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  and  pre- 
vailed." It  is  evident  that  Luke  did  not  desire  to  give  a 
detailed  account  of  that  two  years'  ministry,  but  that  he 
took  from  the  period  certain  outstanding  incidents,  to 
bring  the  reader  into  a  recognition  of  the  difficulties  con- 
fronted, and  of  the  triumphs  of  the  Word  of  God  in 
Ephesus. 

Let  us  first  of  all  consider  briefly  the  city  in  the  back- 
ground, Ephesus;  then  look  more  particularly  at  the 
apostle  in  the  foreground,  Paul  in  Ephesus;  and  finally 

[  446  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  19 : 8-20] 

and  principally,  notice  the  remarkable  spiritual  conflict 
which  this  page  reveals  as  having  taken  place  in  Ephesus. 

Writing  to  the  Corinthian  Christians  from  this  city, 
Paul  said  that  he  proposed  to  tarry  in  Ephesus  until 
Pentecost ;  and  he  gave  his  reasons  for  this  tarrying :  "  for 
a  great  door  and  effectual  is  opened  unto  me,  and  there 
are  many  adversaries."  At  Corinth  Paul  had  stayed  for 
a  long  period.  He  did  not  stay  long  in  Athens.  There 
were  no  adversaries  in  Athens,  there  was  not  virility 
enough  left  in  Athens  to  oppose;  and  consequently 
there  was  very  little  opportunity  for  the  preaching 
of  the  evangel.  But  in  Ephesus  he  said,  "  A  great 
door  and  effectual  is  opened  unto  me."  The  difficulties 
of  the  situation  created  the  greatness  of  the  opportunity 
in  the  mind  of  this  man.  The  difficulties  were  in  them- 
selves aids  to  the  apostolic  preaching.  The  adversaries 
were  compelled  to  contribute  to  the  victory. 

Glance  then  at  Ephesus,  at  the  city  itself.  Dr.  Farrar 
thus  described  it : 

"  It  lay  one  mile  from  the  Icarian  Sea,  in  the  fair  Asian 
meadow  where  myriads  of  swans  and  other  water-fowl 
disported  themselves  amid  the  windings  of  Cayster.  Its 
buildings  were  clustered  under  the  protecting  shadows  of 
Coressus  and  Prion,  and  in  the  delightful  neighbourhood 
of  the  Ortygian  Groves.  Its  haven,  which  had  once  been 
among  the  most  sheltered  and  commodious  in  the  Medi- 
terranean, had  been  partly  silted  up  by  a  mistake  in  en- 
gineering, but  was  still  thronged  with  vessels,  from  every 
part  of  the  civilized  world.  It  lay  at  the  meeting-point 
of  great  roads,  which  led  northwards  to  Sardis  and  Troas, 
southwards  to  Magnesia  and  Antioch,  and  thus  com- 
manded easy  access  to  the  great  river-valleys  of  the 
Hermus  and  Meander,  and  the  whole  interior  continent. 
Its  seas  and  rivers  were  rich  with  fish;  its  air  was  salu- 
brious; its  position  unrivalled;  its  population  multifarious 
and  immense.  Its  markets,  glittering  with  the  produce 
of  the  world's  art,  were  the  Vanity  Fair  of  Asia.  They 
furnished  to  the  exile  of  Patmos  the  local  colouring  of 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  19:8-20] 

those  pages  of  the  Apocalypse  in  which  he  speaks  of  '  the 
merchandise  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  precious  stones,  and 
of  pearls,  and  fine  linen,  and  purple,  and  silk,  and  scarlet, 
and  all  thyine  wood,  and  all  manner  vessels  of  ivory,  and 
all  manner  vessels  of  the  most  precious  wood,  and  of 
brass,  and  iron,  and  marble,  and  cinnamon,  and  odours, 
and  ointment,  and  frankincense,  and  wine,  and  oil,  and 
fine  flour,  and  wheat,  and  beasts,  and  sheep,  and  horses, 
and  chariots,  and  slaves,  and  souls  of  men' " 

There  can  be  no  more  graphic  and  inclusive  description 
of  Ephesus  than  that. 

In  that  great  city  the  central  religious  fact  was  the 
temple  devoted  to  the  worship  of  Artemis.  This  temple 
was  the  banking-house  of  the  merchants,  and  so  there  was 
the  most  intimate  relationship  between  the  commercial 
prosperity  of  Ephesus,  and  the  religion  centred  in  this 
great  temple.  That  temple  of  Artemis  had  been  made  a 
sanctuary  into  which  people  of  all  kinds  were  allowed  to 
come.  Farrar  in  his  Life  of  Paul,  said  that,  "  The 
vicinity  .  .  .  reeked  with  the  congregated  pollutions 
of  Asia,"  and  we  may  have  some  slight  understanding 
of  what  that  meant  by  remembering  that  for  a  furlong 
radius  the  temple  gave  sanctuary  to  all  the  most  evil 
things.  The  worship  itself  was  unutterably  vile.  The 
atmosphere  of  the  city  was  electric  with  sorcery  and  in- 
cantations, with  exorcists,  with  all  kinds  of  magical  im- 
posters.  Jewish  exorcists  were  there,  trafficking  upon 
the  credulity  of  the  people,  superadding  to  all  the  incan- 
tations and  sorceries  of  their  own  religions,  declarations 
of  ability  to  cast  out  evil  spirits  by  the  citation  of  words 
out  of  the  Hebrew  ritual. 

Into  this  city  of  Ephesus,  wealthy,  profoundly  religious, 
with  a  religion  that  was  in  itself  worse  than  an  utter  ab- 
sence of  it,  the  apostle  came.  There  were  many  adver- 
saries; adversaries  among  his  own  brethren  in  the  syna- 
gogue, as  he  revealed  in  his  subsequent  appeal  to  the 
elders  at  Miletus;  adversaries,  not  so  much  among  the 

[448] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  19:8-20] 

ruling  classes,  as  among  those  whose  trades  were  inter- 
fered with ;  adversaries  principally  in  that  worship  which 
had  so  remarkable  a  manifestation  in  the  evil  courses  and 
habits  of  the  eunuch-priests  and  virgin-priestesses.  It 
was  to  the  Church  at  Ephesus  Paul  wrote : 

"We  wrestle  not  against  flesh  and  blood,  but  against 
the  principalities,  against  the  powers,  against  the  world- 
rulers  of  this  darkness,  against  the  spiritual  hosts  of 
wickedness  in  the  heavenly  places." 

It  was  in  Ephesus  that  this  man  became  supremely  con- 
scious of  that  world  of  spiritual  antagonism  which  his 
writings  so  clearly  revealed,  and  which  we  need  to  recog- 
nize even  to-day.  It  was  in  Ephesus  that  the  forces  of 
the  underworld  of  evil  were  massed,  patently  manifest. 
Here,  far  more  than  at  Athens,  Corinth,  or  Philippi,  or 
any  other  of  the  places  which  he  had  visited,  he  came — 
if  we  may  use  so  material  a  figure  for  spiritual  things — 
face  to  face  with  naked  opposition  in  the  spirit  world. 

Now  let  us  look  at  the  man  himself  in  that  city,  in  the 
midst  of  its  wealth,  its  luxury,  surrounded  by  all  those 
religious  influences  which  were  of  the  most  evil  kind, 
supremely  and  sensitively  conscious  of  the  antagonism  of 
spiritual  adversaries.  He  was  occupied  in  making  tents. 
That  fact  does  not  appear  in  this  paragraph,  but  when  the 
elders  of  Ephesus  came  to  meet  him  at  Miletus,  he  said, 
"  I  coveted  no  man's  silver,  or  gold,  or  apparel.  Ye 
yourselves  know  that  these  hands  ministered  unto  my 
necessities,  and  to  them  that  were  with  me."  This  great 
apostle  of  Christ,  this  missionary  of  the  Cross,  in  this 
city  made  tents  to  support  himself,  and  those  who  were 
with  him,  thus  fulfilling  this  ministry.  Mark  well  the 
significance  of  this.  In  a  city  where  financial  gain  was 
the  inspiration  of  all  the  service  of  religion,  this  man 
declined  to  take  either  the  silver,  the  gold,  or  the  apparel 
of  any,  even  of  Christian  people,  but  ministered  to  his 

[  449  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  19 : 8-20] 

own  necessities,  making  tents,  supporting  himself  by  his 
own  labour. 

Notice  in  the  next  place,  that  he  was  in  Ephesus  as 
the  great  Christian  apologist ;  for  three  months  reasoning 
and  persuading  in  the  synagogue ;  and  when  those  of  his 
brethren  in  the  synagogue  began  definitely  to  oppose  his 
teaching,  deliberately  turning  from  them,  and  separating 
the  disciples  from  that  Jewish  community,  taking  them 
out  with  him,  going  to  the  school  of  Tyrannus,  and  there 
reasoning.  We  must  keep  these  two  things  in  close  con- 
nection, to  get  the  picture  of  the  man.  Tent-making  and 
supporting  himself  day  by  day ;  the  great  Christian  apolo- 
gist in  the  school  of  Tyrannus,  in  the  midst  of  all  the 
evil  influences  of  the  city,  preached  the  Kingdom  of 
God,  telling  the  story  of  Jesus,  for  he  had  no  other  mes- 
sage for  these  dead  or  dying  Grecian  cities,  than  Jesus 
and  the  resurrection. 

But  this  was  not  the  whole  of  his  occupation.  In  the 
twentieth  chapter,  where  his  address  to  the  elders  of  the 
Church  is  recorded,  he  said,  "  I  shrank  not  from  declar- 
ing unto  you  anything  that  was  profitable,  and  teaching 
you  publicly,  and  from  house  to  house.  ...  By  the 
space  of  three  years  I  ceased  not  to  admonish  every  one 
night  and  day  with  tears  "  (verses  20  and  31).  He  was 
not  only  the  tent-maker,  not  only  the  logical  and  brilliant 
Christian  apologist,  but  the  pastor  of  the  flock  teaching 
with  tears,  admonishing;  watching,  with  jealous  and 
zealous  love,  the  growth  of  those  who  bore  the  name  of 
Christ. 

This  teaching  in  the  school  of  Tyrannus  "  continued 
for  the  space  of  two  years ;  so  that  all  they  which  dwelt 
in  Asia  " — that  is  Proconsular  Asia — "  heard  the  word  of 
the  Lord,  both  Jews  and  Greeks."  That  is  one  of  those 
verses  that  may  be  read  and  passed  over ;  but  it  is  a  win- 
dow, through  which  we  see  Proconsular  Asia,  those  seven 
churches  referred  to  in  the  book  of  Revelation,  to  which 
the  final  epistles  of  the  risen  and  glorified  Lord  were 

[  450  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  19:8-20] 

sent,  which  were  scattered  through  that  region.  Paul 
then  at  Ephesus  was  making  tents,  conducting  a  great 
course  of  apologetics  for  Christianity,  fulfilling  the  func- 
tion of  the  pastor,  watching  over  the  flock,  admonishing 
with  tears,  and  teaching  from  house  to  house;  but  he 
was  also  directing  a  great  missionary  enterprise  to  that 
whole  region  round  about  Ephesus.  In  all  probability  it 
was  here  in  Ephesus  that  Philemon  was  brought  to  Christ, 
and  sent  to  Colosse  for  the  formation  of  that  Church. 
Probably  also  it  was  at  Ephesus  that  mighty  fellow- 
worker  with  Paul  in  prayer,  Epaphras,  who  watched  over 
another  Church,  was  first  brought  to  Christ.  The  mighty 
apostle  himself  perchance  sometimes  journeyed  from 
Ephesus,  and  was  in  perils  from  robbers  there. 

Once  again  in  the  second  Corinthian  letter,  in  chapter 
eleven,  there  are  certain  words,  written  almost  certainly 
immediately  after  his  departure  from  Ephesus.  The  first 
had  been  written  while  he  was  in  Ephesus.  Arguing  con- 
cerning the  rights  of  his  apostleship,  and  the  dignity  of 
his  ministry,  and  producing  the  evidences  thereof,  he 
described  the  circumstances  through  which  he  passed : 

"In  labours  more  abundantly,  in  prisons  more  abun- 
dantly, in  stripes  above  measure,  in  deaths  oft.  Of  the 
Jews  five  times  received  I  forty  stripes  save  one.  Thrice 
was  I  beaten  with  rods,  once  was  I  stoned,  thrice  I  suf- 
fered shipwreck,  a  night  and  a  day  have  I  been  in  the 
deep;  in  journeyings  often,  in  perils  of  rivers,  in  perils 
of  robbers,  in  perils  from  my  countrymen,  in  perils  from 
the  Gentiles,  in  perils  in  the  city,  in  perils  in  the  wilder- 
ness, in  perils  in  the  sea,  in  perils  among  false  brethren, 
in  labour  and  travail,  in  watchings  often,  in  hunger  and 
thirst,  in  fastings  often,  in  cold  and  nakedness.  Beside 
those  things  that  are  without,  there  is  that  which  presseth 
upon  me  daily,  anxiety  for  all  the  churches." 

Look  at  this  worker  in  Ephesus,  making  tents  to  supply 
his  own  needSj  a  great  Christian  apologist,  the  pastor 

1 451 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  19 : 8-20] 

of  the  flock,  admonishing  with  tears ;  the  evangelist,  going 
out  to  the  regions  beyond;  enabled  to  do  in  Proconsular 
Asia  what  he  had  been  forbidden  to  do  on  that  second 
missionary  journey;  planting  churches,  sending  out  the 
great  message ;  and  all  along  entering  into  the  fellowship 
of  the  suffering  of  his  Lord,  so  that  he  could  write  such 
a  passage  immediately  after  leaving  Ephesus  as  that  in 
the  second  Corinthian  letter. 

Think  of  this  man.  Think  of  the  forces  in  Ephesus 
against  him,  against  his  Gospel,  against  his  Lord.  Think 
of  that  great  heart  of  his,  bearing  the  burden  of  these 
churches  that  he  had  planted  in  the  earlier  missionary 
journeyings.  Think  of  the  poverty,  the  hunger,  the 
anxiety,  the  stress,  and  the  perils.  How  did  he  finish 
that  paragraph  in  the  Corinthian  letter?  "If  I  must 
needs  glory,  I  will  glory  of  the  things  that  concern  my 
weakness." 

"So  mightily  grew  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  and  pre- 
vailed." First  the  difficulties  of  the  city  creating  the  op- 
portunity; secondly,  one  man  absolutely  at  the  disposal 
of  his  Master,  so  consecrated  to  Him  that  of  determina- 
tion he  would  be  independent  of  the  suspicion  that  his 
business  was  the  business  of  financial  gain,  and  laboured 
through  the  long  dark  hours  of  night  that  he  might  be 
free  during  the  day  to  argue  and  reason  concerning  this 
Kingdom  of  God;  and  to  see  his  people,  and  admonish 
them  with  tears ;  and  all  the  time  the  care  of  the  churches 
on  his  heart;  news  reaching  him  of  those  untrue  and 
needing  rebuke;  letters  to  be  written  out  of  great  pas- 
sionate longings;  one  man  in  the  city.  "So  mightily 
grew  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  and  prevailed." 

We  now  turn  to  that  which  is  the  supreme  matter  of 
interest,  the  spiritual  conflict  in  Ephesus.  And  first  let 
us  observe  the  opposing  forces.  On  one  hand  there  was 
the  presence  and  prevalence  of  the  occult  in  Ephesus,  of 
magic,  and  of  sorcery.  We  are  inclined,  in  the  presence 
of  magic  and  sorcery  to-day — for  we  have  not  outgrown 

[  452  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  19:8-20] 

these  things — to  smile,  and  to  speak  of  them  as  mere 
chicanery.  The  New  Testament  never  treats  them  in 
that  way.  In  the  presence  of  this  magic  in  Ephesus,  and 
in  other  places,  of  these  dark  arts,  the  New  Testament 
never  speaks  of  them  as  trickery,  as  though  they  were 
the  work  of  clever  rogues.  The  New  Testament  says  that 
these  things  are  Satanic,  and  always  attributes  them  to 
the  agency  and  activity  of  spiritual  personalities,  who 
are  possessed  and  mastered  by  evil.  This  is  a  matter  we 
need  very  carefully  to  face  and  consider  in  our  own 
days.  To  take  the  New  Testament  outlook,  all  this  is  not 
merely  the  trickery  of  rogues,  but  the  actual  activity  of 
demons.  Through  the  black  arts,  and  clever  manipula- 
tions, actual  messages  are  spoken  to  men,  and  actual  re- 
sults produced,  that  cannot  be  denied.  The  man  who  de- 
nies the  actuality  of  things  done  in  the  name  of  magic 
and  spiritism,  has  never  examined  them  carefully.  These 
were  the  forces  in  Ephesus,  the  degraded  and  demoralized 
principalities  and  powers,  the  rulers  of  darkness. 

On  the  other  hand,  in  Ephesus  with  the  coming  of 
Paul  there  came  the  opportunity  for  the  activity  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  and  for  the  proclamation  of  the  victorious 
name  of  the  Son  of  God.  This  one  man,  and  those  as- 
sociated with  him,  became  the  instruments — or  in  their 
corporate  capacity  as  a  church,  the  instrument — through 
which  the  Spirit  of  God  could  act,  as  against  the  spirits 
of  evil;  the  instrument  through  which  the  great  Name, 
the  victorious  Name  of  the  Christ  might  win  its  victories 
over  the  demoralizing  and  degrading  and  damnable  forces 
of  the  underworld  that  were  so  terribly  blighting  Ephesus 
itself. 

In  this  connection  notice  very  carefully  what  this  pas- 
sage declares.  In  verse  eleven  we  read :  "  God  wrought 
special  miracles  by  the  hands  of  Paul."  Here  is  a  dis- 
tinction not  to  be  lightly  passed  over.  Luke  did  not  say 
that  Paul  wrought  miracles  in  Ephesus,  but  that  God 
wrought  them  by  the  hands  of  Paul.  In  the  first  sermon 

[  453  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  19:8-20] 

preached  in  the  power  of  the  outpoured  Spirit,  which 
sermon  was  the  result  of  the  illumination  and  explana- 
tion of  Christ  through  the  Spirit  to  the  preacher,  Peter 
spoke  of  the  miracles,  and  said  quite  distinctly,  "Jesus 
of  Nazareth,  a  man  approved  of  God  unto  you  by  mighty 
works  and  wonders  and  signs,  which  God  did  by  Him  in 
the  midst  of  you."  This  man  did  not  work  miracles,  nor 
even  our  Lord  Himself,  in  the  loneliness  of  His  human 
nature;  they  were  both  instruments  through  whom  God 
was  able  to  perform  things  that  were  wonders  to  men, 
who  could  not  understand  the  higher  laws  by  which  they 
were  made  possible.  A  miracle  is  not  a  violation  of  law, 
but  an  activity  of  law  in  the  realm  of  laws  higher  than 
we  know,  and,  therefore,  full  of  surprise  to  men,  but  of 
no  surprise  to  God.  God  is  not  imprisoned  within  those 
few  laws  that  man  has  been  able  to  discover.  God  is 
bound  by  the  laws  of  His  own  universe,  but  we  do  not 
know  them  all;  and  consequently,  when  we  see  an  ac- 
tivity ^  within  the  realm  of  the  ultimate  and  final  laws,  we 
call  it  a  miracle,  and  so  it  is,  a  thing  of  wonder  and  sur- 
prise, but  not  a  violation  of  law,  not  a  setting  aside  of 
law. 

Take  the  instances  given  here.  It  is  affirmed  that  men 
took  from  the  person  of  this  man  Paul,  handkerchiefs 
and  aprons,  and  carrying  them  to  sick  people,  they  were 
healed  by  touching  them.  That  is  a  miracle  to  us;  but 
if  God  so  chose  through  this  man  Paul,  to  work  the  heal- 
ing wonder,  I  deny  that  it  was  incredible.  There  is  a 
humanness  in  all  this,  and  it  is  very  interesting.  They 
took  the  handkerchiefs  and  the  aprons.  "  Handker- 
chief "  is  a  most  misleading  word.  To  be  quite  literal  in 
our  translation,  they  took  the  sweat-cloths  and  aprons,  the 
two  things  that  Paul  made  use  of  as  he  worked.  Paul 
did  not  work  the  miracle.  God  wrought  the  miracle; 
and  if  God  shall  honour  the  faith  of  superstitious  people 
within  the  realm  of  a  magic  they  understand,  who  am 
I  that  I  should  question  God?  God  wrought  special 

[  454  ] 


THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  19:8-20] 

miracles,  like  the  very  magic  with  which  these  people 
were  acquainted;  and  by  the  working  revealed  the  fact 
that  the  magic  itself  was  of  spiritual  activity;  and  there- 
fore there  needed  to  be  no  acceptance  of  a  philosophy  be- 
cause its  propounders  wrought  wonders.  Evil  men  have 
often  wrought  wonders.  The  devil  can  work  miracles 
to  our  poor  blind  eyes ;  and  demons  have  astonished  men 
by  the  wonders  they  have  wrought.  The  miracle  is  not  a 
demonstration  that  the  spirit  producing  it  is  good.  It  is 
a  demonstration  of  spiritual  activity,  of  an  activity  in  a 
realm  beyond  and  outside  that  of  which  we  are  conscious. 

So  in  this  city  full  of  magic,  full  of  humours  and  sys- 
tems and  incantations  and  exorcisms,  God  wrought  spe- 
cial miracles ;  and  people,  taking  even  the  garments  Paul 
wore  in  his  work,  their  sick  were  cured,  and  evil  spirits 
were  cast  out.  God  condescended  to  work  not  on  a 
higher  plane,  but  on  a  lower  plane;  for  every  miracle 
wrought  in  the  material  is  a  miracle  wrought  on  a  lower 
plane  than  the  miracles  wrought  in  the  spiritual.  The 
greater  triumphs  were  not  the  healing  of  these  people, 
but  the  spiritual  wonders  wrought  in  those  who  were 
made  children  of  God,  and  brought  to  high  morality  of 
life.  Yet  for  the  capture  of  these  people,  and  their  con- 
vincing, it  was  shown  them  that  the  wonders  that  they 
associated  with  an  evil  form  of  religion,  could  be 
wrought,  and  were  wrought,  in  the  Name,  the  holy  Name, 
which  this  man  taught  and  preached. 

These  victories  created  a  crisis.  There  were  exorcists 
who  now  attempted  to  work  with  Paul's  method.  They 
had  used  other  charms  and  incantations,  but  now  they 
began  to  say,  "  I  adjure  you  by  Jesus  Whom  Paul  preach- 
eth."  The  result  was  immediate.  Victories  cannot  thus 
be  won  by  people  who  are  so  far  apart  from  the  One 
Who  wins  the  victory.  When  these  men  said,  "  /  adjure 
thee  by  Jesus  Whom  Paul  preacheth,"  in  a  moment  the 
answer  came  from  the  evil  spirit,  "  Jesus  I  recognize,  and 
Paul  I  know;  but  who  are  ye?  "  These  men  found  that 

I  455  J 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  19 : 8-20] 

they  could  not  traffic  with  the  name  of  Jesus.  That 
which  impressed  the  city,  and  filled  it  with  fear,  was  not 
the  wonders  wrought  by  Paul,  but  the  fact  that  when 
some  one  else  tried  to  work  with  his  tools  or  implements, 
or  Name,  they  were  defeated. 

Thus  through  the  victories  won  over  these  forces  of 
evil  by  the  Spirit  through  His  servant,  the  Name  was 
magnified,  and  the  Church  was  purified.  That  sacrificial 
fire,  that  burning  of  the  books  of  magic  was  not  the 
burning  of  books  belonging  to  the  Ephesians  still  remain- 
ing in  idolatry.  They  were  books  belonging  to  people  in 
the  Church.  They  came,  confessing  that  they  still  prac- 
tised the  black  arts,  and  still  had  traffic  with  these  un- 
holy things,  and  so  the  fire  was  lit. 

"So  mightily  grew  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  and  pre- 
vailed." That  was  the  impression  made  upon  Luke  as  he 
heard  or  knew  the  story  of  these  years  at  Ephesus,  and 
committed  it  to  those  brief  pictures.  The  word  "  might- 
ily" means  with  resistless  and  overpowering  strength. 
All  kinds  of  facts  and  forces  were  pressed  into  the  serv- 
ice of  the  Word,  and  made  tributary  to  the  carrying  on 
of  the  work;  the  synagogue  of  the  Jews,  or  the  school 
of  a  Greek  teacher;  special  miracles  wrought;  imitation 
mastered;  the  anger  of  demons.  All  these  things  were 
made  tributary  to  the  victory  of  the  Word,  and  led  up 
to  the  final  statement;  all  must  be  included  within  it; 
"  So  mightily  grew  the  Word  of  the  Lord." 

If  we  have  Paul's  vision,  Paul's  conception,  we  shall 
not  say,  There  are  many  adversaries,  therefore  we  must 
abandon  the  work;  but  rather  we  must  stay  until  Pente- 
cost, and  prosecute  His  great  enterprises,  "  Buying  up  the 
opportunity,  because  the  days  are  evil."  That  is  the 
spirit  of  this  story.  The  days  were  evil  days.  Evil  days 
created  the  opportunity  for  God-sent  men. 

If  we  would  see  the  Word  of  God  grow  mightily  and 
prevail  in  our  own  city,  we  need  to  ponder  this  story  care- 
fully, and  find  out  the  secrets  here  revealed ;  to  yield  our- 

[456] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  19:  21-41] 

selves  to  this  Spirit  of  God;  to  serve  this  same  Lord  with 
equal  lowliness  of  mind,  and  sincerity,  and  sacrificial 
earnestness,  as  did  this  man  Paul.  Then  the  Word  of 
God  to-day  as  ever,  will  grow  mightily,  and  prevail. 

Acts  19: 21-41 

The  chief  interest  of  this  passage  centres  in  the  uproar 
in  Ephesus.  The  first  brief  paragraph  contained  in  verses 
21  and  22  is  really  preparatory  to  all  that  remains  of  the 
book. 

In  these  verses  (21,  22)  we  have  a  declaration  of  the 
apostle's  purpose.  The  victories  in  Ephesus  did  not  sat- 
isfy the  heart  of  the  apostle.  From  the  midst  of  abun- 
dant and  victorious  labour,  he  looked  on  over  the  whit- 
ened fields  of  harvest,  until  his  gaze  rested  in  strong  de- 
sire upon  the  central  city  of  earthly  power,  and  he  said, 
"  I  must  also  see  Rome."  That  was  not  the  "  must "  of 
the  tourist.  It  was  the  "  must "  of  the  missionary.  This 
man  knew  perfectly  well  that  Rome  was  the  strategic 
centre  of  the  world,  that  from  Rome  great  highways  ran 
out  over  all  the  known  earth,  along  which  legions  trav- 
elled, and  merchantmen  wended  their  way.  He  felt  that 
if  that  centre  could  but  be  captured,  these  highways 
would  be  highways  for  the  Lord,  for  the  messengers  of 
the  Gospel  of  His  peace.  Therefore  he  said,  "  I  must 
also  see  Rome/' 

Notwithstanding  this  purpose  there  was  delay.  He  did 
not  immediately  set  out  to  Jerusalem.  He  sent  into 
Macedonia  "  two  of  them  that  ministered  unto  him,  Tim- 
othy and  Erastus,  and  he  himself  stayed  in  Asia  for 
a  while."  The  first  letter  to  the  Corinthians  was  written 
almost  certainly  during  this  time  of  tarrying  in  Ephesus, 
and  in  it  we  find  an  explanation  of  the  reason  of  the  de- 
lay. When  he  came  to  the  close  of  that  letter,  he  said, 
"  Now  concerning  the  collection  for  the  saints,  as  I  gave 
order  to  the  churches  of  Galatia,  so  also  do  ye  " ;  and  in 
the  fifth  verse  of  the  last  chapter  we  have  his  reference  to 

[457  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  19:21-41] 

this  same  purpose  which  Luke  chronicles :  "  I  will  come 
unto  you,  when  I  shall  have  passed  through  Macedonia ; 
for  I  do  pass  through  Macedonia."  He  "purposed  in 
the  spirit,  when  he  had  passed  through  Macedonia 
.  .  .  to  go  to  Jerusalem."  In  the  eighth  verse  of  the 
last  Corinthian  chapter  we  find  his  determination  to  tarry 
recorded.  His  purpose  was  to  go  through  Macedonia, 
but  he  said,  "  I  will  tarry  at  Ephesus  until  Pentecost "  ; 
and  the  reason  is  declared,  "  for  a  great  door  and  ef- 
fectual is  opened  unto  me,  and  there  are  many  adver- 
saries." He  did  not,  however,  tarry  in  Ephesus  till  Pente- 
cost, even  though  his  purpose  was  to  do  so,  for  in  the 
twentieth  chapter  and  the  sixteenth  verse  of  the  book  of 
the  Acts,  Luke  says  Paul  had  determined  to  sail  past 
Ephesus;  he  had  already  left  Ephesus — for  he  was 
hastening  to  be  in  Jerusalem  at  the  day  of  Pentecost. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  uproar  in  Ephesus  hastened  the 
departure  of  the  apostle.  He  did  not,  however,  refer  to 
that  uproar  when  he  said,  "  There  are  many  adversaries." 
As  a  matter  of  fact  the  uproar  in  Ephesus  ended  the 
opposition. 

This  uproar  was  occasioned  by  the  fact  that  it  was  the 
month  of  May.  It  was  the  time  of  the  great  gatherings 
throughout  Proconsular  Asia,  of  those  who  worshipped 
Diana,  or  Artemis.  The  city  was  filled  with  her  wor- 
shippers, and  the  uproar  was  occasioned  by  the  presence 
of  these  people  there.  Demetrius  gathered  the  craftsmen 
together,  and  told  them  what  this  man  Paul  was  doing. 
This  caused  the  disturbance,  but  the  end  was  peace, 
patronage,  and  protection  for  the  Christians.  Then  Paul 
left.  While  there  were  adversaries,  the  door  was  open, 
and  he  remained.  Thus  he  did  not  remain  until  Pente- 
cost in  Ephesus;  and  the  reason  of  his  going  was  the 
uproar  which  we  are  now  to  consider. 

The  month  of  May  these  people  called  the  Artemisian, 
because  it  was  the  month  devoted  to  these  great  religious 
assemblies  in  honour  of  Artemis ;  and  the  gatherings  were 

[458] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  19:21-41] 

described  as  the  Ephesia.  The  picture  is  full  of  life  and 
colour.  Vast  crowds  were  gathered  together  for  wor- 
ship. The  theatre  into  which  they  crowded,  taking  with 
them  the  two  travelling  companions  of  Paul,  was  capable 
of  seating  twenty  or  thirty  thousand  people.  These  facts 
help  us  to  understand  the  commotion  of  the  city. 

Our  interest,  however,  is  supremely  centred  in  the  reve- 
lation which  this  picture  gives  us  of  the  progress  of  the 
Word  of  God.  Three  matters  impress  us  as  we  read  the 
story:  first,  the  method  of  the  victories  of  the  Word  of 
God;  secondly,  the  nature  of  the  opposition  stirred  up 
against  the  Word  of  God,  of  which  Demetrius  was  the 
central  figure ;  and  finally,  and  principally,  the  real  peril 
to  the  Word  of  God  and  the  Christian  Church,  which 
was  that  of  the  action  of  the  town  clerk. 

First  then,  as  to  the  method  of  the  victories.  The  fact 
of  these  victories  was  testified  by  Demetrius,  who  gather- 
ing together  the  craftsmen,  said  to  them: 

"  Sirs,  ye  know  that  by  this  business  we  have  our 
wealth.  And  ye  see  and  hear,  that  not  alone  at  Ephesus, 
but  almost  throughout  all  Asia,  this  Paul  hath  persuaded 
and  turned  away  much  people,  saying  that  they  be  no 
gods,  which  are  made  with  hands :  and  not  only  is  there 
danger  that  this  our  trade  come  into  disrepute;  but  also 
that  the  temple  of  the  great  goddess  Diana  be  made  of  no 
account,  and  that  she  should  even  be  deposed  from  her 
magnificence,  whom  all  Asia  and  the  world  worshippeth." 

Thus  Demetrius  confessed  that  the  apostolic  preaching 
was  successful ;  that  wonderful  victories  were  being  won 
in  Ephesus  itself,  and  through  that  whole  region  of  Pro- 
consular Asia,  which  Paul  had  so  longed  to  evangelize, 
and  had  been  prevented,  when  driven  to  Troas. 

Now  let  us  notice  the  methods  of  these  victories.  How 
did  the  Word  of  the  Lord  grow  mightily  and  prevail? 
First,  by  the  presence  in  Ephesus  of  one  man,  wholly  and 
absolutely  at  the  disposal  of  his  Lord  and  Master.  In 

[  459  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  19:21-41] 

Ephesus  he  bore  testimony,  he  preached,  he  taught.  He 
was  thus  at  the  disposal  of  his  Lord  and  Master  as  an 
instrument  for  the  working  of  remarkable  signs.  He  did 
not  attempt  to  work  miracles  in  Ephesus.  Christian 
apostles  never  did ;  but  they  were  at  the  disposal  of  God, 
when  He  desired  to  work  through  them  some  sign.  He 
was  in  fellowship  with  his  Lord  also  in  travail,  sharing 
with  Him  the  very  afflictions  that  make  the  Kingdom 
come.  As  he  told  the  elders  at  Miletus  subsequently,  he 
was  with  them  night  and  day  in  tears,  and  in  much  afflic- 
tion, for  the  Word  of  his  God. 

The  Word  of  God  grew  mightily,  moreover,  because 
God  wrought  special  signs  suited  to  special  needs.  Do 
not  let  us  imagine  that  these  signs  are  needed  to-day.  If 
they  are  not  present,  it  is  because  they  are  not  needed. 
God  never  works  signs  in  order  to  make  His  apostles 
notorious  or  popular;  but  only  where  peculiar  circum- 
stances demand  such  signs. 

And  again,  the  Word  of  God  grew  and  prevailed 
through  a  purified  Church.  The  Church  brought  its  se- 
cret books,  and  burned  them,  and  then  the  Word  grew 
and  prevailed. 

Observe  then  the  nature  of  that  growth.  The  victories 
won  were  the  victories  of  a  positive,  acting  as  a  nega- 
tive. When  the  town  clerk  presently  dealt  with  the 
matter,  he  said, — and  it  was  merely  the  statement  of  a 
common  truth, — these  men  are  no  "  robbers  of  temples, 
nor  blasphemers  of  our  goddess."  These  men  had  not 
broken  into  the  temples  and  robbed  them  of  wealth. 
These  men  had  held  no  meetings  for  the  denunciation  of 
the  worship  of  Diana.  How  then  came  the  victories? 
Why  did  Demetrius  call  together  his  craftsmen?  Be- 
cause the  sale  of  the  silver  shrines  of  Diana  was  falling 
off.  How  was  that  to  be  accounted  for?  The  springs 
of  character  affected  the  streams  of  conduct.  Not  by 
denouncing  shrines,  but  by  so  changing  men  and  women 
that  they  did  not  need  shrines  to  Diana,  thus  the  victory 

[460  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  19 : 21-41] 

was  won.  Men  and  women  in  Ephesus,  who  were  them- 
selves shrines  of  Deity,  did  not  need  the  shrines  to  Diana. 
Men  and  women  in  Ephesus,  who  knew  fellowship  with 
God  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  certainly  would  not  spend  their 
money  upon  these  silver  shrines.  They  had  no  time  to 
abuse  the  silver  shrines ;  no  time  to  make  a  public  protest. 
A  great  phrase  of  Dr.  Chalmers  describes  their  condition, 
"  the  expulsive  power  of  a  new  affection."  This  is  the 
one  way  of  victory,  if  the  Church  is  to  win  real  victories. 
They  are  won  by  the  new,  devitalizing  the  old;  by  the 
rising  of  a  new  life  within  men  and  women,  which 
triumphs  over  all  other  desires.  In  America  there  grows 
a  wonderful  tree  called  the  scrub-oak.  Travelling 
through  the  country  in  the  springtime,  we  see  this  scrub- 
oak,  covered  still  with  the  leaves  of  last  year.  Every 
other  tree  is  stripped  by  the  tempest  of  the  autumn  and 
winter.  But  gradually,  in  the  springtime,  the  leaves  drop 
off  the  scrub-oak,  by  the  rising  of  the  new  life.  That 
which  the  tempest  from  without  never  accomplishes,  the 
rising  life  within  does  accomplish.  The  rustling  of  the 
leaves  seems  to  laugh  at  the  storm,  but  when  the  new 
life  rises,  then  quietly  and  surely  they  drop  off.  That 
was  the  victory  in  Ephesus.  There  was  no  demonstration 
against  idolatry,  but  realization  of  fellowship  with  God. 
All  the  forces  of  the  old  were  devitalized  by  the  rising 
forces  of  the  new. 

Mark  the  rapidity  of  the  growth.  The  business  of 
Ephesus  was  affected;  the  religion  of  Ephesus  was  in 
danger;  and  the  whole  of  Proconsular  Asia  was  in- 
fluenced. To  repeat  the  words  of  the  town  clerk,  these 
men  were  neither  "  robbers  of  temples,  nor  blasphemers 
of  our  goddess,"  and  yet  the  traffic  in  shrines  suffered, 
and  the  splendour  and  magnificence  of  the  worship  of 
Artemis  was  threatened.  Thus  by  the  fact  of  the  new 
life  of  individual  men,  the  old  and  hoary  forces  of  evil 
were  threatened. 

In  the  second  place  notice  the  nature  of  the  opposi- 

[461 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  19:21-41] 

tion.  Here,  one  of  the  most  patent  things  is  the  philoso- 
phy running  through  the  speech  of  Demetrius.  The  pri- 
mary inspiration  of  the  opposition  of  Demetrius  was 
that  vested  interests  were  suffering.  No  attack  had  been 
made  upon  the  craft,  but  the  receipts  were  less.  That  is 
the  whole  story.  There  was  a  secondary  reason,  which 
must  be  given  for  the  sake  of  decency  and  appearance, 
that  religion  was  being  threatened.  Demetrius  in  that 
private  meeting  of  the  craftsmen,  said  to  them : 

"  Sirs,  ye  know  that  by  this  business  we  have  our  wealth. 
And  ye  see  and  hear,  that  not  alone  at  Ephesus,  but  al- 
most throughout  all  Asia,  this  Paul  hath  persuaded  and 
turned  away  much  people,  saying  that  they  be  no  gods, 
which  are  made  with  hands :  and  not  only  is  there  danger 
that  this  our  trade  come  into  disrepute ;  but  also  that  the 
temple  of  the  great  goddess  Diana  be  made  of  no  ac- 
count." 

What  an  unconscious  revelation  was  this  speech  of  the 
inspiration  of  this  opposition.  We  are  reminded  of  that 
story  in  the  Gospels,  of  how  Jesus  landed  upon  the  shore 
of  the  country  of  the  Gadarenes.  There  He  met  two 
men  possessed  with  demons,  and  He  flung  the  demons 
out,  and  made  the  men  free.  The  men  who  saw  it,  went 
up  into  the  city,  "  and  they  told  everything,  and 
.  .  ."!  Can  "everything,  and"  be  told?  They  told 
everything,  and  what  had  happened  to  the  men.  But 
surely  the  "  everything "  should  be  the  healing  of  the 
men,  and  not  what  happened  to  the  pigs  ?  To  these  men, 
the  "  everything "  was  that  the  swine  were  destroyed. 
The  "  and  "  did  not  much  matter ;  two  men  were  healed ! 
That  was  the  case  at  Ephesus ;  "  everything,"  "  our 
trade  "  was  in  danger ;  and  the  "  and  "  was  that  our  re- 
ligion also  is  threatened. 

If  that  was  the  inspiration  of  this  opposition,  notice  its 
expression.  First  there  was  a  conference,  a  meeting  of 
the  craftsmen ;  secondly,  there  was  confusion,  "  some 

[  462  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  AP'OSTLES 

[Acts  19:21-41] 

cried  one  thing,  and  some  another."  Surely  there  is  a 
touch  of  satire  in  Luke's  account,  "  The  more  part  knew 
not  wherefore  they  were  come  together." 

Alexander — I  wonder  if  he  was  the  coppersmith — 
wanted  to  be  heard,  in  order  to  declare  that  they  had  no 
part  in  this  propaganda,  but  he  could  not  be  heard,  and 
the  whole  gathering  ended  in  clamour,  as  for  two  hours 
the  mob  howled,  "  Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephesians." 
That  kind  of  opposition  is  absolutely  futile.  A  spiritual 
force  can  never  thus  be  destroyed.  That  confusion  in 
the  great  theatre  was  by  the  overruling  of  God,  so  that 
some  said  one  thing,  and  some  another;  and  the  great 
majority  did  not  know  why  they  had  come  together;  and 
the  only  unanimity  was  the  unanimity  of  noise.  One 
lie,  multiplied  by  ten  thousand  voices,  never  becomes  a 
truth.  The  Church  of  God  in  Ephesus  had  no  reason  to 
tremble  on  account  of  that  wild  confusion.  That  kind 
of  opposition  never  halts  the  march  of  the  Church  of 
God  for  half  an  hour.  Its  peril  begins  when  the  town 
clerk  makes  it  cease. 

The  town  clerk  as  a  politician  was  wholly  and  abso- 
lutely admirable.  I  have  no  quarrel  with  him.  I  like  to 
listen  to  his  speech,  to  his  sarcastic  rebuke  of  this  shout- 
ing crowd.  In  effect  he  said,  What  you  say  is  quite  true, 
Diana  is  great,  and  therefore  there  is  no  need  to  shout! 
When  men  get  together  and  shout  aloud  the  same  thing, 
we  may  be  perfectly  sure  that  there  is  some  doubt  about 
the  matter. 

I  wonder  how  much  this  man  understood  the  force  of 
what  he  said :  "  These  men  are  neither  robbers  of  tem- 
ples, nor  blasphemers  of  our  goddess."  I  do  not  know 
whether  he  saw  further  than  that;  but  the  deduction 
from  it  was  that  not  these  men,  but  the  spiritual  forces 
were  going  to  win,  and  all  the  shouting  could  not  prevent 
it,  He  showed  to  the  mob  the  true  method  of  dealing 
with  the  difficulty  by  reminding  them  of  the  two  courses 
open  to  them.  If  it  be  a  trade  dispute,  take  it  to  the 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  19:21-41] 

coGrts ;  if  it  be  a  town  matter,  a  municipal  matter,  take  it 
to  the  ecclesia,  that  assembly  of  free  men,  which  have  to 
deal  with  all  such  matters.  He  reminded  them  also  that 
they  were  in  danger.  Though  Ephesus  was  free,  it  might 
lose  its  freedom  unless  they  could  give  a  satisfactory  ac- 
count of  this  riot.  He  was  a  wholly  admirable  town 
clerk. 

But  look  at  him  again,  look  at  his  influence,  look  at 
the  thing  he  did,  which  he  did  not  intend  to  do,  for  I  do 
not  believe  there  was  any  subtlety  in  this  man.  He  agreed 
with,  and  confirmed,  the  superstition  of  the  people.  He 
took  Christianity  under  his  patronage,  not  because  he 
admired  Christianity,  but  in  the  interest  of  civic  quiet. 
Speaking  from  the  standpoint  of  Ephesus,  I  think  he  was 
quite  justified.  Speaking  also  from  the  standpoint  of  the 
town  clerk,  and  of  the  recorder,  of  the  one  responsible 
for  the  affairs  of  the  city,  I  think  he  was  quite  justified. 
He  knew  nothing  about  Paul  or  Christianity ;  but  he  knew 
something  about  Ephesus,  and  the  fact  that  it  was  in 
peril;  and  the  only  thing  to  do  was  to  save  these  men 
from  the  howling  mob,  and  drive  them  back  into  quiet- 
ness and  satisfaction  with  their  own  religion.  Quiet  in 
Ephesus  was  everything  to  him,  but  in  the  moment  in 
which  these  Christian  men  passed  under  the  protection 
of  the  town  clerk,  they  were  in  more  danger  than  when 
Demetrius'  mob  was  howling  about  them. 

The  last  glimpse  of  this  Ephesian  Church  in  the  Bible 
is  in  Revelation :  "  I  have  this  against  thee,  that  thou 
didst  leave  thy  first  love  " ;  and  the  loss  of  first  love  al- 
most invariably  in  the  history  of  the  Church,  follows 
upon  protection  and  patronage  of  the  Church,  from 
without.  What  of  Ephesus  to-day? 

Again  to  quote  Farrar: 

"  Its  candlestick  has  been  for  centuries  removed  out 
of  his  place;  the  squalid  Mohammedan  village  which  is 
nearest  to  its  site  does  not  count  one  Christian  in  its 

464 1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  19:21-41] 

insignificant  population ;  its  temple  is  a  mass  of  shapeless 
ruins;  its  harbour  is  a  reedy  pool;  the  bittern  booms 
amid  its  pestilent  and  stagnant  marshes ;  and  malaria  and 
oblivion  reign  supreme  over  the  place  where  the  wealth 
of  ancient  civilization  gathered  around  the  scenes  of  its 
grossest  superstitions  and  its  most  degraded  sins." 

This  is  an  appalling  picture  penned  by  one  who  had 
looked  upon  the  scene ;  the  picture  of  a  perished  city,  and 
a  perished  Church ;  of  a  city  that  could  not  be  saved  by 
the  Church  because  the  Church's  love  for  its  Lord  had 
passed  under  the  cooling  process  of  the  city's  protection, 
and  patronage.  The  English  Church  was  far  safer  in  the 
days  of  Marian  persecution  than  in  the  days  of  Eliza- 
bethan patronage.  Independency  was  not  nearly  so  much 
in  peril  when  the  Fleet  Prison  existed  as  it  is  now  with 
the  Memorial  Hall  standing  on  the  site  thereof.  Method- 
ism was  not  nearly  so  much  in  danger  when  it  was  the 
scorn  of  Sidney  Smith  and  that  ilk,  as  it  is  when  its 
presidents  are  received  at  Court.  The  Salvation  Army 
was  not  in  half  as  much  danger  when  an  Eastbourne  mob 
pelted  its  missionaries  with  stones,  as  when  her  General 
is  smiled  upon  by  a  king.  I  do  not  say  these  things  are 
wrong.  I  do  not  criticize  King  or  Court  for  receiving; 
but  I  do  say  that  the  Church  of  God  is  in  her  gravest 
peril  when  a  town  clerk  protects  her.  Let  us  be  very 
careful  that  we  do  not  waste  our  energy,  and  miss  the 
meaning  of  our  high  calling,  by  any  rejoicing  in  the 
patronage  of  the  world.  It  is  by  the  friction  of  persecu- 
tion that  the  fine  gold  of  character  is  made  to  flash  and 
gleam  with  glory.  The  Church  persecuted  has  always 
been  the  Church  pure,  and  therefore  the  Church  power- 
ful. The  Church  patronized  has  always  been  the  Church 
in  peril,  and  very  often  the  Church  paralyzed.  I  am 
not  afraid  of  Demetrius.  Let  him  have  his  meeting  of 
craftsmen,  and  let  them  in  their  unutterable  folly  shout 
a  lie  twenty-five  thousand  strong.  The  truth  goes  quietly 

1 465  j 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  20] 

on.    But  when  the  town  clerk  begins  to  take  care  of  us, 
then  God  deliver  us  from  the  peril. 

Acts  20 

The  keynote  to  this  chapter  is  found  in  the  previous 
one,  "  Now  after  these  things  were  ended,  Paul  purposed 
in  the  spirit,  when  he  had  passed  through  Macedonia  and 
Achaia,  to  go  to  Jerusalem,  saying,  After  I  have  been 
there,  I  must  also  see  Rome  "  (19:  21).  Before  the  last 
journey  toward  Rome  was  commenced,  the  apostle  evi- 
dently felt  that  his  work  in  that  district  was  accomplished. 
In  this  chapter  we  have  a  very  condensed  account  of  the 
final  apostolic  visits  through  this  particular  region.  It 
has  been  said  most  accurately  and  helpfully  that : 

"  A  divine  history  is  no  mere  account  of  things  in  de- 
tail ;  it  is  much  more  than  this ;  it  is  a  specially  arranged 
extract  from  the  whole,  to  prevent  our  losing  ourselves 
in  the  many  details,  and  to  guide  us  to  a  proper  estimate 
of  the  whole ;  it  is  at  once  a  history,  and  a  comment  which 
the  history  itself  furnishes." 

We  have  here  then,  a  page  of  selections,  made  from 
the  whole  of  the  final  things  in  the  ministry  of  Paul  in 
Macedonia  and  Achaia ;  and  the  history  becomes  a  com- 
ment. This  chapter  briefly  records  an  itinerary,  and 
deals  principally  with  two  events  in  that  itinerary.  It 
gives  the  story  of  that  last,  strange,  contradictory,  and 
changing  journey  of  Paul  ere  he  left  this  region;  and  it 
describes  two  events:  first  the  meeting  of  the  disciples 
at  Troas  on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  for  the  breaking  of 
bread,  and  to  listen  to  apostolic  testimony ;  and  secondly, 
that  very  remarkable  gathering  of  the  elders  of  the 
Ephesian  Church  at  Miletus,  when  Paul  delivered  to 
them  his  final  charge.  The  facts  of  the  itinerary  may 
be  briefly  dismissed.  We  shall  then  attempt  to  consider 
the  comment  which  it  makes. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  20] 

After  the  uproar  at  Ephesus,  the  apostle  took  leave  of 
the  disciples,  exhorted  them,  and  departed  to  go  into 
Macedonia.  He  moved  back  from  Ephesus,  through 
Macedonia,  by  sea  to  Philippi,  on  to  Corinth  and  Bercea; 
and  the  only  record  here  is  a  brief  statement,  that  he  gave 
the  disciples  much  exhortation.  Between  this  second  visit 
to  Macedonia  and  the  previous  one,  he  had  written  the 
two  Thessalonian  letters.  The  word  made  use  of.  here  is 
suggestive  and  helpful,  "  exhortation."  It  comes  from 
the  root  of  Paraclete.  The  two  thoughts  suggested  are 
those  of  advocacy  and  comfort.  In  the  cities  where 
Paul  had  been  much  persecuted,  and  where  much  bless- 
ing had  also  resulted,  he  defended  the  cause  of  his  Mas- 
ter, and  comforted  these  people  who,  in  all  probability, 
were  now  suffering  persecution,  as  he  had  done. 

Luke  then  records  the  fact  that  he  went  into  Greece, 
and  stayed  there  three  months.  These  three  months  were 
spent  on  the  old  battle  ground,  amid  the  old  difficulties; 
but  his  work  was  principally  that  of  building  up  those 
who  had  found  the  faith. 

Again  the  principle  of  hindrance,  so  often  manifest  in 
the  history  of  Paul,  is  seen  at  work.  As  he  was  about 
to  set  sail  for  Syria,  he  discovered  a  plot;  so  he  went 
back  again  through  Macedonia.  A  company  of  disciples, 
gathered  from  Bercea,  Thessalonica,  and  Derbe,  hastened 
before  him,  in  order  to  accompany  him  into  Syria,  and 
they  waited  for  him  at  Troas.  He  sailed  from  Philippi, 
and  was  five  days  going  to  Troas,  Luke  accompanying 
him.  One  can  imagine  the  communion  of  those  days. 
In  Troas  he  lingered  for  seven  days,  and  there  took  place 
that  first  day  meeting  for  the  breaking  of  bread,  and 
apostolic  instruction.  Then  again  moving  away  from 
Troas,  the  band  of  disciples  went  by  sea  to  Assos,  and 
Paul  went  alone  on  foot,  twenty  miles,  by  land.  This 
man,  with  all  the  labours  of  the  past  on  his  heart,  with 
all  the  turmoil  and  strife  of  the  present,  with  all  the 
expectation  and  longing  of  the  future,  walked  those 

[467] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  20] 

twenty  miles  in  quiet  meditation.  At  Assos  he  joined  the 
little  band,  and  they  sailed  again  past  Mitylene,  Chios, 
and  Samos,  until  they  came  to  Miletus ;  and  there  he  sent 
thirty  miles  for  the  elders  of  the  Church  at  Ephesus,  to 
come  down  to  meet  him. 

What  then  is  the  comment  of  that  page?  I  notice  two 
things:  the  apostle's  rest;  and  the  apostle's  restlessness. 
What  were  the  secrets  of  the  restfulness  of  this  man? 
He  was  a  man,  mastered  by  Christ,  having  no  motive 
other  than  that  of  such  mastery,  having  cut  himself  com- 
pletely adrift  from  every  other  tie  that  binds  the  human 
heart.  We  follow  him  on  the  sea  to  Philippi,  and  back 
again  to  Thessalonica,  Bercea,  down  into  Greece,  sojourn 
there  in  imagination  with  him  for  three  months;  again 
cross  Macedonia,  again  sail  across  the  sea  with  Luke  to 
Troas,  walking  those  twenty  miles,  and  the  whole  story 
may  be  written  thus,  "  To  me,  to  live  is  Christ." 

"  Christ !    I  am  Christ's !  and  let  the  name  suffice  you, 
Aye,  for  me  too  He  greatly  hath  sufficed : 

*•••*••• 

Christ  is  the  end,  for  Christ  was  the  beginning, 
Christ  the  beginning,  for  the  end  is  Christ." 

Consequently  the  man  mastered  by  Christ,,  was  master 
of  his  own  circumstances.  All  the  way  he  pressed  every 
circumstance,  whether  of  adversity  or  prosperity,  into  the 
service  which  was  the  result  of  the  passion  of  his  heart. 
On  the  sea,  and  on  the  land,  in  the  assemblies  and  by 
himself,  in  the  midst  of  hostility  in  Greece,  in  the  midst 
of  loving  fellowship  in  Troas,  I  hear  him  saying,  "  I 
know  how  to  be  abased,  and  I  know  also  how  to  abound." 
Being  himself  confirmed  in  his  faith,  he  confirmed  the 
faith  of  other  people.  He  was  a  man  characterized  by; 
abounding  restfulness  of  spirit. 

And  yet  there  was  manifest  a  constant  restlessness. 
Devoted  to  the  enterprises  of  his  Master,  he  was  never 
able  to  tarry  long.  He  was  sensitive  to  the  immediate 

[468] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  20] 

need  wherever  he  went.  Every  movement  in  the  local 
atmosphere  touched  him,  and  he  was  ever  eager  to  min- 
ister to  it.  Journeying  over  that  country  where  he  had 
been  before,  the  lure  of  the  distant  places  was  ever  in 
his  heart.  He  was  making  steady  progress,  doing  the  im- 
mediate work  thoroughly,  and  yet  all  the  while  the 
clarion  cry  rang  in  his  soul,  "  I  must  also  see  Rome." 
"  Regions  beyond,"  was  his  perpetual  watchword ;  the 
uttermost  part  of  the  earth,  marked  the  limit  of  his  en- 
deavour. Restful  in  Christ;  he  was  yet  restless  in  his 
devotion  to  the  service  of  Christ.  To  have  life's  fitful 
fever  dismissed  by  the  healing  touch  of  the  Master's 
hand,  is  at  the  same  moment  to  feel  the  thrill  and  the 
throb  of  His  compassion  driving  us  forevermore  to  new 
endeavour. 

We  now  turn  to  consider  the  two  events.  The  gather- 
ing in  Troas  is  very  suggestive.  Observe  its  composi- 
tion : — Paul,  with  a  little  company  of  friends,  names  that 
mean  so  little  to  us,  "  Sopater  of  Bercea,  the  son  of 
Pyrrhus;  and  of  the  Thessalonians,  Aristarchus  and 
Secundus;  and  Gaius  of  Derbe,  and  Timothy," — the 
fruitful  reward  of  the  stones  in  Lystra ; — "  and  of  Asia, 
Tychicus  and  Trophimus."  Luke  was  there  also ;  and  all 
these  were  assembled  with  the  little  band  of  disciples  in 
Troas.  The  occupation  of  the  gathering  was  that  of  the 
breaking  of  bread.  They  sat  around  the  board,  with  the 
memorials  of  His  death,  the  bread  and  the  fruit  of  the 
vine.  Over  that  board  the  apostolic  teaching  was  given. 
The  minutes  sped  on,  and  the  hours  swiftly  passed,  until 
morning  broke.  It  is  wonderful  how  people  forget  time 
when  they  are  really  gathered  about  the  living  presence 
of  the  Lord. 

Then  there  is  the  incident  of  Eutychus,  which  was  a 
perfectly  natural  happening.  A  sleepy  lad  fell  from  the 
window  and  was  killed.  Then  followed  something  which 
we  describe  as  supernatural,  another  manifestation  of 
power  which  was  a  perfectly  natural  action  by  the  Lord 

[  469 1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES" 

[Acts  20]  ..; 

of  life.  Like  all  the  Lord's  raisings  from  the  dead,  It 
was  not  done  for  the  sake  of  the  lad,  but  for  the  sake 
of  his  friends :  "  They  were  not  a  little  comforted." 

Look  now  at  the  gathering  at  Miletus.  Notice  its  na- 
ture. It  was  specially  convened  by  Paul.  It  was  com- 
posed, not  of  all  the  members  of  the  Church  in  Ephesus, 
but  of  those  in  oversight;  and  it  was  gathered  in  the  in- 
terests of  the  Ephesian  Church.  This  man  who  had 
been  an  apostle  to  the  Gentiles,  through  whose  ministry 
the  Gentile  churches  had  been  formed,  gathered  about 
him  the  elders  of  one  Church,  in  many  senses  a  typical 
Church  of  the  New  Testament,  and  delivered  his  final 
charge  to  them.  Paul  was  keenly  sensitive  to  the  perils 
that  threatened  the  Church,  to  the  resources  which  were 
at  its  disposal,  and  to  the  true  method  of  its  administra- 
tion. In  his  address  he  was  personal,  affectionate,  direct. 
The  charge  needs  no  exposition.  Its  chief  value  for  us 
is  found  in  its  revelation  of  matters  concerning  the 
Church  itself. 

Paul  revealed  the  central  fact  concerning  the  Church 
of  God ;  it  is  "  The  Church  of  God  which  He  purchased 
with  His  own  blood"  (verse  28).  He  also  revealed  the 
all-sufficient  provision  for  that  Church :  "  I  commend  you 
to  God,  and  to  the  word  of  His  grace1'  (verse  32).  He 
further  stated  the  true  method  of  the  administration  of 
the  Church :  "  The  Holy  Spirit  hath  made  you  bishops,  to 
feed  the  Church  of  God."  "  Take  heed  unto  yourselves, 
and  to  all  the  flock"  (verse  28).  He  also  revealed  the 
perils  of  the  Church ;  from  without,  "  I  know  that  after 
my  departing  grievous  wolves  shall  enter  in  among  you, 
not  sparing  the  flock "  (verse  29)  ;  and  from  within, 
"  From  among  your  own  selves  shall  men  arise,  speaking 
perverse  things"  (verse  30). 

That  central  declaration  concerning  the  Church  of  God 
is  a  most  remarkable  one :  "  The  Church  of  God,  which 
He  purchased  with  His  own  blood."  The  Church  is  the 
ecclesia,  the  called-out  company  of  people.  In  what  does 

[  470  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  20] 

the  difference  or  separation  of  its  members  consist? 
They  are  purchased.  We  must  not  read  into  the  word 
"  purchased  "  the  quantities  of  a  commercial  transaction. 
Wherever  a  reference  is  made  in  the  Bible  to  the  pur- 
chase of  a  soul,  or  the  purchase  of  a  Church,  we  must 
turn  to  other  figures  of  speech,  for  the  correction  of  that 
figure  of  speech  in  our  language,  or  we  shall  misunder- 
stand the  thought  suggested.  It  does  not  mean  the  ran- 
somed people  are  purchased  by  God  from  any  one.  In 
the  apostolic  writings  the  word  only  occurs  half  a  dozen 
times,  and  it  literally  means,  to  make  around  oneself. 
That  is  to  us  an  awkward  phrase,  a  peculiarly  Greek 
method  of  expression.  We  may  approach  its  significance 
by  other  words  or  phrases,  as  for  instance  He  acquired, 
or  He  made  His  own.  It  is,  however,  a  word  which  is 
always  used  of  a  single  act,  and  never  of  a  continual 
practice.  The  reference  then  is  to  some  act  by  which 
God  acquired  the  Church  for  Himself. 

But  now  we  come  to  the  word  of  mystery.  "  The 
Church  of  God,  which  He  purchased  with  His  own 
blood  " — or,  a  little  more  literally, — "  with  blood  that  was 
His  own."  I  admit  at  once  the  difficulty  of  the  passage. 
Scholarly  expositors  have  suggested  that  here,  at  some 
time,  a  word  has  been  omitted  from  the  text;  and  that 
what  the  apostle  really  wrote  was,  "  The  Church  of  God, 
which  He  purchased  with  the  blood  of  His  own  Son." 
That,  however,  is  pure  speculation.  If  we  leave  it  as  it 
is,  it  means  "purchased  with  God's  own  blood."  Some 
of  the  fathers  did  not  hesitate  to  speak  of  the  blood  of 
God,  in  this  connection.  To  think  of  this  materially  is 
to  be  faced  with  difficulty ;  but  if  we  remember  that  which 
is  supreme  to  our  understanding  of  the  mystery  of  re- 
demption, that  God  was  in  Christ,  and  that  there  can  be 
no  attempt  to  divide  or  separate  between  those  two  facts 
in  the  one  Being,  then  we  may  understand  how  at  this 
point  the  apostle  made  use  of  the  most  daring  word  in  all 
his  writing;  the  Church,  redeemed  by  His  own  blood, 

[  471  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  20] 

that  is  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  in  that  sense,  the  very 
blood  of  God. 

Yet  is  there  not  an  intended  contrast  to  an  idea  found 
in  the  Hebrew  letter  ?  The  writer  of  that  letter,  speaking 
of  the  imperfect  priesthood  of  the  past,  declared  that  the 
high  priest  entered  into  the  holy  place  "  with  blood  not  his 
own,"  a  most  remarkable  expression.  Here,  on  the  con- 
trary, is  a  people,  redeemed  by  a  Priest,  Who  has  acquired 
them  with  blood  which  is  His  own.  The  suggestiveness 
of  that  merging  of  Deity  and  humanity  in  the  Person  of 
Christ  is  very  important.  We  cannot  consider  the  death 
of  Christ  as  the  death  of  an  ordinary  man,  because  the 
Person  is  so  entirely  different,  that  His  very  blood  is 
spoken  of  here  as  being  that  of  God  Himself.  In  the 
history  of  the  race  God  came  into  such  relationship  with 
humanity  that  it  was  possible  for  Him  to  bear,  in  the 
Person  of  His  Son,  all  the  issue  of  the  sin  and  failure  of 
a  race ;  and  so  to  ransom,  to  purchase,  to  acquire  a  peo- 
ple for  Himself.  The  Christian  Church  is  not  a  company 
of  people  admiring  the  ideal  of  Jesus,  or  accepting  the 
beauty  of  His  ethical  teaching;  and  attempting  to  obey  it. 
The  Christian  Church  is  the  society  of  those  who  are 
purchased  by  God,  acquired  by  His  own  blood.  The 
mystery  and  the  marvel  and  the  might  of  God  being  in 
Christ,  whereby  He  did  reconcile  us  unto  Himself,  is  the 
foundation  truth  concerning  the  Christian  Church. 

The  all-sufficient  provision  for  the  life  of  the  Church 
is  expressed  in  the  words :  "  I  commend  you  to  God,  and 
to  the  word  of  His  grace."  There  is  no  word  in  the  New 
Testament  that  more  baffles  the  expositor  than  this  word 
"  grace."  Gather  up  the  occasions  in  which  it  is  found 
in  the  New  Testament,  and  read  them  in  their  context; 
and  then  sit  down  in  the  presence  of  them,  and  wonder, 
and  worship  f  The  grace  of  God  is  not  the  love  of  God 
only,  it  is  not  the  favour  of  God  alone;  it  is  the  love  of 
God  operating  through  passion,  in  order  to  the  perfecting 
of  those  upon  whom  that  love  is  set.  "  I  commend  you 

[  472  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  20] 

to  God,  and  to  the  word  of  His  grace."  You  are  His 
own,  purchased  with  His  own  blood.  There  are  grave 
and  grievous  perils  threatening  you,  wolves  from  without, 
men  of  your  own  selves  from  within,  but  these  are  your 
resources:  God,  and  the  word  of  His  grace!  These 
are  always  the  resources  of  the  Christian  Church. 

Then  we  have  a  gleam,  as  to  the  true  administration 
of  the  Church:  "The  Holy  Spirit  hath  made  you 
bishops."  That  is  a  fundamental  word.  The  Holy 
Spirit  selects  some  who  are  to  occupy  the  position  of  the 
bishop.  The  Holy  Spirit  does  not  treat  the  whole  as- 
sembly as  though  they  had  equal  rights  and  gifts  and 
privileges.  "The  Holy  Spirit  .  .  .  made  you 
bishops."  What  is  a  bishop?  Here  I  think  we  have  lost 
a  little  by  the  employment  of  the  word  "bishop."  For 
the  purpose  of  the  English  reader,  the  word  "  overseer  " 
is  preferable.  The  overseer  is  the  man  who  watches, 
oversees.  The  seeing  of  the  overseer  is  seeing  from  a 
distance;  that  is  seeing  of  the  whole  of  things,  rather 
than  a  part.  The  function  of  the  bishop  is  also  that  of 
feeding  the  flock  of  God. 

John  Milton  expressed  the  perils  threatening  the  bishop, 
when  he  described  their  failure  in  that  terrible  juxtaposi- 
tion of  two  words  that  seem  to  contradict  each  other: 


".    .    .    blind  mouths." 

That  is  the  tragedy  that  is  possible  to  every  minister  of 
the  Word ;  instead  of  seeing,  he  may  be  blind ;  instead  of 
feeding,  he  may  become  merely  a  mouth  desiring  to  be 
fed. 

The  perils  threatening  the  Church,  according  to  this 
passage,  are  first  "  grievous  wolves,"  that  is  the  peril 
from  without ;  and  men  "  speaking  perverse  things,"  men 
"  from  among  your  own  selves,"  "  to  draw  away  the  dis- 
ciples," that  is  the  peril  within.  Let  these  two  perils  be 
pondered  well,  and  let  us  remember  that  the  corrective 
to  all  such  peril  is  to  be  found  in  the  exercise  of  the  high 

[  473  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  21 : 1-16] 

office  of  the  overseer,  the  bishop,  whose  business  it  is  to 
watch  and  to  feed. 

Paul  commended  his  example  to  the  elders  at  Ephesus. 
He  had  been  loyal  to  his  Lord,  and  courageous  in  the 
delivery  of  the  message,  "  I  shrank  not  from  declaring 
unto  you  the  whole  counsel  of  God."  There  had  been 
sacrifice  in  his '  service,  "  Ye  yourselves  know  that  these 
hands  ministered  unto  my  necessities."  There  had  ever 
been  a  great  compassion  in  his  heart,  "  I  besought  you 
and  ceased  not  to  admonish  every  one  night  and  day  with 
tears." 

Here  the  apostolic  service  in  freedom  ends.  Immedi- 
ately following  the  completion  of  this  journey,  we  reach 
Jerusalem,  where  Paul  was  arrested,  and  finally  taken  as 
prisoner  to  Rome. 

Acts  21 : 1-16 

The  keynote  of  the  remainder  of  this  book  is  that  of 
bondage.  Paul  from  now  is  seen  as  "  the  prisoner  of  the 
Lord."  Speaking  to  the  elders  of  the  Ephesian  Church 
who  had  gathered  to  Miletus  to  hear  his  farewell  message, 
he  had  said: 

"  And  now,  behold,  I  go  bound  in  the  spirit  unto 
Jerusalem,  not  knowing  the  things  that  shall  befall  me 
there :  save  that  the  Holy  Spirit  testifieth  unto  me  in  every 
city,  saying  that  bonds  and  afflictions  abide  me.  But  I 
hold  not  my  life  of  any  account,  as  dear  unto  myself,  so 
that  I  may  accomplish  my  course,  and  the  ministry  which 
I  received  from  the  Lord  Jesus,  to  testify  the  Gospel  of 
the  grace  of  God." 

He  was  thus  quite  conscious  that  he  was  moving  toward 
bondage  and  limitation.  He  declared  the  Spirit  had  borne 
witness  to  him  that  in  every  city  these  were  the  things 
that  now  lay  before  him.  We  shall  find  him  almost  im- 
mediately an  actual  prisoner;  and  so  far  as  these  records 
are  concerned,  in  that  condition  of  bondage,  we  shall 
finally  take  our  leave  of  him. 

[  474  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  21 : 1-16] 

Perhaps  the  main  value  of  this  final  section  of  the  book 
may  best  be  expressed  in  words  which  Paul  himself 
wrote,  long  after  the  history  which  is  here  recorded.  I 
believe  he  was  subsequently  liberated  for  a  period;  and 
that  it  was  during  his  second  imprisonment  that  he  wrote 
his  final  pastoral  letters,  both  to  Titus  and  Timothy.  In 
all  likelihood  the  last  writing  of  this  man  preserved  for 
us,  is  the  second  letter  to  Timothy,  expressing  his  con- 
cern for  the  Church,  and  for  the  witness  borne  to  truth. 
In  the  course  of  that  letter  he  said :  "  I  suffer  hardship 
unto  bonds,"  and  then  added,  "  but  the  Word  of  God  is 
not  bound."  Whereas  that  description  of  his  own  condi- 
tion was  written  in  an  imprisonment  far  more  full  of  trial 
and  difficulty  and  suffering  than  the  one  in  which  we  find 
him  in  the  Acts;  nevertheless,  the  word  of  triumph  that 
he  wrote  from  the  midst  of  such  circumstances, — "  the 
Word  of  God  is  not  bound," — gives  us  the  keynote  of 
these  final  chapters  of  the  Acts. 

In  our  meditation  on  this  paragraph  we  shall  notice 
some  permanent  values  of  the  incidents  recorded;  but 
more  carefully,  observe  the  central  interest  of  the  story, 
that  namely  of  the  apparent  conflict  in  guidance. 

Let  us  first  observe  the  waiting  time  at  Tyre.  Here 
is  one  of  the  small  matters  in  which  we  have  greatly 
gained  by  the  Revision.  In  the  fourth  verse  of  this 
chapter  it  is  said,  "  And  having  found  the  disciples,  we 
tarried  there  seven  days."  The  Authorized  Version 
reads,  "And  finding  disciples,  we  tarried  there  seven 
days."  At  first  we  may  be  inclined  to  think  that  the 
difference  is  so  slight  that  there  can  be  no  importance 
attached  to  the  change.  Yet  look  again.  The  translation 
in  the  Authorized  Version  suggests  rather  a  casual  find- 
ing of  disciples  who  were  there,  as  though  the  ship  now 
in  port,  being  emptied  of  its  cargo,  and  these  men  having 
to  wait,  they  had  happened  quite  casually  upon  disciples. 
The  Revised  rendering  conveys  quite  another  idea. 
"  Having  found  the  disciples  " ;  and  we  might  convey  the 

[475  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  21 : 1-16] 

thought  of  the  Greek  in  yet  other  words,  and  in  a  more 
arresting  way  thus :  "  Having  by  searching  for  them 
found  the  disciples."  When  these  men  came  to  Tyre 
there  were  seven  days  to  wait,  and  they  sought  for  the 
disciples.  Henry  Ward  Beecher  once  declared  that  Paul 
was  devoid  of  the  artistic  sense,  that  he  travelled  through 
those  cities  of  Asia,  packed  with  things  of  beauty,  and 
artistic  merit  and  value,  and  never  by  a  line  referred  to 
one  of  them.  I  agree  with  the  statement;  but  I  do  not 
agree  with  the  conclusion.  I  would  rather  express  the 
truth  in  the  words  of  Dr.  Parker,  who  when  referring  to 
this  visit  to  Tyre  said,  "  There  was  no  scenery  to  Paul ; 
there  was  no  geography;  there  was  nothing  but  lost 
humanity,  and  the  redeeming  Cross  of  Christ."  That  is 
nearer  the  heart  of  this  matter  so  far  as  Paul  was  con- 
cerned. 

These  travellers,  reaching  Tyre,  sought  out  the  dis- 
ciples. Do  Christian  travellers  to-day,  calling  at  Tyre, 
seek  out  the  disciples  ?  Is  it  not  too  often  the  case  that 
when  travellers  are  far  away  from  home,  they  try  and 
miss  the  disciples  for  that  occasion,  and  see  and  meet 
every  one,  and  everything  else?  They  sought  out  the 
disciples  because  these  men  recognized  that  the  little 
group  of  disciples  in  Tyre  constituted  God's  vantage- 
ground  there  for  the  delivery  of  His  word,  for  the  ac- 
complishment of  His  purpose. 

This  is  the  first  occasion  that  Tyre  is  mentioned  in  the 
record  of  the  Acts.  Whence  did  these  disciples  of  Tyre 
come?  The  question  cannot  be  answered  dogmatically. 
There  must  be  in  any  attempt  to  answer  it,  a  certain 
amount  of  speculation.  Mark  records  how  in  the  early 
part  of  the  ministry  of  our  Lord,  men  came  to  Jesus  from 
Tyre.  A  little  later  on  He  Himself  went  into  the  region 
of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  and  there  the  Syrophcenician  woman 
found  Him;  and  He,  testing  her  faith  by  methods  ap- 
parently rough,  did  nevertheless  answer  the  faith  with 
great  and  generous  gift  of  love  and  power. 

476 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  21 : 1-16] 

,  When  our  Lord  was  uttering  His  solemn  words  of  con- 
demnation of  the  cities  in  which  His  mightiest  works 
were  done,  there  was  a  note  of  patience  and  excuse  made 
for  Tyre: 

"  Woe  unto  thee,  Chorazin !  Woe  unto  thee,  Beth- 
saida!  for  if  the  mighty  works  had  been  done  in  Tyre 
and  Sidon  which  were  done  in  you,  they  would  have  re- 
pented long  ago  in  sackcloth  and  ashes/' 

How  these  disciples  came  there  we  know  not.  I  some- 
times think  that  in  that  long  ministry  of  the  first  genera- 
tion of  the  Christian  Church,  apostles  and  evangelists  and 
deacons  reaped,  even  on  the  human  level,  a  harvest  which 
resulted  from  the  sowing  ministry  of  our  Lord  Himself. 
When  the  travellers  came  to  Csesarea,  they  met  with 
Philip.  Twenty  years  before  this,  Philip  had  been  driven 
from  Jerusalem  through  Saul.  Saul  was  the  appointed 
prosecutor  of  the  Nazarene  heresy,  "  breathing  threaten- 
ing and  slaughter."  Stephen  was  martyred,  and  the 
persecution  continued  until  scattered  thereby,  these  people 
went  everywhere,  preaching  the  Word ;  and  amongst  those 
scattered  from  Jerusalem  through  the  vehement  hatred 
of  Saul,  was  Philip.  Philip  went  down  to  Samaria,  and 
preached  there.  Now  twenty  years  had  passed  away,  and 
Philip  became  Paul's  host.  Philip  had  been  a  pioneer  in 
that  larger  work  for  which  Paul  had  been  apprehended, 
and  which  he  had  been  doing  with  such  conspicuous  and 
marvellous  success.  It  was  Philip  who  had  first  preached 
to  the  Samaritans,  who  had  first  baptized  an  African,  the 
Ethiopian  eunuch.  It  was  to  this  man  there  had  first 
come  the  meaning  of  the  larger  issues  of  things.  Even 
before  the  reception  of  Cornelius,  even  before  the  ap- 
prehension of  Saul  by  the  Lord  Christ,  even  before  the 
men  of  Cyprus  and  Cyrene  had  dared  to  preach  in  An- 
tioch;  Philip  had  answered  the  larger  meaning  of  the 
missionary  purpose,  and  endeavour,  and  had  preached  in 
Samaria;  and  then  had  gone  away  to  baptize  the  Ethio- 

[  477  1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  21 : 1-16] 

pian  eunuch,  and  receive  him  into  the  fellowship  of  the 
saints.  Now  the  man  who  had  followed  that  gleam  until 
it  broadened  into  the  light  of  a  great  and  intensive  day, 
encompassing  the  whole  Gentile  world  in  its  outlook, — 
that  man  is  the  guest  of  Philip.  How  those  men  looking 
back  together,  would  see  the  mosaic  of  the  Divine  govern- 
ment revealed !  Now  at  last  they  sit  together  in  the  home 
of  Philip,  twenty  years  after,  and  look  back.  What  a 
great  and  gracious  thing  it  is  to  look  back!  Yet  how 
careful  we  should  be  to  remember  that  in  the  present! 
We  shall  all  look  back  after  a  little  while,  and  what  a 
thing  this  looking  back  will  be !  Are  there  not  people  we 
knew  twenty  years  ago  that  we  would  not  care  to  meet 
to-day?  Is  not  that  how  Saul  would  naturally  have  felt 
about  Philip ;  one  of  the  "  dear  remembered  faces  "  that 
he  had  caused  to  be  full  of  pain?  What  a  transmuting 
and  transforming  thing  this  fellowship  with  Christ  is, 
that  it  can  bring  together  the  men  who  twenty  years  ago 
were  afraid  of  each  other,  and  fighting  each  other,  and 
persecuting  each  other ;  and  can  now  enable  them  to  talk 
of  the  old  things,  and  see  in  the  fire  and  the  persecution 
the  very  finger  and  hand  of  God.  It  is  a  blessed  thing 
to  look  back,  when  we  have  found  our  way  into  a  true 
fellowship  with  this  Lord  Christ  Himself. 

Now  let  us  look  particularly  at  the  central  interest  of 
this  passage.  Verse  four  reads: 

"And  having  found  the  disciples,  we  tarried  there 
seven  days ;  and  these  said  to  Paul  through  the  Spirit  that 
he  should  not  set  foot  in  Jerusalem." 

In  the  twelfth  verse  we  read : 

"  And  when  we  heard  these  things,  both  we  and  they 
of  that  place  besought  him  not  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem." 

Notice  here  that  Luke  associates  himself  with  those  who 
were  at  Csesarea ;  Philip,  Agabus,  and  those  travelling  in 

[478] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  21 : 1-16] 

the  company.  These  men  all  said  to  Paul,  through  the 
Spirit,  that  he  should  not  set  foot  in  Jerusalem ;  and  later 
there  was  the  beseeching  of  Philip,  Agabus,  Luke,  and 
the  whole  company,  that  he  should  not  go.  In  the  pre- 
vious chapter  we  read  how  Paul  told  the  Ephesian  elders 
of  the  certainty  he  had  about  the  future: 

"  I  go  bound  in  the  spirit  unto  Jerusalem,  not  knowing 
the  things  that  shall  befall  me  there :  save  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  testifieth  unto  me  in  every  city,  saying  that  bonds 
and  afflictions  abide  me," 

He  declared  to  these  Ephesian  elders  that  he  was  never- 
theless compelled  to  finish  his  course,  and  complete  his 
ministry  of  testimony  to  this  Gospel  of  the  grace  of  God. 
He  made  no  answer  at  Tyre  that  is  recorded,  when  they 
told  him  that  he  must  not  go  to  Jerusalem;  he  made  no 
response  when  Agabus  took  his  girdle  and  bound  him- 
self;  but  when  Luke  and  the  rest  joined  with  him,  tried 
to  dissuade  him,  he  said,  "  What  do  ye,  weeping  and 
breaking  my  heart  ?  "  The  word  breaking  there  does  not 
so  much  suggest  suffering,  as  weakening,  bending.  Why 
by  your  weeping  are  you  attempting  to  weaken  my  pur- 
pose, breaking,  bending,  subduing  my  heart?  "  for  I  am 
ready  not  to  be  bound  only,  but  also  to  die  at  Jerusalem 
for  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  The  contrast  is  quite 
clear.  There  can  be  no  escape  from  the  fact  of  the  con- 
flict of  conviction.  The  motive  in  each  case  was  pure. 
The  motive  of  the  apostle  was  pure.  That  we  do  not 
call  in  question.  The  motive  of  these  disciples  in  Tyre, 
of  Philip,  of  Agabus,  and  of  Luke  was  pure.  The  in- 
spiration was  the  same.  They  were  both  acting  in  the 
light  of  spiritual  interpretation,  and  under  the  impulse  of 
great  loyalty  to  the  purpose  of  their  Lord.  Yet  with 
true  motives  and  identical  inspiration,  here  were  convic- 
tions diametrically  opposed. 

In  accounting  for  this  there  are  differing  interpreta-* 
tions.    There  are  those  who  maintain  that   Paul  was 

[  479  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  21 : 1-16] 

wrong,  and  that  all  the  suffering  following  was  the  re- 
sult of  the  mistake  he  made  at  this  point.  On  the  other 
hand  there  are  those  who  maintain  that  these  people  were 
wrong  in  the  advice  they  gave ;  and  that  Paul  was  indeed 
following  the  path  of  loyalty. 

My  conviction  is  that  Paul  was  right.  His  convic- 
tion was  one  resulting  from  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit 
of  God.  Take  this  paragraph,  and  set  it  in  the  light  of 
the  whole  story  of  that  going  to  Jerusalem,  of  its  first 
reason,  and  its  deepest  intention,  of  the  passion  that 
drove  hirn,  and  we  shall  find  that  he  was  going  to  Jeru- 
salem to  carry  a  gift  that  had  been  gathered  among 
Gentile  churches,  in  order  to  be  helpful  to  the  poor  saints 
in  Jerusalem.  He  was  going  to  Jerusalem  with  a  pas- 
sionate desire  to  serve  his  brethren.  Read  again  those 
wonderful  paragraphs  in  the  Roman  letter  which  amaze 
us,  in  that  they  reveal  a  height  of  personal  experience, 
and  an  intensity  of  missionary  devotion,  of  which,  alas! 
we  know  so  little: 

"  I  say  the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not,  my  conscience 
bearing  witness  with  me  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  I  ( have 
great  sorrow  and  unceasing  pain  in  my  heart.  For  I 
could  wish  that  I  myself  were  anathema  from  Christ  for 
my  brethren's  sake." 

Put  that  high  and  holy  passion  behind  this  determination 
to  tread  the  way  to  Jerusalem,  in  the  face  of  all  dangers ; 
and  put  behind  it  that  which,  from  the  standpoint  of  his 
ecclesiastical  statesmanship  was  the  master-passion  of  his 
life;  the  desire  to  bring  together  the  Jews  and  Gentiles 
into  an  experimental  consciousness  of  their  oneness  in 
Jesus  Christ;  and  in  these  we  find  the  inspirations  driv- 
ing this  man. 

What  then  did  these  men  and  Luke  mean  when  they 
said  to  him,  "  through  the  Spirit,  that  he  should  not  set 
foot  in  Jerusalem  "  ?  We  must  interpret  that  declaration 
of  the  fourth  verse  by  other  declarations.  In  the 

[480] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  21 : 1-16] 

previous  chapter,  in  verse  twenty-three  Paul  said  that 
"  in  every  city  the  Holy  Spirit  testifieth  unto  me,  saying 
that  bonds  and  afflictions  abide  me."  In  the  eleventh 
verse  of  this  chapter  we  find  Agabus,  prophesying  in  the 
Spirit,  not  telling  him  that  he  was  not  to  go,  but  declar- 
ing that  if  he  should  go,  then  he  would  be  bound  and 
imprisoned.  When  these  men  in  Tyre  told  Paul  not  to 
go,  their  advice  was  the  result  of  the  Spirit's  foretelling 
that  if  he  went,  he  would  suffer.  Taking  the  whole  story 
into  account,  we  are  not  warranted  in  believing  that  the 
Spirit  declared  that  he  was  not  to  go ;  but  that  the  Spirit 
told  him  that  he  was  going  to  suffering  and  to  prison. 
These  disciples  at  Tyre  when  they  heard  it,  when  they 
were  informed  by  the  Spirit,  and  by  spiritual  interpreta- 
tion, of  the  difficulties  that  awaited  him,  urged  him  not 
to  go.  The  Spirit  said  that  bonds  awaited  Paul,  and  their 
advice  was  really  advice  to  falsify  the  teaching  of  the 
Spirit.  I /do  not  think  they  meant  it  in  that  way;  they 
had  not  thought  the  situation  out.  The  testimony  of  the 
Spirit  was  that  there  was  waiting  for  this  man  bonds, 
afflictions,  and  suffering.  Now  the  Spirit  could  never 
instruct  men  to  give  advice  to  one  which,  if  followed, 
would  be  an  attempt  to  escape  the  very  pathway  of  suffer- 
ing that  the  Spirit  indicated  was  lying  ahead  of  him.  I 
believe  then  that  at  this  point  Paul  was  true  to  the  deepest 
facts,  and  that  he  was  right. 

There  is  great  comfort  in  this  chapter  for  us.  Recog- 
nizing that  such  things  do  occur,  understanding  the  story 
by  our  own  experience,  is  there  not  a  test  by  which  we 
may  finally  decide  which  conviction  is  according  to  the 
mind  of  the  Spirit  of  God?  I  think  that  there  is.  It  is 
the  test  of  motive.  The  motive  of  the  conviction  that 
took  possession  of  the  minds  of  all  these  people,  Luke  in- 
cluded, was  a  very  high  motive.  It  was  love  for  Paul. 
Paul's  motive  was  an  infinitely  higher  motive.  It  was 
love  for  the  Lord,  and  passion  for  the  accomplishment  of 
His  purpose.  The  last  and  final  test  for  those  who  are 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  21 : 17-22 : 29] 

submitted  to  the  Spirit,  who  are  seeking  His  guidance,; 
who  believe  they  have  the  light  of  His  revelation,  is 
always  that  of  motive.  There  may  be  motives  which  in 
themselves  are  very  high,  which  become  wrong,  because 
there  ought  to  be  the  infinitely  higher  motive. 

What  is  the  heart,  then,  of  this  revelation?  Paul  never 
wavered.  He  felt  the  pressure  and  the  persuasiveness  of 
their  love.  "  What  do  ye,  weeping  and  breaking,"  bend- 
ing, "my  heart?"  He  acknowledged  in  that  word  that 
their  tears  and  their  entreaties  weighed  with  him,  weighed 
upon  him,  bent  him  toward  their  inclination  also.  He 
valued  it,  and  he  resisted  it.  He  was  conscious  of  the 
sweet  constraint  of  their  love ;  but  I  never  see  him  rising 
to  a  higher  height  than  when  he  consented  to  put  that 
beneath  his  feet,  in  the  interest  of  the  call  for  loyalty  to 
his  Lord,  and  the  abandonment  of  himself  to  the  purposes 
of  his  Master. 

Notice  how  the  story  finishes.  Luke  says,  "  When  he 
would  not  be  persuaded,  we  ceased,  saying,  The  will  of 
the  Lord  be  done."  They  recognized  at  last  who  was 
right.  In  the  loyalty  of  Paul,  in  his  determination,  in 
that  masterfulness  of  purpose  that  would  not  be  per- 
suaded, even  by  their  tears,  there  flamed  upon  them  the 
revelation  of  the  will  of  the  Lord ;  and  Luke  says,  "  We 
ceased,"  and  "  We  took  up  our  baggage,"  and  went  with 
him.  That  is  a  beautiful  ending.  It  is  the  final  proof 
of  a  true  fellowship.  There  was  the  honesty  of  their 
persuasion;  there  was  the  magnificence  of  his  refusal, 
and  at  last  there  was  the  fellowship  of  oneness  in  the 
discovery  of  the  will  of  the  Lord. 

Thus  we  see  the  prisoner  of  the  Lord  on  his  way  to 
those  bonds  which  presently,  according  to  his  own  writ- 
ing, turned  out  for  the  furtherance  of  the  Gospel. 

Acts  21 : 17-22 : 29 

On  the  arrival  of  Paul  in  Jerusalem,  he  was  welcomed 
by  the  brethren.  It  is  noticeable  that  no  apostle  is  men- 

[  482  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  21 : 17-22 : 29] 

tioned.  By  this  time  in  all  probability  they  were  scat- 
tered here  and  there,  fulfilling  their  true  mission.  To 
James,  and  certain  elders  in  oversight  of  the  church  in 
Jerusalem,  Paul  rehearsed  the  story  of  the  victories  won 
in  the  course  of  his  ministry. 

Immediately  following  this  account  we  are  told  that, 
while  they  that  heard  it  glorified  God,  they  spoke  not  so 
much  of  the  work  accomplished,  as  of  that  which  was 
most  evidently  uppermost  in  their  heart,  the  immediate 
peril  created  by  his  presence  in  Jerusalem.  Facing  the 
situation  as  they  thought  calmly  and  considerately,  they 
advised  a  certain  course  of  action.  Four  men  who,  while 
believing  in  Jesus,  were  nevertheless  under  the  Nazirite 
vow,  were  fulfilling  the  obligations  of  that  vow,  and  the 
elders  suggested  to  Paul  that  he  should  associate  himself 
with  them,  doing  what  men  often  did  in  those  days,  taking 
the  charges  of  their  vow  upon  himself,  and  during  the 
final  days  of  their  purification  spending  the  time  with 
them.  The  elders  thought  that  by  such  action,  he  would 
contradict  current  reports  concerning  his  attitude  toward 
the  Mosaic  economy,  which  were  likely  to  cause  grave 
disturbance  in  Jerusalem. 

Our  theme  is  that  of  the  advice  of  the  elders,  and  the 
action  of  Paul.  To  understand  this  we  must  remind  our- 
selves of  the  circumstances  under  which  this  advice  was 
given  a  little  more  particularly. 

The  time  of  the  apostle's  arrival  in  Jerusalem  was  that 
of  the  Feast  of  Pentecost.  Jerusalem  was  then  crowded 
with  multitudes  of  Jews.  On  the  authority  of  the  Roman 
historians  we  know  that  no  less  than  two  million  Jews 
were  crowded  into  the  city  and  neighbourhood  during 
these  feasts. 

In  order  to  thoroughly  appreciate  the  national  atmos- 
phere, we  need  to  remember  that  during  the  whole  of  that 
period  the  oppression  of  Rome  was  being  most  keenly 
felt  by  the  Hebrew  people.  Rebellion  was  incipient 
everywhere,  on  the  part  of  the  Jews ;  and  Rome  was  ready 

483 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  21 : 17-22 : 29] 

to  stamp  out  all  such  rebellion.  How  easy  it  would  have 
been  to  have  flung  down  into  the  midst  of  the  people  some 
fire  which  would  have  immediately  produced  a  very 
definite  explosion. 

These  facts  enable  us  better  to  understand  the  attitude 
of  these  elders  toward  Paul.  Paul  had  not  been  in 
Jerusalem  for  long  years,  but  his  name  was  known.  He 
had  been  the  publicly  appointed  prosecutor  of  the  Naz- 
arene  heresy.  Twenty  years  before,  he  had  obtained 
letters  from  the  high  priest,  empowering  him  to  hale  men 
and  women  to  prison  and  to  death.  In  the  apprehension 
of  that  man  by  Jesus  Himself,  all  the  force  of  his  mar- 
vellous personality  had  been  turned  into  an  entirely  op- 
posite direction.  Jerusalem,  and  the  Jewish  people 
generally,  knew  his  history,  and  the  very  fact  of  his 
presence  was  made  an  occasion  for  hostility. 

Moreover  the  believing  Jews  were  not  friendly  toward 
him.  Notice  the  words  in  verses  twenty  and  twenty-one : 

"  Thou  seest,  brother,  how  many  thousands  there  are 
among  the  Jews  of  them  which  have  believed;  and  they 
are  all  zealous  for  the  law." 

They  were  believers  who  were  still  observing  rites  and 
ceremonies,  and  who  were  diametrically  opposed  to  Paul's 
view  that  a  man  in  Christ  is  set  free  from  every  other 
yoke  of  bondage.  We  should  remember  also  that  Paul 
was  there,  bearing  to  them  great  gifts,  material  gifts  from 
Gentile  churches,  but  there  does  not  seem  to  have  been 
any  recognition,  any  attitude  of  gratitude  or  thanksgiving 
toward  him  at  all. 

These  must  have  been  sad  days  for  Paul.  He  would 
think  of  the  days  of  Stephen  long  ago,  and  of  his  four 
previous  visits  to  Jerusalem.  He  had  never  been  welcome 
there. 

These  elders  seem  to  have  had  no  conviction  that  the 
zealots  of  the  law  were  wrong.  They  did  not  ask  Paul 
for  a  concession,  but  for  a  vindication  which  is  quite  a 

484 1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  21 : 17-22 : 29] 

different  matter.  They  asked  him  to  deny  the  rumor 
that  he  had  abandoned  rites  and  ceremonies,  by  observing 
these.  The  principle  underlying  their  appeal  was  that  of 
policy.  Whatever  their  view,  they  must  surely  have 
known  Paul's  attitude.  Their  request  for  vindiction  be- 
fore the  believing  Jews  was  dishonest.  They  knew  that 
he  had  personally  abandoned  the  observance  of  rites  and 
ceremonies.  These  elders  in  Jerusalem  had  been  in  close 
touch  with  all  his  movements,  they  had  read  his  letters, 
and  certainly  at  this  time  the  Galatian  letter,  and  the  two 
Corinthian  letters  were  written.  At  Antioch  he  had  re- 
buked Peter  for  dissimulation,  and  now  they  asked  him  to 
practise  dissimulation. 

That  leads  us  to  consider  the  consent  of  Paul;  and  as 
in  looking  at  the  advice  of  the  elders  we  observed  the 
purpose  and  terms  of  the  advice;  so  here  let  us  consider 
the  purpose  of  his  consent,  and  the  terms  of  that  consent. 

Directly  we  turn  from  the  advice  of  these  men  which 
was  that  of  policy  and  of  dishonesty  withal,  to  the  con- 
sent of  Paul,  and  begin  to  look  at  the  purpose  of  his 
consent,  we  have  moved  on  to  an  entirely  different  level. 
I  put  that  emphatically,  because  I  hold  that  Paul  made 
the  greatest  mistake  of  his  ministry  on  this  occasion. 
Yet  we  have  to  recognize  the  fact  that  the  reason  of  his 
consent  was  not  that  of  expediency  merely,  not  that  of 
policy,  but  that  of  devotion.  The  reason  of  his  consent 
was  his  desire  to  win  his  brethren.  The  reason  of  his 
consent  here  is  most  perfectly  declared  in  his  matchless 
words  in  the  Roman  letter: 

"I  say  the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not,  my  conscience 
bearing  witness  with  me  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  I  have 
great  sorrow  and  unceasing  pain  in  my  heart.  For  I 
could  wish  that  I  myself  were  anathema  from  Christ  for 
my  brethren's  sake,  my  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh; 
who  are  Israelites,  whose  is  the  adoption,  and  the  glory, 
and  the  convenants,  and  the  giving  of  the  law,  and  the 
service  of  God,  and  the  promises,  whose  are  the  fathers, 

[  485  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  21 : 17-22 : 29] 

and  of  whom  is  Christ  as  concerning  the  flesh,  Who  is 
over  all,  God  blessed  forevermore." 

This  was  not  the  action  of  a  man  politic,  expedient,  and 
attempting  to  manipulate  circumstances  to  prevent  a 
breach  of  the  peace,  or  a  riot  in  Jerusalem.  It  was  not 
the  action  of  a  man  trying  to  save  his  own  life.  It  was 
the  action  of  a  man  who  passionately  and  earnestly  de- 
sired to  do  anything,  if  by  the  doing  of  it  he  might  deliver 
the  message  to  his  brethren,  and  win  them.  Look  at  the 
action  in  itself.  It  was  the  doing  of  that  which  was  of 
no  value  to  him.  It  was  consent  to  an  appearance,  con- 
trary to  conviction.  Yet  was  he  justified? 

What  was  the  issue  ?  The  issue  was  the  failure  of  the 
purpose  of  the  elders.  They  sought  to  maintain  peace. 
Peace  was  not  maintained.  What  they  did,  provoked  the 
very  riot  they  fain  would  have  obviated.  Again, — and 
here  the  language  needs  to  be  more  tender,  and  the 
sympathy  far  greater — the  issue  was  the  failure  of  the 
purpose  of  Paul.  He  sought  by  that  accommodation,  con- 
trary to  his  own  conviction,  to  gain  an  opportunity  of 
testimony  to  his  brethren,  and  he  lost  his  opportunity. 
His  brethren  were  not  won,  and  the  last  word  of  the 
paragraph  is  the  same  cry  hurled  after  him  that  was 
hurled  after  his  Master,  "  Away  with  him." 

The  teaching  of  this  incident  is  that  love  must  ever  be 
loyal  to  truth.  To  sacrifice  a  principle  for  a  moment  in 
the  hope  of  gaining  an  opportunity  to  establish  it  after- 
wards, is  always  to  fail.  We  never  win  an  opportunity 
that  way.  It  is  in  our  moments  of  highest  spiritual 
exaltation  that  we  need  to  be  most  watchful  against  the 
possibility  of  compromise.  Men  who  would  never  com- 
promise in  order  to  save  their  own  lives,  are  in  danger  of 
compromising  in  the  hope  that  they  may  help  others.  If 
it  is  a  stern  word,  if  it  is  a  hard  word,  it  is  a  word  of 
infinite  love,  it  is  the  word  of  eternal  truth ;  that  by  com- 
promise we  never  establish  a  principle.  Even  though  we 

[  486] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  21 : 17-22  i  29] 

hope  to  gain  an  opportunity  by  the  doing  of  it,  we  lose 
it. 

That  is  the  last  word  of  this  story,  but  there  is  some- 
thing else  to  follow.  We  shall  see  how  when  men  fail, 
even  from  high  motives,  the  Lord  appears,  and  gently 
restores  them.  The  apostle  was  rescued  by  arrest,  and 
was  carried  by  soldiers  up  the  stairs  leading  into  the 
castle. 

There  are  three  matters  of  supreme  interest  in  this 
story ;  first,  the  man ;  secondly,  the  mob ;  and  thirdly,  the 
Mother  Church.  Let  us  consider  them  in  the  reverse 
order,  glancing  first  at  the  infuriated  and  angry  multi- 
tude of  people  surrounding  this  man;  and  finally,  at 
the  man  as  a  prisoner,  to  the  end  of  the  history  in  this 
book. 

Twenty  years  had  passed  away  since  the  formation  of 
the  Church,  and  the  arresting  fact  here  is  that  the  church 
in  Jerusalem  is  not  seen.  Paul  was  alone,  and  would 
have  been  beaten  brutally  to  death  by  an  infuriated  mob, 
had  he  not  been  rescued  by  the  Roman  power.  When 
once  the  seventh  chapter  of  this  book  of  the  Acts  has  been 
passed,  where  the  record  of  the  first  things  in  Jerusalem 
come  to  an  end,  whenever  the  Church  emerges  in  her 
representative  capacity,  she  is  seen  attempting  com- 
promise, pursuing  the  policy  of  accommodation.  It  was  a 
little  difficult  for  her  to  receive  the  testimony  of  Peter 
concerning  the  work  in  the  house  of  Cornelius.  She  was 
suspicious  of  the  movement  in  Samaria.  With  difficulty 
there  was  wrested  from  her  the  granting  of  the  charter 
of  freedom  to  the  Gentiles.  She  pursued  a  policy  of  ac- 
commodation, receiving  into  her  fellowship  those  who  had 
made  no  break  with  Judaism.  James  declared  to  Paul, 
who  had  come  up  bearing  with  him  gifts  from  the  Gentile 
churches,  with  the  love  of  his  Lord  burning  in  his  heart, 
that  there  were  multitudes  of  believing  Jews,  all  of  whom 
were  observing  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  Judaism. 
This  was  in  itself  a  yery  remarkable  admission  and  con- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  21 : 17-22 : 29] 

fession.  It  may  of  course  be  said  that  these  men  had  at- 
tempted thus  to  secure  safety.  It  was  undoubtedly  the 
easier  path  to  admit  to  the  fellowship  of  the  Church  men 
who  confessed  Christ,  and  really  believed  in  Him,  who 
nevertheless  compromised  with  Judaism,  by  still  observ- 
ing its  rites  and  ceremonies;  but  that  policy  of  accom- 
modation, policy  of  compromise,  had  weakened  the 
Church. 

The  issue  is  revealed  in  this  page.  The  Church  had 
no  influence  in  Jerusalem.  In  this  tragic  hour,  when 
this  man,  bearing  in  his  body  the  stigmata  of  Jesus,  ought 
to  have  been  welcomed  with  open  heart  and  arms  by  the 
Church;  he  stood  alone  in  the  midst  of  the  pitiless  scorn 
and  brutality  of  an  angry  mob,  and  had  to  be  protected 
by  Roman  power.  The  Church  had  neither  power  nor 
protest.  She  had  lost  both  by  her  policy  of  accommoda- 
tion. 

Now  look  at  the  mob.  The  word  is  admittedly  not  a 
very  elegant  one,  but  no  other  suits  the  occasion.  Yet 
can  we  feel  in  our  hearts  anything  of  anger  in  the  pres- 
ence of  that  mob?  Ought  we  not  rather  to  feel  the  in- 
finite sadness  of  the  fact  that  any  measure  of  conviction 
that  came  to  that  city  had  been  weakened  by  the  failure 
of  the  witnesses?  That  city  had  passed  under  the  spell 
of  the  power  of  Christ  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  even 
though  they  had  rejected  Him  in  the  days  of  His  flesh. 
One  wonders  whether  the  whole  city  would  not  have 
been  in  a  different  attitude  and  demeanour  if  there  had 
been  no  compromise  on  the  part  of  the  Church. 

The  arresting  fact  as  we  look  at  this  crowd  of  Jews  is 
that  of  their  frenzy.  It  is  an  Oriental  picture,  perfectly 
natural;  the  tearing  of  garments,  the  flinging  of  dust  into 
the  air,  as  the  result  of  the  emotion  that  seized  them. 
They  were  silent  enough  at  first;  they  listened  to  all  the 
earlier  parts  of  that  wonderful  address  characterized  by 
so  fine  a  courtesy  and  so  definite  a  testimony.  The  oc- 
casion of  this  sudden  outburst  was  the  one 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  21 : 17-22 :  29] 

"  Gentiles.'*  We  cannot  read  that  address  of  Paul,  and 
believe  that  he  had  finished  where  he  ended.  It  is  most 
certain  that  he  was  going  on,  but  he  said  "  Gentiles,"  and 
in  a  moment  the  frenzy  of  the  crowd  was  manifested. 

It  was  an  expression  of  prejudice  and  of  pride;  prej- 
udice which  resulted  from  a  false  view  of  themselves  in 
the  economy  of  God.  Their  outcry  against  Paul  was 
perfectly  consistent.  It  was  the  carrying  out  in  the  case 
of  Paul,  of  all  their  actions  when  his  Master  had  stood  in 
their  midst.  There  is  something  better  than  consistency. 
This  was  ignorant  consistency,  or  consistency  in  igno- 
rance, or  a  consistency  that  was  the  outcome  of  ignorance. 
They  had  taken  a  false  view  of  themselves,  and  they 
would  be  true  to  that  at  all  costs.  The  view  was  that 
they  were  God's  peculiar  and  elect  people,  in  the  sense 
that  He  had  chosen  that  nation  to  bestow  His  love  upon 
it,  to  the  forgetfulness  of  other  nations.  They  believed 
that  God  had  no  care  for  those  Gentile  nations,  except 
that  of  governing  them  and  smashing  them  if  they  stood 
in  the  way  of  the  Jew.  That  was  their  outlook,  that  was 
their  mistake,  that  was  their  prejudice. 

The,, issue  was  blindness  to  the  Divine  activity.  In  the 
address  of  Paul  the  one  thing  that  he  sought  to 
show  these  people  was  that  all  his  action  was  in  line  with 
the  Divine.  The  outcome  was  not  only  blindness  to  the 
Divine  activity,  it  was  consequently  injustice  to  Paul; 
and  not  only  blindness  to  the  Divine  activity  and  injustice 
to  Paul,  but  ultimately  suicide  to  the  nation  itself. 

What  was  Paul's  motive  as  he  asked  that  he  might 
speak  ?  It  is  revealed  in  his  first  word :  "  Brethren  and 
fathers,  hear  ye  the  defence  which  I  now  make  unto 
you."  The  defence  which  Paul  desired  was  not  personal. 
He  was  not  defending  himself. 

He  had  gone  to  the  Gentiles  resolutely.  To  the 
Gentiles  he  had  preached  the  fullness  of  the  Christian 
salvation.  He  had  declared  to  the  Gentiles,  and  by 
argument  with  the  Christian  Jew  had  maintained,  that  if 

[489] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  21 : 17-22 : 29] 

any  man  superadded  anything  to  faith  as  being  necessary 
for  salvation,  that  man  was  anathema,  denying  the  very 
Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God.  When  he  came  to  Jerusalem 
James  had  said  to  him  that  this  attitude  was  known,  and 
that  he  had  better  take  up  the  appearance  of  loyalty  to 
the  law  by  entering  into  the  temple  with  these  men.  He 
was  not  now  defending  himself  for  doing  that.  He  was 
defending  the  method  of  his  ministry  which  had  stirred 
up  the  very  opposition  in  the  midst  of  which  he  stood. 
That  hour  and  that  address  was  the  hour  of  his  decisive 
and  final  break  with  Judaism. 

This  defence  was  a  vindication  of  the  ways  of  God. 
These  words  indicate  the  movement  of  the  address.  He 
began,  "  I  am  a  Jew,"  that  is,  he  was  one  of  the  people 
of  God,  one  of  that  nation  to  which  they  belonged ;  cer- 
tainly created  by  God  for  the  accomplishment  of  certain 
purposes.  Ananias,  himself  a  devout  Jew,  had  said  to 
him  in  the  days  of  his  enlightenment,  "  God,"  the  God 
of  the  nation  to  which  they  belonged,  "  hath  appointed 
thee  ...  to  see  the  Righteous  One."  Take  that 
phrase,  "  the  Righteous  One."  Where  did  it  come  from  ? 
Why  did  he  not  say,  To  see  the  Messiah,  to  see  Jesus? 
It  was  a  peculiar  phrase,  chosen  with  singular  aptness  by 
Ananias,  and  now  quoted  by  Paul  in  his  defence  before 
the  Jews.  It  will  be  found  in  the  great  prophecy  of  the 
doubting  prophet,  Habakkuk,  as  the  revelation  of  the 
central  principle  of  Israel's  life,  and  the  hope  thereof. 
The  swelled  soul,  behold,  it  is  puffed  up,  but  "  My  right- 
eous One  shall  live  by  faith."  While  this  was  the 
declaration  of  a  principle,  it  was  also  the  prophecy  of  the 
embodiment  of  that  principle  in  a  Person.  Ananias  had 
said  to  this  Jew  in  the  moment  of  his  enlightenment,  that 
God  had  appointed  him  also  to  see  this  One  referred  to 
in  the  heart  of  the  prophecies  with  which  he  was  familiar ; 
looked  for  from  the  centre  of  the  law  under  which  he 
had  lived.  Paul  now  quoted  it.  I  am  a  Jew,  I  belong 
to  your  nation,  and  the  God  Whom  you  worship  has 

490  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  21 : 17-22 : 29] 

given  me  the  vision  of  the  Lord,  of  the  One  for  Whom 
you  wait,  and  for  Whom  you  hope.  I  have  seen  the 
Righteous  One. 

So  far  they  were  prepared  to  follow  him.  Now  he 
said,  that  the  God  Who  had  apprehended  him  by  the 
vision  of  that  Righteous  One,  and  by  His  voice;  that 
God,  the  God  of  their  nation,  sent  him  to  the  Gentiles. 
At  that  moment  their  frenzy  broke  out. 

What  lay  behind  the  desire  on  Paul's  part  to  speak  to 
the  people  ?  Surely  it  was  a  great  and  passionate  craving 
to  persuade  his  brethren  after  the  flesh.  Why  else  did 
he  ask  to  speak  to  this  infuriated  mob  ?  There  was  burn- 
ing within  him  that  passion  that  grows,  that  unceasing 
pain  that  desired  to  be  anathema  from  Christ  for  his 
brethren's  sake,  that  they  might  yet  come  to  an  under- 
standing of  the  truth. 

Observe  then  the  method  of  the  apostle;  his  central 
loyalty  to  this  purpose  and  appointment  of  God.  He 
argued,  not  for  the  sake  of  his  apostleship  and  right,  but 
because  it  was  part  of  God's  right  and  method.  This  man 
sanctified  all  the  means  of  his  education  and  life  to  the 
purposes  to  which  he  was  called  and  pledged.  If  he 
would  speak  to  this  Greek  captain,  he  used  the  Greek 
tongue.  If  he  spoke  to  the  mob,  he  spoke  in  the  Hebrew 
tongue.  If  this  captain,  seeking  to  find  out  more  than  he 
could  in  the  ordinary  way,  ordered  his  examination  by 
scourging,  he  appealed  to  his  Roman  citizenship.  Some 
may  say,  Ought  he  not  to  have  suffered?  No,  martyr- 
dom is  only  of  value  when  it  cannot  be  avoided.  A  cheap 
martyrdom  never  produces  any  great  result.  All  the 
facts  and  forces  of  his  wonderful  personality  were  mani- 
fest. 

Mark  his  argument.  He  set  up  claims  on  the  Jews 
by  reason  of  his  birth  and  his  education.  He  appealed 
to  them  with  a  fine  courtesy.  Is  there  anything  more  re- 
markable than  his  recognition  of  their  zeal,  and  his 
admiration  of  it?  There  he  stood,  confronting  those 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  21 : 17-22 :  29] 

dark  angry  faces,  hushed  into  silence  for  a  moment  by  the 
fine  art  that  made  him  employ  the  Hebrew  tongue.  Yet 
as  he  looked  upon  them  he  recognized  their  zeal,  and 
could  have  quoted  from  his  own  letter,  "  I  bear  you  wit- 
ness that  you  have  a  zeal  for  God,  but  not  according  to 
knowledge." 

Then  follow  the  line  of  his  appeal.  First,  his  claim 
of  sincerity.  He  also  had  been  zealous  for  God.  Had 
he  not  persecuted  unto  the  death  men  who  held  the  views 
for  which  he  was  now  being  persecuted?  How  had 
come  the  change  in  him?  There  was  no  abandon- 
ment of  sincerity.  There  was  no  turning  away  from 
the  God  of  their  fathers.  Thus  he  gave  to  those 
listening  men,  as  his  most  powerful  argument,  his  own 
definite  personal  experience.  He  told  them  that  this 
Christ  appeared  to  him,  called  him,  and  arrested  him ;  and 
he  said  to  them  in  effect:  What  could  I  do,  but  abandon 
my  prejudice,  and  trample  underfoot  my  pride,  and  yield 
myself  entirely  to  Him?  Then  having  claimed  his  sin- 
cerity through  the  whole  process,  he  sought  to  bring  them 
to  see  that  in  the  line  of  that  sincerity  he  was  compelled 
to  obey  the  commission  of  the  One  Whom  he  recognized 
as  his  Lord,  Who  had  sent  him  to  the  Gentiles;  but  of 
that  they  would  hear  nothing. 

In  the  application  of  the  teaching  of  this  passage  let  us 
begin  with  that  furious  mob.  We  learn  first  the  danger 
of  prejudice.  The  test  of  conviction  is  the  temper  it 
produces.  Frenzy  in  defence  is  always  a  condemnation 
of  the  thing  defended.  That  is  a  great  principle.  Test 
it  by  all  these  New  Testament  pictures,  and  it  will  be 
found  that  those  who  were  set  for  the  defence  of  the 
Gospel  were  always  quiet,  calm,  sure,  never  possessed  by 
panic,  never  descendng  to  anything  in  the  nature  of  un- 
fairness or  abuse  of  those  from  whom  they  differed.  It 
is  a  lie  that  demands  frenzy  in  defence,  even  though  the 
frenzied  man  may  not  know  that  it  is  a  lie. 

Then  we  turn  to  the  Mother  Church,  and  in  doing  so 

[  492  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  21 : 17-22: 29] 

we  see  the  need  of  a  clear  line  of  severance  between  the 
Church  and  all  that  contradicts  her  claims.  The  line  of 
demarcation  ought  to  be  marked,  and  drawn  with  a  fine 
distinction  and  courtesy;  but  it  must  be  done.  There  is 
a  toleration  which  is  treachery.  There  is  a  peace  which 
issues  in  paralysis.  There  are  hours  when  the  Church 
must  say  No,  to  those  who  ask  communion  with  her,  in 
the  doing  of  her  work,  upon  the  basis  of  compromise. 
Such  standing  aloof  may  produce  ostracism  and  persecu- 
tion; but  it  will  maintain  power  and  influence.  If  the 
Church  of  God  in  the  cities  of  to-day  were  aloof  from  the 
,  maxims  of  the  age,  separated  from  the  materialistic 
philosophies  of  the  schools,  bearing  her  witness  alone  to 
the  all-sufficiency  of  Christ,  and  the  perfection  of  His 
salvation,  even  though  persecuted  and  ostracized  and 
bruised:  it  would  be  to  her  that  men  would  look  in  the 
hour  of  their  heart-break  and  sorrow  and  national  need. 
The  reason  why  men  do  not  look  to  the  Church  to-day 
is  that  she  has  destroyed  her  own  influence  by  com- 
promise. 

Finally  we  look  at  the  man,  and  in  doing  so  are  brought 
face  to  face  again  with  the  true  motive,  and  the  true 
methods  of  all  endeavour.  The  one  motive  must  be  that 
of  a  passion  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  Divine  pur- 
pose. What  was  it  that  sustained  this  man  through  all 
these  experiences?  It  was  his  conviction  that  God  had 
willed  and  was  planning,  and  that  His  way  must  be  dis- 
covered and  followed.  That  is  the  central  motive  of  all 
true  Christian  work. 

The  methods  are  those  first,  of  the  use  of  all  our  powers 
by  their  consecration  to  that  one  purpose.  Let  the  Greek 
speak  his  Greek  language  when  it  is  necessary.  Let  the 
Hebrew  borrow  the  language  of  the  Hebrew,  and  speak 
in  the  speech  of  the  Hebrew.  Let  the  Roman  citizen  use 
his  Roman  citizenship  for  purposes  of  the  establishment 
of  the  Kingdom  of  God. 

The  last  thing  we  learn  is  that  more  powerful  than  all 

[  493  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  22 : 30-23] 

argument  is  the  experience  of  one  man,   arrested  by 
Christ,  and  changed  by  that  experience. 

Acts  22: 30-23 

The  interest  of  the  first  part  of  this  paragraph  (22 : 30- 
23 :  1 1 )  centres  in  Paul,  and  there  are  two  things  which 
we  will  note :  first,  Paul  and  his  circumstances, — that  is 
the  story  of  the  day ;  secondly,  Paul  and  his  Lord, — that 
is  the  story  of  the  night. 

It  is  only  as  we  can  put  ourselves  back  into  this  man's 
circumstances  that  we  shall  understand  some  of  the 
things  he  said,  and  some  of  the  things  he  did.  The  day 
had  been  one  of  turmoil,  a  day  in  which  he  had  been 
brutally  beaten,  and  yet  unexpectedly  and  marvellously 
protected  by  the  Gentile  power.  Then  followed  the  night. 
Paul  was  physically,  bruised;  mentally,  disturbed  by  all 
the  happenings  of  those  hours;  and  spiritually,  he  was 
wounded,  because  he  had  failed  to  reach  his  brethren  in 
Jerusalem,  after  the  flesh. 

Glance  again  at  the  doings  of  the  day.  He  had  been 
arraigned  before  his  accusers,  by  the  action  of  the 
Roman  captain.  Therefore  their  attitude  was  inevitable, 
and  their  finding  was  a  foregone  conclusion.  This  was 
not  a  court  of  justice.  The  only  possible  friend  he  had, 
as  he  faced  the  Sanhedrim,  was  the  Roman  captain  who 
had  rescued  him,  and  had  put  him  in  this  position  in  order 
to  investigate  a  case  which  perplexed  him. 

The  shadow  of  dejection  over  his  spirit  is  discovered 
in  the  very  first  words  that  he  spoke.  "  Looking  stead- 
fastly on  the  council/'  he  said,  "  Brethren,  I  have  lived 
before  God  in  all  good  conscience  until  this  day." 

The  high  priest  immediately  commanded  that  he  should 
be  smitten  upon  the  mouth,  and  in  a  moment  we  see  Paul 
losing  all  his  dejection,  and  flaming  into  anger :  "God  shall 
smite  thee,  thou  whited  wall ;  and  sittest  thou  to  judge  me 
according  to  the  law,  and  commandest  me  to  be  smitten 
contrary  to  the  law  ?  "  That  was  a  manifestation  of  his 

[  494  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  22:30-23] 

righteousness.  When  a  man  sitting  there,  ostensibly  to 
judge  him,  insulted  the  principle  of  righteousness,  he 
flamed.  He  did  not  know  he  was  the  high  priest.  When 
he  realized  that  the  man  who  had  thus  spoken  to  him  was 
the  appointed  ruler  in  the  Divine  economy,  he  apologized  ; 
not  for  the  protest  against  unrighteousness,  but  for  the 
method  of  it;  and  in  that  apology  there  was  evidence  of 
his  passion  for  righteousness  as  surely  as  there  was  in 
the  protest  itself. 

Paul  now  became  conscious,  or  woke  to  the  conscious- 
ness that  the  Sanredrim  was  divided,  that  there  were 
Pharisees  there.  He  appealed  to  them  therefore : 

"  Brethren,  I  am  a  Pharisee,  a  son  of  Pharisees ;  touch- 
ing the  hope  and  resurrection  of  the  dead  I  am  called  in 
question." 

It  has  been  affirmed  that  in  this  appeal  he  was  making 
an  effort  to  defeat  that  Sanhedrim,  and  secure  his  own 
escape.  I  do  not  so  read  the  story.  I  believe  that  he 
was  trying  to  find  a  vantage  ground  for  reaching  his 
brethren  with  the  evangel  of  the  resurrection.  It  was 
his  attempt  to  rearrest  men  whom  he  had  lost,  to  get  one 
other  chance  to  win  them  for  his  Lord. 

Let  us  now  look  at  Paul  in  the  darkness  and  quietness 
of  the  night  succeeding  this  day  of  strange  and  perplex- 
ing emotions.  Let  us  try  and  get  with  him  into  the 
prison.  The  uppermost  thought  of  his  mind  would  in- 
evitably be  that  of  the  disastrous  failure  of  the  day.  His 
claim  of  sincerity  had  been  insulted.  His  passion  for 
righteousness  had  been  defeated.  His  purpose  of 
testimony  had  been  frustrated.  I  believe  there  settled 
upon  his  spirit  that  night  the  sense  of  utter  dejection.  I 
believe  he  was  overwhelmed  with  a  sense  of  his  failure  in 
Jerusalem.  I  believe  he  was  confronted  with  grave 
doubts  as  to  the  future  of  his  ministry.  We  argue  these 
things,  first  of  all  from  the  experiences  through  which  he 
had  passed,  and  from  what  it  seems  natural  any  human 

[  495  3 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  22 : 30-23] 

heart  would  feel.  But  we  also  argue  them  from  things 
Christ  said  to  him.  We  shall  see  presently  that  the 
three  words  of  Christ  exactly  met  those  attitudes  of  mind. 
This  man  was  in  prison,  dejected,  disappointed.  He  had 
come  up  to  Jerusalem,  bearing  gifts,  and  he  had  not  been 
granted  a  hearing.  He  had  not  been  able  to  win  those  he 
loved,  his  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh.  He  had  failed 
in  Jerusalem.  Then  his  mind  would  travel  away  to  those 
hopes  and  aspirations  that  had  filled  hini  for  so  many 
months,  his  passionate  desire  to  reach  Rome.  He  had 
said,  "  I  must  see  Rome  also."  It  was  not  at  all  certain 
now  that  he  ever  would.  It  looked  as  though  he  were 
hemmed  in,  and  defeated.  He  was  suffering  from  dejec- 
tion, despair,  and  doubt.  That  is  the  story  of  one  of  the 
darkest  nights  in  the  history  of  Paul. 

The  rest  of  the  story  is  full  of  splendour.  That  night 
the  Lord  stood  by  him,  and  spoke  to  him.  We  should 
insult  the  very  sacredness  of  this  incident  if  we  discussed 
how  the  Lord  appeared,  or  how  Paul  heard  Him.  He 
was  there,  and  Paul  knew  it.  He  spoke,  and  Paul  heard 
it. 

Mark  the  fact  of  the  presence.  "The  Lord  stood  by 
him."  Think  of  all  the  past,  think  of  those  wonderful 
journeys,  and  the  buffeting  and  the  bruising,  and  the 
darkest  and  most  trying  of  all  the  days,  far  more  trying 
than  the  hour  in  which  he  lay  well-nigh  dead  from  the 
stones  in  Lystra.  He  was  dejected,  despairing,  full  of 
doubt. 


"  Sometimes  a  light  surprises 

The  Christian  while  he  sings. 
It  is  the  Lord,  Who  rises 
With  healing  in  His  wings." 

"  The  Lord  stood  by  him."  The  Lord  was  familiar  with 
his  experiences.  He  also  had  been  in  Jerusalem,  buffeted, 
broken,  bruised,  alone;  but  He  had  been  victorious  over 
those  very  experiences.  He  was  filled  with  genuine 

1 496 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  22:30-23] 

sympathy,  not  pity.  Pity  is  often  an  insult.  Sympathy 
is  another  matter.  It  is  bearing  with,  entering  into  the 
experiences  of  another.  Was  Paul  dejected?  The  Lord 
standing  by  him,  felt  in  the  mystery  of  His  own  Divine 
mind,  all  the  misery  of  his  dejection.  Was  Paul  disap- 
pointed and  in  despair,  because  he  had  failed  in  Jeru- 
salem? All  the  iron  of  it  entered  into  the  very  spirit  of 
his  Lord.  Was  Paul  in  doubt  about  the  future  ?  His 
Lord  knew  the  pang  of  the  pain. 

Then  He  spoke  to  him,  and  in  doing  so  covered  all  the 
ground  of  his  need.  He  had  a  word  for  his  dejection, 
"  Be  of  good  cheer."  He  had  a  word  for  his  sense  that 
he  had  failed  in  Jerusalem,  "Thou  hast  testified  con- 
cerning Me  at  Jerusalem."  There  may  have  been  failure 
in  method,  in  policy,  but  the  motive  was  pure,  and  there- 
fore the  Lord  could  say,  "  Thou  hast  testified."  He  had 
a  word  for  his  fear  about  the  future,  "  So  must  thou  bear 
witness  also  at  Rome."  What  a  night  it  was.  How  full 
of  light,  how  full  of  glory.  His  Master's  word  of  cheer 
to  chase  away  the  dejection  of  his  spirit;  his  Master's 
word  of  commendation  astonishing  him,  and  yet  comfort- 
ing him  in  view  of  his  failure ;  his  Master's  word  of  ap- 
pointment, filling  him  with  certainty  that  in  spite  of  all 
the  difficulties  in  front  of  him,  he  should  preach  in 
Rome. 

If  I  were  asked  to  express  the  teaching  of  this  para- 
graph for  my  own  heart,  I  would  use  the  first  great  words 
of  our  perpetual  benediction :  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  As  to  the  present,  He  ever  brings  us  in 
hours  of  darkness  the  cheer  of  His  nearness.  When  He 
does  so,  prisons  become  sanctuaries,  dark  nights  become 
golden  days  of  sunlight.  As  to  the  past,  we  have  His 
word  of  approval.  Notwithstanding  all  failure  of  method 
and  accomplishment,  if  the  motive  has  been  pure,  He  will 
say,  Well  done.  As  to  the  future,  we  have  the  certainty 
of  His  appointment. 

In  the  rest  of  our  paragraph  (23 : 12-35),  we  have  the 

[  497  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  22 : 30-23] 

story  of  how  the  first  word  of  the  Lord,  spoken 
in  the  night,  was  vindicated,  and  the  last  word  was  ful- 
filled. 

The  vindication  of  the  first  word,  "  Be  of  good  cheer/' 
will  be  found  finally  as  we  follow  Paul  through  the  vicis- 
situdes of  the  next  two  and  a  half  or  three  years.  The 
final  vindication  of  the  Lord's  last  word,  "  So  must  thou 
bear  witness  also  at  Rome,"  will  be  found  in  the  closing 
paragraph  of  the  book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 

There  are  three  matters  of  interest  in  this  paragraph: 
first  the  mental  mood  of  the  apostle;  second,  the  sur- 
rounding circumstances  in  the  midst  of  which  we  find 
him;  and  finally,  the  unseen  Presence,  the  overruling 
Lord. 

Observe  Paul's  mental  mood.  The  night  had  passed; 
the  close,  intimate,  mystic,  and  exceptional  consciousness 
of  the  Presence  had  gone.  The  voice  was  sounding  no 
longer  in  his  ears ;  he  was  still  in  prison,  and  conscious  of 
the  hostility  outside,  which  was  increasing;  he  was  face 
to  face  with  multiplying  difficulties.  Yet  everything  was 
changed,  and  the  mood  resulting  from  that  holy  fellow- 
ship in  the  darkness  of  the  night  with  his  Lord  is  seen 
in  all  the  subsequent  story.  There  was  perfect  assurance. 
This  man  never  wavered  again,  through  all  perils  which 
grieved,  tried,  and  brought  suffering  upon  him.  Turn  to 
the  Corinthian  letters,  and  see  the  description  of  some  of 
his  trials.  But  through  them  all,  faith  never  wavered. 

But  more,  there  was  poised  and  balanced  judgment 
manifest  ever  after  in  this  man's  attitudes  and  activities. 
All  his  actions  were  the  reasonable  activities  of  faith; 
neglecting  nothing,  attending  to  all  things.  He  passed 
on  the  report  of  the  plot  to  the  chief  governor,  and  ex- 
pected that  Rome  would  do  its  duty,  and  be  just.  A  little 
later  on  he  availed  himself  of  his  citizenship,  and  made 
his  appeal  to  Caesar.  He  took  charge  of  the  ship  in  the 
hour  of  coming  peril.  There  was  no  recurrence  of  de- 
jection, no  more  sadness  on  account  of  failure.  His 

1 498 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  22:36-23] 

Ebrd  had  said  to  him,  "  Thou  hast  testified  concerning 
Me  at  Jerusalem,"  and  he  was  content  to  abide  by  his 
Master's  measurement  of  his  work  rather  than  by  his 
own.  Moreover  he  had  no  further  doubt  as  to  the  issue. 
He  would  reach  Rome  in  spite  of  shipwrecks  and  Eura- 
quilo,  barbarians,  and  vipers,  and  he  knew  it.  Hence- 
forth he  is  seen  as  a  man  moving  quietly  and  strongly 
onward  toward  the  goal.  His  story  is  that  of  a  triumphal 
progress,  in  which  he  is  seen  superior  to  all  circumstances, 
and  yet  all  the  way  buying  up  the  opportunities.  He  had 
passed  into  the  realm  of  a  great  and  dignified  peace  and 
quietness  and  confidence,  because  he  dared  believe  what 
his  Lord  had  said  to  him  in  the  quietness  of  that  one 
night. 

Glance  at  the  surrounding  circumstances.  Forty  men 
were  plotting  and  planning,  and  pledging  themselves 
neither  to  eat  nor  drink  until  he  was  dead.  Then  re- 
member his  loneliness;  he  had  no  help  from  the  Church, 
there  was  no  message  sent  to  him  from  that  assembly. 
In  an  earlier  chapter  we  find  that  when  Peter  was  in 
prison  there  was  a  prayer  meeting.  We  do  not  read  that 
there  was  any  for  Paul.  Perhaps  it  is  not  safe  to  build 
upon  the  argument  of  silence,  but  I  think  we  are  warranted 
in  saying  there  was  no  praying.  At  least  there  was  no  at- 
tempt to  help  him.  There  was  no  one  in  Jerusalem  to 
whom  he  could  turn.  The  only  man  likely  to  be  friendly 
toward  him,  and  that  was  a  very  questionable  friendship, 
was  Claudius  Lysias,  the  chief  captain.  The  determined 
hostility  of  the  men  outside  had  as  its  inspiration  religious 
fanaticism,  and  that  is  always  the  most  deadly  form  of 
hostility.  There  was  no  change  from  former  conditions 
save  for  the  worst ;  no  ray  of  earthly  light  breaking  upon 
the  darkness ;  and  yet  he  was  quiet  and  strong.  How  can 
it  be  accounted  for?  The  Lord  had  been  with  him,  the 
Lord  had  said,  "  Be  of  good  cheer."  The  music  of  that 
anthem  was  singing  itself  out  in  his  soul,  while  men  out- 
side were  plotting,  and  all  forces  were  against  him.  The 

[  499  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  22 : 30-23] 

Lord  had  set  the  seal  of  His  approval  even  upon  his 
testimony  in  Jerusalem..  The  Lord  had  declared  he 
should  witness  in  Rome,  and  he  knew  no  hostility  could 
prevent  His  purpose. 

The  overruling  Lord  is  not  seen  in  this  paragraph  by 
the  eyes  of  sense.  As  a  matter  of  fact  beyond  that  vision 
of  the  night  there  is  nothing  miraculous  here.  It  is  a 
commonplace  story.  There  was  no  great  crisis,  no 
thunder,  no  lightning,  no  bolt  from  the  blue.  The  first 
instrument  was  Paul's  sister's  son.  We  know  absolutely 
nothing  about  him.  He  never  appears  again  in  the  nar- 
rative. He  heard  the  rumour  of  the  plot,  and  he  went  to 
tell  Paul.  The  unseen  Lord  took  hold  of  the  youth,  and 
working  along  the  line  of  the  commonplace,  proceeded 
to  the  ultimate  deliverance.  He  found  entrance  to  the 
prison,  and  was  taken  to  Paul ;  and  then  the  message  was 
sent  by  Paul  to  Lysias. 

The  next  person  to  notice  is  Lysias.  The  heart  of  this 
man  was  moved.  An  Egyptian  had  recently  led  out  a 
host,  and  there  had  been  much  bloodshed  and  slaughter. 
Their  Roman  governors  were  watching  these  turbulent 
Jews  very  carefully,  and  this  man  was  afraid  of  a  riot. 
He  told  Felix  how  he  had  delivered  Paul  from  the  mob, 
when  he  found  that  he  was  a  Roman  citizen,  and  that  he 
brought  him  to  the  council  of  the  Jews.  His  action  was 
a  result  of  the  touching  of  his  heart  either  with  fear  or 
sympathy,  but  by  the  unseen  Lord. 

Look  at  the  issue.  Forty  men  were  lying  in  wait,  and 
getting  ready  on  the  morrow  to  kill  him.  How  did  his 
Lord  save  him  from  the  forty  ?  By  setting  him  out,  not 
on  foot,  to  drag  his  bruised  and  weary  limbs  along  the 
wayside,  but  on  horseback,  with  four  hundred  and  seventy 
men.  That  was  how  he  left  Jerusalem.  For  between 
thirty-five  and  forty  miles  through  the  night  he  rode  in 
the  midst  of  these  soldiers,  as  far  as  Antipatris.  Then 
the  danger  zone  being  passed,  four  hundred  of  them  went 
back  to  Jerusalem,  and  Paul  went  on  to  Caesarea,  sitting 

[  500  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  22 : 30-<23] 

in  the  centre  of  seventy  of  the  Roman  cavalry.    That  is 
how  the  Lord  took  care  of  him. 

It  all  ends  with  these  words :  "  kept  in  Herod's  palace." 
Built  by  Herod,  the  Idumsean,  appropriated  by  the  Roman 
procurator,  taken  away  from  Herod  at  this  time,  the 
palace  was  used  by  the  Lord  as  a  safe  place  for  His 
servant.  It  was  a  prison,  but  a  prison  is  a  palace  when 
the  Lord  provides  it  for  His  servant. 

Said  this  man  in  his  letters,  "There  is  one  Lord." 
This  is  the  Lord,  his  Lord,  and  our  Lord.  "  There  is 
one  faith."  It  was  his  faith  in  this  Lord  that  made  him 
strong.  Our  faith  is  in  this  Lord.  "  There  is  one  bap- 
tism," the  baptism  of  the  Spirit  whereby  the  believing 
soul  is  made  one  with  this  Lord.  We  have  shared  that 
baptism  if  we  are  Christian  souls.  "  One  God  and 
Father  of  us  all,  Who  is  over  all,  and  in  all,  and  through 
all,"  the  God  and  Father  of  that  Lord  and  that  apostle, 
and  of  us  all. 

Look  back  then  at  this  story,  and  in  its  light  let  us 
look  back  on  our  own  lives,  and  as  we  do  so,'  we  see  a 
mosaic.  Oh  the  supernaturalism  of  the  natural !  It  was 
the  Lord  Who  turned  us  to  the  side  street,  Who  sent  the 
caller  at  that  moment,  Who  made  the  inquisitive  boy  care 
to  hear  the  story  and  tell  it.  It  was  the  Lord ! 

We  take  up  the  Old  Testament,  and  read  a  sentence 
like  this,  "  In  that  night  could  not  the  King  sleep."  What 
kept  him  awake  ?  The  supernatural  God  kept  him  awake. 
To  amuse  himself  that  yawning,  restless  king  said,  Bring 
me  out  those  records,  and  read;  and  they  read  to  him 
about  Mordecai.  Oh  the  little  natural  things,  and  the 
supernatural  Lord ! 

We  look  back,  and  life  is  a  mosaic.  Look  round,  and 
it  is  all  confusion.  There  is  no  hope  in  circumstances, 
there  is  no  help  in  man.  But  the  Lord  is  committed  to 
us,  and  we  may  be  quiet.  He  will  use  the  small  thing  to 
save  us ;  the  curious  boy ;  He  will  compel  the  great  things 
to  our  service,  the  Roman  soldiers  if  need  be  shall  guard 

[501 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  24] 

us.    It  is  indeed  a  commonplace  story,  but  it  is  radiant 
with  the  light  of  God's  eternal  day. 

Acts  24 

This  chapter  covers  a  period  of  two  years.  The  details 
have  to  do  mainly  with  the  earlier  days  of  that  period, 
and  there  are  three  matters  for  our  consideration;  first, 
the  story  itself  as  part  of  the  history  of  the  apostle's 
work;  secondly,  the  events  recorded,  as  part  of  the 
Divine  activity;  and  finally,  and  perhaps  principally,  the 
teaching  of  the  story  of  Felix. 

The  story  itself  is  simple,  and  yet  very  full  of  interest 
and  value.  An  accusation  was  brought  against  the  serv- 
ant of  Christ  by  his  enemies;  he  made  his  defence;  and 
the  issue  of  the  accusation  and  defence  is  recorded. 

The  inspiration  of  that  accusation  is  made  evident  by 
the  presence  of  Ananias  the  high  priest.  In  considering 
this  story  the  geographical  facts  should  be  remembered, 
and  the  age  in  which  these  things  happened.  One  can 
imagine  with  what  distaste  an  old  man  like  Ananias  would 
make  this  journey  of  about  seventy  miles.  Nevertheless 
he  did  so  in  great  haste.  The  memory  of  that  simple 
fact  will  help  us  to  understand  the  inspiration  of  this 
opposition.  It  was  caused  by  the  hatred  that  had  entered 
into  the  heart  of  this  man,  and  all  those  associated  with 
him,  toward  Paul,  and  toward  all  that  for  which  Paul 
stood.  Coming  for  this  reason,  to  a  Roman  court,  he 
brought  with  him  an  orator  or  barrister,  one  accustomed 
to  the  order  of  the  court,  and  able  to  plead  the  cause  of 
the  high  priest  and  his  friends,  and  to  present  the  accusa- 
tion in  correct  legal  phrasing.  That  is  exactly  what 
Tertullus  did. 

Let  us  carefully  consider  the  indictment.  What  was 
the  charge  against  Paul?  They  first  of  all  described  him 
as  "  a  pestilent  fellow."  That  in  itself  was  a  very  serious 
charge.  It  was  intended  to  be  a  declaration  of  the  char- 
acter of  Paul,  and  was  employed  in  order  to  prejudice  his 

[  502  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  24] 

case  in  the  minds  of  the  Roman  governor  and  the  court. 
No  word  could  have  been  used  by  Tertullus  in  the  pres- 
ence of  Felix,  more  calculated  to  suggest  that  Paul  was  a 
man  of  the  very  basest  morals.  The  translation  hardly 
carries  the  offensiveness  of  the  description. 

Introducing  him  thus  as  "  a  pestilent  fellow,"  the 
charges  were  three ;  first  that  he  was  "  a  mover  of  insur- 
rections among  all  the  Jews  throughout  all  the  world." 
The  only  ground  there  could  have  been  for  any  such 
charge  might  have  been  that  the  account  of  the  uproar 
in  Ephesus,  and  at  Philippi,  had  reached  Jerusalem.  The 
second  charge  and  the  real  one,  so  far  as  the  enmity  of 
his  enemies  was  concerned,  was  uttered  when  Tertullus 
said  that  he  was  "  a  ringleader  of  the  sect  of  the  Naza- 
renes."  The  third  charge  was  of  the  nature  of  an  illustra- 
tion in  proof  of  both  these  earlier  charges,  and  was  ex- 
pressed in  the  words :  "  Who  moreover  assayed  to  pro- 
fane the  temple."  Had  this  been  true,  then  by  such  prof- 
anation Paul  would  have  violated  the  Hebrew  law,  and 
run  the  risk  of  stirring  up  insurrection  in  Jerusalem  itself. 
This  general  examination  of  the  accusation  shows  that  it 
consisted  of  a  truth  objectionably  stated.  This  then  was 
the  charge  preferred  against  Paul  as  he  was  arraigned 
before  Felix. 

The  defence  of  Paul  is  a  singular  illustration  of  his 
ability.  His  introduction  was  characterized  by  courtesy, 
without  flattery,  standing  in  striking  contrast  to  the  in- 
troduction of  Tertullus,  the  orator.  But  his  arguments 
were  strictly  and  severely  logical.  He  first  denied  the 
charges,  and  demanded  proof.  His  familiarity  with 
Roman  law  was  clearly  evidenced  when  he  declared  that 
those  who  accused  him  ought  to  be  present  to  prove  their 
case.  The  distinction  that  was  always  made  in  that  law 
between  accusation  and  proof  was  thus  recognized,  and 
pleaded  before  the  Roman  judge.  Having  thus  denied 
the  charges,  and  demanded  proof,  Paul  then  proceeded  to 
tell  Felix  his  own  story,  setting  that  story  over  against 

[  503  1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  24] 

the  charges  made.  He  gave  him  the  history  of  his  relig- 
ion, and  there  was  a  fine  and  wonderful  art  in  the  way 
he  presented  it  to  this  man,  Felix.  He  dismissed  the 
Hebrew  description  of  his  religion  with  a  touch  of  satire. 
They  had  spoken  of  it  as  a  sect ;  but  he  said,  "  I  confess 
unto  thee,  that  after  the  Way  which  they  call  a  sect,  so 
serve  I  the  God  of  our  fathers."  Everything  he  subse- 
quently said  on  that  matter  was  in  denial  of  their  state- 
ments. His  claim  was  that  his  religion  was  their  religion ; 
carried  to  its  ultimate  conclusion.  In  effect  he  claimed 
that  they  had  profaned  their  own  religion,  and  violated 
its  intention  by  stopping  short  at  a  point,  when  they 
should  have  gone  on.  He  claimed  that  his  religion  was 
according  to  Hebrew  religion,  "  So  serve  I  the  God  of  our 
fathers."  He  argued  that  this  Way  was  "  according  to 
the  law,"  and  in  harmony  with  that  which  was  "  written 
in  the  prophets."  He  declared  that  it  was  according  to 
the  spiritual  hope  of  resurrection,  which  was  at  the  heart 
of  the  Hebrew  religion.  Finally  he  maintained  that  it 
was  his  religion  according  to  personal  conviction. 

Proceeding,  he  told  Felix  the  reason  of  his  presence 
in  Jerusalem,  how  that  after  many  years'  absence  he  had 
returned  there  to  bring  alms  to  his  nation.  He  em- 
phatically denied  that  he  had  made  insurrection,  describ- 
ing the  peaceableness  of  his  visit  there.  He  declared  he 
had  stirred  up  no  tumult,  either  in  temple,  synagogue,  or 
city.  So  the  defence  of  Paul  consisted  first  of  a  claim 
for  justice,  and  then  of  the  quiet  telling  of  his  own  story. 

The  issue  was  first  of  all  the  extension  of  clemency  on 
the  part  of  Felix,  in  the  adjournment  of  the  case;  and 
the  charge  to  the  centurion  that  while  Paul  be  kept  in 
safety  he  was  to  be  treated  with  all  clemency,  and  that 
his  friends  be  allowed  to  reach  him. 

Then  curiosity  manifested  itself  on  the  part  of  the 
judge  as  he  sent  for  Paul  to  talk  to  him  about  his  faith  ; 
and  we  have  that  marvellous  picture  of  the  reasoning  of 
Paul  with  Felix,  and  the  resulting  terror  of  the  judge. 

[  504  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  24] 

Presently  we  observe  the  cupidity  of  Felix,  as  he  hoped 
that  there  might  be  a  bribe.  So  again  he  held  repeated 
conversations  with  him,  and  the  weeks  slipped  on  into 
months,  and  months  into  two  years.  That  is  a  very  im- 
pressive fact  in  this  story.  Two  years  Paul  was  in  the 
custody  of  Felix,  and  during  this  period  this  man,  with 
the  great  word  of  liberty,  held  constant  conversation  with 
Felix.  The  end  of  it  was  compromise  on  the  part  of  the 
judge,  who  desired  to  obtain  favour  with  the  Jews.  We 
need  all  the  background  of  the  history  to  understand  that. 
Felix  had  at  last  been  summoned  to  Rome,  because  of  his 
cruelty  to  these  people,  and  was  in  grave  danger  of  los- 
ing, not  only  position,  but  life.  Currying  favour  with  the 
Jews,  Felix  left  Paul  in  bonds.  In  all  the  early  stages 
of  his  imprisonment  Paul  had  been  allowed  great  liberty, 
but  when  Felix  left  him,  he  made  more  severe  restric- 
tions ;  leaving  him  in  actual  bonds. 

Now  let  us  look  at  these  events  in  the  light  of  the 
Divine  activity.  Paul  was  being  transferred  from  He- 
brew to  Roman  influence  and  surroundings.  Already  he 
was  moving,  though  apparently  with  great  slowness,  to- 
ward Rome  itself.  It  is  not  easy  to  see  the  sequence. 
There  came  a  critical  moment  almost  immediately  Felix 
had  gone,  when  Festus  arrived,  and  Paul  used  the  Roman 
formula,  "  I  appeal  unto  Caesar."  It  is  easy  to  under- 
stand the  trial  of  his  faith  at  this  time.  Two  years  had 
gone,  years  in  which  a  vacillating  and  corrupt  judge  had 
often  talked  to  him,  hoping  to  obtain  a  bribe  from  him ; 
years  which  had  apparently  done  nothing  to  give  him  any 
hope  of  release.  Yet  all  the  while  we  see  by  the  over- 
ruling of  his  Lord  and  Master,  this  man  was  moving  into 
the  Roman  influence  and  atmosphere,  and  approaching 
the  hour  of  that  appeal  which  would  issue  in  his  coming 
to  Rome. 

Yet  is  there  not  another  value  in  this  two  years?  I 
cannot  meditate  upon  this  chapter  without  discovering 
what  seems  to  me  to  be  one  of  those  tender  and  gracious 

[  505  1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  24] 

provisions  which  the  Master  constantly  makes  for  His 
servants.  Think  of  the  two  years  in  prison,  and  then 
remember  the  quietness  of  those  years,  by  comparison 
with  the  rapid  movement  and  tireless  activity  and  stress 
and  strain  and  storm  of  the  years  that  had  preceded.  I 
believe  those  two  years  in  prison  were  the  Lord's  method 
of  resting  His  servant,  and  preparing  him  for  the  years 
lying  before  him,  for  do  not  forget  they  were  years  of 
comparative  comfort.  Almost  surely  Luke  and  Aristar- 
chus  were  with  him  there;  and  Philip  also,  who  twenty 
years  before,  had  been  driven  from  Jerusalem  by  the  per- 
secuting spirit  of  this  very  man,  and  who  but  recently 
had  been  Paul's  host,  refreshing  him  in  his  own  house 
for  a  little  time. 

A  very  interesting  suggestion  has  been  made  that  in  all 
likelihood  it  was  during  this  period  that  the  letter  to  the 
Hebrews  was  written.  I  know  the  doubt  and  the  diffi- 
culty about  the  authorship  of  that  letter,  and  that  there 
are  those  who  think  that  Paul  was  not  the  writer.  My 
own  conviction  is  that  Luke  was  the  writer,  but  that  he 
wrote  what  Paul  had  taught.  Possibly  during  those  two 
years  Paul  talked  with  Luke  again  concerning  the  things 
which  Luke  had  so  often  heard  him  teach  in  those  syna- 
gogues in  Gentile  cities ;  and  then  Luke  wrote  the  think- 
ing of  Paul  in  this  form  of  the  Hebrew  letter.  If  we 
remember  the  Hebrew  opposition  at  that  time,  and  that 
Paul  was  considered  by  them  to  be  a  man  in  conflict  with 
the  Divine  religion;  and  then  read  the  letter,  we  shall 
see  that  it  argues  exactly  what  he  claimed  before  Felix, 
that  the  religion  of  "  the  Way "  was  the  fulfilment  of 
the  Hebrew  ideal.  That  view  is  carried  out  to  consum- 
mation and  perfection  therein.  While  all  that  is  specula- 
tion, it  is  certainly  true  that  some  of  the  finest  and  most 
formative  writings  the  world  has  ever  had,  have  been 
writings  from  the  prison  house.  Some  of  Paul's  great  let- 
ters, the  Ephesian  and  Colossian,  were  written  from  a 
later  imprisonment.  The  majority  of  these  days,  how- 

[506] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  24] 

ever,  were  not  days  of  toil  and  strife,  but  of  quiet  fel- 
lowship with  Luke,  Aristarchus,  and  Philip;  broken  in 
upon  with  conversations  with  Felix. 

The  last  picture  is  that  of  Felix.  The  very  name  Felix 
is  suggestive  of  a  reckless  abandonment  to  pleasure ;  the 
name  meaning  happy.  This  man  was  a  freed  slave,  one 
who  had  risen  from  the  lowest  ranks  in  the  most  corrupt 
city  at  the  time;  a  man  who  had  forced  his  way  into 
power,  side  by  side  with  his  own  brother,  in  a  degraded 
court.  The  character  of  the  man  is  most  remarkably 
revealed,  not  in  Biblical  history,  but  by  the  Roman  his- 
torian, Tacitus,  who  said  of  him: 

"  Through  all  cruelty  and  licentiousness  he  exercised 
the  authority  of  a  king  with  the  spirit  of  a  slave." 

That  is  a  most  illuminative  statement.  There  is  no 
despot  so  cruel  as  a  slave  when  he  is  put  on  a  throne. 
When  these  slaves  became  free  men,  they  always  took  a 
new  name;  and  this  man  was  named  Felix,  happy.  In 
what  sense  was  he  happy,  for  he  was  palpably  cruel,  as 
all  the  history  reveals  ?  He  was  happy  with  that  reckless 
abandonment  to  pleasure  which  trampled  upon  every 
thought  of  righteousness  and  every  right  of  man.  When 
he  listened  to  Paul,  by  his  side  sat  Drusilla,  with  whom 
he  was  living  at  the  moment  in  open  and  wanton  adultery. 
He  was  utterly  cruel.  All  the  history  outside  the  New 
Testament  reveals  it.  He  was  corrupt,  as  that  story  of 
Drusilla  does  most  surely  reveal.  He  was  covetous,  for 
even  though  probably  he  had  a  real  desire  at  first  after 
light,  the  hope  that  he  might  be  bribed  by  this  prisoner 
who  was  in  Jerusalem  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  alms, 
mastered  him.  Finally  he  was  a  man  of  perpetual  com- 
promise, whose  habit  was  the  habit  of  adjournment. 
He  adjourned  Paul's  case,  deferred  it.  He  adjourned 
his  own  case,  "  Go  thy  way  for  this  time ;  and  when  I 
have  a  convenient  season,  I  will  call  thee  unto  me,"  He 

[  507  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  24] 

was  always  postponing,  always  vacillating.    That  is  the 
picture  of  the  man. 

Now  mark  the  picture  of  that  man  in  his  contact  with 
Paul;  with  all  its  suggestiveness,  teaching,  and  solemn 
warning.  First  of  all  mark  the  fact  of  his  interest. 
There  is  a  significant  phrase  here.  When  he  decided  in 
favour  of  Paul,  that  is,  that  the  case  should  be  adjourned, 
and  that  he  should  be  treated  with  clemency,  Luke  wrote 
this,  "  Felix,  having  more  exact  knowledge  concerning 
the  Way,  deferred  them."  The  word  "  Way  "  there  is 
capitalized.  It  is  a  quotation  from  what  Paul  had  said, 
"  after  the  Way  which  they  call  a  sect."  What  knowl- 
edge had  Felix?  What  did  he  know  about  "  the  Way  ". 
We  do  not  know,  but  we  do  know  that  he  knew  some- 
thing more  about  "  the  Way  "  than  these  men  did.  There 
is  a  suggestion  of  some  past  connection  with  "  the  Way." 
Perhaps  like  Herod  in  the  olden  days,  at  one  time  this 
man  had  listened  with  care  to  some  teacher.  I  think  there 
is  some  light  upon  this  from  outside  history.  A  tragic 
story  from  profane  history  is  that  Simon  Magus,  after 
his  judgment,  had  found  his  way  to  the  court  of  Felix, 
and  it  is  said  that  through  Simon  Magus  the  unholy 
alliance  had  been  entered  into  between  Felix  and  Dru- 
silla.  That  is  the  background  by  the  side  of  Biblical 
history;  and  it  may  have  been  that  in  the  loneliness  of 
long  and  wearisome  nights,  Felix  and  Simon  Magus  had 
talked  about  this  "Way."  We  do  not  know  this  cer- 
tainly, but  what  we  do  know  is  that  he  had  more  exact 
knowledge  of  "the  Way";  and  now  either  good  or  ill 
fortune  had  put  Paul,  the  great  pioneer  of  "  the  Way  " 
at  his  disposal.  So  he  sent  for  him,  and  talked  to  him 
about  "  the  Way,"  and  asked  Paul  to  talk  to  him  about 
"  the  Way." 

Then  Paul  reasoned  with  him  about  righteousness, 
self-control,  and  judgment  to  come.  We  only  have  to 
read  the  words  to  be  back  in  the  very  atmosphere.  Paul 
reasoned  about  righteousness ;  and  Felix  with  the  memory 

508] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  24] 

of  the  years  of  his  governorship,  of  the  cruelty,  the 
wrong,  the  devilishness  of  the  past,  talked  with  him  about 
righteousness.  Paul  reasoned  also  about  self-control,  and 
Brasilia  was  at  his  side.  Then  he  reasoned  with  him 
about  "judgment  to  come."  Then  the  man  trembled. 
That  was  gracious  emotion.  Had  he  but  known  it,  his 
terror  was  the  demonstration  of  the  Divine  tenderness. 
It  created  his  opportunity. 

Then  he  procrastinated.  Go,  I  will  send  for  thee  again 
at  a  more  convenient  season.  Then  two  years  passed,  and 
Felix  was  going  back  to  Rome.  He  wanted  to  keep  these 
Jews  pleased  if  he  could.  He  was  now  hardened.  What 
a  mental  process.  The  man  with  a  corrupt  past,  cruel  by 
nature,  profligate  in  life,  corrupt  in  every  fibre  of  his  be- 
ing; yet  with  the  spiritual  faculty  within  him,  asserting 
itself  in  interest,  clamouring  for  the  ascendancy  over  his 
own  cupidity  and  corruption ;  wanting  to  talk  to  the  apos- 
tle ;  and  then  listening  to  him  as  he  reasoned  of  righteous- 
ness, of  self-control,  of  judgment  to  come.  If  this  man 
had  but  climbed  upon  his  terror  to  truth.  But  he  put  it 
away,  and  the  end  of  the  story  is  that  of  a  man  entirely 
hardened. 

Another  truth  to  be  learned  from  this  story  is  that  the 
nemesis  of  vacillation  is  hardness.  The  truth  is  taught  in 
many  ways  upon  the  pages  of  Holy  Scripture.  In  a 
thousand  ways  the  truth  is  emphasized  in  the  experience 
of  to-day.  Some  simply  observe  an  external  respectabil- 
ity, and  have  no  trembling.  There  in  the  past  are  deeds 
as  black  as  hell  in  their  lives.  If  by  the  great  tenderness 
and  compassion  of  our  God  they  may  tremble  for  a  mo- 
ment, that  trembling,  that  terror  is  their  opportunity  of 
return.  But  vacillation,  the  postponement  to  to-morrow, 
or  to  a  more  convenient  season,  means  hardening;  and 
hardness  of  heart  is  more  hopeless  than  profligacy,  than 
drunkenness,  or  adultery,  or  lust.  The  terror  of  the 
picture  to  me  is  the  hour  in  which  Felix  said,  Bind  him ; 
and  then  departed  to  Rome.  It  may  be  that,  when  pres- 

[  509  1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  25] 

ently  he  was  degraded — for  degraded  he  was  ultimately 
— it  may  be  that  once  again  the  terror  seized  him;  and 
when  Paul  was  not  seeking  him,  he  sighed  himself  out 
to  Paul's  Lord.  If  so,  he  was  received  and  healed.  If 
any  man  conscious  of  his  past  of  sin  and  of  shame,  has 
felt  the  keen  and  biting  blast  of  the  wind  sweeping  across 
his  soul,  filling  him  with  terror,  and  has  answered  it  im- 
mediately by  casting  himself  upon  the  infinite  mercy  of 
God,  then  that  man  may  and  will  be  healed  and  remade. 

Acts  25 

This  chapter  is  part  of  a  larger  whole.  Chapter  twenty- 
six  is  needed  to  complete  the  story.  The  whole  section 
is  the  account  of  Paul's  last  set  address  before  reaching 
Rome ;  his  final  "  apologia  pro  vita  sua." 

This  chapter  (25)  is  preparatory;  and  in  it  we  find 
those  matters  which  created  the  atmosphere  for  this  final 
address  of  the  apostle.  There  are,  however,  in  the  chap- 
ter some  outstanding  values.  We  shall  briefly  survey 
the  picture,  taking  the  story  as  a  whole,  and  then  consider 
two  of  these  special  matters. 

Felix  was  succeeded  by  Porcius  Festus,  and  an  attempt 
was  immediately  made  on  the  part  of  the  Jews  to  have 
Paul  brought  to  Jerusalem.  After  two  years,  notwith- 
standing the  fact  that  a  new  high  priest  was  in  office — 
for  there  had  been  a  change  in  the  period, — their  hos- 
tility to  this  man  still  remained.  This  attempt  on  their 
part  was  frustrated  by  the  decision  of  Festus.  It  was 
a  remarkable  fact  that  Festus  declined  to  bring  Paul  to 
Jerusalem,  for  almost  immediately  afterwards  it  is  de- 
clared that  he  was  anxious,  as  the  new  governor  of  that 
neighbourhood,  to  secure  the  good-will  of  these  turbulent 
Jews;  and  presently  he  suggested  to  Paul  that  his  case 
should  be  transferred  to  Jerusalem ;  but  in  the  first  move- 
ment he  declined.  This  is  quite  inexplicable,  apart  from 
the  fact  that  this  man  was  all  the  way  being  guided  by 
God,  and  that  here,  as  in  so  many  other  instances,  which 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  25] 

we  have  noticed  in  the  study  of  this  book,  the  touch  of 
the  Divine  power  was  laid  upon  the  heart  of  an  unsus- 
pecting governor,  in  order  to  contribute  toward  the  end. 

The  trial  took  place  at  Caesarea.  Very  few  details  are 
given,  because  they  are  unnecessary.  The  charges  made 
against  Paul  were  many, — as  Luke  declares,  "  many  and 
grievous," — but  they  were  not  proven;  and  the  apostle's 
defence  was  simply  that  of  definite  and  emphatic  denial  of 
every  charge  they  had  brought  against  him. 

Then  came  Festus'  proposition  that  he  should  be  taken 
to  Jerusalem,  and  there  tried  by  a  court  of  the  Jews, 
undoubtedly  the  Sanhedrim,  in  the  presence  of  Festus 
himself.  It  was  in  connection  with  that  suggestion  that 
Paul  made  his  appeal  to  Caesar.  In  whatever  language 
this  particular  trial  was  carried  forward,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  he  made  use  of  the  actual  legal  formula;  and 
having  declared  to  Festus  his  reason,  used  the  very  words 
which  might  be  used  by  Roman  citizens  under  certain 
circumstances,  "  Csesarem  appello !  "  In  a  moment,  by 
virtue  of  the  fact  that  he  was  a  Roman  citizen,  and  that 
Caesar  had  arrogated  to  himself — robbing  the  Republic  of 
its  own  powers  in  the  process  of  the  years, — the  right  to 
final  decision,  Festus  dared  not  commit  him  to  Jerusalem. 
After  conference  with  his  council  he  gave  the  equally 
legal  form  of  answer  which  is  translated  here  in  the 
words,  "  Thou  hast  appealed  unto  Caesar :  unto  Csesar 
shalt  thou  go."  "  Caesarem  appellesti ;  ad  Csesarem  ibis." 

Paul  had  said,  "  I  must  also  see  Rome."  In  the  lone- 
liness of  a  night  of  dejection  his  Master  had  said  to  him, 
"  So  must  thou  bear  witness  also  at  Rome."  Now  from 
the  lips  of  the  representative  of  the  emperor  himself 
came  the  words,  "  Unto  Caesar  shalt  thou  go." 

Following  upon  the  trial  which  thus  ended,  there  was 
a  consultation  with  Agrippa.  Certain  things  are  revealed 
in  what  Festus  said  to  Agrippa,  which  are  interesting. 
He  told  Agrippa  definitely  that  the  Jews  had  asked  sen- 
tence against  Paul,  that  they  had  attempted  to  reach  him, 


THE  "ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  25] 

and  undoubtedly  influence  him  in  order  to  encompass  the 
death  of  this  man;  and  with  the  passion  for  justice  in  his 
heart  which  was  characteristic  of  Roman  governors,  he 
was  in  revolt  against  that  attempt  on  the  part  of  the 
Jews.  He  told  Agrippa  that  no  charge  of  evil  was 
brought  against  Paul  such  as  he  had  supposed;  but  only 
certain  questions  of  their  own  religion ;  and  the  particular 
word  there  translated  religion,  is  one  which  might  be 
translated  religion,  or  superstition.  Agrippa  was  a  Jew, 
and  so,  while  there  was  a  touch  of  courtesy  in  the  word, 
there  was,  perhaps,  also  an  element  of  contempt.  Then 
he  spoke  of  the  matter  of  supreme  foolishness,  "  One 
Jesus,  Who  was  dead,  Whom  Paul  affirms  to  be  alive." 

Then  we  come  to  the  last  picture,  that  of  Paul  before 
Agrippa  and  Bernice.  This  was  not  a  trial.  Agrippa 
had  no  jurisdiction.  Jurisdiction  had  passed  out  of  the 
hands  of  Festus.  That  "  Caesarem  appello  "  had  set  the 
apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  to  earthly  government,  face  to 
face  with  the  central  authority  in  the  world.  This  was 
a  court  function,  and  a  court  function  withal,  provided 
for  the  entertainment  of  Agrippa  and  Bernice,  who  had 
come  to  stay  for  a  while  with  Festus.  The  assembly  on 
this  occasion  is  worth  notice.  Festus  was  there,  the  host. 
Agrippa  was  a  vassal  of  Rome;  and  Festus  was  repre- 
sentative of  the  imperial  purple.  By  the  side  of  Agrippa 
was  Bernice.  The  chief  captains  were  there,  that  is  all 
the  heads  of  the  military  department  in  Cassarea,  the  chief 
officers;  and  the  principal  men,  that  is  the  civil  rulers. 
Luke  says  that  they  gathered  with  great  pomp.  We  see 
the  glitter,  the  glamour,  and  the  earthly  glory  of  the 
gathering. 

Look  at  the  three  principals.  Festus  now  stands  on 
one  side,  as  the  host  ever  has  to  do.  Agrippa,  Bernice, 
Paul ;  these  are  the  central  figures. 

Who  was  this  man  Agrippa  ?  Agrippa  the  Second,  was 
the  last  of  the  Herods.  His  great-grandfather  had  mur- 
dered the  innocents  at  the  birth  of  Jesus.  His  grand- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  25] 

uncle  had  murdered  John  Baptist  at  the  caprice  of  a 
wanton.  His  father,  Agrippa  the  First,  had  executed 
James ;  and  seeing  that  it  pleased  the  people,  had  sought 
to  lay  hands  on  Peter  also.  Each  of  these  men  had  died, 
or  been  disgraced  soon  after  the  events  referred  to.  Six- 
teen years  before  this  hour  when  Agrippa  the  Second  sat 
by  the  side  of  Bernice  facing  Paul,  his  father  had  been 
smitten  with  worms,  and  had  died  a  tragic  death  in  the 
hour  of  his  blasphemy.  These  brief  sentences  will  carry 
us  back  over  the  past,  and  put  us  into  sympathy  with  the 
mental  mood  of  Agrippa.  Somehow  the  destinies  of  his 
house  had  been  mixed  up  with  the  faith  and  fate  of 
Jesus;  and  when  Festus  had  said,  The  charge  against 
this  man  Paul  was  something  concerning  questions  of  his 
own  religion,  and  one  Jesus ;  Agrippa  had  expressed  his 
desire  to  hear  this  man.  Now  he  was  face  to  face  with 
Paul.  Remember  also  that  Agrippa  was  a  guardian  of 
the  temple,  the  appointer  of  the  high  priest.  These  were 
among  the  powers  that  he  retained,  but  he  was  also  the 
vassal  of  Rome. 

One  glance  only  at  the  woman  at  his  side.  Bernice  was 
his  own  sister,  sister  also  of  Drusilla,  the  wife  of  Felix, 
who  appeared  in  our  last  study,  a  woman  who  had  been 
married  to  her  own  uncle,  Herod;  had  abandoned  him, 
and  then  had  been  married  to  Polemon.  Jewish  and 
Roman  historians  agree  in  the  declaration  of  the  fact 
that  at  this  moment  Bernice  was  living  in  unnameable 
sin  with  Agrippa. 

The  third  figure,  Paul,  needs  no  description.  We  may 
perhaps  accept  Voltaire's  description  of  him ;  that  "  ugly 
little  Jew,"  mean  and  contemptible  of  bodily  presence; 
but  we  shall  see  the  contemptible  bodily  presence,  weak- 
ened by  the  process  of  the  years,  transfigured  with  a 
glory  in  the  presence  of  which,  all  the  pomp  and  the 
pageantry  for  the  entertainment  of  kings,  pales  into  in- 
significance. 

The  address  of  Festus  here  is  interesting.     He  told 

[513  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  25] 

Agrippa  the  claim  that  the  Jews  made  about  Paul,  that 
he  ought  not  to  live.  He  declared  to  Agrippa  the  verdict 
of  Roman  justice,  that  he  had  done  nothing  worthy  of 
death.  Then  he  stated  his  difficulty.  Paul  had  appealed 
to  Caesar.  It  was  not  permitted  to  a  governor  to  send  a 
prisoner  to  Caesar  unless  he  was  accompanied  by  the 
charge  preferred  against  him,  and  Felix  had  attempted 
to  find  the  charge. 

In  all  this  there  are  two  outstanding  matters  of  inter- 
est and  value.  The  first  is  that  of  the  action  of  Paul  in 
appealing  to  Caesar;  and  the  second  is  this  Roman  esti- 
mate of  the  supreme  matter  in  the  whole  difficulty :  "  One 
Jesus,  Who  was  dead/'  Whom  this  man  said  was  alive. 

This  action  of  Paul  in  appealing  to  Caesar  has  been 
characterized  by  certain  expositors  as  wrong;  they  have 
said  that  he  had  no  right  to  make  this  appeal.  Let  us  first 
enquire  what  this  appeal  was  in  itself.  It  was  a  turning 
on  the  part  of  Paul  from  those  who  had  violated  every 
principle  of  justice.  He  took  himself  and  his  case  by 
this  action  of  his  own  definite  will,  out  of  the  hands  of 
his  own  countrymen.  How  he  had  longed  for  them. 
How  he  had  prayed  for  them.  How  he  had  suffered  for 
them.  What  tears  and  agonies  and  heart-break  he  had 
known  on  their  behalf.  All  the  story  reveals  it,  and 
finally  his  Roman  letter.  But  at  this  moment  he  dis- 
tinctly turned  from  them,  because  they  had  violated  every 
principle  of  justice.  In  the  second  place  he .  made  an 
appeal  to  the  final  court  of  that  human  authority  which 
had  always  treated  him  justly.  That  is  not  too  strong  a 
statement  to  make.  From  the  beginning  of  his  missionary 
journeys  he  had  been  repeatedly  protected,  cared  for,  by 
the  authority  which  was  represented  by  the  Roman  power 
of  his  day.  They  had  been  fair  to  him,  their  lictors,  their 
prefects,  their  governors  had  all  been  fair  to  him,  and 
that  greatest  deposit  of  Rome,  the  sense  of  justice,  had 
been  active  on  his  behalf.  He  turned  definitely  from  his 
countrymen  who  had  violated  every  principle  of  justice, 

1 514] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  25] 

to  that  Roman  pagan  authority  which  had  always  treated 
him  justly.  Let  it  be  added,  that  it  was  a  consistent  final 
act.  He  had  claimed  Roman  citizenship  in  the  heart  of 
Jerusalem,  when  a  mob  had  been  attacking  him.  Having 
been  released  by  Lysias  the  chief  captain,  he  was  in  dan- 
ger of  being  bound  and  scourged.  Then  he  claimed 
citizenship.  A  little  later  on  he  had  claimed,  not  only 
citizenship,  but  Roman  protection.  When  he  learned 
from  his  sister's  son  of  the  plot  laid  against  him,  he  had 
given  information.  Now  at  last  the  man  who  had  claimed 
Roman  citizenship  and  protection,  claimed  Roman  justice, 
and  its  administration  by  the  emperor  himself. 

The  principles  underlying  this  appeal  are  revealed.  In 
his  Roman  letter,  written  to  the  Romans  at  an  earlier 
date  than  these  happenings,  these  words  occur: 

"  Let  every  soul  be  in  subjection  to  the  higher  powers ; 
for  there  is  no  power  but  of  God ;  and  the  powers  that  be 
are  ordained  of  God.  Therefore  he  that  resisteth  the 
power,  withstandeth  the  ordinance  of  God ;  and  they  that 
withstand  shall  receive  to  themselves  judgment.  For 
rulers  are  not  a  terror  to  the  good  work,  but  to  the  evil. 
And  wouldest  thou  have  no  fear  of  the  power?  do  that 
which  is  good,  and  thou  shalt  have  praise  from  the  same ; 
for  he  is  a  minister  of  God  to  thee  for  good.  But  if  thou 
do  that  which  is  evil,  be  afraid;  for  he  beareth  not  the 
sword  in  vain ;  for  he  is  a  minister  of  God,  an  avenger 
for  wrath  to  him  that  doeth  evil "  (13 : 1-4). 

That  letter  was  sent  to  Christians  in  Rome.  Its  applica- 
tion was  preeminently  to  that  Roman  authority  under 
which  they  lived.  It  was  the  idealizing  of  that  Roman 
authority.  If  in  the  exercise  of  authority  the  Roman 
power  had  violated  the  master  principles  here  revealed, 
Paul  would  have  been  the  first  to  dispute  the  Roman 
power.  But  this  idealization  of  the  Roman  power  showed 
that  authority  is  ordained  of  God  to  punish  evil-doers, 
and  to  reward  the  good.  That  was  Paul's  recognition  of 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  25] 

the  place  of  the  authority  of  the  Roman  emperor  at  the 
moment.  Recognizing  that  the  power  of  the  emperor, 
in  the  economy  of  God,  was  for  the  punishment  of  the 
evil-doer,  and  the  reward  of  the  good;  he  made  his  ap- 
peal to  the  emperor,  and  so  to  the  principle  of  justice  in 
the  economy  of  God  which  was  embodied  in  the  person 
of  the  ruler.  The  action  of  Paul  was  at  least  entirely 
consistent  with  his  philosophy  in  this  letter  to  the 
Romans;  and  any  who  feel  that  his  action  was  out  of 
place,  must  at  the  same  time  criticize  and  condemn  the 
philosophy  revealed  in  that  letter. 

But  let  us  look  at  this  in  another  way.  This  appeal 
meant  Paul's  use  of  rightful  means  to  avoid  personal 
suffering.  Using  the  words  martyr  and  martyrdom  in 
our  common  acceptation,  rather  than  in  the  true  sense  of 
them,  let  us  remember  that  the  man  who  seeks  martyr- 
dom is  never  a  martyr.  The  man  who  puts  himself  into 
the  way  of  a  sufferer,  knows  nothing  of  suffering.  It  is 
the  business  of  the  Christian  man,  when  on  the  business 
of  his  King,  to  avoid,  so  far  as  he  can,  the  pathway  of 
pain,  and  not  to  seek  it.  There  are  people  to-day  who 
seem  to  imagine  that  they  are  never  doing  anything  for 
God  unless  they  are  choosing  the  most  distasteful  line  of 
action.  It  does  not  follow.  If  God's  way  for  a  man  is 
to  walk  a  pathway  that  is  distasteful,  he  must  tramp  it. 
But  if  God  call  him  to  walk  in  a  path  that  is  delightful, 
then  he  will  walk  that  pathway  with  songs  and  gladness. 
We  have  no  business  to  put  ourselves  in  the  way  of  suf- 
fering. Paul  made  his  appeal  to  Caesar.  He  did  not 
choose,  and  was  not  called  upon  to  choose,  in  the  service 
of  his  Master,  and  for  the  fulfilment  of  His  purpose,  to 
hand  himself  over  to  the  folly  and  brutality  of  men  who 
had  lost  their  sense  of  justice. 

Once  again,  and  perhaps  this  is  the  deepest  note.  In 
that  appeal  to  Caesar  I  discover  a  representative  act  on 
behalf  of  others  for  all  time;  a  revealing  action  on  the 
part  of  the  great  pioneer  missionary,  the  apostle  to  the 

t 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  25] 

Gentiles;  the  most  illustrious  exponent  of  the  Christ  in 
all  the  early  centuries.  His  way  was  that  of  an  attitude 
revealing  for  all  time  what  the  duty  of  the  Christian  man 
is ;  to  be  true  to  his  Lord,  to  be  true  to  his  conscience,  to 
be  loyal  to  the  powers  that  be ;  and  to  make  his  appeal  to 
them  where  necessary,  for  protection,  in  order  that  he 
may  continue  his  work  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  his 
Lord. 

Finally  let  us  observe  the  Roman  estimate  of  the  su- 
preme matter  in  the  whole  difficulty.  Festus  had  come 
into  this  strange  Judean  province  to  be  procurator,  and 
found  it  turbulent  and  restless ;  and  one  of  the  first  cases 
he  had  to  deal  with  was  that  of  this  man  Paul,  who  had 
been  for  two  years  a  prisoner.  He  began  to  try  and  find 
out  all  the  particulars,  and  it  was  a  little  difficult  to  do  it ; 
but  he  came  to  this  conclusion  that  the  central  thing 
in  the  whole  difficulty  was  that  of  "  One  Jesus,  Who  was 
dead,"  Whom  this  man  Paul  declared  to  be  alive.  That 
was  the  root  of  the  trouble.  It  was  a  fine  appreciation 
of  the  actual  fact  of  the  situation.  Festus  had  found  out 
the  very  heart  of  the  matter.  That  was  the  religious  diffi- 
culty. Paul's  belief  that  this  One  Jesus  was  alive,  had 
created  his  attitude  toward  Hebraism  through  all  the 
years,  which  attitude  had  stirred  up  the  animosity  of 
the  ritualists  in  the  Jewish  faith.  The  belief  that  He 
was  alive  had  caused  him  to  cast  off  the  impedimenta  of 
ritualism.  He  had  no  use  for  all  the  things  which  had 
been  dear  to  him  in  the  old  days  of  his  devout  and  austere 
Pharisaism,  because  Jesus  was  alive.  He  was  not  fol- 
lowing Him  at  a  distance  of  a  generation.  It  was  not 
necessary  to  keep  Him  in  mind  by  the  observance  of  any 
ritual,  fast,  or  feast.  He  was  alive,  and  He  was  with 
him;  and  so  Paul  had  set  aside  circumcision,  and  all 
other  things  as  unimportant,  and  not  only  unimportant, 
but  dangerous,  if  men  made  them  necessary  to  salvation. 
That  was  the  religious  difficulty  at  its  very  heart. 

But  the  persecuting  priests  were  Sadducees,  rational- 

[  517 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  26] 

ists,  who  were  against  the  doctrine  of  resurrection;  and 
the  Pharisees  only  held  it  intellectually,  and  did  not  be- 
lieve in  the  actual  fact.  To  Paul  the  resurrection  of  Jesus 
was  an  accomplishment;  it  was  a  fact,  He  was  alive. 
His  old  Pharisaic  theology  had  been  touched  with  dy- 
namic, and  he  no  longer  held  the  resurrection  possible,  he 
knew  it  accomplished.  That  was  the  theological  diffi- 
culty. 

Was  it  not  the  personal  secret  also?  If  Paul  had  not 
believed  that  "  One  Jesus  "  was  alive,  then  not  a  single 
chapter  would  have  been  written ;  and  it  was  that  con- 
viction that  Jesus  was  alive  which  created  his  passion  for 
justice,  and  made  him  appeal  to  Rome  rather  than  to 
Jerusalem. 

So  the  truth  abides.  Lift  the  resurrection  out  of  this 
chapter,  and  out  of  this  book,  and  out  of  the  history  of 
the  centuries,  and  what  remains  ?  The  Cross  is  left ;  but 
the  Cross  without  the  resurrection  has  no  meaning,  and 
no  power.  It  is  ordinary,  tragic,  every  day  a  catastrophe, 
nothing  else.  To  know  the  importance  of  the  resurrec- 
tion we  turn  to  another  familiar  passage  in  Corinthians: 
"  Christ  crucified,  to  Greeks  a  stumbling-block,  to  Jews 
foolishness."  He  did  not  say,  Christ  crucified  the  power 
and  the  wisdom  of  God.  He  very  carefully  distinguished. 
Christ  crucified  is  neither  the  power  nor  the  wisdom  of 
God,  unless  we  add  to  it  the  words  of  the  apostle,  "  It 
is  Christ  that  died,  yea,  rather,  that  is  risen  again."  The 
central  verity  of  the  Christian  faith  is  the  resurrection  of 
the  Lord.  Take  it  away,  and  the  Cross  remains  a  tragedy, 
a  catastrophe,  a  blunder  in  the  universe,  in  view  of  the 
perfection  of  the  life  of  the  Man  Who  died.  But  this 
"  One  Jesus,"  Who  was  dead,  is  alive  f  orevermore ;  and 
the  real  force  of  the  Gospel  of  Christianity  is  the  abso- 
lute certainty  in  the  souls  of  men  that  He  is  alive. 

Acts  26 
In  our  last  study  we  observed  the  surroundings  in  the 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  26] 

midst  of  which  this  final  address  of  Paul  was  delivered. 
Our  attention  must  now  be  focussed  upon  the  two  men 
confronting  each  other;  the  one  standing,  a  prisoner; 
and  the  other  seated,  in  the  dignity  of  his  kingly  office. 
Agrippa  and  Paul  were  face  to  face,  the  one  a  king,  robed 
and  enthroned;  the  other  a  prisoner,  chained  and  ar- 
raigned ;  the  one  an  expert  in  all  the  technicalities  of  the 
Hebrew  economy,  as  the  Rabbinical  writers  testify;  the 
other  a  man  equally  expert  in  the  same  technicalities,  but 
knowing  the  spiritual  values  and  intentions  thereof;  the 
one  given  over  to  sin  and  impurity ;  the  other  glorying  in 
deliverance  from  the  dominion  of  sin ;  the  one  an  enslaved 
king ;  the  other  an  enthroned  prisoner.  The  picture  is  full 
of  light,  life,  colour,  and  arresting  force.  Agrippa  hav- 
ing given  Paul  permission  to  speak,  he  made  what  Luke 
here  terms  his  defence.  The  movement  of  the  defence 
falls  into  three  parts:  first  his  address  to  Agrippa,  in 
verses  two  and  three;  then  his  apologia,  from  verses 
four  to  twenty-three;  and  finally  that  wonderful  closing 
appeal  made  to  the  man  Agrippa,  in  forgetfulness  of  the 
purple  of  his  royalty,  and  the  dignity  of  his  throne,  in 
verses  twenty- four  to  twenty-nine. 

Paul's  address  was  that  of  courteous  introduction,  rec- 
ognizing Agrippa's  knowledge,  and  requesting  that  he 
should  hear  him  in  patience. 

What  were  the  probable  values  of  that  method  of  ad- 
dress ?  First  of  all  I  seem  to  hear  in  it  a  genuine  sigh  of 
relief  on  the  part  of  the  apostle  that  he  was  to  be  heard 
by  one  who  would  at  least  be  able  technically  to  follow 
his  argument.  His  plea  for  a  patient  hearing  suggested 
his  memory  of  former  interruptions.  It  is  well  perhaps 
to  be  reminded  that  Agrippa  granted  him  his  patient 
hearing;  but  it  is  well  also  to  notice  that  the  address  was 
never  finished,  for  Festus  interrupted  him.  Having  fol- 
lowed the  journeys  of  this  man,  having  listened  to  his 
discourses,  having  observed  his  manner  of  life  through 
this  study  of  the  book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  I  be- 

[  519  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  26] 

lieve  that  there  was  a  deeper  note  in  that  introductory 
address.  I  think  there  was  a  stirring  in  his  soul  of  that 
deeper  passion  from  which  he  never  escaped.  Paul 
knew  how  the  letter  of  the  law  had  flamed  into  new  light 
in  the  spiritual  interpretation  that  had  come  to  him  by 
the  way  of  the  resurrection  of  his  Lord.  As  he  looked 
into  the  face  of  Agrippa,  and  knew  him  a  magnificent 
man  in  many  respects,  of  physical  presence,  of  mental 
ability,  expert  as  Paul  said,  and  as  Rabbinical  writers 
agree,  in  all  the  technicalities  of  the  Hebrew  economy,  I 
think  he  felt  within  him:  Oh,  that  this  man  could  only 
see  these  things  as  I  have  seen  them  through  the  light  of 
the  resurrection  of  the  Lord.  I  think  the  passion  for 
his  saving  possessed  him  as  he  asked  Agrippa  to  hear 
him  patiently.  In  that  appeal  to  Agrippa,  if  that  be  the 
deepest  sense  of  it,  there  is  an  interesting  revelation  of 
Paul's  personal  conviction  that  the  logic  of  "  The  Way  " 
was  irresistible.  Was  Paul  right  about  that?  The  an- 
swer must  be  postponed  to  the  end  of  the  study. 

From  that  brief  examination  of  the  method  of  address 
we  turn  to  the  argument  itself.  Paul  made  no  reference 
here  to  the  charges  which  had  been  brought  against  him 
by  his  own  countrymen.  Probably  they  were  not  present, 
they  had  been  excluded,  as  this  was  a  court  function,  and 
not  a  trial.  Festus,  Agrippa,  and  Bernice,  the  chief 
magistrates,  and  the  heads  of  the  military  department 
and  their  friends  were  there.  It  was  a  pagan  assembly, 
designed  for  the  entertainment  of  Agrippa  and  Bernice. 
Paul's  defence  was  of  the  nature  of  an  explanation  of 
the  reason  of  the  change  of  attitude  and  activity  which 
had  taken  place  in  his  own  career.  Agrippa  said,  "  Thou 
art  permitted  to  speak  for  thyself,"  and  true  to  the  lines 
suggested  by  the  king,  he  spoke  for  himself;  the  whole 
address  was  experiential.  It  was  infinitely  more,  in  our 
ordinary  use  of  the  word,  than  experiential.  Gathered 
round  about  this  central  personal  experience  are  all  the 
values  of  the  Hebrew  economy,  and  all  the  virtues  of  the 

[  520  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  26] 

Christian  faith.  Nevertheless  in  this  defence  Paul  was 
himself  central.  Agrippa  had  said :  "  Thou  art  permitted 
to  speak  for  thyself  " ;  and  for  himself,  and  from  him- 
self, and  of  himself,  Paul  spoke. 

While  all  that  is  true,  we  might  write  across  the  whole 
of  this  defence :  "  Not  I  but  Christ.  I  have  been  cru- 
cified .  .  .  nevertheless  I  live."  The  note  was  nega- 
tive, but  it  was  also  positive.  The  Cross  cancels  the  old 
ego,  but  it  creates  a  new :  "  Christ  liveth  in  me,"  there- 
fore "  I  live,"  a  definite  personality  with  an  experience 
resulting  from  all  the  facts  of  contact  with  Christ.  The 
great  value  of  this  address  is  that  it  is  a  revelation  of  the 
relation  between  the  truths  of  Christianity,  and  the 
triumphs  it  produces  in  the  life.  So  his  defence  was  an 
explanation  of  the  reason  of  the  change  of  attitude  and 
activity  in  his  own  career. 

There  are  two  ways  in  which  the  defence  may  be  con- 
sidered; it  was  a  defence  of  "the  Way"  to  a  logical 
mind ;  and  it  was  a  declaration  of  "  the  Way  "  to  a  seek- 
ing spirit.  The  apostle  had  his  eyes  fixed  upon  Agrippa, 
and  not  on  Agrippa  only,  but  upon  Bernice  also,  and 
upon  Festus,  and  upon  the  heads  of  the  military  depart- 
ment, and  upon  the  chief  ministers.  He  included  them 
all  in  the  final  burst  of  affectionate  and  passionate  appeal. 
Perhaps  his  thoughts  centring  upon  Agrippa,  there  were 
two  purposes  in  his  mind ;  first  to  convince  this  man,  in  a 
defence  of  "  the  Way "  intended  to  capture  the  logical 
assent  of  an  acute  mind.  But  that  was  not  all.  It  was 
moreover,  the  declaration  of  "  the  Way  "  to  an  enquiring 
spirit.  He  assumed — whether  the  assumption  was  jus- 
tified or  not  I  do  not  know, — that  this  man  was  an  en- 
quirer, not  merely  inquisitively  curious,  but  sincerely 
wanting  for  once  to  hear  what  this  thing  really  meant. 
These  then  were  the  two  movements  of  the  great  apolo- 
gist, a  mental  movement  intended  to  compel  logical  ac- 
quiescence; and  a  spiritual  movement  intended  to  com- 
pel the  will  to  yield  obedience  to  the  mental  conviction, 

521  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  26] 

Let  us  observe  in  the  first  place  how  he  pursued  his 
defence  of  "  the  Way  "  to  the  logical  mind.  He  began 
by  asking  Agrippa  to  remember  his  past.  He  said,  "  My 
manner  of  life  from  my  youth  up  ...  among  mine 
own  nation  and  at  Jerusalem  known  all  the  Jews."  It 
is  interesting  to  notice  that  he  commenced  with  the 
period  when  he  went  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  sat  at  the  feet 
of  Gamaliel.  He  made  no  appeal  to  the  Jew  about  that 
earlier  period,  that  wonderfully  formative  period  in 
Tarsus,  when  he  was  influenced  inevitably  by  Hellenist 
teaching.  That  was  not  pertinent  to  his  argument  with 
Agrippa.  A  Jew  "  from  my  youth  up/'  from  that  period 
when  his  parents,  Hebrews  both  of  them,  sent  him  away 
from  the  influence  of  Tarsus,  in  order  that  he  might  be 
trained  in  Hebraism. 

Continuing,  he  said,  "After  the  straitest  sect  of  our 
religion  I  lived  a  Pharisee."  There  the  emphasis  was 
not  upon  the  supernatural  conviction  of  the  Pharisee,  but 
upon  the  narrowness  of  the  Pharisee's  traditional  inter- 
pretation of  righteousness ;  being  of  "  the  straitest  sect 
.  .  .  a  Pharisee,"  he  had  also  been  one  in  whose  mind 
there  burned  the  central  hope  of  Judaism,  the  hope  of 
a  resurrection.  He  was  a  Jew,  a  traditional  religionist, 
and  yet  one  believing  in  the  supernatural  element  in  his 
own  religion,  looking  for  resurrection.  Such  was  his 
past. 

The  next  phase  was  that  in  which  he  described  to 
Agrippa  his  first  contact  with  "the  Way"  of  Jesus  of 
Nazareth.  The  first  picture  had  been  that  of  himself  as 
a  young  Jew,  a  Pharisee,  having  in  his  heart  the  great 
hope  of  immortality,  of  resurrection,  of  the  fact  of  the 
spiritual ;  and  now  he  told  Agrippa  that  when  he  came 
into  contact  with  "  the  Way  "  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  his 
attitude  was  that  of  mental  antagonism,  expressing  itself 
in  strenuous  opposition.  He  declared  his  mental  antago- 
nism in  the  words,  "  I  verily  thought  with  myself,  that  I 
ought  to  do  many  things  contrary  to  the  name  of  Jesus  of 

[  522  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  26! 

Nazareth ; "  and  he  was  careful  to  make  Agrippa  see  how 
definite  his  opposition  was : 

"  And  this  I  also  did  in  Jerusalem ;  and  I  both  shut  up 
many  of  the  saints  in  prison,  having  received  authority 
from  the  chief  priests,  and  when  they  were  put  to  death, 
I  gave  my  vote  against  them.  And  punishing  them  often- 
times in  all  the  synagogues,  I  strove  to  make  them  blas- 
pheme ;  and  being  exceedingly  mad  against  them,  I  per- 
secuted them  even  unto  foreign  cities." 

That  was  the  first  effect  produced  upon  this  man  by 
Jesus  of  Nazareth,  by  "  the  Way." 

All  that  led  up  to  the  simple  and  central  story.  He 
now  told  Agrippa  how  the  crisis  came  which  changed 
everything  in  his  life.  It  came  when  he  was  on  the  way 
to  Damascus,  in  strenuous  opposition  to  Jesus,  when  he 
was  persecuting  even  unto  foreign  cities  those  who  named 
His  name,  or  professed  to  believe  Him  alive,  Whom  he 
knew  to  be  crucified.  It  came  when  he  was  sincere  with 
a  sincerity  that  had  never  been  surpassed  even  in  his 
Christian  history,  and  when  he  was  carrying  out  his  sin- 
cere conviction,  even  against  intellectual  perplexity. 

He  told  how  a  light  had  shone  about  him  brighter  than 
the  light  of  the  sun ;  how  a  voice  had  spoken,  entirely  un- 
known to  him,  but  compelling  his  attention  because  it  was 
above  the  natural,  and  out  of  the  ordinary ;  definite,  posi- 
tive, real.  The  discovery  must  have  been  so  marvellous 
and  startling  to  this  man,  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to 
convey  the  idea  of  it.  Suddenly  a  light,  then  a  voice, 
and  he  found  that  it  was  the  voice  of  Jesus;  and  in  the 
words  uttered  there  was  no  unkind  accusation,  no  rail- 
ing judgment  against  him.  The  most  amazing  and  star- 
tling thing  in  the  whole  revelation  to  Paul  was  that  Jesus 
had  said  that  He  had  a  purpose  in  apprehending  him, 
and  appearing  to  him.  He  declared  that  He  would  make 
him  His  pioneer  messenger  of  this  very  fact  of  resurrec- 
tion to  all  the  Gentile  peoples. 

[523] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  26] 

Then  said  Paul  to  Agrippa :  "  I  was  not  disobedient 
unto  the  heavenly  vision."  Logically  how  could  he  be? 
That  is  what  he  desired  to  make  plain  to  Agrippa. 

What  was  the  issue?  Passing  over  the  experience  of 
the  long  years  he  said :  "  For  this  cause  the  Jews  seized 
me  in  the  temple."  The  effect  produced  upon  him  was 
expressed  in  the  words  "  I  stand  .  .  .  testifying." 
He  then  declared  that  his  testimony  was  in  harmony  with 
the  foretelling  of  prophets,  and  the  teaching  of  Moses, 
that  the  Messiah  must  suffer ;  and  that  out  of  the  resur- 
rection light,  had  come  the  explanation  of  the  ancient 
prophesying. 

Paul  thus  argued  before  Agrippa  that  his  Christianity 
was  the  logical  and  necessary  sequel  to  his  past,  because 
that  which  was  the  central  hope  of  Hebraism  had  been 
fulfilled  in  One  Who  demonstrated  His  Messiahship  by 
His  actual  resurrection  from  among  the  dead.  Here  was 
no  laboured  argument,  no  attempt  to  define  the  doctrine 
of  the  resurrection,  but  rather  an  almost  cold  and  dis- 
passionate, clear  and  unyielding  testimony,  of  a  personal 
experience,  the  avowal  of  the  fact  that  he  had  met  the 
Jesus  they  had  murdered,  alive ;  and  that  he  could  do  no 
other  than  follow  His  call. 

But  now  let  us  notice  how  all  through,  this  address  of 
Paul  was  not  merely  a  defence  of  "  the  Way  "  for  the 
logical  mind ;  but  the  declaration  of  "  the  Way  "  for  the 
enquiring  spirit.  The  central  fact  creating  the  Gospel 
according  to  Paul  was  the  risen,  living,  acting  Jesus. 
Take  Him  out  of  the  address,  and  nothing  is  left;  the 
address  could  not  have  been  given,  apart  from  Him. 
The  address  could  not  have  been  given,  apart  from  this 
man's  conviction  that  He  was  risen  from  the  dead.  If 
men  are  inclined  intellectually  to  question  the  actual  fact, 
at  least  this  must  be  admitted,  that  this  man  believed  it. 
Everything  centred  in  his  belief  that  Christ  rose.  That 
fact  had  created  the  crisis,  revolutionizing  his  mental  atti- 
tude, and  causing  his  activity  under  the  mastery  of  Jesus 

[  524  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  26] 

Christ.  The  conviction  took  possession  of  him,  capturing 
him,  compelling  his  loyalty,  that  Jesus,  Who  had  been 
executed  as  a  felon,  was  alive,  and  at  the  heart  of  the 
universe,  managing  the  affairs  of  men,  apprehending  him, 
and  commissioning  him  to  his  work. 

The  central  fact  of  the  Gospel  according  to  this  truth 
of  the  risen,  living,  acting  Jesus,  is  the  suffering  Messiah 
of  Moses  and  the  prophets,  seen  in  the  light  of  resurrec- 
tion. In  other  words,  the  Cross,  interpreted  by  resur- 
rection, is  the  Gospel,  according  to  Paul.  Not  the  Cross 
apart  from  resurrection.  That  were  a  martyrdom,  that 
were  a  tragedy,  that  were  a  catastrophe,  that  were  a  re- 
flection upon  the  goodness  of  God.  Is  it  any  wonder 
that  this  man,  when  writing  one  of  his  letters  said  that 
He,  the  Christ,  was  "  horizoned  as  the  Son  of  God  .  .  . 
by  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  " ;  or  that  Peter  in  his 
letter  said,  that  they — the  disciples — were  born  again 
"  unto  a  living  hope  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ 
from  the  dead  "  ?  By  that  resurrection  all  that  had  pre- 
ceded in  the  ministry  of  Christ  was  transfigured  and 
changed;  everything  became  sharp,  clear,  and  full  of 
meaning.  The  Cross,  interpreted  by  the  resurrection,  was 
the  Gospel  which  Paul  preached  to  Agrippa. 

In  the  address  then  there  was  a  revelation  of  the  hu- 
man responsibility  concerning  the  way  of  the  Gospel,  and 
of  the  Divine  activity.  The  human  responsibility  was  that 
of  turning  from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power 
of  Satan  to  God.  The  Divine  activity  in  response  was 
remission  of  sins,  and  inheritance  among  the  sanctified. 
The  central  impact  of  the  whole  message  to  the  enquiring 
soul  was  created  by  the  words :  "  Wherefore,  O  king 
Agrippa," — he  named  him  at  this  point — "  I  was  not  dis- 
obedient unto  the  heavenly  vision."  Not  the  vision  only, 
but  obedience  to  it;  not  the  light  merely,  but  walking  in 
it ;  not  the  evangel  alone,  but  surrender  to  its  claims ;  had 
produced  the  change  in  Paul. 

Then  Festus  interrupted  him,  and  it  was  a  perfectly 

I  525  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  26] 

natural  interruption.  If  instead  of  observing  Paul  and 
Agrippa,  we  had  been  observing  Festus  we  should  under- 
stand this.  Festus  had  listened  to  the  past  history  of  this 
man,  to  the  strange  things  he  had  said  about  visions  and 
revelations  and  voices  and  resurrection ;  until  at  last,  un- 
able to  contain  himself  any  longer  he  said,  "  with  a  loud 
voice,  Paul,  thou  art  mad;  thy  much  learning  doth  turn 
thee  to  madness."  To  Festus  what  this  man  had  said 
was  the  raving  of  an  unbalanced  mind ;  and  yet  it  was  a 
mind  well-informed. 

Paul,  thus  interrupted,  immediately  gathered  up  every- 
thing into  his  final  appeal.  The  argument  passed  out  of 
sight,  the  defence  was  now  certainly  no  more  in  his  mind. 
He  was  seeking  to  gain  Agrippa.  He  began  by  an  oblique 
attack  upon  the  citadel  of  his  volition.  It  is  oblique,  be- 
cause he  spoke  first  to  Festus : 

"  I  am  not  mad,  most  excellent  Festus,  but  speak  forth 
words  of  truth  and  soberness.  For  the  king  knoweth  of 
these  things,  unto  whom  also  I  speak  freely;  for  I  am 
persuaded  that  none  of  these  things  is  hidden  from  him ; 
for  this  hath  not  been  done  in  a  corner." 

Then  turning  from  the  oblique  method,  to  direct  frontal 
attack  upon  the  soul  of  the  man,  he  first  asked  a  ques- 
tion :  "  King  Agrippa,  believest  thou  the  prophets  ? " 
Then  came  the  affirmation :  "  I  know  that  thou  believest." 
Notice  very  carefully  the  meaning  of  that  question  and 
affirmation,  taken  in  close  relationship.  To  know  the 
story  of  Jesus,  and  to  believe  the  prophets,  was  to  recog- 
nize the  connection  between  the  prophetic  ministry  of  the 
Hebrew  people,  and  the  historic  record  of  the  work  of 
Christ.  It  was  Paul's  attempt  to  capture  the  will.  He 
was  attempting  to  do  for  Agrippa  what  he  had  been  try- 
ing to  lead  Agrippa  to  do  for  himself.  He  had  been 
showing  Agrippa  there  was  expectation  in  the  Hebrew 
economy,  and  continuation  and  completion  in  the  min- 
istry of  Jesus;  and  he  now  said  in  effect:  Agrippa,  you 

[  526] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  26] 

know  the  story  of  Jesus,  you  believe  the  prophets;  put 
them  together,  find  the  logical  conclusion,  in  order  to 
come  to  volitional  abandonment. 

What  did  Agrippa  say?  There  are  many  questions 
which  an  expositor  can  ask,  that  he  can  never  answer. 
At  this  point  there  is  a  greater  diversity  in  the  manu- 
scripts than  in  the  translations.  I  am  rather  interested 
to  find  that  it  is  a  little  difficult  to  state  what  he  did  say. 
"  Almost  thou  persuadest  me  to  be  a  Christian."  "  With 
a  very  little  wouldest  thou  persuade  me  to  be  a  Chris- 
tian." "You  are  very  easily  persuading  yourself  that 
I  am  going  to  be  a  Christian."  "  A  very  little  more,  and 
you  would  make  me  a  Christian."  All  these  renderings 
of  Agrippa's  answer  have  been  given.  It  is  very  inter- 
esting to  study  the  different  wording  and  tenses.  The 
one  thing  that  is  certain  is  that  for  the  moment  he  put 
aside  the  conviction  and  appeal,  and  ended  the  function, 
and  chatted  with  Festus,  Agrippa,  and  Bernice.  We  do 
not  know  how  it  ended  at  last,  we  cannot  say.  Our  last 
consideration,  however,  is  not  of  Agrippa,  but  of  Paul. 
Here  we  have  one  of  the  greatest  pictures  in  all  his  life. 
It  was  a  moment  of  high  inspiration,  when  the  surging 
tides  of  the  Christ  life  leapt  forth  from  his  heart,  and 
flung  themselves  upon  the  soul  of  Agrippa :  "  I  would  to 
God,  that  whether  with  little  or  with  much,  not  thou 
only,"  but  Bernice,  Festus,  and  these  soldiers,  and  these 
magistrates,  "  all  that  hear  me  this  day  might  become  such 
as  I  am  " ;  and  then,  with  a  fine  touch  of  the  very  spirit 
of  Christ, — "except  these  bonds."  This  does  not  need 
explanation.  Notice  the  gracious  assumption  of  superi- 
ority of  condition.  Agrippa  was  in  the  purple ;  Bernice 
was  decked  with  her  jewels;  Festus  was  robed  in  scarlet; 
the  soldiers  and  magistrates  were  seen  in  their  dignities ; 
the  lictors  were  observing  and  listening.  Paul  was  a 
prisoner  in  chains,  in  bonds ;  he  was  to  be  sent  to  Rome, 
perhaps  to  death.  Yet,  he  said,  I  would  to  God  you  could 
be  such  as  I  am.  Such  was  his  desire  for  the  brilliant 

[  527  1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  27-28 : 15] 

and  yet  despairing  crowd.  And  mark  the  tenderness  of 
the  man :  Agrippa,  I  fain  would  give  thee  my  soul  liberty, 
but  not  my  bodily  bonds ;  I  would  give  thee  all  the  privi- 
leges, but  none  of  the  burdens.  Three  and  thirty  years 
earlier,  this  man  had  been  as  sincere  as  he  was  when 
he  faced  Agrippa.  Of  that  past  he  had  said,  "  I  verily 
thought  with  myself,  that  I  ought  to  do  many  things  con- 
trary to  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth."  Mark  care- 
fully the  difference  in  the  man.  It  was  a  difference  of 
tone,  of  temper,  and  of  spirit.  Thirty  years  ago  his 
sincerity  would  allow  him  to  cast  his  vote  for  the  death 
of  men  and  women;  and  made  him  persecute  them  even 
to  other  cities.  To-day  he  would  die  to  save  Agrippa, 
but  he  would  not  put  his  chains  upon  Agrippa.  That  is 
Christianity.  Magnify  it,  multiply  it,  apply  it.  The  sin- 
cerity that  persecutes  is  not  Christian.  The  sincerity  that 
dies  to  deliver,  but  will  not  impose  a  chain,  is  Christianity. 

Acts  27-28 : 15 

The  words  of  Luke  in  the  fourteenth  verse  of  chapter 
twenty-eight,  "  So  we  came  to  Rome  "  indicate  the  value 
for  us  of  this  long  section  of  the  book.  A  grouping  of 
brief  statements  scattered  over  ten  chapters  will  help  us 
to  gather  up  the  story  which  ends  at  this  point.  "  I  must 
also  see  Rome  "  (19:  21).  "  So  must  thou  bear  wii.^ss 
also  at  Rome"  (23:  n).  "Unto  Caesar  shalt  thou  go" 
(25:12).  "Thou  must  stand  before  Caesar"  (27:24). 
"  So  we  came  to  Rome  "  (28:  14). 

The  first  of  these  words  was  spoken  by  the  apostle  him- 
self in  Ephesus,  just  before  the  uproar.  They  were  words 
expressive  of  the  passion  of  this  man's  heart  as  a  mis- 
sionary of  Christ.  "  I  must  also  see  Rome."  He  knew 
that  Rome  stood  at  the  strategic  centre  of  the  world. 
He  knew  how  her  highways  ran  out  through  all  the 
known  world,  and  he  coveted  that  centre  as  a  base  of 
operations  for  Christian  service. 

Then  in  the  lonely  night,  in  Jerusalem,  after  the  scourg- 

1 528 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  27-28 :  15] 

ing  and  the  buffeting  and  the  bruising,  into  the  quietness 
of  the  cell  the  Lord  had  come,  and  had  spoken  to  His 
servant,  saying,  "  So  must  thou  bear  witness  also  at 
Rome." 

Later  there  had  been  definite  if  unconscious  coopera- 
tion with  the  desire  of  the  apostle,  and  the  will  of  the 
Lord,  when  the  Roman  governor,  Festus,  had  said,  "  Unto 
Caesar  shalt  thou  go."  That  word  was  spoken  in  Csesarea. 

The  next  word  had  been  spoken  by  the  angel  visitor; 
when,  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  in  the  midst  of  the  storm 
and  tempest,  and  the  stress  and  strain,  he  had  said,  "  Thou 
must  stand  before  Caesar." 

The  last  word  was  that  of  Luke,  the  companion  of  the 
perilous  voyage  and  journey,  "  So  we  came  to  Rome." 
The  "  So  "  of  Luke  covers  the  whole  story,  even  though 
it  had  immediate  reference  to  the  voyage  and  journey. 

This  voyage  and  journey  occupied,  as  we  find  by  ob- 
serving the  time  notes  of  the  story,  about  six  months. 
Lewin,  who  has  attempted  to  date  these  stories,  declares 
that  Paul  left  Caesarea  in  August  A.  D.  60,  and  that  they 
were  shipwrecked  at  the  beginning  of  November.  That 
is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  they  were  three  months  on 
the  island  of  Melita,  that  they  sailed  again  after  the  three 
months'  stay  there  at  the  beginning  of  February  A.  D.  61, 
and  arrived  in  Rome  about  the  first  day  of  March.  This 
story  is  full  of  interest  geographically  and  nautically, 
revealing  a  most  intimate  and  accurate  acquaintance  with 
the  methods  of  navigation  at  that  time.  The  main  in- 
terest for  us,  however,  centres  in  Paul  himself.  Let  us 
then  glance  briefly  at  the  incidents  of  the  voyage;  in 
order  that  we  may  gather  up  some  of  the  lessons  which 
the  whole  story  teaches. 

We  observe  first  that  on  this  voyage  and  journey  Paul 
had  as  close  companions  two,  namely  Luke  and  Aristar- 
chus.  There  is  perhaps  a  speculative  and  yet  very  inter- 
esting line  of  study,  that  namely  of  following  these  men 
of  the  early  days,  who  cross  the  pathway  of  the  reader 

[  529  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  27-28 : 15] 

now  and  then,  in  association  with  more  prominent  figures. 
Aristarchus  first  appeared  in  the  nineteenth  chapter, 
where  this  whole  movement  toward  Rome  began.  Al- 
most immediately  after  the  apostle  had  said,  "I  must 
also  see  Rome,"  Aristarchus  is  seen  as  one  of  his  travel- 
ling companions.  When  in  the  uproar  at  Ephesus  they 
were  unable  to  find  Paul,  they  arrested  Gaius  and  Aris- 
tarchus. Then  we  find  that  Paul  returned  from  Europe 
to  Asia,  accompanied  by  Aristarchus,  who  had  preceded 
him  there,  and  then  returned  to  meet  Paul.  Here  we 
find  that  he  was  a  Macedonian  of  Thessalonica,  in  all 
probability  he  was  a  convert  of  an  earlier  ministry  of  the 
apostle.  We  now  know  that  he  went  with  him  all  the 
way  to  Rome,  and  certainly  remained  with  him  through- 
out the  period  of  his  imprisonment  there;  for  in  the 
Colossian  letter,  and  in  the  letter  to  Philemon  he  is  re- 
ferred to  as  being  in  company  with  the  apostle,  with  oth- 
ers. So  when  we  watch  the  apostle  in  the  midst  of  tem- 
pest and  tumults,  we  must  remember  that  he  had  with 
him  two  men,  dear  to  his  heart,  of  one  mind  with  him- 
self in  the  purpose  and  passion  of  his  life  and  ministry. 

The  first  incident  to  note  is  that  of  Paul  tarrying  for  a 
few  hours  at  Sidon  among  friends,  when  the  ship  made 
its  first  call.  Imagine  the  refreshment  and  quiet  of  those 
hours.  Then  the  ship  took  its  way,  and  arrived  at  its 
destination,  and  the  passengers  were  transferred  into  an- 
other boat. 

Paul  then  warned  those  in  charge— himself  a  prisoner 
in  charge  of  a  centurion — of  the  danger  of  the  proposed 
voyage. 

In  the  midst  of  the  storm  itself,  he  gently  reproved 
those  men  that  they  had  not  listened  to  him,  and  then 
spoke  the  word  of  good  cheer  and  of  courage,  so  making 
in  the  midst  of  the  storm,  and  in  the  listening  ear  of 
these  men,  the  Roman  centurion,  the  soldiers,  the  master 
of  the  vessel,  and  the  whole  of  that  company  of  nearly 
three  hundred  souls,  a  good  confession  of  faith.  "  I  be- 

[  530  ] 


•THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  27-28: 

Eeve  God/'  he  said,  and  therefore  this  thing  must  be  as 
He  has  said  to  me. 

Then, — when  presently  the  vessel  was  anchored,  four 
anchors  being  cast  out  of  the  stern,  and  the  soldiers 
wished  and  prayed  for  the  day,  as  the  ship  was  near  to 
the  land, — mark  the  apostle's  action.  He  had  observed 
that  by  stealth  the  soldiers  were  attempting  to  escape ;  he 
knew  the  danger,  and  so  immediately  interfered.  He  had 
said  he  believed  in  God,  and  was  perfectly  sure  no  harm 
could  happen  to  them,  and  that  they  would  be  saved ;  but 
he  was  very  careful  to  prevent  the  soldiers  escaping. 
His  courage  was  proved  by  his  caution.  There  is  also  a 
revelation  of  a  sanctified  sanity  in  his  appeal  to  these 
men  to  take  food.  For  fourteen  days  they  had  fasted, 
and  he  set  the  example  himself  by  beginning  to  eat.  With 
the  ship  threatening  to  break  up,  tossed  and  heaved  about, 
they  took  food,  and  were  filled  with  good  cheer. 

The  next  incident  is  that  of  Paul  himself  on  the  island 
of  Melita.  There  is  a  subject  for  an  artist,  Paul  gather- 
ing sticks  to  light  a  fire.  That  is  apostolic  in  the  finest 
sense  of  the  word.  The  viper  fastened  upon  him,  and  the 
amazed  barbarians  imagined  first  of  all,  that  justice  was 
dogging  him,  and  he  would  die ;  but  when  the  viper  was 
shaken  off,  and  the  man  was  unharmed,  then  they  said  he 
was  a  god. 

Then  we  see  Paul  in  the  house  of  Publius,  healing  his 
father;  and  exercising  a  healing  ministry  for  all  who 
were  brought  to  him.  The  story  is  told  in  a  sentence,  but 
what  a  picture  there  is  here  of  the  power  of  Christ  in 
healing,  operating  through  this  man.  There  are  many 
things  suggested  in  the  story.  There  is  not  a  word  re- 
corded here  of  his  preaching  of  the  Gospel.  Of  course 
the  argument  of  silence  is  dangerous.  Undoubtedly  he 
did  preach;  but  it  was  a  ministry  of  healing.  The  man 
who  wrote  the  story  was  himself  a  physician. 

The  journey  was  resumed,  and  Paul  does  not  appear 
again  until  forty  miles  from  Rome,  or  perhaps  three  and 

i 531 


THE  ACTS  DE  THE  APOSTLES 
(Acts  27-28:15] 

thirty  miles,  there  at  the  Three  Taverns,  where  He  me? 
the  little  company  coming  out  from  the  City.  In  the 
sixteenth  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  we  prob- 
ably have  the  names  of  some  of  those  of  that  company. 
It  was  a  great  meeting,  and  Paul  thanked  God,  and  took 
courage.  Such  are  the  incidents. 

Surveying  the  scene  I  am  first,  and  perhaps  supremely 
impressed  with  the  contrasts  that  run  through  the  whole 
story.  On  the  one  hand  there  were  difficulties  and  dan- 
gers all  the  way.  It  does  seem,  as  we  read  this  story,  as 
though  all  forces  were  combined  to  hinder  this  man,  and 
to  prevent  his  arrival  at  Rome.  If  it  were  possible  to 
read  the  story  without  knowing  the  things  that  had  pre- 
ceded it,  without  knowing  what  the  end  was,  in  the  proc- 
ess of  our  reading  we  should  say  again  and  again,  This 
man  will  never  see  Rome.  Or  if,  on  the  other  hand, 
recognizing  the  truth  about  this  man,  we  read  the  story, 
we  could  almost  interpret  it  by  the  book  of  Job,  in  im- 
agining that  the  arch-enemy  of  mankind  himself  had 
somehow  gained  possession  of  all  storms  and  tempests, 
and  let  them  loose  upon  this  ship.  For  instance,  in  that 
story  of  the  girding  of  the  ship,  the  technical  expression 
is  that  they  f  rapped  the  ship  together ;  a  term  never  used 
except  when  a  ship  was  imminently  in  danger  of  falling 
to  pieces,  when  men  pass  great  hawsers  round  her.  That 
was  a  most  perilous  hour.  We  see  how  tremendous  was 
the  storm,  and  how  terrific  the  elemental  forces  that 
seemed  to  be  let  loose  against  that  ship.  All  forces 
seemed  to  combine  to  make  it  impossible  for  this  man  to 
reach  Rome.  And  yet  this  is  not  the  principal  impression 
produced  upon  the  mind  as  we  read  the  story.  It  is  that 
of  sure,  if  slow  progress;  and  in  the  midst  of  all  the 
storms,  and  tempest,  and  all  the  difficulties,  and  buffeting, 
and  darkness,  and  hopelessness,  a  man  is  seen,  conducted, 
cared  for,  and  comforted;  until  at  last,  his  companion, 
writing  the  story  at  the  close,  said,  "So  we  came  to 
Rome,"  "  So,"  by  these  very  things,  by  these  storms,  and 

[  532  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  27-28 : 15] 

shipwrecks,  and  all  this  darkness,  and  by  these  difficul- 
ties, "  So  we  came  to  Rome." 

Again  looking  at  the  story,  mark  the  recurring  hope- 
lessness of  situations,  and  that  not  once  or  twice,  but 
over  and  over  again.  Humanly  speaking  the  situation 
was  entirely  hopeless.  Over  against  that,  mark  the  un- 
varying hopefulness  of  Paul.  There  was  never  an  hour 
in  which  he  became  despondent;  never  a  situation  in 
which  he  lost  heart. 

There  is  another  way  of  looking  at  the  contrast.  I  see 
the  repeated  perils  resulting  from  the  excitement  and  the 
folly  of  men;  but  I  also  see  the  persistent  sanity  and 
strength  of  Paul. 

We  want  to  discover  the  secret  of  the  quietness,  the 
strength,  and  the  optimism  of  this  man;  for  here, 
wherever  we  find  the  storm  at  its  worst,  we  find  the  man 
at  his  calmest.  What  was  the  secret  of  it  all;  for  the 
story  is  a  parable.  It  is  this,  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord 
is  with  them  that  fear  Him."  As  we  look  at  this  picture, 
or  this  series  of  pictures,  for  the  changes  are  very  re- 
markable, we  notice  all  the  way  through,  that  this  man 
was  a  man  who  was  in  personal  fellowship  with  the 
Lord.  On  this  voyage  the  Lord  did  not  appear  to  him. 
There  was  one  hour  when,  in  the  stress  and  strain  of  the 
tempest,  amid  the  howling  of  Euraquilo,  when  waves 
were  tossing  the  ship,  an  angel  came  and  spoke  to  him 
in  the  night;  but  the  Lord  did  not  appear.  Yet  all  the 
way  through  this  man  was  in  fellowship  with  his  Lord. 
Remember  what  happened  during  the  forty  days,  between 
our  Lord's  resurrection  and  ascension.  What  was  He 
doing?  He  was  always  vanishing.  Into  the  upper  room 
He  came,  no  door  was  unlocked.  Why  did  He  come? 
To  vanish.  He  walked  to  Emmaus  with  two  men.  Why 
did  He  walk  with  them,  and  talk  with  them,  and  enter 
with  them,  and  break  the  bread  with  them ;  for  they  never 
knew  Him  until  He  broke  the  bread?  To  vanish.  In 
other  words  He  accustomed  them  to  the  vanishing,  and  to 

[  533  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
(Acts  27-28: 15] 

the  fact  that  He  was  always  there,  though  they  could 
not  always  see  Him.  The  last  thing  said  about  this  mat- 
ter in  the  beginning  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  is  this, 
not  that  He  vanished,  but  that  He  went  out  of  sight. 
The  secret  of  it  all  is  that  these  men  knew  Him  nigh  at 
hand,  though  they  could  not  see  Him.  The  new  spiritual 
sense  was  a  more  real  and  definite  thing  to  them  than  the 
old  sensual  sense  could  be.  Here  is  the  secret.  Here 
was  a  man  on  two  ships,  one  after  the  other,  in  storms,; 
in  stress  and  danger,  with  howling  winds  and  creaking 
timbers  and  rending  ropes  and  buffeting  waves.  Why 
was  he  quiet?  Because  the  Lord  was  with  him,  and  he 
knew  it. 

But  there  is  another  element  in  it.  Not  only  this  per- 
sonal fellowship,  but  the  fact  that  he  knew  his  Lord's 
purpose.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear 
Him."  He  had  told  him,  "  So  must  thou  bear  witness 
also  at  Rome."  When  the  next  peril  came  he  always 
measured  it  against  the  power  of  the  Lord.  He  said,  "  I 
must  also  see  Rome.""  Paul  will  never  get  to  Rome! 
These  foolish  men  are  fascinated,  and  mistaken  by  reason 
of  this  soft  south  wind,  and  they  are  going,  though  they 
ought  not !  It  is  a  mistake,  they  will  be  wrecked !  Paul 
would  have  stopped  them.  But  when  they  persisted,  he 
knew  that  the  One  Who  was  with  him  had  said  that  he 
must  go  to  Rome,  and  though  all  tempests  broke  upon 
the  ship,  he  knew  he  would  reach  Rome.  He  knew  the 
secret  of  the  Lord.  Talking  along  that  line  to  a  friend 
who  was  not  a  professing  Christian,  he  said,  "  Well,  then, 
there  is  no  credit  at  all,  after  that  man  knew  the  secret ; 
and  if  he  knew  what  would  happen  ahead,  there  was  no 
credit  in  being  quiet."  Quite  true.  There  was  no  credit 
to  Paul;  and  Paul  would  have  been  the  first  to  say  so. 
But  the  fact  remains  that  this  man  was  perfectly  calm 
with  his  Lord,  perfectly  conscious  of  His  purpose,  per- 
fectly confident  in  His  power;  and  that  kept  him  calm 
in  all  the  stress  and  strain. 

[  534  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  27-28 : 

Mark  the  activity  of  the  Lord.  No  Christian  man  or 
woman  of  spiritual  understanding,  reading  this  story,  can 
talk  about  coincidences,  happenings.  We  cannot  read  the 
story  without  seeing  this  living  Lord  Himsel-f  presiding 
over  everything.  Mark  His  activity  on  behalf  of  His 
servant.  The  central  figure  throughout  is  Paul.  Paul  is 
the  respected  prisoner.  Paul  is  the  honoured  castaway  on 
the  island.  Paul  is  the  much-loved  friend.  Everything 
is  in  his  favour.  A  viper  fastening  on  his  hand  is  made 
the  method  by  which  the  barbarians  are  brought  to  a 
new  respect  and  a  new  willingness  to  listen  to  him.  AH 
this  resulted  from  the  presidency  of  the  Lord  and  Master 
Himself.  All  was  by  the  overruling  of  Christ. 

I  like  to  read  this  story  again  and  again,  and  to  listen 
to  the  whistling  winds  and  the  straining  ropes,  and  to 
feel  the  buffeting  of  the  waves,  and  to  see  danger  on 
danger  threatening  to  engulf  the  ship ;  and  then  to  read  at 
the  end  that  wonderfully  quiet  calm  statement,  "  So  we 
came  to  Rome."  This  story  is  all  condensed  in  Psalm 
107,  which  declares  that  God  creates  the  storm,  and  the 
calm.  The  psalmist  sang  at  last,  "  So  He  bringeth  them 
unto  the  haven  of  their  desire."  And  Luke  wrote,  "  So 
we  came  to  Rome." 

What  are  the  things  of  importance  here  for  us  ?  First 
that  we  have  a  destination,  Rome.  We  may  have  to 
change  the  spelling  of  the  word,  and  may  have  to  change 
the  geographical  location  of  the  destination ;  but  we.  must 
be  sure  of  the  place  to  which  God  has  appointed  us. 
Not  heaven.  Do  not  spiritualize  this  story  and  spoil  it. 
This  is  not  the  assurance  that  we  shall  get  to  heaven  some 
day.  This  is  a  destination  on  earth,  a  place  of  service  in 
this  world,  a  great  conviction  in  the  soul  that  the  Lord 
says,  "  That  is  the  place  of  thy  service."  A  good  many 
may  say,  "That  is  our  difficulty.  We  are  not  sure  of 
our  destination."  Then  wait  on  the  Lord.  But  when 
once  the  destination  is  marked  and  seen,  then  al- 
though the  way  there  may  be  through  storms  and 

[  535  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  28: 16-31] 

by  devious  ways,  we  shall  reach  it.  Get  the  map,  and 
mark  the  way  Paul  went  to  Rome  from  Csesarea.  It  is 
most  accurately  described  in  this  chapter.  It  was  not  a 
straight  way.  By  devious  ways  he  came  to  Rome; 
through  storms,  but  in  the  atmosphere  of  an  abiding 
calm ;  all  the  way  communicating  help  to  other  people. 

Then  we  have  the  account  of  the  arrival,  in  spite  of 
all  obstacles,  through  loyalty  and  faith,  and  in  quietness ; 
and  the  issue  is  declared.  Put  together  the  end  of  this 
story  in  the  book  of  the  Acts,  and  the  end  of  the  psalm 
paragraph;  "  Paul  .  .  .  thanked  God  and  took  cour- 
age " ;  "  Oh  that  men  would  praise  the  Lord  for  His 
goodness ! "  When  we  are  in  the  place  of  His  appoint- 
ment, if  we  will  only  look  back,  we  shall  see  by  storms 
and  stress  and  strain,  and  through  devious  paths  He  led 
us.  Have  we  forgotten  to  praise  Him  ?  "  Oh  that  men 
would  praise  the  Lord ! "  Some  may  not  yet  be  there, 
but  in  the  midst  of  the  buffeting  still.  Then  let  them  rest 
assured  that, 

"  No  water  can  swallow  the  ship  where  lies 
The  Master  of  ocean  and  earth  and  skies." 

If  He  have  called  us  to  Rome  to  witness,  we  must  come 
there.  So  let  there  be  a  song  in  the  heart,  and  light  on 
the  pathway;  and  as  we  journey  by  devious  ways,  through 
stress  and  strain,  let  us  help  the  soldiers  and  the  sailors 
and  the  sick  folk,  and  every  one  who  crosses  our  path- 
way; for  on  the  way  to  destination  there  are  great  op- 
portunities of  service. 

Acts  28 : 16-31 

This  paragraph  constitutes  the  last  page  of  the  first 
chapter  of  the  history  of  the  Christian  Church.  In  the 
course  of  our  study  of  this  book  we  have  followed  the 
story  of  about  a  human  generation.  According  to  the 
plan  of  the  risen  Lord,  we  have  been  following  the  wit- 
nesses in  their  work  in  Jerusalem,  in  Judaea,  in  Samaria, 

1 536 


,THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  28 : 16-31] 

and  to  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth.  Luke  tells  the 
story  of  the  movement  from  Jerusalem  to  Rome,  and 
there  he  ends ;  but  the  end  is  full  of  suggestiveness  and 
value.  The  book  is  an  unfinished  fragment,  and  incom- 
plete. The  very  first  words  of  the  book  suggest  our  need 
of  the  knowledge  of  another  book,  if  we  are  to  understand 
it.  Certain  facts  are  referred  to,  and  are  taken  for 
granted,  of  which  we  know  nothing  apart  from  the  Gos- 
pel story. 

Now  having  followed  this  movement,  having  watched 
the  Church  witnessing  in  Jerusalem,  seen  its  failure  there 
as  well  as  its  victory ;  and  having  followed  this  wonderful 
servant  of  God,  this  great  pioneer  missionary  on  his 
journeyings,  through  perils  often;  we  at  last  find  our- 
selves with  him  in  Rome.  Now  we  feel  that  we  should 
like  to  settle  down  to  a  new  chapter ;  we  have  shared  this 
man's  passionate  desire  to  reach  Rome,  imperial  mistress 
of  the  world's  cities,  seated  upon  her  seven  hills,  from 
whence  the  highways  run  out  through  all  the  earth ;  now 
let  us  see  how  things  developed.  But  the  book  is  over, 
and  there  is  no  further  record.  Why  not?  Because 
more  was  unnecessary.  The  same  story  will  be  repeated 
in  every  decade,  in  every  century,  in  each  millennium, 
until  the  Lord  shall  come ;  and  to  write  the  whole  history 
was  unnecessary.  Enough  was  written,  to  reveal  the  se- 
crets of  power,  to  bring  into  the  light  the  perpetual  perils 
threatening  the  Church,  to  indicate  directions,  and  to  pro- 
vide all  that  was  necessary  for  the  Church  to  fulfil  its 
mission  until  the  consummation  of  the  age. 

But  this  last  page  is  full  of  interest,  because  we  arrive 
at  Rome.  Paul  arrived  there  in  the  days  when  she  was 
under  an  imperial  despotism.  The  golden  days  of  the 
Republic  had  passed  away.  Gradually  the  dictators  had 
usurped  the  power  of  the  people,  and  at  that  moment  the 
city  of  Rome,  and  the  Empire,  were  under  the  despotism 
of  an  emperor,  and  of  all  the  emperors  perhaps  in  some 
senses  the  worst.  These  were  the  days  of  Nero.  When 

[  537  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  28:16-31] 

Paul  arrived  in  Rome,  Nero  would  not  be  more  .than 
twenty-five  years  of  age ;  but  already  his  hands  were  red 
with  the  blood  of  murder.  His  mother,  Agrippina,  had 
been  murdered  about  a  year  before  Paul's  arrival ;  and  in 
all  probability,  though  this  cannot  be  stated  with  as  much 
certainty,  Octavia  his  wife  was  also  already  murdered. 
Nero  occupied  the  throne  of  the  Caesars ;  cruel,  lascivious, 
weak. 

Paul  did  not  see  Rome  as  Rome  is  seen  to-day.  When 
he  arrived,  the  central  architectural  wonder  was  not  St. 
Peter's.  When  he  arrived  the  Colosseum  was  not  there. 
Upon  the  Capitol  was  the  temple  of  Jupiter,  and  the  great 
Citadel ;  and  on  the  Palatine  the  three  houses  respectively 
of  Augustus,  Tiberius,  and  Caligula,  which  had  been 
joined  together,  until  they  were  then  united  as  the  palace 
of  Caesar.  Passing  into  Rome,  one  of  the  things  most 
conspicuous  to  the  eye  of  the  apostle  would  be  a  temple 
to  Mars,  reminding  all  those  arriving  in  the  city,  of  the 
fact  that  the  strength  of  the  empire  was  based  upon  her 
warlike  character. 

Rome  at  that  time  was  the  very  centre  of  paganism. 
There  is  a  brief  sentence,  and  yet  full  of  suggestiveness 
in  Conybeare  and  Howson's  account  of  Paul's  journey, 
in  which  it  is  said : 


"  Rome  was  like  London  with  all  its  miseries,  vices, 
and  follies  exaggerated;  and  without  Christianity." 


What  then  of  the  people  in  Rome?  One  has  to  draw 
an  average  among  conflicting  statements  concerning  the 
population ;  but  we  may  safely  say  that  within  the  circuit 
of  twelve  miles,  all  included  within  Rome  proper,  there 
were  resident,  when  Paul  arrived,  two  million  people. 
One  million  of  these  were  slaves.  Those  are  approxi- 
mate figures,  but  it  is  accurate  to  say  that  about  half  the 
population  of  Rome  were  slaves.  Of  the  one  million 
citizens,  there  were  about  seven  hundred  senators;  a 

538 1 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  28:16-31] 

thousand  had  been  the  number,  but  their  number  was 
gradually  decreased  as  the  power  of  the  emperor  in- 
creased. There  were  about  ten  thousand  knights,  mostly 
occupying  the  public  positions  in  Rome ;  and  about  fifteen 
thousand  soldiers.  The  vast  majority  of  the  remainder 
of  the  citizens  were  paupers.  The  wealth  of  Rome  was 
massed  in  the  possession  of  a  very  few.  This  great  mul- 
titude of  pauper  citizens  were  proud  of  their  citizenship, 
and  held  the  slaves  beneath  them  in  supreme  contempt. 
One  of  the  tourists  of  the  time  declares  that  they  had  but 
two  cries,  one  was  "Bread!"  and  the  other  was  "The 
Circus ! "  Thousands  of  these  pauper  citizens  had  no 
home  of  their  own.  Managing  somehow  to  obtain  the 
bread  that  satisfied  the  hunger  of  the  day,  crowding  to  the 
circuses  at  night,  watching  the  gladiatorial  combats,  they 
were  living  upon  bread  and  excitement.  Thousands  of 
them  slept  at  night  upon  the  parapets,  and  in  public  places 
of  the  city. 

Then  think  of  the  million  slaves,  and  remember  that 
these  conditions  were  so  different  from  ours  to-day.  All 
the  professional  men,  manufacturers,  and  tradespeople 
were  slaves.  These  pauper  citizens  held  themselves  aloof 
from  those  beneath  them  in  the  pride  of  their  citizenship, 
and  they  disdained  to  touch,  not  merely  a  trade,  but  also 
a  profession.  Slaves  were  ground  under  the  cruel  heel 
of  oppression :  so  much  the  property  of  their  masters  that 
these  masters  could  take  their  life  without  any  protest. 

"  On  that  hard  Pagan  world  disgust 

And  secret  loathing  fell ; 
Deep  weariness  and  sated  lust 
Made  human  life  a  hell. 

"  In  his  cool  hall,  with  haggard  eyes, 

The  Roman  noble  lay; 
He  drove  abroad  in  furious  guise 
Along  the  Appian  Way. 

I  539  I 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  28: 16-31] 

"  He  made  a  feast,  drank  fierce  and  fast, 
And  crowned  his  hair  with  flowers — 
No  easier  and  no  quicker  passed 
The  impracticable  hours." 

Into  that  great  centre,  where  ancient  paganism  was  seen 
in  its  ultimate  results,  on  the  very  verge  of  a  break-up, 
and  yet  full  of  an  amazing,  an  awful,  and  a  world-wide 
power,  at  last  passed  Paul,  the  apostle  of  Jesus. 

When  in  Rome  it  was  my  privilege  to  listen  to  some 
lectures  by  Dr.  J.  Gordon  Gray,  on  the  Footsteps  of  Paul 
in  Rome;  and  under  his  direction  to  see  some  of  the 
places  which  almost  surely  were  the  haunts  of  Paul.  He 
told  us  of  a  bronze  medallion  of  the  second  century,  pre- 
served to-day  in  the  Vatican  Library,  having  upon  it 
portraits  of  Peter  and  Paul.  It  is  quite  true  that  these 
may  not  be  accurate  representations,  but  all  subsequent 
art,  whether  in  sculpture,  or  in  painting,  has  taken  this 
medallion  as  being  so.  Dr.  Gordon  Gray  believes  that 
we  have  in  that  medallion  a  true  representation  of  their 
appearance.  This  is  his  description  of  Paul: 

"  Paul  is  the  man  of  deep  thought,  wiry  in  form, 
slightly  bald,  with  beard  long  and  pointed.  The  expres- 
sion of  the  face  is  calm,  even  benevolent,  not  without  a 
touch  of  sadness.  His  countenance  has  an  air  of  refine- 
ment, which  is  by  no  means  belied  by  the  fact  of  his 
having  wrought  with  his  hands  to  minister  to  his  neces- 
sities. The  impression  thus  taken  from  that  bronze  plate 
enables  us  to  picture  him  as  he  taught  in  his  hired  dwell- 
ing." 

Paul,  at  the  time,  was  about  sixty  years  of  age,  and  writ- 
ing of  himself  soon  after  he  described  himself  as  "  such 
an  one  as  Paul  the  aged."  He  was  prematurely  aged  by 
all  the  toil  and  the  suffering  of  the  thirty  years  in  which 
he  had  been  a  follower  and  a  disciple  and  an  apostle  of 
Jesus  Christ. 

His  first  activity  on  arrival  in  Rome  was  that  of  calling 

[  540  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  28:16-31] 

together  his  own  people ;  for  he  could  not,  as  his  custom 
had  been  in  other  cities,  go  to  them,  for  he  was  a  prisoner, 
chained  to  a  soldier.  Nevertheless  he  was  most  con- 
siderately treated  during  the  first  imprisonment.  The 
first  meeting  was  by  invitation.  He  claimed,  in  the 
presence  of  those  of  the  Jewish  synagogue  in  Rome,  that 
he  was  wearing  the  chain,  "  because  of  the  hope  of 
Israel."  They  said,  they  had  had  no  letters  blaming 
him,  but  they  knew  about  this  sect,  that  it  was  every- 
where spoken  against.  The  opinion  that  they  held  of 
the  sect  was  that  it  was  a  break  with  Judaism.  There  is 
nothing  more  interesting  in  all  the  addresses  and  the 
writings  of  Paul  than  his  constant  effort  to  show  that 
Christianity  was  not  a  break  with  Judaism,  but  its  fulfil- 
ment. For  the  hope  of  Israel,  for  that  which  had  been 
the  central  hope  of  their  religion  in  bygone  days,  for  that 
imperishable  hope  that  had  been  at  the  heart  of  all  their 
history,  for  that  he  wore  the  chain. 

This  first  meeting  was  followed  by  a  more  formal  as- 
sembly. We  have  no  detailed  account  of  Paul's  dis- 
course, but  Luke  has  given  us  the  theme  of  it.  He  talked 
from  morning  till  evening  to  these  men  of  two  things. 
First,  "  testifying  the  Kingdom  of  God."  That  was  the 
rock  foundation  of  the  Hebrew  economy.  Notice  the 
fine  and  wonderful  art  with  which  this  man  in  Rome, 
among  the  Hebrews,  pleaded  the  cause  of  his  Master. 
He  began  by  testifying  the  Kingdom  of  God;  the  The- 
ocracy. That  is  what  the  Hebrew  people  were,  in  the 
purpose  of  God.  In  that  they  made  their  boast.  He 
testified  to  that,  showing  first  how  he  had  not  departed 
from  the  foundation  position  of  the  Hebrew  people. 
Then  secondly,  he  persuaded  them,  arguing  with  them 
"  concerning  Jesus,"  from  their  own  writings,  from 
Moses,  and  all  the  prophets.  The  picture  ends  sadly;  it 
is  one  of  division.  Some  believed,  and  some  disbelieved; 
they  were  not  able  to  come  to  any  decision.  They  de- 
parted, after  Paul  had  spoken  his  final  word. 

I  541  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  28:16-31] 

This  whole  book  of  the  Acts  is  the  story  of  God's  final 
striving  with  the  Hebrew  people.  In  the  life  of  our  Lord 
He  came  first  to  the  Hebrew,  the  Jew.  He  said  upon  one 
occasion  to  a  woman  who  asked  His  help,  "  It  is  not  meet 
to  take  the  children's  bread,  and  cast  it  to  the  dogs." 
That  little  incidental  word  revealed  the  fact  that  He  came 
first  to  the  Hebrew  people.  They  rejected  Him.  They 
had  their  new  opportunity  beyond  His  rejection  at  Pente- 
cost, and  yet  another  in  that  period  in  which  this  man 
had  stood  in  Jerusalem.  Jerusalem  finally  rejected  Christ 
when  it  rejected  Paul.  After  that  Paul  strove  to  reach 
them  in  every  city.  He  went  first  to  the  synagogue,  first 
to  the  Hebrew.  The  word  of  Paul  in  Rome  was  the 
final  word.  Ere  very  many  years  had  gone,  after  a  period 
of  oppression,  tyranny,  and  suffering,  the  Roman  eagles 
were  carried  through  Jerusalem,  and  the  nation  was 
swept  out.  It  was  the  occasion  of  the  last  and  solemn 
abandonment  of  the  people,  this  word  spoken  by  Paul 
to  the  Hebrew  rulers  in  that  city  of  Rome,  the  central 
city  of  the  world. 

The  words  he  quoted  were  words  which  had  been 
spoken  to  Isaiah  in  that  great  vision,  the  record  of  which 
we  have  in  the  sixth  chapter,  when  his  whole  ministry 
was  changed.  Our  Lord  quoted  these  very  words  in  the 
thirteenth  chapter  of  Matthew,  in  the  course  of  the  para- 
bles of  the  Kingdom.  When  He  was  showing  why  the 
Kingdom  was  to  be  taken  from  the  Jewish  people,  He 
quoted  the  same  words.  John  also  quoted  exactly  the  same 
word  in  the  twelfth  chapter  of  his  Gospel,  where  he  was 
giving  the  last  things  in  the  presentation  of  the  Kingdom 
to  Israel.  Mark  these  occurrences  of  these  words  in  the 
Bible:  Isaiah,  Jesus,  John,  and  Paul.  If  we  say  that 
Paul  quoted  them  from  Isaiah,  we  shall  say  that  which  is 
correct,  but  do  not  forget  that  they  were  not  the  words  of 
Isaiah,  but  the  words  of  Jehovah  spoken  to  Isaiah  about 
these  people.  The  declaration  is  that  they  themselves  had 
closed  their  eyes,  because  they  would  not  see ;  and  there- 

[  542  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  28:16-31) 

fore  God  had  made  them  blind ;  that  they  themselves  had 
hardened  their  heart,  because  they  would  not  yield ;  and 
therefore  God  handed  them  over  to  their  own  hardness  of 
heart.  But  it  is  interesting  and  solemn  to  remember  that 
here  in  Rome,  the  city  to  whose  yoke  the  Hebrew  people 
had  bowed  the  neck  anew,  in  order  to  encompass  the 
death  of  Christ,  Paul's  final  word  of  excommunication 
was  spoken. 

So  we  pass  to  that  which  is  in  some  senses  the  most 
interesting  part  of  this  final  page,  the  last  two  verses. 
There  were  two  years,  of  which  we  only  know  what  these 
two  verses  reveal,  and  what  is  found  in  the  letters  to  the 
Philippians,  the  Colossians,  the  Ephesians,  and  Philemon ; 
for  those  four  letters  were  written  undoubtedly,  during 
this  first  imprisonment,  and  not  during  the  second. 

There  is  a  difference  between  the  "  lodging  "  of  verse 
twenty-three,  and  the  "hired  dwelling"  of  verse  thirty. 
First  he  was  in  a  lodging,  possibly  the  guest  of  some 
friend,  his  soldier  guardian  still  by  his  side.  It  was  in  a 
lodging  where  he  received  the  Jews;  but  after  that  he 
turned  to  the  Gentiles,  he  was  for  two  years  in  his  own 
hired  dwelling.  He  was  a  prisoner,  and  a  prisoner  of 
Rome,  waiting  the  pleasure  of  the  emperor.  At  any 
hour  it  might  be  that  he  would  be  called  to  appear  before 
the  emperor  to  whom  he  had  appealed.  Consequently 
he  was  in  Rome  at  the  charges  of  Rome.  But  in  order 
that  he  might  do  his  Christian  work  in  Rome,  he  hired 
his  dwelling.  Independent  of  the  patronage  of  Rome 
must  the  apostle  be,  if  he  would  deliver  the  Gospel  to 
Rome.  There  came  an  hour  when  a  Roman  emperor 
espoused  the  cause  of  Christianity,  when  he  provided  the 
house  in  which  there  should  be  the  Christian  worship  of 
God,  when  he  became  a  patron  of  the  Christian  Church. 
That  was  the  darkest  and  most  disastrous  hour  that  ever 
came  to  that  Church.  When  the  emperor  provides  the 
house,  he  will  dictate  the  message.  When  the  secular 
power  governs  the  affairs  of  the  Church,  the  word 

[  543  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  28:16-31] 

"  Church  "  will  be  employed,  in  order  to  meet  the  re- 
quirement of  the  secular  power.  Simple  and  yet  sublime 
is  the  graphic  word  of  the  last  picture  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles,  that  a  prisoner  of  Rome,  at  the  charges  of 
Rome,  will  yet  for  the  doing  of  Christian  work  in  Rome, 
hire  his  dwelling. 

There  he  kept  open  house,  receiving  all  that  came  to 
him."  Undoubtedly  many  patrician  Romans  went  in  those 
two  years  into  the  dwelling  of  that  strange  and  wonderful 
Hebrew  Christian,  and  listened  to  him.  We  shall  find 
in  his  letters  references  to  nobles  in  Rome,  who  had 
passed  under  the  influence  of  the  Gospel.  But  there  came 
to  him,  visiting  him,  abiding  with  him,  a  little  band  of 
faithful  souls,  referred  to  in  his  letters  as  coming 'to  him 
in  Rome.  Luke  and  Aristarchus  had  accompanied  him, 
and  remained  with  him.  Tychieus  was  there  for  a  while, 
but  was  presently  sent  away  with  a  letter  to  Ephesus. 
Timothy  also  was  there  for  part  of  the  time.  Epaphrodi- 
ttts  came  to  see  him  from  Philippi,  bringing  with  him 
the  gifts  of  the  Church  there.  Onesimus,  the  runaway 
slave,  found  his  way  into  the  dwelling  of  the  apostle,  and 
was  brought  under  the  spell  of  the  Gospel,  and  to  Christ, 
until  he  served  with  IQVC  this  man  in  his  imprisonment. 
Mark  too,  from  whom  he  had  parted  once  in  anger,  also 
was  there  for  part  of  the  time,  and  one  called  Jesus,  or 
Justus,  a  disciple  of  Epaphras.  Then  Epaphras,  whose 
portrait  Paul  had  drawn  in  his  letters,  and  who  stands 
upon  the  page  of  the  New  Testament  as  one  of  the  most 
wonderful  saints  of  the  whole  period,  "  one  of  you,"  who 
agonized  in  prayer  that  the  Colossians  might  "  stand  per- 
fect and  complete  in  all  the  will  of  God,"  he  too  came  to 
Rome.  During  those  days  also  Demas  was  with  him. 
That  group  of  faithful  souls  went  to  that  open  house, 
were  taught  by  the  great  apostle,  inspired  for  new  work, 
and  sent  out  upon  new  missions. 

Two  words  tell  the  method  of  Paul.  The  first  is 
"preaching,"  and  the  word  is  not  eitaggeltidzo,  the 

1  544  ] 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  28 

preaching  of  the  Gospel,  but  kerusso,  the  proclamation 
of  the  herald,  "  preaching  the  Kingdom."  That  picture 
of  Rome  is  still  in  our  minds,  Rome,  mistress  of  the 
world,  with  Nero  as  the  central  figure.  But  there  was 
another  man  in  Rome,  proclaiming  the  Kingdom  of  God. 
The  other  word  is  "teaching" — and  it  is  literally  dis- 
cipling— "  the  things  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
For  the  Romans,  for  all  visitors  outside  the  Christian 
faith  and  economy,  there  was  the  proclamation  of  the 
Kingdom  of  God;  but  for  the  disciples,  there  was  the 
teaching  of  the  things  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

That  is  all  that  Luke  has  recorded.  But  during  that 
period  Paul  wrote  some  letters :  the  Philippian  letter,  the 
Ephesian  letter,  the  Colossian  letter;  and  the  half -page 
letter  to  Philemon.  Measure  the  teaching  given  to  the 
disciples  by  these  letters,  then  we  shall  know  some  of  the 
things  he  taught  concerning  Christ  during  those  two 
years.  Christ  the  well-spring  of  joy,  as  in  the  Philippian 
letter;  Christ  in  all  the  glory  of  essential  Deity  em- 
bodied, as  in  the  Colossian  letter;  Christ  filling  His 
Church,  and  making  it  the  medium  of  manifestation  in 
unending  ages,  as  in  the  Ephesian  letter;  Christ  taking 
Onesimus  back  to  his  master,  making  his  master  receive 
him  no  longer  as  a  slave,  but  as  a  brother.  "  Teaching 
the  things  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

The  last  word  here  is,  "  none  forbidding  him,"  akolutos. 
Our  translation  is  I  think  a  little  weak.  Sometimes  we 
translate  all  the  fire,  and  passion,  and  dynamite  out  of  a 
word.  The  last  word  is  "  unhindered."  But  Paul  is  in 
prison?  Unhindered.  But  Nero  is  on  the  throne?  Un- 
hindered. That  is  the  last  word,  flaming  in  light,  thrilling 
in  power,  telling  the  secret  of  the  new  force  right  at  the 
heart  of  the  world,  at  its  strategic  centre.  Only  one  man, 
mean  and  contemptible  of  bodily  presence,  if  we  are  to 
believe  his  own  description,  but  that  man  unhindered. 
That  last  picture  of  Paul  in  Rome  is  full  of  value. 

What  must  be  the  deepest  note  of  the  Christian  witness 

[  545  I 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 
[Acts  28: 16-31] 

to  the  cities  of  to-day?  The  Kingdom  of  God,  not  the 
caprice  of  a  king,  nor  the  decision  of  a  parliament,  not 
the  will  of  the  people,  which  may  be  as  mistaken  as  the 
caprice  of  a  king.  We  stand  not  for  monarchy,  or  de- 
mocracy; but  for  Theocracy,  for  the  Kingdom  of  God, 
for  the  government  of  God,  for  the  fact  that  He  is  King 
of  the  kings,  for  the  fact  that  His  law  must  be  the  crite- 
rion by  which  all  human  laws  are  measured,  for  the  fact 
that  only  as  His  will  is  done  can  the  people  enter  into  the 
heritage  of  their  own  life.  The  Kingdom  of  God  was 
the  deepest  note  of  the  witness  of  the  one  man  in  Rome ; 
and  must  be  the  deepest  note  of  the  witness  of  the  Church 
in  every  city. 

But  not  that  alone.  Also  "teaching  the  things  con- 
cerning the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  That  is  to  say,  that  the 
Kingdom  of  God  must  be  interpreted  by  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  He  Himself  being  an  interpretation  of  the  King. 
We  know  God  as  King  if  we  know  Jesus.  He  Himself 
was  also  the  interpretation  of  life  in  the  Kingdom,  for 
He  was  subject  to  the  will  of  God  in  all  the  mystery  of 
His  human  life.  So  that  in  this  Lord  Jesus  Christ  we 
have  the  unveiling  of  the  King  Who  is  over  the  King- 
dom; and  of  the  men  who  are  in  the  Kingdom,  when 
they  realize  the  meaning  thereof. 

Yet  the  central  word  is  neither  that  of  this  interpre- 
tation of  the  unveiled  King,  nor  this  revelation  of  the 
subjects  of  the  Kingdom.  The  central  word  is  that  of 
the  mystery  of  the  Cross  whereby  the  rebel  may  be 
made  nigh  again,  and  the  chaos  may  give  place  to  cosmos, 
and  all  the  weariness  and  wounding  and  woe  may  give 
place  to  rest  and  healing  and  happiness.  Where  the 
Christian  witness  is  true  to  this  Kingdom  and  to  this 
interpretation,  the  issue  is  that  the  witness  is  unhindered ; 
in  spite  of  emperors,  enemies,  prisons,  and  chains.  "  The 
word  of  God  is  not  bound,"  and  whatever  may  be  the 
massed  forces  against  its  testimony,  it  is  they  which 
must  crumble  and  pass  and  perish,  as  did  Rome  and 

546 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

[Acts  28 : 16-31] 

Nero,  and  not  this  word  of  the  testimony.  May  it  be 
ours  to  be  true  to  that  testimony  in  life  and  speech,  to 
the  glory  of  His  name.  In  proportion  as  we  are  so,  the 
one  word  forever  describing  the  Church  will  be  the  word 
with  which  this  book  ends,  unhindered! 


tfte  United  States  9f  America. 


[547] 


G.   CAMPBELL   MORGAN'S 
BIBLE  STUDT  COURSE 

"Nothing  Like  This  in  Literature" 
"A  Whole  Biblical  Library." 

The  Analyzed   Bible 

The  great  life-work  of  this  "  prince  of  Bible  ex- 
positors," whose  phenomenal  success  as  a  teacher  of 
the  word  in  America  and  England  is  well  known. 

THE  INTRODUCTORY  VOLUMES 

INTRODUCTION  TO  GENESIS-ESTHER 
INTRODUCTION  TO  JOB-MALACHI 
INTRODUCTION  TO  HATT.-REVELATION 

j  volumes,  cloth,  each  $1.75 

Complete  in  themselves  these  three  volumes  form 
a  broad,  helpful,  fascinating  view  of  the  entire  Bible. 
They  are  practical,  workable  outlines  which  should 
be  in  the  library  of  every  Christian  worker. 

THE  FULL  ANALYTICAL  VOLUMES 


READY 

THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS 

THE  BOOK  OF  JOB 

ISAIAH,  VOL.  I. 

ISAIAH,  VOL.  II. 

THE  GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW 

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  JOHN 

ROMANS 

Each  volume,  I2m.ot  cloth,  $1.25 

Thousands  are  now  purchasing  these  volumes  as  they  ap- 
pear. A  simple,  easy  way  to  secure  this  valuable  library  of 
Bible  Expositions.  Upon  completion  it  will  form  what  The 
Westminster  terms  "  the  most  wonderful  and  valuable  pos- 
session that  has  come  into  the  hands  of  the  Bible  student  in 
recent  years." 

The  Examiner:  "  A  few  months'  use  will  make  the  Bible 
a  new  book.  The  crowning  work  of  Dr.  Morgan's  life." 

Congregationalist  :  "Success  is  assured  by  insight,  spir- 
itual power  and  a  wise  discernment  of  the  aim  in  view  and 
the  best  means  of  attaining  it." 


G.  Campbell  Morgan's 

Analyses  of  the  Life  of  Christ 
The  Crises  of  the  Christ 

An  Interpretation  of  the  Vital  Events  in 
the  Life  of  Christ.    8vo,  cloth,  $2. 50 

"Its  conception  is  excellent;  its  treats  seven 
critical  epochs  in  the  life  of  Christ — the  birth, 
baptism,  temptation,  transfiguration,  crucifix- 
ion, resurrection  and  ascension.  Dr.  Morgan 
has  abilities  which  peculiarly  fit  him  to  treat 
these  experiences  in  a  practical  and  spiritual 
manner." — Out  took. 

The  Teaching  of  Christ. 

An  Interpretation  of  the  Oral  Teachings 

of  Jesus.     8vo,  cloth,  $2. 50 

••The  method  of  the  author  is  to  gather 
together  the  great  truths  enunciated  by  Christ 
in  relation  to  each  of  the  subjects  selected  for 
study.  After  collating  the  passages  contained 
in  the  four  Gospels,  the  texts  are  carefully  ex- 
plained and  the  conclusions  drawn.  These 
studies  are  marked  by  the  Biblical  knowledge, 
the  clear  analysis,  and  the  vivid  style  which 
characterize  all  the  utterances  and  writings 
of  this  popular  preacher  and  author.** 

— Record  of  Christian  Work. 


f.          .-», 


.MM 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 


•        •  •     «  •  •• 

17  490  325 


