<^^X  OF  r^^HG^ 


THE 
ANALYZED  BIBLE 

BY 

G.  CAMPBELL  'morgan,  D.D. 

VOLUME  I 

GENESIS   TO   ESTHER 


New  York        Chicago        Toronto 

Fleming   H.  Revell   Company 

LoNDOK   AND   Edinburgh 


Copyright,  1907,  by 
FLEMING  H.  REVELL  COMPANY 


<^ 


^.^ 


New  York  :  158  Fifth  Avenue 
Chicago  :  80  Wabash  Avenue 
Toronto  :  25  Richmond  St.,W. 
London  :  21  Paternoster  Square 
Edinburgh  :     100  Princes  Street 


CONTENTS 

Genesis. 

The  Book  of  Beginnings 

PAGE 

9 

Exodus. 

The  Emergence  of  the  Na- 
tion       .        .        .        . 

31 

Leviticus. 

The  Book  of  Laws 

53 

Numbers. 

The  Book  of  Wandering 

.      65 

Deuteroxomy. 

The  Book  of  Reviews  . 

.      79 

Joshua. 

The  Book  of  Possession 

.       91 

Judges. 

Deliverances 

.     103 

EUTH. 

Faith  and  Faithlessness 

.     115 

I.  Samuel. 

Transition    . 

.     125 

II.  Samuel. 

Theocratic  Monarchy 

.     137 

I.  Kings. 

Disruption    . 

149 

II.  Kings. 

Corruption    . 

161 

6  Contents 


PAGE 

I.  Chronicles.  The   Temple,   Desired   and 

Approached    .        .        .  173 

II.  Chronicles.  The  Temple,  Possessed  and 

Abandoned     .        .        .  185 

Ezra.                  A  Eeturning  Eemnant        .  197 

Nehemiah.         Consolidation       .        .        .  205 

Esther.              God  amid  the  Shadows        .  215 


INTRODUCTION 

IN  every  direction  people  are  turning  anew 
to  the  study  of  the  Bible.  There  are  many 
ways  of  prosecuting  that  study.  I  am  not 
proposing  to  enter  into  any  discussion  concern- 
ing the  relative  values  of  these  different 
methods.  In  these  volumes  I  am  adopting 
one,  which  is  most  consistently  expressed  as 
being  the  first,  and  consists  in  an  endeavour  to 
discover  the  content  and  message  of  the  Divine 
Library.  This  whole  method  has  different  proc- 
esses, from  the  telescopic  to  the  microscopic. 
The  telescopic  is  that  of  taking  in  large  areas 
at  one  view,  in  order  to  see  the  relation  of  part 
to  part  and  system  to  system.  The  micro- 
scopic is  that  of  the  minute  and  careful 
examination  of  the  smallest  parts,  the  study  of 
words,  and  all  that  goes  to  make  for  detailed 
accuracy.  Between  the  two  extremes  there  are 
many  grades.  All  are  in  turn  valuable,  and 
all  may  be  pursued  by  the  Bible  student  con- 
currently. The  first  and  fundamental  is  the 
telescopic.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  in 
the  study  of  any  book  in  the  Divine  Library 
to  gain  primarily  a  broad  and  general  idea  of 


Introduction 


the  scope  and  main  structure  thereof.  Until 
this  is  done  the  other  methods  are  not  safe, 
and  very  much  false  exposition  of  individual 
texts,  and  of  separate  sections,  is  due  to  the 
fact  that  their  setting  in  the  whole  scheme  is 
not  understood.  In  other  words  texts  should 
never  be  studied  save  in  relation  to  their 
context. 

In  the  first  three  volumes  of  the  "  Analyzed 
Bible,"  the  Old  and  the  New  Testament  are  to 
be  passed  in  general  review.  The  method  is  to 
be  followed  in  its  simplest  process.  The  sub- 
sequent volumes  will  deal  with  the  books  of 
the  Bible  more  fully,  but  always  in  broad 
outline.  The  microscopic  method  is  never 
reached.  For  that,  there  are  almost  innumer- 
able volumes  by  expert  expositors.  The  pres- 
ent series  is  not  intended  to  take  the  place  of 
such,  but  to  serve  as  an  introduction  to  their 
use.  As  the  method  can  hardly  be  revealed  in 
the  volumes  themselves,  a  brief  word  as  to  how 
these  results  have  been  reached  may  be  in 
place.  It  has  been  first,  that  of  repeated  read- 
ing of  the  books,  sometimes  as  many  as  fifty 
times,  sometimes  of  course  less,  until  the  gen- 
eral sweep  is  felt.  This  has  been  followed  by 
tabulation,  and  correction  by  more  careful 
reading.  The  issue  is  an  Analysis,  or  Table  of 
Contents.    I  do  not  claim  finality  for  any  of 


Introduction  3 


these  analyses.  I  simply  give  the  results  of 
my  first  line  of  Bible  study  during  the  past 
twenty  years.  In  the  microscopic  method 
some  of  these  analyses  have  been  altered,  and 
more  exhaustive  study  might  necessitate  still 
further  alterations.  No  student  of  the  Bible 
can  deal  with  all  its  books  satisfactorily  to 
himself  in  a  lifetime.  The  treasures  are  un-  ( 
searchable;  and  those  who  have  spent  most  ) 
time  and  toil  in  the  fascinating  work  are  most  \ 


conscious  of  the  vast  reaches  that  stretch  away 
beyond  them,  luring  them  on  to  closer  examina- 
tion and  profounder  investigation. 

So  much  concerning  the  writer  and  his 
methods.  Now  a  word  with  my  readers  as  to 
purpose  and  method. 

As  to  the  first,  I  am  profoundly  convinced 
that  one  of  the  gravest  perils  of  this  hour  of 
increased  interest  is  that  of  a  merely  carnal 
desire  for  the  technical  knowledge  of  the  con- 
tent of  Scripture.  Unless  those  who  devote 
themselves  to  the  study  of  the  Word  zealously 
and  ceaselessly  watch  and  pray,  the  very  de- 
light of  discovering  the  system  will  become  a 
paramount  motive,  and  wherever  this  is  so,  it 
results  in  disastrous  failure,  and  an  actual 
peril  to  spiritual  life.  In  these  volumes  I 
need  hardly  say  the  Bible  is  to  be  treated  as 
Divine.     It  is  a  volume  of  the  Oracles  of  God. 


Introduction 


If  this  be  recognized  it  must  at  once  be  ad- 
mitted that  they  speak  to  men  with  purpose, 
and  not  merely  for  amusement,  even  on  highest 
lines.  The  use  of  the  word  amusement  in  this 
connection  may  shock  some  people,  and  yet  I 
employ  it  advisedly,  for  I  do  not  hesitate  to 
say  that  I  know  of  no  recreation  more  full  of 
mental  interest  than  that  of  a  diligent  study 
of  any  one  of  these  books.  Yet  the  purpose  of 
the  whole  library  is  that  of  so  revealing  the 
will  of  God  to  man  as  to  lead  him  into  personal 
conformity  thereto.  There  is  no  book  without 
some  direct  teaching.  To  discover  the  teach- 
ing as  a  theory  merely,  without  yielding  to  it 
personal  and  immediate  obedience,  is  to  fa- 
miliarize the  mind  with  truth  and  so  to  rob  it 
of  its  power,  to  the  immeasurable  harm  of  the 
one  who  does  so. 

As  to  the  method  which  will  be  most  helpful 
to  those  intending  to  follow  this  series,  I  be- 
lieve that  the  first  thing  should  be,  before  any 
analysis  of  mine  is  looked  at,  that  the  book 
should  be  read  through.  I  do  not  think  it 
necessary  for  me  to  stay  to  argue  at  any  length 
for  the  possibility  of  this.  I  would  simply 
remind  my  readers  that  the  whole  Bible  can  be 
read  through  with  ease  at  the  ordinary  pulpit 
rate  of  public  reading  in  sixty  hours.  I  leave 
them  to  make  their  own  calculations  upon  this 


Introduction 


statement  as  to  the  time  necessary  for  the  read- 
ing of  any  particular  book. 

Having  read  the  book  through,  the  next  proc- 
ess of  value  will  be  that  of  marking  out  the 
main  divisions  as  indicated  in  the  analysis,  in 
a  Bible  specially  procured  for  the  purpose. 
Then  let  each  division  be  read  through 
separately. 

The  third  and  final  process  should  be  that 
of  taking  each  division  separately,  and  mark- 
ing the  sub-sections  in  the  Bible. 

Then  a  word  as  to  the  use  of  these  studies. 
By  this  I  do  not  mean  the  use  to  the  reader, 
but  the  use  the  reader  is  going  to  make  of  what 
he  gains.  I  think  that  I  may  best  express  what 
I  mean  by  the  use  of  the  brief  word  of  advice 
— Pass  it  on.  This  method  of  Bible  study  may 
be  profitably  followed  in  the  family.  It  will 
be  found  that  children  in  the  home  are  greatly 
interested  in  rapidly  passing  over  the  Bible 
with  someone  who  is  familiar  with  these  broad, 
outlines.  Of  course  I  do  not  mean  to  suggest 
that  the  children  are  to  be  asked  to  read  the 
book  through,  but  that  parents  will  take  them 
over  the  books,  telling  them  the  content  of 
each.  Perhaps  in  such  use,  a  mere  statement 
of  the  first  divisions  of  each  book  by  the  parent, 
and  committed  to  memory  by  the  child,  would 
be  the  best  plan.     It  is  perfectly  certain  that 


6  Introduction 


there  is  nothing  that  this  age  more  needs  than 
a  return  on  the  part  of  Christian  parents  to 
simple  and  yet  consecutive  teaching  of  the 
Bible  to  their  own  children. 

Then  these  studies  may  be  used  again,  by 
gathering  small  groups  of  friends  together  for 
Bible-marking,  and  conversation  on  the  basis 
thereof. 

And  yet  once  again,  in  the  more  public  work 
of  the  Christian  Church.  In  Sunday  schools, 
and  Bible-classes,  and  in  the  regular  ministry 
of  the  .Word  by  the  pastors,  nothing  could  be 
more  interesting  than  passing  the  books  of  the 
Bible  in  review  by  this  method  of  general  out- 
line and  analysis. 

I  should  like  to  write  a  final  word  concern- 
ing the  ultimate  value  of  this  particular 
method,  that  namely,  of  the  discovery  thereby 
of  the  unity  of  the  Library.  If  once  again  a 
personal  word  of  testimony  may  be  permitted, 
I  may  say  that  it  was  by  the  adoption  of  this 
method  in  my  own  life  that  the  Bible  became 
my  own.  By  that  I  mean  to  say  that  it  was 
my  high  privilege  to  be  born  and  trained  in  a 
home  where  the  Bible  was  the  supreme  Book. 
From  my  earliest  childhood  its  stories  charmed 
me,  and  I  grew  up  firmly  believing  without 
question  in  its  divinity.  Then  came  a  day  of 
questioning  and  of  doubt,  of  fear  amounting 


Introduction 


almost  to  dread  in  the  presence  of  much  that 
was  being  written  and  said  concerning  the 
Scriptures.  It  was  out  of  a  deep  sense  of  per- 
plexity that  I  turned  from  books  about  the 
Bible  to  the  Bible  itself.  The  result  in  my 
own  experience  has  been  a  discovery  of  unity 
which  to  me  is  the  final  proof  of  Divinity. 
Beginning  with  the  Old  Testament  and  moving 
systematically  forward,  I  discovered  that  each 
book  demanded  another,  and  that  when 
Malachi  had  been  reached,  the  whole  collection 
demanded  more.  In  other  words,  I  found  that 
step  by  step  I  had  proceeded  through  history 
and  through  teaching  all  of  which  pointed  to- 
ward a  coming  One.  Then,  turning  to  the 
New  Testament,  I  found  the  answer  to  all  the 
expectation  created  in  the  reading  of  the  Old. 
He,  the  lonely  and  perfect  Personality  of  the 
Gospel  narratives,  stands  at  the  centre,  and  all 
the  highways  meet  in  Him.  The  roads  of  the 
books  of  the  Old  Testament  lead  up  to  Him. 
The  pathways  of  the  New  lead  out  from  Him. 
If  Christ  is  a  myth,  then  the  books  of  the  Old 
Testament  have  raised  questionings  and  hopes 
which  have  never  been  answered.  If  the 
things  declared  in  these  books  are  untrue,  then 
history  has  produced  a  Person  and  an  effect 
answering  with  absolute  accuracy  things  which 
never  happened.     One  illustration  will  suffice. 


Introduction 


If  man  never  fell,  then  the  Christ  of  the 
Gospels  lived  and  taught  and  died  unneces- 
sarily. That  man  is  consistent  who  abandons 
all,  rather  than  he  who,  professing  still  to  own 
allegiance  to  Christ,  denies  some  parts  of  the 
whole. 

This  result  of  conviction  of  the  unity  of  the 
Library  cannot  be  realized  save  by  patient 
study  of  its  parts.  I  do  not  say  that  it  is 
w^rong  to  believe  upon  the  testimony  of  others 
in  the  Divinity  of  the  whole.  To  those  who 
are  able  to  do  so,  the  study  will  confirm  their 
faith.  I  do  however  mean  to  say  that  those 
who  conscientiously  are  asking  questions  in 
this  direction  will  find  an  answer  best,  not  by 
a  study  of  books  about  the  Scriptures,  either  of 
a  destructive  nature  or  in  defence,  but  by 
earnest  devotion  to  a  study  of  the  Scriptures 
themselves. 


GENESIS 


GENESIS^THE  BOOK  OF  BEGINNINGS 


A 

B 

C 

GENERATION 

I.,  it. 

DEGENERATION 

Hi. — xi. 

REGENERATION 

xii.—l. 

I. 

Of  the  Material 

I.  Of  the  Individual 

iii. 

I.  Of  Individuals 

to  IVIan         i.- 

-ii.3 

i.  The  Serpent  and  Man 

1-8 

xii.— XXXV.  21 

i 

Origin. 

i.  I 

ii.  Jehovah. 

9-24 

i.  Abraham.      xii.— xxv.  10 

ii 

Ruin. 

i.   23 

7  Cotnmunications 

iii 

The  revealed  Cosmogony. 

ii.   Isaac.          xxv.  it— xxvi. 

i.  2b 

-n.  3 

II.  Of  the  Family  iv 

.,v. 

2  Communicattons 

i.  The  first  Family. 

iv. 

iii.  Jacob.      xxvii.— xxxv.  21 

11. 

Of  Man,  as  to 
Nature  and 

ii.  The  Families. 

V. 

5  Communications 

11.  Of  the  Family 

Office          ii. 

4-25 

xxxv.  22-xxxviiI. 

i. 

Created. 

4-8 

III.  Of  Society 

vi. 

i.  The  Sons  of  Jacob. 

ii 

Crowned. 

9-15 

i.  Intermixture 

xxxv.  22-29 
Generations  of  Esau. 

iii 

Conditioned. 

16,17 

ii.  Degeneracy 

xxxvi. 

iv 

Completed. 

18-25 

r  Destruction  and 
1          Deliverance. 

L                                      vii., 

New  Departure 
National 

viii. 

II.  Joseph.                    xxxvii. 

iii.  J udah's  corruption. 

xxxviii. 

111.  Of  Society 

ix., 

X.    J 

xxxix.-l.  21 

i.  History  of  Joseph 

IV.  Of  the  Nations 

Xi. 

ii.  Israel  segregated 

i.  Confederacy. 

ii.  Confusion. 

IV.  Of  a  Nation 

iii.  Continoity. 

1. 22'26 

Shem  to  Abraham. 

Prophecy  of  faith 

GENESIS 

THE  book  of  Genesis  is  the  book  of  origins. 
It  deals  with  the  beginnings  of  the  facts 
and  forces  in  the  midst  of  which  humanity 
lives,  in  so  far  as  it  is  necessary  for  man  to 
know  them  in  order  to  set  his  life  in  right  re- 
lationship to  them.  There  is  nothing  final  in 
this  book.  Things  created  are  not  seen  in  per- 
fection, but  rather  as  prepared  for  develop- 
ment. Evil  is  revealed  neither  as  to  its  first 
origin  nor  ultimate  development,  but  only  in 
the  beginnings  of  its  operation  in  human  life. 
The  Divine  plan  of  redemption  is  not  fully  un- 
folded, but  the  first  movements  in  history 
toward  its  outworking  are  clearly  revealed. 

The  main  divisions  of  the  book  are  marked 
by  the  phrases:  "In  the  beginning  God"  (i. 
1),  "Now  the  serpent"  (iii.  1),  "Now  Jeho- 
vah "  (xii.  1 ) .  The  first  division  tells  the  story 
of  the  beginnings  of  the  material  universe. 
The  second  division  gives  an  account  of  how 
evil  entered  human  history,  and  traces  its  first 
movements.  The  third  division  gives  the  his- 
tory of  the  calling  of  a  man,  the  making  of  a 
nation,'  the  creation  of  a  testimonj^,  and  thus 


10  Genesis 


the  preparation  for  the  ultimate  coming  of  a 
Saviour.  These  in  broad  outline  are  the  divi- 
sions of  the  book.  The  beginnings  of  created 
things:  Generation,  and,  at  the  back  of  all, 
God.  The  beginnings  of  evil:  Degeneration, 
and,  at  the  back  of  all,  the  serpent.  The  be- 
ginnings of  the  process  of  restoration:  Re- 
generation, and,  at  the  back  of  all,  Jehovah. 

A.  Generation 

In  this  first  division  there  are  two  sections, 
which  give  an  account  respectively  of  the  gen- 
eration of  the  material  to  man,  and  the  genera- 
tion of  man  as  to  nature  and  office. 

"  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven 
and  the  earth."  In  that  simple  statement  we 
have  the  Bible  declaration  of  the  origin  of  the 
material  universe ;  and  it  is  one  in  which  faith 
finds  reasonable  foundation.  Interpretations 
of  method  may  vary,  but  the  essential  truth 
abides.  In  its  dignified  and  sublime  statement 
reason  may  rest  as  it  cannot  possibly  do  in 
any  theory  which  leaves  God  out  of  the  ques- 
tion, and  thus  finally  declares  that  the  first 
cause  was  more  or  less  the  result  of  accident, 
or  the  existence  of  laws  without  mind,  or  of 
order  without  thought. 

"And  the  earth  was  waste  and  void;  and 
darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the  deep."    It 


The    Book    of    Beginnings  11 

is  not  possible  that  those  words  describe  the 
condition  of  the  heaven  and  tlie  earth  as  they 
were  created  by  God.  Between  the  original 
creation  and  the  conditions  herein  described 
there  had  been  a  cataclysm.  Of  that  revela- 
tion has  given  us  no  account.  Speculations  are 
interesting,  but  they  cannot  be  final  or  dog- 
matic. It  may  be  that  behind  the  material 
cataclysm  there  was  a  moral  catastrophe. 
Probably,  if  we  knew  all  the  history,  we  should 
know  the  truth  concerning  the  origination  of 
evil.  In  subsequent  volumes  of  the  Divine 
Library  there  are  flashes  of  light  which  may 
afford  some  clue  to  the  hidden  things.  The 
fact  that  Satan  is  spoken  of  as  "  the  god  of 
this  world,'^  "  the  prince  of  this  world,''  may 
refer  to  a  relationship  he  bore  to  the  earth 
prior  to  the  appearance  of  man.  It  may  be 
that  here  angels  "  kept  not  their  own  princi- 
pality," and  that  in  their  fall  they  involved 
the  earth  itself  in  degradation  from  its  primal 
perfection,  and  brought  it  to  the  condition 
described  as  "  waste  and  void." 

With  the  words  "  The  Spirit  of  God  moved 
upon  the  face  of  the  waters  "  begins  the  story 
of  reconstruction,  and  this  continues  through 
the  third  verse  of  the  second  chapter.  The 
method  of  the  new  birth  of  the  earth  was  that 
of  the  brooding  over  it  of  the  Spirit,  and  the 


12  Genesis 


uttering  of  the  Word  of  God.  The  earth  was 
born  again  by  the  Spirit  and  the  Word.  A 
careful  study  of  this  section  and  of  the  follow- 
ing one  will  reveal  the  fact  that  two  words  are 
made  use  of  to  describe  the  Divine  action.  The 
Revised  Version  has  indicated  the  difference 
by  the  use  of  our  words  "  created  '^  and 
"made."  The  Hebrew  words  of  which  these 
are  translations  do  not  indicate  the  same  thing. 
The  first,  "created,"  indicates  an  essential 
making,  a  bringing  into  existence.  The  second, 
"  made,"  suggests  rather  the  origination  of  new 
forms  by  the  use  of  things  already  created.  It 
is  of  great  interest,  and  moreover  of  value,  to 
notice  the  places  where  the  word  "  created  "  is 
used.  It  occurs  first  in  the  declaration  con- 
cerning the  origin  of  material  things.  It  occurs 
again  at  the  point  where  life  rises  from  the 
non-sensient  to  the  sensient.  It  occurs,  in  the 
third  place,  at  the  story  of  the  coming  of  man. 
Between  these  the  word  used  is  always 
"made."  This  fact  reveals  that  at  the  points 
indicated  there  was  a  new  act  of  God,  intro- 
ducing an  entirely  fresh  order  of  being.  It  is 
worthy  of  notice  that  these  words  occur  ex- 
actly where  the  evolutionary  theory  has  never 
yet  been  able  to  bridge  a  gulf.  The  evolution- 
ary process  demands  a  primal  fact  from  which 
everything  goes  forward.    It  cannot  supply  it. 


The    Book    of    Beginnings  13 

It  is  supplied  by  tlie  declaration  "  In  the  be- 
ginning God  created.''  It  has  never  been  able 
to  discover  the  link  between  the  nonsensient 
and  sensient;  that  link  is  here  supplied  in  the 
affirmation  '^  God  created  .  .  .  every  liv- 
ing creature."  It  has  never  been  able  finally 
to  discover  a  link  between  the  highest  form  of 
animal  life  and  man;  that  link  is  supplied  in 
the  affirmation  "  God  created  man  in  His  own 
image."  Whereas  according  to  this  account 
He  was  ever  the  immanent  God,  by  His  own 
Avisdom  and  power  producing  every  new  form 
of  already  existing  life,  He  did  also  at  certain 
periods  in  the  process  by  direct,  essential,  new 
creation,  create  a  crisis  from  which  the  order 
proceeded  anew. 

There  are  those  who  affirm  that  in  the  first 
two  chapters  we  have  two  distinct  accounts  of 
the  creation  of  man;  and  moreover,  some  de- 
clare that  they  contradict  each  other.  As  a 
matter  of  fact  the  first  story  places  man  in  his 
relation  to  the  material  universe.  He  is  seen 
as  the  crowning  work  in  creation,  the  last  of 
a  succession,  whether  a  succession  of  separate 
events  or  of  evolutionary  processes  is  not  de- 
clared. Whatever  the  process,  he  is  seen  to 
be  the  crown  of  the  material  creation.  In  the 
second  story  he  is  shown  to  be  more  than  this. 
There  an  explanation  is  given  of  that  spirit- 


14  Genesis 


ual  quantity  which  is  found  in  man  and  in  no 
other  creation.  It  describes  the  process  by 
which  man  became  different  from,  and  su- 
perior to,  everything  which  had  preceded  him. 
He  was  made  of  the  dust  of  the  ground,  that 
is,  he  had  come  from  the  common  origin.  His 
creation  as  man  was  due  to  the  fact  that  God 
breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  lives. 
By  the  possession  of  God-breathed  lives  he 
was  differentiated  from  everything  which  had 
preceded  him. 

This  being,  at  once  related  to  the  material 
universe,  and  yet  kin  of  God,  was  placed  at 
the  centre  of  creation,  to  govern  it  in  co-opera- 
tion with  God.  He  was  to  reign  over  all  be- 
neath him.  The  garden  in  which  he  found  him- 
self was  not  the  ultimate  goal.  It  was  the 
opportunity  for  the  exercise  of  the  functions  of 
the  life  bestowed.  Within  it  there  lay  poten- 
tially the  city,  which  man  was  to  build  by  the 
cultivation  of  the  forces  of  the  garden,  and  by 
exercising  authority  over  creation  under  the 
authority  of  God. 

The  relation  of  man  to  God  and  Nature 
was  conditioned  by  a  simple  and  yet  perfectly 
clear  command,  which  indicated  the  limits  of 
liberty.  There  were  things  which  he  might 
do.  There  were  bounds  beyond  which  he  might 
not  go.    His  liberty  consisted  in  loyalty  to  the 


The    Book    of    Beginnings  15 

law  of  God.  Of  these  fundamental  truths  the 
trees  of  the  garden  afforded  sacramental  sym- 
hols.  Of  all  save  one  he  might  eat;  of  this 
one  he  might  not  eat.  It  stood  in  the  presence 
of  his  life,  marking  the  bounds  of  his  free- 
dom. 

Man  was  completed  by  the  bringing  to  him 
of  one  who  w^as  of  himself,  and  in  whom  he 
found  the  true  complement  of  his  own  nature. 
In  man  and  his  companion  the  likeness  of  God 
was  complete.  "  In  His  own  image  .  .  . 
male  and  female  created  He  them." 

B.  Degeneration 

The  division  here  commencing  deals  with 
the  beginnings  of  that  long  process  of  degener- 
ation, in  the  midst  of  which  the  human  race 
still  finds  itself.  The  suggested  analysis  must 
not  be  treated  as  hard  and  fast  in  its  separa- 
tion of  parts.  It  is  intended  simply  to  indi- 
cate the  natural  development  of  thought  as  to 
the  individual,  the  family,  society,  the  nation. 
These  divisions  indicate  the  true  circles  of 
human  inter-relationship  as  they  spread  out 
in  ever-widening  circumference. 

Everything  commences  with  the  individual. 
This  is  a  simple  story  of  a  man  in  individual 
innocence  and  racial  immaturity.  Satan  ap- 
pealed to  him  through  a  lower  form  of  crea- 


16  Genesis 


tion,  here  spoken  of  as  the  serpent.  Spiritual 
evil  took  material  form  to  reach  spiritual  man 
through  the  material  side  of  his  being.  The 
deepest  note  in  the  attack  was  that  of  its  at- 
tempt to  reflect  on  God.  The  deepest  note  in 
the  fall  was  that  of  failure  of  faith.  Faith 
being  lost,  fear  immediately  succeeded. 

Man  hid  from  God,  but  he  could  not  escape 
Him.  He  came  first  for  inquisition,  and  then 
lor  pronouncement  of  sentence.  In  the  sen- 
tences pronounced  there  is  evident  the  differ- 
entiation of  strictest  justice.  The  curse  was 
for  the  originator,  justice  for  the  deceived. 
Side  by  side  with  the  sentence  the  first  pro- 
phetic word  broke  upon  human  ears.  Behind 
all  the  movements  of  law  there  abides  the 
heart  of  love,  and  this  is  finally  seen  in  the 
exclusion  of  man  from  the  tree  of  life  in  order 
that  he  might  not  perpetuate  the  condition 
into  which  he  had  come  as  the  result  of  sin. 

Following  swiftly  upon  the  degradation  of 
the  individual  came  that  of  the  family.  The 
sorrow  following  upon  sin  was  manifest  first 
in  the  agony  of  the  heart  of  the  first  mother. 
In  hope  she  bore  her  first-born,  and  called 
him  Cain,  crying,  "  I  have  gotten  it,"  that  is, 
I  have  gotten  the  promised  seed  of  the  Lord. 
The  hope  was  doomed  to  disappointment,  and 
she  called  her  next  boy  xlbel.  Vanity,  because 


The    Book    of   Beginnings  17 

of  what  she  had  seen  in  the  first.  Thus  the 
first  family  was  broken  up,  and  the  first  gap 
in  the  circle  of  human  society  was  made  by 
murder. 

The  race  moved  on,  multiplying  into  fam- 
ilies, but  the  shadow  of  the  issue  of  sin  was 
on  the  whole  of  them,  and  with  one  rare  ex- 
ception through  fifteen  centuries  the  knell  of 
death  was  heard  unceasingly. 

As  families  multiplied  and  branched  out 
into  many  directions,  the  new  relationship  of 
society  was  created.  From  the  original  man 
two  lines  proceeded,  one  through  Cain,  the 
other  through  Seth.  These  developed  around 
two  opposing  ideals,  the  one  that  of  self-con- 
sideration and  self-advancement,  the  other 
that  of  fear  of  God,  and  obedience  of  Him. 
The  lines  of  difference  became  less  clearly 
marked  until  the  sons  of  the  godly  race  inter- 
mixed in  marriage  with  the  daughters  of  the 
people  of  the  materialized  ideals,  and  the  issue 
was  most  terrible  corruption. 

This  all  ended  in  a  Divine  interference  of 
swift  and  overwhelming  judgment.  The  de- 
struction of  the  race  was  not  total,  for  while 
man  had  failed,  the  purpose  of  God  moved 
forward  toward  consummation.  Out  of  the 
devastation  a  remnant  was  saved,  and  human 
history  started  forward  upon  a  new  basis  as 


18  Genesis 


there  emerged  a  new  idea  of  social  relation- 
ship, that  of  the  nation. 

With  an  immediateness  which  startles,  the 
book  chronicles  the  story  of  the  failure  of  the 
national  idea.  The  will  of  God  was  the  peo- 
pling of  the  earth  by  the  separation  of  those 
delivered  from  its  primal  corruption  into  na- 
tions occupying  different  territories.  Against 
this  separation  man  rebelled  by  the  formation 
of  a  godless  confederacy,  and  an  attempt  to 
resist  the  Divine  decree.  This  was  followed 
by  immediate  Divine  intervention,  which  is- 
sued in  the  confusion  of  the  confederacy. 
Finally,  the  line  of  continuity  from  Shem  to 
Abram  is  declared,  and  the  section  setting 
forth  degeneration  closes. 

c.  Regeneration 

In  the  third  division  we  have  the  account  of 
the  beginnings  of  Eegeneration,  that  is,  of  a 
movement  which  culminated  in  the  person  of 
the  Messiah.  The  lines  of  development  cor- 
respond to  those  we  have  already  noticed  in 
the  previous  division.  As  there  we  had  first 
the  degeneration  of  the  individual,  so  here  the 
regeneration  of  the  individual  is  first  dealt 
with,  and  indeed,  at  greatest  length.  We  also 
see  the  movement  in  its  application  to  the 
family,  to  society,  and  toward  the  nation. 


The    Book    of    Beginnings  19 

The  section  dealing  with  the  regeneration  of 
the  individual  gives  us  the  account  of  the  deal- 
ings of  God  with  three  men :  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob.  There  is  a  distinct  difference  be- 
tween the  Divine  communications  in  these 
three  cases.  The  difference  is  to  be  accounted 
for  by  the  different  quality  of  faith  exempli- 
fied in  each  man.  To  Abraham  there  were 
seven  communications,  each  initiating  a  new 
movement.  His  faith  was  obedient  faith. 
To  Isaac  there  were  two  Divine  communi- 
cations, and  there  does  not  seem  to  be 
any  personal  or  direct  relation  between  the 
communications  of  God  and  Isaac's  life.  The 
faith  of  Isaac  was  passive.  To  Jacob  there 
were  five  communications,  each  of  them  com- 
ing at  the  close  of  a  movement  in  the  life  of 
the  man,  by  which  God  arrested  and  changed 
the  order  of  his  progress.  Jacob's  faith  was 
restless  faith. 

The  first  communication  to  Abram  was  of 
the  nature  of  a  call  to  leave  his  own  country, 
and  to  set  his  face  toward  a  new  one,  under 
new  conditions  of  life.  "  The  Lord  said  unto 
Abram,  Get  thee  out  of  thy  country  .  .  . 
unto  the  land  that  I  will  show  thee."  It  may 
be  that  this  initial  call  was  really  to  Terah. 
It  is  certainly  declared  that  Terah  moved,  tak- 
ing Abram  and  Lot  with  him.     The  first  in- 


20  Genesis 

tention,  however,  was  not  immediately  real- 
ized. Coming  to  Haran,  Terah  remained  there. 
After  his  death,  Abram  moved  on,  and  came 
into  the  land  of  Canaan. 

In  the  second  communication  God  promised 
him  the  land  for  possession,  and  he  proceeded 
in  faith  and  obedience. 

By  the  third  communication  the  land  was 
solemnly  given  to  Abram  under  interesting 
and  remarkable  circumstances.  The  herdsmen 
of  Abram  and  Lot  had  quarrelled;  and  the 
former,  with  the  magnanimity  of  a  great  soul, 
allowed  Lot  to  make  his  choice.  When  he  had 
departed  God  said  to  Abram,  "Lift  up  now 
thine  eyes,"  and  thus  to  the  man  who  was  con- 
tent not  to  choose,  but  rather  to  leave  himself 
free  for  the  following  of  faith,  the  whole  of 
the  land  was  given. 

In  the  fourth  communication  God  promised 
him  a  seed,  which  should  become  a  great  na- 
tion. 

In  connection  with  the  fifth  communication 
God  entered  into  a  solemn  covenant  as  between 
Himself  and  Abraham. 

The  sixth  communication  was  in  connection 
with  the  actual  coming  to  Abraham  of  his  son. 

The  seventh  and  final  communication  was 
that  by  which  God  finally  tested  this  man  in 
the  matter  of  faith,  and  because  of  his  obedi- 


The    Book    of    Beginnings  21 

ence  was  able  to  lead  liim  into  a  closer  and 
more  conscious  fellowship  with  Himself. 

By  these  seven  communications  God  led 
Abraham  step  by  step  through  more  trying 
circumstances  toward  higher  experiences,  and, 
because  he  followed,  to  larger  possessions.  In 
the  process  of  the  story  we  find  on  the  part  of 
Abraham  deflections  from  faith.  In  a  time  of 
difficulty  he  went  down  into  Egypt  and  by 
so  doing  fell,  not  merely  from  the  simplicity 
of  faith,  but  from  truth.  The  method,  how^- 
ever,  is  clearly  indicated  as  being  a  Divine  ap- 
pearing, an  obedient  answer,  and  a  consequent 
advancement. 

In  the  story  of  Isaac  we  have  first  of  all 
an  account  of  the  pastoral  simplicity  of  his 
life.  In  the  midst  of  this  quietness  there  came 
to  him  the  first  of  two  Divine  communications, 
in  w^hich  God  told  him  that  the  covenant 
made  with  Abraham  was  continued  to  him. 
The  second  communication  was  for  the  pur- 
pose of  ratifying  this  selfsame  covenant.  Isaac 
w^as  a  man  quiet,  restful,  and  passive.  His 
deflections  from  faith  were  fewer  than  those 
of  his  father.  His  restlessness  was  less  than 
that  of  his  son.  There  are  no  actions  of  mag- 
nificent or  daring  triumph.  God  never  broke 
in  upon  his  life  with  the  thick  darkness  or  the 
alarming  struggle  by  Jabbok,  but  with  quiet 


22  Genesis 


messages,  showing  that  he  too  was  included 
in  covenant  privilege  and  purpose.  Isaac,  the 
man  who  dug  wells,  and  lived  by  them,  was 
necessary  in  the  Divine  economy  as  well  as 
Abraham,  the  man  who  blazed  the  way,  and 
became  the  pioneer  of  faith ;  as  well  as  Jacob, 
the  man  of  restless  activity,  who  never  found 
final  anchorage  until  he  was  crippled. 

The  dealings  of  God  with  Jacob  were  of  an 
entirely  different  nature  because  he  was  an 
entirely  different  man.  Through  all  the  story 
it  is  evident  that  he  was  a  man  who  believed 
in  God.  That  was  the  deepest  fact  in  his  life. 
He  was  nevertheless  a  man  of  restless  activity, 
and  the  five  communications  to  him  were  all 
for  the  purpose  of  checking  him,  correcting  his 
methods,  and  keeping  him  in  the  pathway  of 
the  Divine  will. 

The  first  of  these  culminated  a  method  of 
duplicity,  followed  in  order  to  obtain  a  bless- 
ing. By  deceit  wrought  upon  his  father,  under 
the  instigation  and  with  the  connivance  of 
his  mother,  he  obtained  the  blessing  which 
God  meant  him  to  have.  He  believed  that  it 
was  in  the  purpose  of  God  for  him,  but,  unable 
to  follow  and  to  wait,  by  manipulation  of 
events  and  by  the  exercise  of  cunning  obtained 
his  father's  benediction.  As  his  face  was  set 
toward  a  new  country,  in  consequence  of  his 


The    Book    of    Beginnings  23 

duplicity,  God  appeared  to  him,  and  with  great 
tenderness,  knowing  the  deepest  in  him, 
bridged  the  gulf  between  his  material  life  and 
the  spiritual  realities  by  the  vision  of  the  lad- 
der and  the  angels. 

Arrived  in  the  land  of  Laban,  by  quick  wit 
and  ready  resource  he  won  his  way  to  material 
prosperity  against  all  the  meanness  of  his 
uncle.  There  was  great  danger  lest  such  a 
man  should  become  satisfied  with  success  in 
an  alien  land,  and  God  appeared  to  him  the 
second  time,  and  commanded  him  to  return. 

The  self-reliance  and  independence  of  Jacob 
are  seen  in  the  method  of  his  return.  He  made 
his  arrangments  with  Laban,  and  built  a 
watch-tower  at  Mizpah.  He  then  went  forward 
to  meet  his  brother,  and  so  far  as  possible  pre- 
pared for  every  contingency.  Then  followed 
the  third  Divine  communication.  God  set 
Himself  against  Jacob's  independence,  and  in 
the  mystery  of  that  long  night  revealed  Him- 
self as  the  conquering  One,  Who  breaks 
in  order  to  make.  Who  cripples  in  order  to 
crown. 

Having  come  back  into  the  land,  immedi- 
ately he  compromised  with  the  circumstances 
by  w^hich  he  found  himself  surrounded,  with 
the  result  that  sorrow  entered  his  house  in 
the  wake  of  sin.    Again  God  appeared  to  him 


24  Genesis 

for  purposes  of  restoration,  commanding  him 
to  get  back  to  Bethel. 

In  the  last  part  of  this  section  the  faith  of 
Jacob  seems  to  have  become  obedient,  and  the 
fifth  communication  of  God  immediately  fol- 
lowed. 

Subsequently  there  is  an  account  of  another 
word  God  spoke  to  Jacob,  but  because  it  was 
intimately  connected  with  his  sons  it  is  omit- 
ted in  this  description  of  the  dealings  of  God 
with  the  man  himself. 

In  this  study  of  the  beginnings  of  the  regen- 
eration of  the  individual  the  truth  is  revealed 
that  the  one  principle  through  which  God  is 
able  to  operate  is  that  of  faith  in  Himself. 
Where  that  is  present,  even  though  it  may  ex- 
press itself  in  different  ways,  according  to  dif- 
fering temperaments,  He  can  act.  Obedient 
faith  He  leads  quietly  forw^ard;  passive  faith 
He  visits  to  comfort  and  strengthen;  restless 
faith  He  checks  and  corrects  toward  ultimate 
realization. 

Through  the  sons  of  Jacob  the  circle  widens 
and  we  see  the  movement  toward  the  regenera- 
tion of  the  family.  Two  stories  run  concur- 
rently, that  of  Joseph  and  that  of  Israel.  In 
the  history  of  Joseph  we  have  a  further  reve- 
lation of  the  method  of  God  with  the  individ- 
ual, but  grouped  around  the  man  are  move- 


The    Book    of    Beginnings  25 

meuts  that  make  toward  the  regeneratiou  of  \ 
the  family,  of  society,  and  the  nation.  The 
story  of  Joseph  is  in  some  senses  the  most 
wonderful  of  the  Old  Testament.  Consider- 
ing it  from  first  to  last  there  is  less  in  him  of 
failure,  less  of  faltering  than  in  any  other  of 
the  Old  Testament  characters.  Around  the 
story  of  his  life  are  grouped  the  CA'cnts  which 
contributed  toward  the  larger  application  of 
the  regenerative  purposes  of  God.  These 
events,  as  they  contributed  to  that  purpose, 
were  the  result  of  God's  overruling.  Apart 
from  that,  the  process  of  degeneration  moved 
forward  hopelessly. 

A  list  of  the  sons  of  Jacob,  and  a  table  of  the 
generations  of  Esau  are  first  given.  Then  fol- 
lows the  story  of  Joseph,  which  is  immediately 
succeeded  by  an  account  of  the  terrible  corrup- 
tion of  the  family  in  the  case  of  Judah.  The 
connection  here  is  important  in  that  it  indi- 
cates the  beginning  of  that  movement  which 
culminated  in  the  segregation  of  the  nation,  ^ 
by  which  they  w^ere  saved  for  long  years  from 
the  contaminating  influences  of  the  people  of 
Canaan ;  and  purity  of  family  life,  and  of  so- 
ciety, was  made  possible. 

The  history  of  Joseph  shows  how  God  over- 
ruled all  the  failure  of  man  for  the  ultimate 
good   of  man.     Joseph   was  exiled  from  his 


26  Genesis 

father's  home  by  the  malice  of  his  brethren, 
but  by  the  overruling  hand  of  God  he  was  sent 
into  Egypt  in  order  that  there  he  might  pre- 
pare a  place  for  Israel,  that  the  whole  society, 
which  had  not  yet  become  a  nation,  might  be 
brought  into  circumstances  of  separation  and 
suffering  for  their  purification.  Already,  in- 
stead of  being  separate  and  peculiar,  as  salt 
and  light  in  the  midst  of  darkness,  they  had 
become  corrupted,  as  the  case  of  Judah  proves, 
and  from  this  corruption  it  was  necessary  that 
they  should  be  delivered.  This  was  accom- 
plished by  the  overruling  of  God  through  the 
exile  of  Joseph,  the  coming  of  famine,  and  all 
those  events  which  issued  in  their  being  trans- 
ferred from  Canaan  to  the  land  of  Goshen,  and 
kept  there  in  separation  for  centuries.  There 
was  nothing  more  beneficent  in  the  early  his- 
tory of  the  people  than  those  long  years  of 
pain  and  slavery.  Through  those  years  God 
purged  the  family  and  society  and  so  prepared 
for  the  nation  which  was  presently  to  emerge 
under  His  wonder-working  hand  and  to  enter 
into  possession  of  the  land  of  His  appoint- 
ment. 

In  the  final  verses  of  the  book  of  Genesis 
the  national  idea  is  seen  for  a  moment  as 
a  prophecy  and  a  hope.  Joseph,  in  dying, 
charged  those  who  were  about  him  that  when 


The    Book   of   Beginnings  27 

presontlj  they  should  return  to  their  land,  they 
should  take  his  bones  and  carry  them  with 
them.  In  this  charge  there  is  revealed  one  of 
the  greatest  triumphs  of  faith  recorded  in  the 
whole  book.  It  is  the  triumph  of  a  man  who 
believed  in  God,  and  in  the  assured  establish- 
ment of  His  people ;  and  he  therefore  was  cer- 
tain that  they  must  ultimately  pass  back  into 
their  own  land.  The  book  closes  with  the  ac- 
count of  the  burial  of  the  man  who  had  ex- 
pressed this  faith ;  and  the  story  of  beginnings 
closes  with  the  phrase,  "  a  coffin  in  Egypt." 


EXODUS 


EXODUS— THE  EMERGENCE  OF  THE  NATIO> 


A 

B 

c 

BONDAGE 

DELIVERANCE 

ORGANISATION 

i.'V. 

vi.-xviii. 

xix.-xl. 

,. 

Israel  in  Egypt      i. 

I. 

Jehovah  and 

,^ 

Preliminary  and 

i 

Growth  of  the  nation. 

Moses    vi.— vii.  7 

Fundamental 

1-7 

The  Charge 

xix..  XX, 

ii 

Oppression.              8-22 

' 

Self-declaration  of 
Jehovah.               vi.  1-9 

i 

The  Purpose.    Grace, 
xix. 

ii 

The  Charge  and  Fear, 
vi.  10-12 

" 

The  Plan.    Law. 

xz. 

II. 

Moses            ii.-iv. 

(Parenthesis.        13-27) 

i. 

Birth  and  Preservation. 

iii 

The  Charge  and  Faith. 

II. 

Lraws.      xxi.— XXilL 

ii.  i-io 

vi.  28— vii.  7 

i 

Of  the  Person. 

ii. 

Flight   and    Residence 
in  Midian.          ii.  11-22 

II. 

Jehovah  and 

ii 

xxi.  1.-32 
Of  Property. 

iii. 
iv. 

His  Call.    ii.  23— iv.  17 
His  Obedience. 

Pharaoh 

vii.  8-xi. 

iii 

xxi.  33— xxii.  IS 
Of  the  State. 

iv.  iS-""! 

xxii.  16— xxiii.  ig 

Judgment 

iv. 

The   Angel    Promised. 

i 

The  Approach. 

xxiii.  20-33 

vii.  8-X3 

HI 

.  Israel  and 

ii. 

First  cycle— 3  Plagues. 

Ill 

.  The  System  of 

Pharaoh             v. 

vii.  14— viii.  19 

Worship 

i. 

Moses  and  Pharaoh. 

1-18 
Moses  and  Israel. 

iii. 

Second  cycle— 
3  Plagues. 

xxiv.— xl. 

ii. 

iv. 

viii.  20— ix.  12 
Third  cycle— 3  Plagues. 

^• 

Instruction  and  Equip- 
ment,        xxiv.— xxxi. 

iii 

19-21 
Moses  and  Jehovah. 

V. 

ix.  13— X.  29 
Final.                           xi. 

ii. 

Interlude.  The  People's 
Sin.          xxxii— xxxiv. 

22-23 

iii. 

Construction  and 

Ill 

.  Jehovah  and 
Israel  xU.-xviil. 

Deliverance. 

xii.— XV.  21 

Consecration. 

XXXV.— xli 

ii. 

Guidance^ 

XV.  22— xviii. 

EXODUS 

THE  book  of  Exodus  is  a  continuation  of 
the  story  told  in  the  latter  part  of  the 
book  of  Genesis.  In  Exodus  nothing  is  com- 
menced and  nothing  is  finished.  It  is  a  link 
in  the  chain  of  the  story  of  God's  dealings  with 
the  human  race.  For  the  sake  of  linking  the 
subject  to  that  which  has  gone  before,  let  it 
be  remembered  that  the  book  of  Genesis  was 
divided  into  three  parts:  first,  Generation; 
secondly,  Degeneration;  thirdly,  Regenera- 
tion. 

In  considering  Regeneration  we  saw  the 
work  proceeding  with  regard  to  the  individual, 
the  family,  and  society.  The  last  note  in  Gene- 
sis indicated  the  line  of  the  regeneration  of 
the  nation. 

We  now  turn  to  Exodus.  The  word  "  Now," 
with  which  the  first  chapter  commences,  may 
with  perfect  accuracy  be  translated  "  And." 
It  is  a  word  marking  continuity.  If  we  take 
the  book  of  Genesis  away,  the  book  of  Exo- 
dus becomes  meaningless.  All  the  history  in 
Exodus  depends  upon  that  in  Genesis.  We 
left  the  children  of  Israel  a  people  without  a 

SI 


32  Exodus 


national  consciousness,  or  organisation.  We 
are  now  to  study  the  account  of  the  emergence 
of  the  nation. 

There  are  three  clearly  defined  divisions  in 
the  book:  Bondage,  Deliverance,  and  Organi- 
zation. 

A.  Bondage 

Segregated  from  the  corrupting  influences 
of  the  land  of  Canaan,  the  children  of  Israel 
rapidly  multiplied  in  the  land  of  Goshen. 

This  very  growth  became  a  menace  to  Egypt, 
and  from  the  standpoint  of  political  expedi- 
ency Pharaoh  was  justified  in  resorting  to  ex- 
treme measures  to  check  it.  High  enthroned 
over  Pharaoh,  Jehovah  permitted  His  people 
to  pass  through  the  long  period  of  oppression 
and  suffering,  and  so  stiffened  the  national 
fibre,  and  thereby  made  the  people  strong  for 
the  campaigns  of  the  future. 

As  the  appointed  time  for  deliverance  ap- 
proached, the  instrument  of  God  was  found 
and  prepared.  The  story  of  Moses  occupies 
the  next  section.  His  preservation  presents 
a  wonderfully  human  picture  as  it  manifests 
the  sweet  art  of  mother-love.  The  inspiration 
of  love's  activity  was,  as  we  learn  from  the 
New  Testament,  that  of  faith. 

Jehovah's     overruling     of     circumstances 


The    Emergence    of   the   Nation     33 

toward  the  accomplishment  of  His  purpose  is 
seen  in  the  coming  of  Pharaoh's  daughter.  The 
history  of  the  human  race  has  been  affected 
by  the  fact  that  on  a  given  day  a  baby  cried 
into  the  face  of  a  woman.  The  baby  found  its 
way  into  the  woman's  heart,  and  the  woman 
carried  the  baby  into  the  heart  of  Egypt's 
power.  There  the  future  leader  of  Israel  re- 
ceived his  education,  and  the  first  part  of  the 
preparation  necessary  for  the  work  that  lay 
before  him. 

Forty  years  passed  away,  and  the  child, 
having  become  a  man,  turned  his  back  upon 
the  court  of  Egypt,  and  upon  all  its  splendours. 
His  flight  w^as  also  under  the  government  of 
God.  If  he  had  attempted  to  deliver  Israel 
at  forty  years  of  age,  he  would  have  failed. 
The  man,  cultured  and  refined,  with  all  the 
learning  of  his  time,  passed  to  the  next  period 
of  his  preparation  in  the  majestic  loneliness 
of  the  Sinaitic  peninsula.  It  was  change  from 
lesser  to  greater  grandeur.  The  solitude  of 
the  mountains,  under  the  golden  light  of  sun 
by  day  and  the  stately  solemnity  of  stars  by 
night,  is  more  full  of  majesty  than  all  the  glit- 
ter of  an  earthly  court.  There  Moses  was  a 
shepherd,  and  so  received  the  next  part  of  his 
preparation  for  leadership. 

Then  follows  the  account  of  his  direct  call 


34  Exodus 


and  commission.  In  it  Jehovah  had  to  meet 
and  deal  with  the  difficulties  of  Moses'  fear. 
The  victory  was  with  God,  and  Moses  turned 
his  back  this  time  upon  the  loneliness  of  the 
wilderness,  and  set  his  face  toward  the  court 
of  Pharaoh. 

B.  Deliverance 

In  this  division  Jehovah  emerges  from  the 
shadows  into  clear  light,  and  becomes  the  cen- 
tre of  supreme  interest.  He  is  seen  dealing 
with  Moses  by  way  of  preparation,  with  Pha- 
raoh in  judgment,  and  with  His.  people  in  de- 
liverance and  guidance. 

In  the  first  section  we  have  the  account  of 
the  answer  which  Jehovah  gave  to  the  com- 
plaint of  His  servant  when  he  was  discouraged 
at  his  first  reception  both  by  Pharaoh  and  his 
own  people. 

This  answer  consisted  in  the  first  place  of 
a  great  Self-declaration.  In  the  course  of  it 
the  words  "  I  am  Jehovah "  are  used  four 
times,  and  surrounding  these  declarations  are 
affirmations  concerning  the  Divine  activity. 
"  I  appeared  ...  I  was  not  known  .  .  . 
I  have  established  my  covenant  ...  I 
have  heard  the  groaning  ...  I  have  re- 
membered My  Covenant  ...  I  will  bring 
you  out    ...     I  will  rid  you  out     .     .     . 


The    Emergence    of   the   Nation     35 

I  will  redeem  you  ...  I  Avill  take  you  to 
Me  ...  I  will  be  to  you  a  God  ...  I 
will  bring  you  in  ...  I  will  give  it  you." 
The  value  of  this  declaration  may  be  gathered 
by  a  recognition  of  the  difficulty  of  the  position 
which  Moses  occupied.  The  man  who  had 
been  brouglit  up  in  the  court  of  Egypt  had  re- 
turned to  declare  the  authority  of  another 
Potentate,  an  unseen  King.  He  had  been 
treated  with  contempt  by  Pharaoh.  The  very 
people  he  had  come  to  deliver  had  refused  to 
hear  him.  He  had  returned  to  God  with  his 
complaint,  and  the  method  of  the  Divine  deal- 
ing with  him  was  that  of  unveiling  before  Him 
His  own  glory.  Moses  was  never  afraid  again. 
There  were  other  failures,  but  no  dread  of 
God  w^as  manifest  from  that  moment  to  the 
end.  He  had  seen  a  new  vision  of  Him,  and 
doubted  His  power  no  more. 

And  yet  fear  was  immediately  manifest, 
but  it  was  fear  of  himself.  It  was  difficult 
to  believe  that  he  could  be  the  instrument  of 
such  a  God.  This  new  fear  Jehovah  answered 
by  assuring  His  servant  that  his  strength  be- 
fore Pharaoh  would  not  be  that  of  his  own 
eloquence  or  power,  but  rather  that  of  Divine 
preparation  and  equipment.  Then  faith  tri- 
umphed over  fear,  and  Moses  went  forward  to 
the  work  appointed  him. 


36  Exodus 


The  next  section  reveals  Jehovah  dealing 
with  Pharaoh  in  judgment.  That  judgment 
moves  in  three  cycles,  in  each  of  which  three 
plagues  demonstrate  the  power  of  God.  These 
all  failing  to  bring  the  heart  of  Pharaoh  into 
willing  submission,  a  fourth  and  final  judg- 
ment fell  upon  him. 

In  the  story  of  this  process  of  judgment  it 
is  necessary  to  draw  a  most  careful  distinction 
between  Pharaoh's  hardening  of  his  own  heart 
and  God's  hardening  of  his  heart.  This  is  one 
of  the  great  passages  in  Scripture  in  which  the 
Authorized  Version  is  apt  to  mislead.  There, 
throughout  the  account,  it  is  declared  that  the 
Lord  hardened  the  heart  of  Pharaoh.  The 
Hebrew  text  does  not  warrant  any  such  trans- 
lation. As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  never  stated 
that  Jehovah  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart  until 
the  end  of  the  second  cycle  of  plagues. 

Moreover,  two  different  words  are  made  use 
of,  although  both  are  translated  "  hardened." 
One  of  these  means  to  make  strong  or  cour- 
ageous. The  other  means  to  make  stubborn. 
It  is  declared  from  the  beginning  that  God 
made  his  heart  strong  or  courageous,  thus  set- 
ting him  absolutely  free  for  the  unfearing 
exercise  of  his  own  will.  It  is  never  declared 
that  God  made  his  heart  stubborn  until  it  had 


The    Emergence    of   the  Nation     37 

been  five  times  affirmed  that  he  hardened  his 
own  heart. 

There  is  a  moment  when  God  does  that  with 
a  man.  There  is  no  Bible  warrant  for  teach- 
ing that  a  man  will  be  able,  whensoever  he 
chooses,  throughout  the  ages,  to  turn  back  to 
God.  Every  man  has  his  own  probation,  and 
his  own  opportunity,  and  the  Judge  of  all  the 
earth  holds  the  balances  with  infinite  preci- 
sion. Whosoever  stubbornly  refuses  to  submit 
himself  to  God  in  the  day  of  opportunity,  and 
that  repeatedly,  finds  at  last  that  his  own  deci- 
sion has  become  his  destiny.  By  the  outwork- 
ing of  law  God  seals  the  choice  of  the  human 
win. 

In  this  w^hole  process  of  judgment  the  pa- 
tience of  God  is  as  clearly  manifest  as  is  His 
power.  In  spite  of  persistent  lying  and  deceit 
by  Pharaoh  in  the  promises  made  to  Moses, 
God  patiently  waited.  It  was  not  until  he  had 
repeated  opportunities  of  yielding  himself  to 
the  Power  Who  was  manifesting  Himself  that, 
by  the  will  and  decision  and  act  of  God,  the 
stubbornness  he  had  cultivated  became  such 
that  he  could  not  escape  therefrom. 

The  final  section  in  this  division  is  occupied 
with  the  account  of  the  actual  deliverance  of 
these  people,  and  the  commencement  of  that 


38  Exodus 


wonderful  guidance  which  included  provision 
for  all  their  need,  and  power  for  all  their 
weakness. 

Judgment  is  seen  in  its  purpose  as  it  merges 
into  deliverance.  As  they  moved  on  toward 
the  realization  of  their  nationality,  the  very 
calendar  was  altered,  and  there  dawned  for 
them  a  new  year,  and  a  new  order  began.  Be- 
fore the  march  to  liberty  they  observed  the 
religious  rite  of  Passover.  This  rite  was  called 
an  ordinance,  a  feast,  a  sacrifice.  It  was 
wholly  an  ordinance  to  be  observed.  It  was 
essentially  a  feast  of  rejoicing  or  deliverance. 
It  was  fundamentally  a  sacrifice  perpetuating 
the  memory  of  vital  and  essential  truths.  The 
night  of  the  exodus  was  indeed,  as  the  historian 
declares,  "  a  night  to  be  much  observed."  The 
people  passed  from  slavery  to  liberty,  from  the 
lash  of  oppression  to  the  place  of  power,  from 
degradation  to  the  realization  of  national  life. 

Immediately  the  nation,  delivered  and  con- 
secrated, is  seen  under  the  direct  government 
and  guidance  of  God.  "  God  led  them  not  by 
the  way  of  the  land  of  the  Philistines,  although 
that  was  near."    "  God  led  the  people  about." 

The  first  march  after  that  from  Egypt  was 
back  into  a  place  of  danger.  The  definite  mean- 
ing of  that  march  was  declared  to  Moses. 
The  just  judgment  of  the  sin  of  Pharaoh  must 


The    Emergence    of   the   Nation      39 

be  carried  out  to  its  last  degree,  but  it  must 
also  be  carried  out  in  such  a  way  as  to  make 
evident  its  justice.  Was  ever  the  madness  and 
blindness  of  sin  persisted  in,  more  manifest 
than  in  the  proud  preparation  of  chariots  and 
armies  to  overthrow  and  destroy  a  people  for 
whom  God  had  so  wondrously  wrought? 

No  comment  is  necessary  on  a  story  so  full 
of  life  and  colour  and  dramatic  power  as  that 
of  the  crossing  of  the  sea.  In  the  silent  hush 
of  the  march  through  the  solemn  night  there 
was  revealed  to  the  people  the  fact  that,  under 
Divine  government,  there  are  no  obstacles 
which  cannot  be  overcome.  In  fatuous  re- 
bellion Pharaoh  and  his  host  attempted  to 
walk  by  the  pathway  specially  prepared  for 
the  men  of  faith.  With  the  morning  watch 
Qod  manifested  Himself  in  some  way  to  the 
Egyptians.  He  "looked  forth  upon  the  hosts 
through  the  pillar  of  fire  and  of  cloud."  There 
then  dawned  upon  them  the  consciousness  of 
their  folly,  and  they  attempted  flight.  It  was 
too  late.  Their  doom  was  sealed,  and  with  the 
hand  of  Closes  outstretched  by  Divine  author- 
ity, the  sea  broke  over  them  in  rushing  waves 
of  destruction,  and  the  power  of  the  mighty 
people  that  had  oppressed  God's  nation  in 
spite  of  every  opportunity  for  repentance  was 
broken  forever.    It  was  a  great  and  glorious 


40  Exodus 


song  that  rose  upon  the  morning  air  on  the  far 
side  of  the  sea. 

There  now  commences  the  more  direct  story 
of  the  guidance  of  the  people  by  Jehovah. 
Marah  afforded  an  opportunity  for  the  dis- 
covery of  the  resources  of  God.  Elim  was  an 
evidence  of  His  tender  care  for  them.  As  they 
passed  into  the  wilderness  they  began  to  be 
conscious  of  the  scarcity  of  some  of  the  things 
which  they  had  possessed,  even  in  the  midst  of 
Egyptian  slavery.  Again  the  resources  of  their 
God  were  proved  as  He  supplied  them  with 
manna  and  with  meat.  Again  their  faith  was 
tried  by  lack  of  water,  and  notwithstanding 
their  murmuring  against  Moses,  God  was 
proved  to  be  the  God  of  patience. 

The  march  of  the  people  brought  down  upon 
them  the  army  of  Amalek.  Perfect  victory 
was  gained  by  Israel,  and  in  the  first  battles 
the  principles  of  their  perpetual  conflict  were 
revealed.  They  won  by  a  combination  of  fight- 
ing and  faith,  a  union  of  practice  with  prayer. 

This  division  ends  with  the  story  of  Jethro. 
His  advice  to  Moses  was  reverent  in  its  recog- 
nition of  the  Divine  authority,  ''  If  thou  shalt 
do  this  thing,  and  God  command  thee  so." 
The  fact  that  Moses  acted  on  his  advice  is 
almost  certain  evidence  that  he  recognized  that 
God  was  speaking  to  him  through  this  man. 


The    Emergence    of    the   Nation      41 

c.  Organization 

The  people  of  Israel,  delivered  from  bond- 
age, were  still  a  promiscuous  multitude  rather 
than  an  organized  nation.  In  this  division 
we  have  an  account  of  the  giving  of  the  con- 
stitution, and  of  the  great  work  of  organiza- 
tion. It  is  divided  into  three  sections,  dealing 
with  matters  preliminary  and  fundamental, 
the  moral  code,  and  the  established  system  of 
worship. 

The  Divine  purpose  of  grace  was  first  de- 
clared. The  people  were  to  be  His  "  peculiar 
possession  ...  a  kingdom  of  priests  .  .  . 
a  holy  nation."  They  were  not  yet  prepared 
for  the  fulfilment  of  so  great  an  intention,  and 
their  unpreparedness  was  manifest  in  their 
ready  declaration  that  they  would  keep  all  the 
words  of  Jehovah.  Immediately  the  new 
method,  necessary  in  view  of  their  condition 
of  mind,  was  commenced.  They  were  brought 
face  to  face  with  the  supreme  fact  of  the  maj- 
esty of  God.  The  law  was  given  amid  the  ac- 
companiments of  thunders,  voices,  fire,  and 
smoke.  All  of  this  was  symbolic  of  the  maj- 
esty and  holiness  of  God.  By  special  covenant 
He  had  brought  the  people  near  to  Himself. 
It  was  a  nearness  characterized  by  untold 
blessing.     Yet  they  must  be  reminded  of  the 


42  Exodus 


majesty  of  their  King,  and  so  be  filled  with 
reverence  for  Him. 

The  ten  words  of  the  moral  law  were  pre- 
ceded by  a  proclamation  of  God  concerning 
Himself,  first  as  to  His  name,  "  I  am  Jeho- 
vah"; secondly,  as  to  His  relation  to  them, 
"  thy  God  " ;  and,  thirdly,  as  to  His  deliverance 
of  them  from  bondage.  The  Decalogue  con- 
sisted of  two  parts.  The  first  four  command- 
ments constituted  the  first,  and  governed  the 
relationship  existing  between  God  and  man. 
The  last  six  constituted  the  second,  and  con- 
ditioned human  inter-relationships.  These  ten 
words  revealed  a  philosophy  of  life  as  well  as 
a  law.  The  true  morality  was  to  be  learned 
from  this  philosophy.  Man's  first  business  is 
with  God.  His  every  other  relation  depends 
upon  that,  and  will  be  created  by  it. 

The  effect  produced  upon  the  people  by  the 
uttering  of  these  words  was  that  they  were 
filled  with  fear.  The  nearness  of  God  became 
a  terrible  thing  as  they  understood  His  holi- 
ness through  the  spoken  words.  Their  fear 
was  due  to  ignorance  as  surely  as  was  their 
presumption.  The  Divine  answer  was  full  of 
grace.  They  were  charged  to  have  no  other 
God,  and  a  way  of  approach  to  God  was  at 
once  provided.  It  was  the  way  of  the  altar, 
and  of  sacrifice.     These  earliest  instructions 


The    Emergence    of   the  Nation     43 

concerning  the  altar  were  deeply  significant. 
It  was  to  be  constructed  of  simple  and  unmade 
things,  devoid  of  any  workmanship  in  which 
the  heart  of  man  might  make  its  boast. 

Then  followed  the.  laws  which  were  to 
goTcrn  the  new  nation  as  a  state.  These  had 
first  to  do  with  the  person.  The  relation  of 
slaves  to  their  masters  was  dealt  with,  and 
they  were  of  such  a  nature  that  wherever  they 
were  obeyed  they  led  ultimately  to  emancipa- 
tion. 

The  sacredness  of  life  was  safeguarded 
by  the  enactment  that  any  man  taking  the  life 
of  another  was  to  forfeit  his  own.  If  the  act 
w^as  premeditated  there  was  to  be  no  escape. 
Injury  or  death  wrought  by  cattle  on  men  and 
women,  and  also  on  cattle,  was  to  be  punished 
and  compensated.  The  laws  of  property  were 
such  as  to  make  it  patent  that  no  man  was  to 
imagine  that  when  he  had  fulfilled  certain  di- 
rect obligations  to  God  he  might  live  his  life 
without  reference  to  his  neighbour.  Wrong 
inflicted  by  neighbour  on  neighbour  in  the 
material  realm  was  accounted  sin  against  God 
in  the  moral  realm. 

These  requirements  w^ere  characterized  by 
the  most  careful  adjustment  of  relation  be- 
tween man  and  man,  and  revealed  the  intimate 
relation  of  God  to  all,  and  His  remarkable 


44  Exodus 


interest  in  every  phase  and  department  of 
human  life. 

There  followed  a  group  of  laws  promiscu- 
ously stated,  yet  all  having  to  do  with  the 
bonds  which  strengthened  the  state.  In  two  of 
them  sins  of  unchastity  were  dealt  with.  Pas- 
sion was  penalized,  in  the  more  natural  expres- 
sion by  stern  social  requirement,  and  in  the 
more  unnatural  by  death.  A  blunt,  stern 
word,  "  Thou  shalt  not  suffer  a  sorceress  to 
live,"  revealed  how  harmful,  according  to  the 
mind  of  God,  were  all  attempts  to  traffic  in 
secret  and  hidden  things.  Laws  affecting  the 
lending  of  money  and  the  receiving  of  pledges 
followed,  and  finally  such  as  conditioned  the 
administration  of  justice. 

In  this  connection  the  feasts  of  the  Lord 
were  placed  in  their  true  relation  to  the  social 
life  of  the  people.  The  sabbatic  year  was  ar- 
ranged in  order  that  the  poor  might  eat.  The 
rest  of  the  Sabbath  was  revealed  to  be  a  pro- 
vision of  tender  care  for  cattle  and  servants 
also,  who  were  included  in  its  intention.  This 
section  ends  with  a  gracious  promise  which 
Jehovah  made  to  His  people  of  that  Presence 
which  should  lead  and  guide  them  in  all  the 
days  to  come.  A  study  of  the  subject  of  this 
Presence  will  show  that  the  Person  referred 
to  was  the  Angel-Jehovah. 


The    Emergence    of    the   Nation      45 

The  third  section  deals  at  length  and  in  de- 
tail with  the  preparation  for  tlie  true  worship 
which  followed  upon  the  promise  of  the  Angel 
Presence,  and  the  warning  against  false  wor- 
ship. There  was  a  preliminary  solemn  assem- 
bly of  the  elders  of  Israel  in  the  presence  of 
God.  Perhaps  there  is  nothing  more  august 
in  the  whole  book  than  this  account  of  the 
approach  of  the  elders.  We  are  told  "  they 
saw  the  God  of  Israel."  No  description  is 
given  of  what  they  saw.  It  may  be  that  Je- 
hovah manifested  Himself  to  them  in  that 
Angel  Presence  which  He  had  promised.  It 
is  better,  however,  to  leave  the  statement  as  it 
stands,  remembering  that  it  can  only  be  inter- 
preted by  the  facts  which  followed,  namely 
that  Moses  went  into  yet  closer  communion 
with  God  almost  immediately  afterwards. 
The  vision  was  characterized  for  the  elders  by 
immunity  from  judgment,  for  upon  them  "  He 
laid  not  His  hand " ;  and,  moreover,  by  a 
sacred  act  of  communion  in  which  they  "  did 
eat  and  drink."  Finally,  Moses  was  called 
beyond  the  people  in  the  valley,  and  beyond 
that  more  select  circle  of  the  elders,  into  the 
very  midst  of  the  mount,  where  he  received  in 
yet  fuller  detail  the  law  which  w^as  to  govern 
them,  and  saw  the  heavenly  things,  and  so 
learned  the  pattern  of  the  earthly  worship. 


46  Exodus 


In  examining  the  structure  of  the  Taber- 
nacle, it  will  be  well  to  endeavour  to  under- 
stand what  it  meant  to  the  people  for  whom 
it  was  provided.  That  detailed  study  is  not 
within  the  compass  of  our  present  work.  We 
notice  now  merely  the  general  method  of  pro- 
cedure. The  first  instructions  were  not  con- 
cerning the  building  itself,  but  concerning  its 
contents.  They  began  at  the  very  centre  with 
the  ark,  which  symbolized  the  fact  of  the  pres- 
ence of  God,  and  the  right  of  the  people  to 
approach  Him  as  their  King.  Next  in  order 
the  table  of  shewbread  was  described.  Two 
ideas  were  suggested  by  this  table.  To  the 
Eastern  mind  a  table  was  always  a  symbol  of 
fellowship  and  of  hospitality.  Thus  the  nation 
was  reminded  of  the  privilege  of  fellowship 
with  God,  and  of  the  fact  of  a  friendship  which 
expressed  itself  in  hospitality.  The  golden 
lampstand  was  the  symbol  and  the  figure  of 
the  testimony  which  these  people  were  to  bear 
to  the  outside  world.  The  curtains  and  cover- 
ings of  tabernacle  and  tent  were  made  of  ma- 
terials which  suggested  the  conditions  among 
which  God  could  make  His  dwelling-place. 
The  boards  and  bars,  set  up  in  sockets  of  silver, 
spoke,  in  the  symbolism  of  the  time,  of  the 
standing  of  these  people  as  a  redeemed  nation 
before  God.    The  veil  and  the  screen  indicated 


The    Emergence    of   the  Nation     47 

at  once  the  exclusion  of  the  people  from  near- 
ness, and  yet  the  way  of  their  approach 
through  mediation.  The  veil  of  the  outer 
court,  the  brazen  altar,  and  all  its  fittings, 
reminded  them  of  the  life  of  devotion,  based 
on  sacrifice,  which  they  were  called  to  live. 
The  gorgeous  robes  of  the  priest  are  seen  to 
be  in  common  with  everything  else,  full  of 
symbolic  teaching.  The  ceremony  of  the 
priests'  consecration  is  described,  as  is  also 
the  altar  of  incense,  and  the  arrangements  for 
placing  the  whole  of  the  furniture  within  the 
sacred  enclosure. 

Instructions  followed  as  to  the  gathering  of 
the  half-shekels  from  the  people,  which  were 
to  be  used  in  the  construction  of  the  founda- 
tion sockets ;  and  also  as  to  the  preparation  of 
the  holy  oil  to  be  used  in  anointing. 

The  final  words  of  instruction  were  those 
of  a  promise,  full  of  grace  and  tenderness,  that 
equipment  should  be  granted  to  certain  men 
which  would  enable  them  to  do  the  work  nec- 
essary for  the  construction  of  the  tabernacle. 

While  the  lawgiver  was  yet  in  the  mount  re- 
ceiving this  pattern  of  heavenly  things  in  order 
to  earthly  worship,  the  people  in  the  valley 
had  fallen  into  grievous  sin.  This  making  of 
the  golden  calf  consisted  of  a  positive  viola- 
tion of  the  promise  they  had  made  to  keep  the 


48  Exodus 


words  of  the  law.  When  they  said,  "  Up,  make 
us  Elohim,"  it  was  not  that  they  desired  to 
substitute  other  gods  for  the  One  God,  but 
rather  they  sought  a  similitude  of  God.  Their 
choice  of  a  calf  was  in  itself  significant.  In 
Eastern  symbolism  the  ox  was  ever  the  type 
of  sacrifice  and  service,  and  they  had  at  least 
some  glimmering  of  the  truth  concerning  the 
Divine  attitude.  It  is  also  to  be  observed  that, 
the  day  after  the  calf  was  erected,  they  ob- 
served a  feast  to  Jehovah.  The  evil  of  their 
action  was  seen  in  the  attitude  of  mind  pro- 
duced in  them  by  their  creation  of  a  symbol. 
They  "  sat  down  to  eat  and  to  drink,  and  rose 
up  to  play."  Worship  at  once  became  materi- 
alized and  sensual. 

Moses  is  manifested  in  all  the  grandeur  of 
his  character  in  this  connection.  His  pleading 
with  God  was  not  so  much  on  behalf  of  the 
people  as  on  behalf  of  God.  He  was  swayed 
by  an  infinite  pity  for  them,  but  at  the  back 
of  the  pity,  and  burning  through  it  like  a  fire, 
was  a  passion  for  the  honour  of  God.  Having 
stood  before  God  for  the  people,  he  came  to 
stand  before  the  people  for  God.  In  hot  anger 
he  broke  the  tables  of  stone,  and  seizing  the 
calf,  ground  it  to  powder,  and  compelled  the 
men  who  made  it  to  drink  of  the  water  into 
which  it  was  flung.    He  then  proceeded  to  the 


The    Emergence    of    the   Nation     40 

ceremony  of  mediation  and  restoration,  and 
passed  back  into  the  mount.  We  have  no  de- 
taik^d  account  of  the  happeninj^js  of  the  second 
period  save  that  the  tables  of  the  law  were 
written  anew.  During  this  second  absence  the 
people  waited  patiently  until  Moses  returned, 
his  face  shining  with  the  glory  of  the  awful 
and  solemn  fellowship  of  the  mount. 

The  final  movement  of  the  book  tells  the 
story  of  the  construction  and  consecration  of 
the  Tabernacle.  A  willing  people  offered  of 
their  substance  until  there  was  "  much  more  " 
than  enough.  Then,  by  the  hands  of  specially 
equipped  workmen,  the  work  went  speedily 
forward  until  all  was  completed  according  to 
the  Divine  pattern.  This  is  declared  in  the 
general  statement  "  thus  did  Moses ;  according 
to  all  that  the  Lord  commanded  him,  so  did 
he."  Finally  it  is  recorded,  "  so  Moses  finished 
the  work.''  Everything  was  completed  ac- 
cording to  the  Divine  pattern,  and  in  the 
Divine  order. 

Everything  symbolized  the  real  presence  of 
Jehovah,  and  that  fact  was  made  living  in  the 
consciousness  of  the  people  when  the  glory  of 
Jehovah  filled  the  completed  place  of  worship. 
So  great  was  the  glory  that  Moses  was  not  able 
to  enter  the  Tent  of  meeting. 

Thus  the  nation  was  organized  around  the 


50  Exodus 


presence  and  power  of  Jehovah,  and  the  chron- 
icle closes  with  the  simple  statement  that  they 
went  onward  in  their  journeyings  guided  ever 
by  the  presence  of  God  manifested  in  con- 
nection with  this  centre  of  their  life  and 
worship. 


LEVITICUS 


LEVITICUS— THE  BOOK  OF  LAWS 


A 

B 

c 

D 

E 

DEDICATION 

MEDIATION 

SEPARATION 

CONSECRATION 

RATIFICATIOr 

The  Offerings 

The  Priests 

The  People 

The  Feasts 

The  Signs 

i.-vii. 

viii.-x. 

xi.-xxii. 

xxiii.-xxiv. 

xxv.-xxvii. 

Provision  for 
Approach 

Appropriation 
of  Pro2>iston 

Conditions  of 

Benefits  of 
Approach 

Symbols  of 

App  rop  ria  tio  n 

Relation 

I.  The  Offer- 

I. Consecra^ 

1.  A  People 

I.  The  Feasts 

I.  ObUgator 

ings 

tion  of 

Cod- 

xxiii. 

xxv.-xx% 

i.-vi.  7 

the 

govern- 

The Worship 

i.  Burnt 

Priests 
viii. 

ed 
xi.-xvii. 

i.  The  Sabbath. 
1-3 

i.  The  Land  Sa 
bath. 

XXV.  I 

Offering,     i. 

ii.  The  Passover. 

ii.  Meal 

Offering,    ii. 

i.  Preparation. 

i.  Of  Health. 

4-5 

ii.  Jubilee. 

XXT.  8-. 

1-9 

xi.-xv. 

iii.  Unleavened 

ii.  Anointing. 

ii.  The  Day  of 

Bread.     6-8 

iii.  Exhortations 

iii.  Peace 

Offering,  iii. 

10-24 
iii.  Sacrifice  and 

Atonement, 
xvi. 

iv.  First-fruits. 

9-14 

XXI 

iv.  Sin 

Offering,  iv. 

New  Anoint- 
ing.         25-36 

iii.  General 

Instructions 

V.  Pentecost. 

15-22 

concerning 

V.  Trespass 
Offering. 

Sacrifices. 

xvii. 

vi.  Trumpets. 

v.-vi.  7 

23-25 
vii.  Atonement. 

U.  The  Laws 

II.  The  Priests 

II.  A  People 

26-32 

II.  Voluntar 

of  the 

at  Work 

Cod- 

viii.  Tabernacles. 

xxvl 

Offer- 

ix. 

mani- 

33-44 

ings 

i.  Offerings  for 

festing 

Vows 

vi.  8-vii. 

Themselves. 
1-14 

xviii.-xxil. 

II.  Symbols  of 
Conse- 

The 

ii.  Offerings  for 

i.  Separation 
from  Evil 

cration 

Worshipper 

the  People. 
15-24 

Practices. 

xviii. 

ii.  A  Call  to 

xxlv.  1-9 

i.  The  Oil.       1-4 

III.  Nadab 

Holiness  xix. 

ii.  The  Shew- 

and 

iii.  Laws  against 

bread.        5-9 

Abihu 

Unchastity 
and  Unclean- 

X. 

ness.         XX. 

i.  Their  Sin.    1-7 

iv.  Responsibili- 

III. The  Blas- 

ii. Consequent 

ties  of  the 
Priests. 

phemer 

Warnings. 

xxi.,  xxii. 

xxiv.  10-23 

8-co 

LEVITICUS 

THIS  is  a  book  of  laws.  It  has  been  aptly 
called  the  handbook  of  the  priests.  Its 
Hebrew  title,  Vayyikra,  which  means  "  And 
He  called,"  is  the  first  phrase  of  the  book  itself. 
The  first  verse  indicates  the  character  of  what 
follows.  The  moral  law  had  been  given  from 
amid  the  splendours  of  the  mountain.  The 
laws  regulating  worship  were  spoken  from  the 
tent.  Thus  the  content  of  the  book  is  linked 
to  the  subjects  dealt  with  in  Exodus,  and  is  in 
direct  continuation  thereof. 

The  nation  had  been  brought  out  of  bondage 
and  organized.  At  the  very  centre  of  its  life 
was  a  provision  for  worship  in  the  Tabernacle. 
The  whole  outlook  of  Exodus  teaches  the  su- 
preme place  of  w^orship  in  the  life  of  the 
nation.  It,  moreover,  reveals  the  fact  that 
there  can  only  be  w^orship  through  propiti- 
ation, because  man  is  a  sinner.  The  fact  of  sin 
thus  underlies  all  now  to  be  considered.  The 
fact  of  redemption  in  the  purpose  and  economy 
of  God  is  seen  overshadowing  the  fact  of  sin 
and  making  worship  possible.  The  laws  enun- 
ciated here  have  to  do  with  these  matters  of 
supreme  importance. 

53 


> 


54  Leviticus 


The  book  falls  into  ^Ye  parts.  First,  the 
setting,  forth  of  the  Provision  for  Approach 
(i.-vii.).  Secondly,  the  Institution  of  the 
Priesthood  through  which  the  Provision  might 
be  appropriated  (viii.-x.).  Thirdly,  the  Life 
of  Separation,  which  is  the  condition  of  Ap- 
propriation (xi.-xxii.).  Fourthly,  the  Feasts, 
which  portrayed  the  Benefits  of  Approach 
(xxiii.-xxiv.).  Lastly,  Symbols  of  Eelation 
which  safeguarded  the  maintenance  of  the 
right  of  Approach  (xxv.-xxviii.). 

A.  Dedication:  the  Offerings 

In  this  division  there  is  revealed  the  pro- 
vision of  God  for  the  approach  of  His  people 
to  Himself  in  worship.  The  offerings  are  first 
described,  and  then  their  laws  are  enunciated. 

As  to  the  offerings,  five  were  needed  to  per- 
fectly unfold  the  meaning  and  method  of  per- 
sonal dedication.  The  first  was  the  burnt 
offering,  which  suggested  the  need  for  perfect 
dedication.  The  lamb  without  blemish  con- 
sumed by  fire  indicated  the  necessity  of  a  dedi- 
cation perfect  in  quality  and  quantity.  The 
meal  offering  was  the  work  of  men's  hands,  of 
the  fruits  of  the  ground,  the  result  of  cultiva- 
tion, manufacture,  and  preparation,  suggest- 
ing that  dedication  necessitated  the  offering 


The    Book    of   Laws  55 

of  a  perfect  service  as  well  as  a  perfect  life. 
Of  the  peace  offering,  part  was  burned  by  fire 
and  part  consumed  by  the  worshipper.  It  was 
the  symbol  of  communion.  In  the  white  light 
of  the  Divine  holiness,  sin  is  sin,  whether  it 
be  wilful  or  not ;  and  tlie  sin  offering  was  pro- 
vided to  teach  that  the  failure  of  those  dedi- 
cated to  God  must  yet  he  dealt  with  on  the 
basis  of  sacrifice.  The  trespass  offering  was 
provided  for  definite  acts  of  wrong-doing. 
Trespass  in  this  connection  is  more  than  a 
mere  missing  of  the  mark.  It  includes  the 
thought  of  positive  and  wilful  wrongdoing. 

The  Divine  provision  for  worship  having 
been  revealed  in  the  offerings,  there  followed 
instructions  concerning  the  method  of  offer- 
ing, which  revealed  the  true  attitude  of  the 
worshipper.  In  connection  with  each  there 
were  detailed  instructions  which  are  full  of 
suggestiveness.  The  ceremonial  was  Divinely 
arranged,  and  nothing  was  frivolous  or  un- 
necessary. Every  detail  had  signification,  and 
was  intended  to  impress  upon  the  mind  of  the 
worshipper  truths  which  were  of  vital  impor- 
tance, in  order  that  he  should  recognize  the 
solemn  nature  of  his  dedication  as  a  member 
of  the  nation  whose  greatness  consisted  in  its 
intimate  relation  to  Jehovah. 


5Q  Leviticus 


B.  Mediation:  The  Priests 

The  second  division  of  the  book  deals  with 
the  laws  of  mediation.  It  consists  of  a  brief 
historical  portion,  which  gives  an  account  of 
the  actual  ceremony  of  the  consecration  of  the 
priests  and  the  tabernacle,  and  the  commence- 
ment of  worship ;  and  so  sets  forth  God's  pro- 
vision for  the  approach  of  His  people  to  Him- 
self through  mediation  on  the  basis  of  sacrifice. 
In  the  midst  of  a  solemn  assembly  the  priests 
were  washed,  and  Aaron  was  arrayed  in  the 
garments  of  his  sacred  office.  The  holy  rites 
of  consecration  then  moved  forward.  The 
ceremonies  were  repeated  daily  for  seven 
days. 

This  account  of  the  consecration  of  the 
priests  is  immediately  followed  by  that  of  the 
commencement  of  their  work.  The  people 
were  first  gathered  together,  bringing  with 
them  offerings  according  to  the  instructions 
given.  While  they  stood  in  solemn  stillness 
in  the  presence  of  Jehovah,  Aaron,  in  full  of- 
ficial capacity,  commenced  his  work.  His  first 
act  was  that  of  presenting  the  sin  offering  and 
the  burnt  offering  for  himself.  Then  followed 
immediately  his  first  acts  on  behalf  of  the  peo- 
ple. First  the  sin  offering,  indicating  the 
necessity  for  expiation  of  sin;  next  the  burnt 


The    Book    of    Laws  57 

offering,  indicating  the  devotion  of  the  whole 
life  to  God;  following  that  the  meal  offering, 
speaking  of  the  devotion  of  work  and  service ; 
finally  the  peace  offering,  the  symbol  of  com- 
munion. Thus  the  values  of  the  offerings  of 
approach  could  only  be  appropriated  through 
the  mediation  of  the  priests. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  history  of  the 
official  work  of  the  priesthood  there  were  evi- 
dences of  failure.  Nadab  and  Abihu,  two  sons 
of  Aaron,  offered  strange  fire  before  the  Lord, 
and  w^ere  swiftly  slain  by  fire.  Strangely 
solemn  were  the  words:  "Aaron  held  his 
peace."  They  were  his  own  sons,  but  his  rela- 
tion to  God  was  superior  to  his  relation  to 
them,  and  the  only  attitude  becoming  to  him 
was  that  of  submissive  silence.  The  other 
priests  were  solemnly  charged  to  show  no  signs 
of  mourning,  and  to  abide  at  their  posts. 

c.  Separation:  The  People 

While  provision  for  approach  was  made, 
and  the  method  of  appropriation  was  provided, 
there  were  still  very  definite  conditions  which 
must  be  fulfilled  in  order  that  the  people  might 
avail  themselves  of  the  provision  made.  These 
conditions  may  be  summarized  as  those  of  en- 
tire separation  to  God.  They  were  to  be  a 
people    God-governed     and    God-manifesting. 


58  Leviticus 


The  Divine  government  must  be  recognized 
and  obeyed  in  the  matter  of  health.  Minute 
regulations  were  given  as  to  food,  as  to  child- 
birth, as  to  leprosy,  and  as  to  all  uncleanness. 
In  the  midst  of  this  section  instructions  were 
given  for  the  observance  of  the  great  Day  of 
Atonement,  which  was  perhaps  the  most  im- 
portant religious  rite  of  the  whole  year  in  the 
Hebrew  economy.  It  was  the  day  on  which 
the  high  priest  entered  into  the  holy  place,  all 
the  arrangements  for  which  entry  were  given 
in  detail.  In  the  ceremonial  of  this  day  pro- 
vision was  made  for  dealing  with  the  whole 
question  of  sin,  known  and  unknown.  Most 
particular  instructions  were  given  as  to  the 
attitude  of  the  people  on  the  great  day.  They 
were  to  rest  and  afflict  their  souls.  It  was  to 
be  a  day  of  solemn  fasting  and  humiliation  in 
which  they  reminded  themselves  of  the  fact  of 
their  sin,  of  the  provision  made  for  their 
cleansing,  and  of  their  consequent  right  of  ap- 
proach to  God  in  worship.  Strict  instructions 
were  next  given  concerning  sacrifices. 

The  laws  of  separation  then  assumed  a 
slightly  altered  character.  So  far  the  princi- 
pal note  had  been  that  of  the  fundamental 
matters  of  relationship  to  God.  The  habits  of 
the  life  of  separation  are  more  particularly 
dealt  with.    The  people  were  distinctly  forbid- 


The    Book    of   Laws  59 

den  to  conform  to  the  doings  either  of  Egypt 
or  Canaan. 

Then  followed  a  repetition  of  laws  already 
given,  with  one  reiterated  emphasis :  "  Ye  shall 
be  holy,  for  I,  the  Lord  your  God  am  holy.'^ 
No  less  than  fourteen  times  in  the  course  of 
one  chapter  (xix.)  does  the  solemn  declaration 
"  I  am  Jehovah "  occur.  Yet  further  lawa 
concerning  unchastity  and  uncleanliness  w^ere 
repeated,  and  the  death  penalty  was  associ- 
ated with  certain  forms  of  disobedience. 

The  final  section  in  this  division  deals  with 
the  responsibilities  of  the  priest.  Standing, 
as  he  ever  did,  in  a  place  of  special  nearness  to 
God  as  the  appointed  mediator  of  the  people, 
he  must  of  all  men  manifest  in  the  externals 
of  life  and  conduct  that  holiness  without 
which  no  man  can  see  the  Lord. 

D.  Consecration:  The  Feasts 

The  feasts  of  Jehovah  w^ere  the  national 
signs  and  symbols  of  the  fact  that  the  people, 
dedicated  to  God  as  the  offerings  witnessed, 
permitted  to  approach  through  the  mediation 
of  the  priestly  service,  separated  in  all  the  de- 
tails of  life,  were  by  God  consecrated  to  Him- 
self. 

The  foremost  place  was  given  to  the  Sab- 
bath,   It  was  a  perpetually  recurring  feast,  to 


60  Leviticus 


be  observed  throughout  all  the  year,  on  every 
seventh  day. 

Following  this  we  have  the  appointment  of 
the  set  feasts  in  their  relation  to  times  and 
seasons  and  the  passing  of  the  year.  Thus 
all  time-measurements  were  related  to  eternal 
truth.  The  first  feast  was  the  Passover,  which 
merged  into  that  of  unleavened  bread.  With 
these  the  year  commenced.  The  Feast  of  First- 
fruits  was  appointed  for  the  land  into  which 
God  would  bring  them.  Marking  the  begin- 
ning of  possession,  it  served  as  a  constant  re- 
minder of  the  truth  that  all  they  had  was  the 
result  of  His  giving  rather  than  of  their  get- 
ting. 

After  a  lapse  of  seven  full  weeks,  during 
which  the  whole  harvest  was  gathered,  the 
Feast  of  Harvest  was  observed,  and  Pente- 
cost reminded  them  that  all  they  needed  was 
provided  by  Jehovah.  The  seventh  month  was 
the  most  sacred  of  all.  Therein  two  great  or- 
dinances were  observed:  the  Day  of  Atone- 
ment, and  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  Pre- 
ceding these,  and  preparing  for  them,  came 
the  Feast  of  Trumpets.  This  was  held  on  the 
first  day  of  the  month.  Its  characteristic  notes 
were  rest,  and  proclamation  of  the  will  of  God. 
The  tenth  day  of  the  month  was  the  great  Day 
of  Atonement,  which  has  already  been  de- 
scribed.   The  last  Feast  of  the  year  was  that  of 


The    Book    of    Laws  61 

Tabernacles.  It  was  observed  after  all  the 
work  was  completed,  and  the  results  thereof 
gathered.  For  seven  days  the  people  dwelt  in 
booths,  and  heard  the  reading  of  the  law.  The 
section  ends  w^ith  instructions  concerning  the 
symbols  of  consecration,  those  namely  of  the 
oil  and  the  shewbread. 

E.  Ratification:  The  Signs 

The  laws  of  ratification  consisted  of  the 
outward  signs  of  the  principle  of  possession  to 
be  observed  in  the  land,  together  with  solemn 
promises  and  warnings.  The  first  sign  w^as 
of  the  Sabbath  of  the  land.  In  the  seventh  year 
of  rest  the  original  Ownership  of  God  was  rec- 
ognized. The  second  sign  was  that  of  the  jubi- 
lee, wherein  great  human  inter-relationships, 
dependent  upon  the  fact  of  Divine  possesson, 
were  insisted  upon. 

The  law^s  of  the  year  of  jubilee  affected  the 
land,  dwelling-houses,  and  persons.  In  these 
the  foundations  of  the  social  order  w- ere  firmly 
laid.  All  inter-human  relationships,  both  of 
person  and  property,  were  conditioned  in  the 
fundamental  relationship  of  the  people  to  God. 

The  book  ends  with  a  section  dealing  with 
vows.  The  principle  laid  down  is  that  it  is 
not  necessary  that  vows  should  be  made,  but 
that  if  they  are  made  they  must  be  religiously 
observed. 


NUMBERS 


NUMBERS^THE  BOOK  OF  WANDERING 


ON  THE  MARGIN  OF 
THE  LAND 


i.  The  Order  of  the 

Camp  i.— Iv. 

i.  The  Census.  i. 

ii.  The  Encampment.  ii. 

iii.  The  Levites.  iii.,  iv. 

II.  The  Purity  of 

the  Camp     v.,  vi. 


i. 

Purification  from 
Pollution.                       V. 

ii. 

Special  Dedication.       vi. 

Ill 

.  The  Worship  of 

the  Camp 

vii.-ix.  14 

i. 

Offerings  of  the 
Princes.                        vii. 

ii. 

Order  of  Worship,     viii. 

iii. 

Passover  and 
Purification.          ix.  1-14 

IV.  The  Movement  of 
the  Camp 

ix.  15-x. 

i.  Determined  by  the 

Cloud.  ix.  15-23 

ii.  The  Method  of  Summons, 
and  Order  of  March. 

X. 


EXCLUSION  AND 
WANDERING 

xi.  —  xxv. 


xl..  xii. 

xi.  1-3 


I.  Discontent 

i.  Against  God 
The  People, 
ii.  Against  Circumstances 

xi.  4-35 
The  Mixed  Multitude. 

iii.  Against  Moses  xii. 

Miriam  and  Aaron. 

II.  Disaster       xiii.,  xlv. 

i.  Fear.    Sending  of 

Spies.  xiii. 

ii.  Rebellion.  xiv.  1-35 

iii.  Presumption,     xiv.  36-45 

JII.  DiscipBine  xv.— xxv. 

i.  Domestic.         xv. — xx.  13 

a.  The  Sabbath-breaker. 

XV. 

b.  Korah,  Dathan,  and 
Abiram.  xvi. 

c.  Laws.  xvii.-xix. 

d.  Death  of  Miriam,  xx.  i 

e.  Failure  of  Moses  and 
Aaron.  xx.  2-13 

ii.  Foreign.         xx.  14— xxv. 

a.  Edom.  xx.  14-21 

b.  Death  of  Aaron. 

XX.  22-29 

c.  Victory  over 
Canaanites.       xxi.  1-3 

rf.  Murmuring.       xxi.  4-9 
e.  Sihon  and  Og. 

xxi.  1-35 
/.  Balaam.        xxii.— xxv. 


ON  THE  MARGIN  OF 
THE  LAND 


xxvt. — XXXVl. 


[.  The  Census 


xx\l. 


I!.  The  Inheritance  of 

Women 

xxviL  1-11 

III.  The  Summons   to 

Moses 

xxvii.  12-23 

(Sequel.  Deut.  xxxiv.) 

IV.  Repetition  of 

L«aws 

xxviii.— XXX. 

V.  War  with  Midian 

xxxi. 

VI.  Settlement  of  Reu" 

ben.  Gad,  and  half" 
tribe  of  Man- 
asseh  xxxSi. 

VII.  List  of  Journey- 

ings        xxxili.  1-49 

VIII.  Repetition  of 
Laws 

xxxiii.  50— xxxvi. 


NUMBERS 

THE  book  of  Numbers  deals  with  the  wil- 
derness. Ic  is  principally  the  story  of  a 
long'  discipline  due  to  disobedience.  The  na- 
tional idea  moves  forward,  for  God  ever  pro- 
tects His  own  purposes  against  the  failure  of 
His  chosen  instruments.  In  the  book  of  Exo- 
dus we  saw  the  emergence  and  consolidation 
of  the  nation  which  God  had  chosen  to  be  the 
channel  of  communication  between  Himself 
and  the  world  at  large.  In  Leviticus  we  con- 
sidered the  laws  of  its  worship.  In  Numbers 
the  movement  toward  actual  possession  of  the 
land  commences.  This  movement,  however, 
was  hindered  for  nearly  forty  years,  and  the 
book  is  principally  occupied  with  matters  re- 
lating to  that  period.  It  closes  with  the 
account  of  the  return  of  the  people  to  the 
borders  of  the  land. 

Thus  it  naturally  falls  into  three  parts,  the 
first  dealing  with  the  Preparation  for  En- 
trance (i.-x.)  ;  the  second  giving  the  story  of 
the  Exclusion  and  Wandering  (xi.-xxv.)  ;  while 
the  last  gives  the  account  of  how,  after  the 
long  discipline,  they  were  brought  back  and 
prepared  for  actual  Possession  (xxvi.-xxxvi.). 

65 


66  Numbers 


A.  On  the  Margin  of  the  Land 

In  this  division  we  watch  the  final  move- 
ment of  the  chosen  people  in  preparation  for 
coming  into  the  land,  and  in  doing  so  observe 
the  order  of  the  camp,  the  purity  of  the  camp, 
the  worship  of  the  camp,  the  movement  of  the 
camp. 

By  the  command  of  Jehovah  the  men  from 
twenty  years  and  upwards  were  numbered. 
This  was  the  first  movement  in  preparation 
not  merely  for  their  entrance  to  the  land,  but 
for  their  carrying  out  of  the  Divine  purpose. 
That  purpose  was  first  punitive.  In  the  in- 
terests of  purity  corrupt  peoples  were  to  be 
swept  out. 

Definite  instructions  were  given  concern- 
ing the  relative  positions  to  be  occupied  by 
the  tribes,  both  in  the  time  of  encampment 
and  on  the  march.  At  the  centre  of  every- 
thing was  the  Tabernacle.  The  Levites  were 
encamped  round  the  two  sides  and  at  the  back 
thereof.  Moses  and  the  priests  occupied  the 
fourth  side,  close  to  the  courts  of  worship. 
Outside  the  enclosure  the  tribes  of  the  nation 
were  grouped  under  their  standards  according 
to  the  Divine  command.  The  service  of  the 
Levites  was  described  in  detail.  Their  sacred 
work  was  carefully  apportioned  both  for  the 


The    Book    of   Wandering  67 

march  and  for  places  of  encampment.  All 
these  provisions  solemnly  impressed  upon  the 
people  the  supreme  importance  of  worship, 
and  revealed  to  them  the  orderliness  of  Je- 
hovah. 

On  the  eve  of  the  coming  of  the  people  into 
the  land,  the  necessity  for  the  purity  of  the 
camp  was  emphasized.  All  who  were  unclean 
were  put  outside.  This,  of  course,  does  not 
mean  that  they  were  left  to  perish,  but  that 
they  were  not  allowed  to  march  in  their  proper 
place  with  the  tribes  of  the  people.  For  the 
time  being  they  were  camp-followers  only. 
Moreover,  the  necessity  for  moral  rectitude 
was  insisted  upon,  and  such  as  had  in  any  way 
sinned  against  others  made  restitution. 

Having  provided  for  the  purity  of  the  camp 
by  the  exclusion  of  the  unclean,  special  instruc- 
tions were  given  concerning  cases  of  peculiar 
and  special  devotion  to  a  life  of  separation  to 
God.  There  is  absolutely  nothing  monastic 
in  the  order  of  the  Nazarites.  These  men  did 
not  separate  themselves  from  their  fellow- 
men,  or  from  their  ordinary  avocations,  but  re- 
mained in  the  midst  of  their  fellows,  and  prose- 
cuted their  daily  calling,  though  yet  maintain- 
ing an  attitude  of  special  consecration.  At  the 
close  of  this  section  dealing  with  the  purity  of 
the  camp,  we  find  the  specific  form  in  which 


68  Numbers 


the  priestly  blessing  was  to  be  pronounced 
upon  the  people. 

Immediately  following  are  the  arrangements 
concerning  the  worship  of  the  camp.  This  sec- 
tion opens  with  an  account  of  the  voluntary 
offerings  on  the  part  of  the  princes.  It  is  first 
to  be  noticed  that  the  giving  was  voluntary, 
and  next  that  it  was  equal,  thus  precluding 
the  possibility  of  a  spirit  of  rivalry,  and  indi- 
cating a  great  unity  of  purpose.  While  all 
the  story  might  have  been  told  in  a  few  words, 
it  is  set  forth  with  elaborate  detail.  Every 
man  is  named,  and  every  gift  is  chronicled. 

In  the  final  arrangements  concerning  wor- 
ship, before  the  moving  forward  of  the  people, 
the  one  symbol  referred  to  is  that  of  the  light, 
which  was  the  type  of  the  witness-bearing  of 
the  nation.  In  the  consecration  of  the  Levites, 
no  anointing  oil  or  blood  was  used,  neither  was 
any  specific  dress  provided.  The  sign  of  their 
cleansing  was  the  simple  one  of  water. 
Finally,  the  great  Passover  feast  was  observed. 
A  month  later  a  special  observance  of  the  same 
feast  was  arranged  for  such  as,  through  defile- 
ment, were  precluded  from  taking  part  in  the 
first. 

At  last  everything  was  ready  for  the  march, 
and  the  hosts  waited  only  the  Divine  will. 
The  people  were  to  follow  the  moving  of  the 


The    Book    of    Wandering  69 

cloud,  and  to  answer  the  hlast  of  the  trumpet. 
Careful  instructions  were  given  concerning 
the  use  of  these  trumpets.  Different  notes 
suggested  different  meanings  to  those  who  lis- 
tened. On  the  twentieth  day  of  the  second 
month  the  actual  movement  of  the  camp  com- 
menced. The  division  ends  with  the  sugges- 
tive w^ords  which  Moses  used  at  the  commence- 
ment and  close  of  each  successive  movement 
of  the  hosts.  They  indicated  the  profound 
recognition  on  his  part,  and  on  that  of  the 
people,  that  everything  centred  around  the 
presence  and  government  of  God,  both  in  re- 
gard to  the  victory  of  Israel  over  her  enemies, 
and  her  own  safety  and  well-being. 

B.  Exclusion  and  Wandering 

In  this  second  division  of  the  book  is  re- 
vealed the  failure  of  man.  Its  general  move- 
ment may  be  indicated  by  the  words,  Discon- 
tent, Disaster,  Discipline. 

The  discontent  manifested  itself  first  against 
God.  At  the  beginning  there  w^as  no  open  re- 
volt against  authority.  The  people  were,  how- 
ever, in  all  probability,  conscious  of  the  irk- 
someness  of  restraint.  They  w^ere  learning 
that  liberty  was  not  license,  and  so  through- 
out the  camp  the  Lord  heard  the  tone  of  mur- 
muring and  discontent.     His  judgment  was 


70  Numbers 


sudden  and  swift.  Moses  became  an  interces- 
sor, and  the  fire  abated. 

A  second  time  discontent  manifested  itself, 
and  this  time  it  was  expressed  against  circum- 
stances. Influenced  by  the  mixed  multitude 
which  had  accompanied  them,  the  people  hun- 
gered after  the  things  of  Egypt,  apparently 
forgetting  the  cruelty  of  its  bondage.  Moses 
w^as  perplexed  and  perturbed,  and  he  poured 
out  his  complaint  into  the  ear  of  God.  In  in- 
finite patience  God  talked  with  him,  and  to  the 
murmuring  people  He  sent  quails,  and  through 
them  the  punishing  plague.  As  the  psalmist 
afterwards  sung,  "  He  gave  them  their  request; 
but  sent  leanness  into  their  souls." 

A  third  time  there  was  a  manifestation  of 
rebellion.  Miriam  and  Aaron,  in  whose  hearts 
there  w^as  evidently  an  under-current  of  jeal- 
ousy, made  the  marriage  of  Moses  to  a  Cushite 
woman  the  occasion  of  protesting  against  his 
exercise  of  authority.  They  were  punished 
immediately,  and  pardoned  in  answer  to  the 
earnest  cry  of  Moses. 

The  hour  had  now  arrived  when  the  people 
should  have  gone  forward.  The  story  of  the 
sending  of  the  spies,  as  told  in  Numbers,  indi- 
cates that  it  was  done  in  obedience  to  a  Divine 
command.  The  comparison  of  this,  however, 
with  Moses'  account  of  it  in  Deuteronomy  will 


The    Book    of    Wandering  71 

show  that  this  command  of  the  Lord  was  the 
sequel  to  a  determination  on  the  part  of  the 
people  to  do  so.  Tliis  was  in  itself  an  act  of 
suspicion  and  unbelief.  The  spies  were  sent, 
and  in  forty  days  returned,  bringing  with  them 
a  majority  report  and  a  minority  report.  All 
were  agreed  as  to  the  desirability  of  the  land. 
The  majority,  however,  had  seen  the  difficul- 
ties of  possessing,  and  beyond  this  had  seen 
nothing.  The  minority  had  seen  first  Jehovah, 
then  the  excellencies  of  the  land,  and  finally 
the  difficulties.  The  essential  difference  was 
that  of  the  vision  of  God.  The  people  were 
infiuenced,  as,  alas!  men  too  often  are,  by  the 
majority,  and  in  unutterable  folly  they  de- 
clared that  it  was  preferable  to  return  to 
Egypt.  One  of  the  most  magnificent  pictures 
in  the  Old  Testament  is  presented  to  us  as 
Moses  interceded  with  God  on  behalf  of  the 
people.  His  plea,  however,  w^as  not  based 
upon  pity  in  his  heart  for  the  sinning  people, 
but  upon  that  deeper  passion  for  the  honour 
of  the  name  of  God.  The  people  w^ere  par- 
doned, but  they  must  be  excluded  from  the 
land.  They  had  themselves  rejected  the  land 
toward  which  God  had  brought  them,  and 
their  punishment  w^as  that  they  should  not  en- 
ter it. 

This  decree  of  Jehovah  was  followed  by  an 


72  Numbers 


instance  of  false  repentance.  The  men  came 
to  the  consciousness  of  their  unutterable  folly, 
and  then  resolved  to  go  up  and  possess  the 
land  in  their  own  strength.  The  result  was 
defeat  and  disaster. 

Then  began  the  long  years  of  discipline.  It 
is  a  story  full  of  sadness.  At  first  we  follow 
the  people  through  a  period  in  which  the  re- 
sults of  their  failure  were  manifest  in  their  in- 
ternal life.  The  Sabbath  was  violated,  and  the 
guilty  one  was  punished.  Korah,  Dathan,  and 
Abiram  led  an  organized  opposition  against 
Moses,  and  were  summarily  dealt  with.  After 
this  new  arrangements  were  made,  and  old 
laws  repealed.  Then  as  the  people,  toward 
the  close  of  the  forty  years,  were  led  back  into 
the  neighbourhood  of  Kadesh-barnea,  Miriam 
died,  and  was  buried.  In  this  neighbourhood, 
moreover,  Moses  and  Aaron  both  failed  in  sim- 
ple allegiance  to  God,  and  they  also  were  ex- 
cluded from  the  land. 

It  would  seem  as  though  the  people  were 
moving,  on  their  own  part,  in  an  attempt  to 
find  their  way  into  the  land.  Their  endeavour 
to  go  in  one  direction,  changed  through  the  op- 
position of  Edom,  would  seem  to  indicate  the 
absence  of  the  guiding  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire. 
During  this  time  Aaron  died.  His  death  was 
a  solemn  and  impressive  ceremony.  The  robes 


i 


The    Book    of   Wandering  73 

of  his  office  were  transferred  to  his  son.  He 
then  died,  and  was  buried  amidst  the  lamenta- 
tions of  the  people.  The  transference  of  the 
outward  symbols  of  the  priestly  office  taught 
the  truth  that  the  priesthood  was  greater  than 
the  man.  In  these  final  days  of  exclusion 
Balaam  was  hired  to  prophesy  against  the 
people  of  Jehovah. 

c.  On  the  Margin  of  the  Land 

The  third  and  last  section  of  the  book  of 
Numbers  is  devoted  to  the  second  numbering 
of  the  people,  and  their  preparation  for  com- 
ing into  possession  of  the  land  from  which 
they  had  been  excluded  for  forty  years.  In  a 
study  of  this  division  there  are  discoverable 
two  movements.  The  first  chronicles  historic 
facts  in  their  sequence,  and  the  other  is  an  in- 
sistence upon  the  Divine  government  by  the 
repetition  of  certain  law^s  with  new  emphasis 
and  applications.  There  is  a  marked  continu- 
ity of  purpose,  notwithstanding  the  change  of 
persons.  Two  men  only  of  those  who  had  come 
to  the  margin  were  allowed  to  pass  into  the 
land.  The  time  for  the  passing  of  Moses  had 
come,  and  in  all  God's  dealings  with  him  there 
is  manifest  a  great  tenderness.  The  final  ac- 
count of  his  death  is  reserved  for  the  ending 
of  the  next  book.     In  this,  however,  we  have 


74  Numbers 


the  story  how  he  publicly  appointed  his  suc- 
cessor. When  the  call  of  God  came  to  him  to 
ascend  the  mountain  and  view  the  land,  and  to 
be  gathered  to  his  people,  the  final  passion  of 
his  heart  was  that  which  had  so  long  sustained 
him  in  the  midst  of  all  the  trying  circum- 
stances of  his  work  as  leader.  He  thought  of 
the  great  congregation  as  the  congregation  of 
Jehovah,  and  prayed  for  the  appointment  of 
a  successor.  Thus  there  was  granted  to  him 
the  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  the  one  who 
succeeded  him  in  leading  the  people  was  the 
man  of  God's  own  choice. 

After  a  repetition  of  the  laws  concerning 
the  great  religious  observances  of  the  people, 
we  have  the  account  of  a  war  directly  con- 
nected with  the  sin  of  the  people,  resulting 
from  the  influence  of  Balaam.  In  the  battle 
Balaam  was  slain.  Even  here  the  imperfection 
of  the  people  was  manifest  in  the  desire  on  the 
part  of  Reuben,  Gad,  and  the  half-tribe  of 
Manasseh  to  settle  on  the  wrong  side  of  the 
Jordan.  Moses  failed  in  judgment  in  allow- 
ing them  to  do  so,  out  of  which  failure  trouble 
arose  in  after-years. 

The  book  ends  with  a  list  of  the  journey- 
ings  of  the  people  during  the  period  of  their 
exclusion,  and  a  repetition  of  laws  with  special 


The    Book    of   Wandering  75 

reference  to  settlement  in  the  land.  Through 
all  the  book  there  is  manifest  the  forward 
movement,  not  of  men,  but  of  Jehovah.  It  is 
a  revelation  of  the  sure  procedure  of  God 
toward  the  final  working  out  into  human  his- 
tory of  His  purposes  for  the  world. 


DEUTEEONOMY 


DEUTERONOMY— THE  BOOK  OF  REVIEWS 


A 

B 

C 

D 

E 

F 

r             r 

THE 

THE 

RETROSPECT 

RESUME  OF  LAWS 

WARNINGS 

COVENANT 

THE  SONG 

BLESSrNG 

1. — iv.  43 

iv.  44— 

xxvii.  II— 

xxix.— 

xxxi.  14— 

xxxii.  48— 

xxvix.  10 

xxviii. 

xxxi.  13 

xxxii.  ^ 

xxxiii. 

I.  IntrO' 

Introduction 

1.  Intro- 

1. Intro- 

I. Intro- 

I. Intro- 

ductlon 

Iv.  44-49 

duction 

duction 

duction 

duction 

L  1-5 

xxvii.  11-26 

xxix.  l-2a 

xxxL  14-30 

xxxii.  48-52 

The  Place 

Character 
and  Place 

The 

Curses 

ILThe 

II.  The 

II.  The  Dis- 

11. The  Dis- 

II. The 

II.  The 

Dis- 

Discourse 

course 

course 

Song 

Blessing 

course 

v.-xxvi. 

xxviii. 

xxix.  2b 

xxxii.  1-43 

xxxiU 

L  6-iv.  40 

i.  "Testimonies." 

i.  The  Bless- 

XXX. 

i.  Introduc- 

i    P^vipur   f\( 

v.-xi.  31 

ing  of 

i.  The  Appeal 

tion.     i-3a 

«•    AXCVICW     yJi. 

th*  forty 

a.  The  Deca- 

Obedience. 

to  the 
past. 
xxix.  2b-9 

ii.  The  Terms 

ii.  A  Contrast. 

y^.3^s- ... 

logue,     v.-vi. 

1-14 

3b-5 

1. 6— lii. 

b.  Obedience. 

vii.-xi.  31 

ii.  The  Curs- 
ing of 

iii.  An  Appeal. 

ii.  Exhortation 

Disobedi- 

of the 

6a 

to  Obedi- 

ii. "Statutes." 

ence. 

Covenant. 

iv.  A  Contrast. 

ence. 

xi.  32-xvi.  17 

15-68 

io-:?9 

6b-i8 

iv.  I-40 

a.  Worship 

iii.  The  Appeal 

V.  Judgment. 

a.  Retro- 

xii.-xiv. 2 

to  the 
future. 

19-28 

spective. 

b.  Some  effects 

XXX. 

vi.  Lament. 

1-24 

of  Worship 

29-30 

b.  Prospective 

on  Conduct. 

vii.  Final  De- 

25-31 

xiv.  3-xvi.  17 

liverance. 

c.  Intro- 

iii. "Judgments." 

31-43 

spective. 

xvi.  18-xxvi. 

32-40 

a.  Principles  of 
Law. 

xvi.  18-20 

b.  Administration 

of  Law. 

xvi.  2x-xxvi.  19 

111.  Sequel 

III.  Sequel 

HI.  Sequel 

III.  Sequel 

Iv.  41-43 

xxvil.  1-10 

xxxi.  1-13 

xxxii. 

Cities  of 

Provision  for 

44-47. 

Refuge 

the  Land 

Historic  Conclusion   xxxlv. 


DEUTERONOMY 

DEUTERONOMY  is  the  last  of  the  books 
of  the  Pentateuch.  It  is  didactic  rather 
than  historic.  Its  actual  history  covers  a  very 
brief  period,  probably  not  many  days.  It  con- 
sists of  a  collection  of  the  final  public  utter- 
ances of  Moses.  The  form  in  which  we  possess 
it  is  in  all  likelihood  the  result  of  the  work  of 
an  editor,  who  collected  these  great  discourses, 
and  connected  them  by  such  information  con- 
cerning the  occasion  of  their  utterance  as 
should  make  them  a  consecutive  series,  and 
thus  give  them  value  in  their  relation  to  the 
earlier  books.  It  has  been  surmised  that  this 
work  was  done  by  Joshua,  and  this,  to  say  the 
least,  is  quite  probable. 

The  book  is,  therefore,  essentially  a  book 
of  Moses,  for  it  consists  of  his  final  words  to 
the  people  whom  he  had  led,  first  out  of  Egypt, 
and  then  for  forty  years  of  wandering  in  the 
wilderness.  It  may  therefore  be  most  simply 
divided  by  the  six  discourses  which  it  chroni- 
cles. Of  these  discourses  the  first  was  a  Retro- 
spect (i.-iv.  43)  ;  the  second,  a  Resum^  of  Laws 
(iv.  44-xxvii.  10) ;  the  third,  the  uttering  of 
Warnings  (xxvii.  11-xxviii.) ;  the  fourth,  con- 

79 


80  Deuteronomy 


cernBd  the  Covenant  (xxix.-xxxi.  13) ;  the  fifth 
was  a  great  farewell  Song  (xxxi.  14-xxxii.  47)  ; 
and  the  sixth,  a  final  Benediction  (xxxii.  48- 
xxxiiL). 

A.  First  Discourse  :  Ketrospect 

In  reviewing  the  forty  years  of  wandering 
Moses  dealt  with  the  three  great  movements: 
first,  from  Horeb  to  Kadesh-barnea ;  secondly, 
from  Kadesh-barnea  to  Heshbon;  and  finally, 
from  Heshbon  to  Beth-peor.  In  looking  back 
he  was  careful  to  state  all  the  facts  in  the  light 
of  God's  government.  Their  disturbance  at 
Horeb  was  due  to  the  direct  commandment  of 
God,  and  even  though  the  path  of  the  wilder- 
ness was  a  terrible  one,  they  had  not  been  left 
to  grope  their  way  through  it  alone.  God  had 
ever  moved  before  them,  choosing  them  out  a 
place  in  which  to  pitch  their  tents.  Moreover, 
he  reminded  them  that  they  had  not  only  been 
the  objects  of  God's  love,  but  that  His  power 
had  wrought  on  their  behalf. 

Having  surveyed  the  history  from  Horeb 
to  Beth-peor,  he  exhorted  them  to  obedience. 
Keminding  them  of  the  importance  of  the  com- 
mandments, he  based  his  appeal  upon  the 
greatness  of  God  and  the  perfection  of  His 
law,  insisting  upon  it  that  their  whole  existence 
and  history  centred  around  a  spiritual  ideal. 


The    Book    of    Reviews  81 

There  had  been  granted  to  them  no  visible 
form  of  God,  even  amid  the  majestic  manifes- 
tations of  Sinai,  and  therefore  he  warned 
them  against  making  any  graven  image. 

Continuing  this  exhortation  to  obedience,  he 
looked  into  the  future,  and  in  the  light  of  sub- 
sequent history  his  words  were  indeed  pro- 
phetic. At  the  close  of  the  first  discourse  we 
have  a  brief  account  of  his  appointment  of 
three  cities  of  refuge. 

B.  Second  Discourse  :  RfeuME  of  Laws 

A  general  introduction  indicates  the  place, 
time,  and  subject  of  this  second  discourse, 
which  deals  with  testimonies,  statutes,  and 
judgments.  The  testimonies  were  the  actual 
w^ords  of  the  law  given,  and  these  were  first 
dealt  with.  The  statutes  were  the  provisions 
for  worship,  and  the  conduct  harmonizing 
therewith.  The  judgments  dealt  with  the  ar- 
rangements for  civil  and  religious  authority, 
and  the  administration  of  justice. 

A  study  of  the  testimonies,  or  uttered  words 
of  the  law,  reveals  the  fact  that  no  vital  change 
was  made  at  any  point  in  the  nature  or  bind- 
ing force  of  the  commandments.  There  were 
slight  verbal  alterations,  but  these  were  due  to 
the  circumstances  in  which  they  were  uttered. 
One  striking  difference  is  that  in  connection 


82  Deuteronomy 


with  the  law  concerning  the  Sabbath:  the 
ground  of  appeal  was  no  longer  the  rest  of 
God  in  creation,  but  their  position  as  redeemed 
from  Egypt's  bondage.  Having  referred  to  the 
ten  words,  a  great  statement  was  made  as  to 
the  deepest  value  thereof,  and  as  to  the  peo- 
ples' corresponding  responsibility.  "  Jehovah, 
our  God,  is  one  Jehovah."  The  true  response 
of  the  people  to  this  truth  was  that  of  fear  is- 
suing in  obedience,  and  resulting  in  well-being. 
The  discourse  then  proceeded  to  deal  with  the 
responsibilities  in  detail. 

Dealing  with  the  statutes,  he  carefully 
warned  them  against  idolatry,  and  commanded 
that  all  idols  and  false  places  of  worship  were 
to  be  destroyed  as  they  entered  the  land. 
Nothing  was  to  be  allowed  to  seduce  them  from 
their  loyalty  to  Jehovah  in  worship.  He  then 
passed  to  injunctions,  which  revealed  his  con- 
sciousness of  the  effect  of  worship  on  conduct ; 
and  finally,  restated  the  arrangements  for  the 
observation  of  the  great  feasts. 

In  dealing  with  judgments,  he  first  com- 
manded the  appointment  of  judges  and  offi- 
cers, and  then  declared  the  principles  upon 
which  they  were  to  act.  The  three-fold  me- 
dium through  which  the  will  of  God  would  be 
interpreted  to  the  people — that  namely  of  king, 
priest,  and  prophet — he  then  described.     The 


The    Book    of    Reviews  83 

laws  of  peace  and  of  war  were  set  out  in  great 
detail,  and  finally  provision  was  made  for  a 
ceremony  of  blessing  and  cursing  on  the 
mountains  of  Ebal  and  Gerizim,  when  the 
land  was  entered. 

c.  The  Third  Discourse  :  Warnings 

In  this  third  discourse  Moses  devoted  him- 
self to  solemnly  w^arning  the  people.  Before 
proceeding  to  this  more  specific  purpose  of  his 
discourse,  he  spoke  of  the  blessings  which 
would  follow^  obedience.  The  effect  of  dis- 
obedience he  described  first  in  their  own  bor- 
ders. Adversity  of  every  kind  would  overtake 
them  in  trade,  agriculture,  and  in  matters  of 
health;  and  in  every  way  there  would  be  suf- 
fering if  there  w^ere  disobedience.  In  all  this 
he  really  uttered  prophetic  words,  for  we  find 
here  a  detailed  description  of  the  Koman  vic- 
tories, w^hich  came  so  long  after,  and  the  ulti- 
mate destruction  of  the  city  and  the  driving 
out  of  the  people. 

D.  Fourth  Discourse  :  The  Covenant 

The  terms  of  the  covenant  had  been  already 
given.  In  urging  the  people  to  be  true  to  it, 
Moses  first  of  all  referred  to  the  Lord's  deliv- 
erances wrought  in  the  past,  from  Egypt, 
through  the  wilderness  experience,  and  in  the 


84  Deuteronomy 


day  of  battle  on  the  eve  of  their  coming  into 
possession.  His  appeal  was  made  to  all  classes. 
In  prophetic  and  burning  words  he  described 
what  would  be  the  result  of  their  breaking  the 
covenant.  Recognizing  their  imperfection,  and 
their  inability  to  appreciate  the  methods  of 
the  Divine  government,  he  enunciated  a  prin- 
ciple of  far-reaching  importance  and  perpetual 
application.  He  declared  that  the  secret  or 
hidden  or  mysterious  things  belong  to  God, 
while  the  things  revealed  belong  to  us  and  to 
our  children.  Continuing  his  discourse,  he  ut- 
tered words  thrilling  at  once  with  all  tender- 
ness and  urgency  of  appeal.  We  have  here  a 
great  prophetic  evangel,  the  value  of  which 
Israel  has  perhaps  not  learned  even  until  to- 
day. 

After  the  conclusion  of  the  formal  discouse, 
Moses  spoke  to  the  people  of  his  own  de- 
parture, and  encouraged  their  heart  in  view  of 
their  coming  into  the  land  by  reassuring  them 
of  the  presence  and  power  of  God. 

E.  Fifth  Discourse  :  The  Song  of  Moses 

Preceding  the  public  uttering  of  the  great 
Song,  Moses  and  Joshua  appeared  before  the 
Lord  in  order  that  the  latter  might  be  officially 
appointed  to  succeed  in  the  administration  of 
affairs.    Jehovah  then  solemnly  spoke  to  His 


The    Book    of   Reviews  85 

servant,  telling  him  that  his  time  had  come 
to  sleep  with  his  fathers,  but  that  the  people 
he  had  so  long  loved  and  cared  for  would  in- 
deed fulfil  his  predictions  concerning  fail- 
ure, and  would  be  visited  with  punishment. 
Gloomy  enough  was  the  outlook  for  the  great 
leader,  but  it  was  the  occasion  of  one  of  those 
manifestations  of  the  Divine  love  which  are 
so  full  of  beauty. 

It  was  in  face  of  this  foreknown  fact  of 
failure  that  he  was  commanded  to  write  the 
song.  The  purpose  of  it  was  distinctly  stated. 
A  song  embodied  in  the  nation's  life  remains 
from  generation  to  generation,  and  in  days  of 
disaster  will  constitute  a  haunting  memory, 
testifying  to  truth  concerning  God.  Songs 
often  remain  after  commandments  are  forgot- 
ten. The  law  was  written  and  committed  to 
the  priests;  the  song  was  written  and  taught 
to  the  people.  The  first  part  of  the  song  con- 
sisted of  a  call  to  attention,  and  a  statement 
concerning  its  nature.  Heaven  and  earth  were 
called  to  listen  while  the  servant  of  God  pro- 
claimed the  name  of  God.  Moses  sang  of  God 
as  to  His  greatness.  His  perfection.  His  jus- 
tice, His  faithfulness.  Then  in  a  description 
equally  brief,  he  referred  to  the  people.  It 
was  a  sad  contrast.  There  is  nothing  said  of 
them  which  is  good.    There  follows  a  descrip- 


86  Deuteronomy 


tion  of  the  tender  government  of  God  which  is 
full  of  exquisite  beauty.  It  is  a  revelation  of 
the  love  which  lies  behind  all  law.  The  figure 
of  the  eagle  and  its  method  with  its  young  is 
one  of  the  most  superb  in  the  whole  Bible,  as 
a  revelation  of  the  truth  that  through  methods 
which  may  appear  almost  unkind,  love  is  work- 
ing perpetually  toward  the  higher  development 
of  those  upon  whom  it  is  set.  In  strange  con- 
trast the  song  now  became  a  wail  as  the  un- 
faithfulness of  the  loved  people  was  described. 
Such  unfaithfulness  had  resulted  in  discipline 
necessarily  severe.  The  people  who  had  turned 
to  the  false  were  abandoned  to  the  false.  The 
face  which  had  been  as  the  sunlight  was  hid- 
den from  the  people  who  had  turned  their  back 
upon  it.  The  very  tenderness  of  love  had  be- 
come the  burning  of  a  fierce  anger,  and  the 
benefits  had  been  replaced  by  chastisement. 
The  song  then  broke  out  into  lament,  "  Oh, 
that  they  were  wise,"  and  celebrated  God's 
ultimate  deliverance  of  His  people.  Finally 
Moses  appealed  to  the  people  to  be  obedient. 

F.  Sixth  Discourse:  The  Blessing 

These  were  the  final  words  of  the  man  of 
God.  Often  had  he  set  before  his  people  bless- 
ing and  cursing.  His  last  words  were  of  bless- 
ing only.    In  stately  and  majestic  language  he 


Tlie    Book    of    Reviews  87 

affirmed  anew  the  majesty  of  Jehovah.  The 
great  words  of  blessing  were  pronounced  upon 
the  tribes,  Simeon  only  being  omitted.  Reu- 
ben and  Judah  were  referred  to  in  terms  which 
suggested  that  they  w^ere  to  be  saved,  yet  so  as 
by  fire.  Levi,  having  lost  all  earthly  things 
for  the  special  honour  of  bearing  the  word  of 
God,  would  receive  the  reward  of  such  sacri- 
fice. Benjamin  was  to  have  the  special  pro- 
tection needed  by  frailty.  The  choicest  things 
were  said  concerning  Joseph.  His  were  all 
precious  things,  and  the  good-will  of  Him  Who 
dwelt  in  the  bush.  His,  therefore,  was  the 
portion  of  government.  In  Issachar  and  Zebu- 
lun  there  was  to  be  triumph  over  disability. 
Gad,  overcoming  at  last,  w^as  to  be  a  judge; 
and  Dan  was  the  type  of  conquest.  Naphtali 
was  to  be  satisfied,  and  Asher  sustained.  Thus 
in  his  final  benediction  Moses  made  the  pecu- 
liar realization  of  blessing  by  the  tribes  unfold 
the  all-sufficiency  of  God. 

The  last  chapter  of  Deuteronomy  is  in  all 
probability  the  writing  of  another  hand.  It 
contains  the  story  of  the  death  of  Moses,  the 
equipment  of  Joshua  for  his  work,  and  a  last 
tender  reference  to  the  great  leader  and  law- 
giver. The  passing  of  Moses  was  full  of 
beauty.  In  the  fact  of  his  exclusion  from  the 
land  toward  which  his  face  had  so  long  been 


88  Deuteronomy 


set  was  his  punishment.  Yet  it  was  tempered 
with  mercy.  There  had  been  no  weakening 
of  his  force.  His  career  ended  in  full  strength. 
He  went  up  into  the  mount  to  die,  and  Jeho- 
vah gave  him  a  vision  of  the  land,  and  buried 
him  in  the  valley. 

The  last  words  are  almost  a  wail  of  sorrow : 
"  There  hath  not  arisen  a  prophet  .  .  . 
like  unto  Moses."  Thus  ends  the  last  book  of 
the  Pentateuch.  The  nation  created  for  re- 
generation among  the  nations  was  on  the  mar- 
gin of  possession.  The  great  story  will  now 
move  on  through  the  history  of  these  people 
to  the  coming  of  the  promised  One. 


JOSHUA 


JOSHUA— THE  BOOK  OF  POSSESSION 


A 

B 

C 

THE    CONQUEST   OF 

THE  SETTLEMENT  OF 

JOSHUA'S  FAREWELL 

THE  LAND 

THE  PEOPLE 

i.—xii. 

xiii.—xxi. 

xxti. — XXIV. 

I.  Mobilization        I..  U. 

I.  Settlement  accord- 

I. The  Two-and-a- 

i.  The  Call  to  Arms.           i. 

ing  to  Mosaic 

half  Tribes    xxll. 

a.  God's  Call  to  Joshua. 

1-9 

b.  Joshua's  Call  to  the 

People.                   10-18 
ii.  The  Mission  of  the 

Spies.                        ii. 

Promise  xiii.,  xiv. 

i.  The  two-anda-half 

Tribes.                          xiii. 

ii.  The  Possession  of  Caleb 

xiv. 

II.  Advance           iii.- v. 

II.  Farewell  Addresses 

i.  Crossing  of  the  Jordan. 

II.  Settlement  of  nine- 

xxiii.— xxiv.  15 

iii.  iv. 
a.  The  Crossing.           iii. 

and-a-half  tribes 

i.  First  Address.           xxiii. 

b.  The  Final  Movements. 

XV.— xix. 

ii.  Second  Address. 

»v. 

i.  Judah.                             XV. 

xxiv,,  1-15 

ii.  Ceremonies  of  Con- 

ii. Ephraim.                      xvi. 

secration.                        V. 

iii.  Manasseh.                   xvii. 
iv.  Benjamin.                   xviii. 
V.  The  Rest.                    xix. 

III.  War                 vL-xl. 

i.  Jericho.                            vi. 
i.  Ai.                         vii.,  viii. 

III.  Final  Things 

III.  Settlement  of  Cities 

xxiv.  16-33 

a.  Defeat.     "But."        vii. 

of  Refuge  and 

b.  Victory.                    viii. 
iii.  Beth-horon.                ix.  x. 

Levites 

XX.,  xxi. 

a.  The  Deceit  of  the 

Gibeonites.             ix. 

i.  Cities  of  Refuge.          xx. 

b.  The  Defeat  of  five 

n.  The  Levites.               xxi. 

Kings.               X.  1-27 

c.  The  following 

Conquests.          28-43 

iv.  The  Northern  Kings,  xi. 

, 

IV.  Extent  of  the 

Conquest          xil. 

JOSHUA 

IN  the  ancient  Hebrew  Scriptures  the  second 
division  was  known  as  "  The  Prophets." 
In  this  division  the  first  section  included 
Joshua,  Judges,  First  and  Second  Samuel,  and 
First  and  Second  Kings,  and  was  called  "  The 
earlier  Prophets."  Of  this  division  Joshua 
was  the  first  book.  It  derives  its  name  from 
the  great  leader,  the  story  of  whose  work  is 
chronicled  therein. 

Of  its  authorship  nothing  definitely  is 
known.  In  all  likelihood  it  was  largely  the 
work  of  Joshua  himself,  subsequently  added 
to,  and  completed,  by  some  one  or  more  of  the 
elders  of  Israel.  Its  content  is  a  continuation 
of  the  history  of  the  chosen  people.  The  na- 
tion led  out  by  Moses  is  led  in  by  his  successor. 
This  book  tells  the  story.  It  is  the  book  of 
possession,  and  may  be  broadly  divided  into 
three  parts:  The  Conquest  of  the  Land  (i.- 
xii.) ;  the  Settlement  of  the  People  (xiii.-xxi.) ; 
Joshua's  Farewell  (xxii.-xxiv.). 

A.  The  Conquest  of  the  Land 

In  this  first  division  there  are  four  sections 
dealing  with  mobilization,  advance,  war,  and 
the  extent  of  conquest. 

91 


92  Joshua 


The  first  fact  chronicled  is  that  of  the  call 
to  arms,  and  therein  God's  call  to  Joshua.  His 
right  of  entrance  to  the  land  was  that  God  had 
given  it  to  His  people.  His  power  of  entrance 
was  that  of  the  Divine  presence.  The  condi- 
tions of  his  success  were  that  he  should  be 
strong  and  courageous,  and  in  order  to  this 
he  was  charged  to  be  obedient  to  the  law.  Thus 
commissioned,  Joshua  issued  his  call  to  the 
people.  It  was  characterized  by  urgency  and 
despatch.  Within  three  days  the  hosts  were 
to  move  forward.  Forty  years  before  spies 
had  been  sent.  Of  these  Joshua  had  been  one 
of  the  few  who  had  brought  back  a  report  true 
to  God.  He  now  sent  them  again.  The  princi- 
ple of  sending  was,  however,  quite  different. 
It  was  now  the  action  of  that  faith  which  was 
characterized  by  caution.  The  spies,  return- 
ing, made  it  evident  that  the  promise  of  God 
that  no  man  should  be  able  to  stand  before 
Joshua  was  being  fulfilled,  for  according  to 
Rahab,  "  their  terror  was  fallen  upon  the  peo- 
ple." Rahab's  action  was  that  of  faith.  The 
men  of  Jericho  shared  her  conviction,  but  re- 
belled against  it.  She  recognized  the  activity 
of  God,  and  yielded. 

The  first  movement  of  the  people  forward 
was  of  such  a  nature  as  to  impress  them  with 
the  truth  of  their  positive  relation  to  God. 


Tlie   Book    of    Possession  93 

They  came  on  to  the  actual  soil  of  Canaan,  not 
by  deflecting  the  course  of  the  river,  nor  by 
bridging  it,  but  by  direct  Divine  intervention. 
While  obedience  demanded  haste,  haste  was 
not  allowM^d  to  cause  neglect  of  religious  ob- 
servance. Safely  over  Jordan,  the  hosts  paused 
while  stones  were  gathered  out  of  the  river- 
bed, and  a  ceremony  of  worship  was  observed. 
This  miraculous  crossing  of  the  river  produced 
a  remarkable  effect  upon  the  surrounding  peo- 
ple. "  Their  heart  melted,  neither  was  there 
any  spirit  in  them  any  more."  Before  the  ac- 
tual march  commenced,  the  Captain  of  the 
hosts  of  the  Lord  appeared  to  Joshua,  and  he 
was  thus  made  to  recognize  that  his  authority 
and  leadership  depended  upon  his  submission 
and  obedience. 

Preparation  thus  being  complete,  the  hosts 
of  Israel  became  the  scourge  of  God,  moving 
forward  in  judgment  upon  the  corrupt  peo- 
ples of  the  land.  It  is  impossible  to  imagine 
anything  more  calculated  to  impress  upon 
them  their  absolute  weakness  than  the 
method  of  their  victory.  Marching  priests 
and  blatant  horns  are  utterly  inadequate 
to  the  capture  of  a  city,  and  represent  fool- 
ishness, judged  by  all  ordinary  methods  of 
human  warfare.  The  victory  was  theirs,  but 
they  were  taught  that  it  came  not  by  might, 


94  Joshua 


and  not  by  power,  but  by  their  being  obedient 
to  the  government  of  God.  Suddenly  the  tri- 
umphant people  were  defeated.  The  reason 
was  the  sin  of  a  man,  which  was  also  the  sin 
of  a  nation.  Israel  had  now  become  a  nation, 
and  no  one  person  could  act  alone.  Thus  in- 
dividualism is  seen  to  become  a  far  greater 
responsibility  when  it  has  ceased  to  be  isola- 
tion. The  sin  of  the  one  became  the  sin  of 
the  community.  The  evil  thing  was  judged 
and  punished,  and  through  this  return  to  obe- 
dience on  the  part  of  the  nation  the  campaign 
moved  victoriously  forward.  The  story  of  the 
taking  of  Ai  is  one  of  acute  military  strategy. 
Thus  the  truth  is  brought  into  prominence 
that  in  prosecuting  the  work  of  Jehovah  there 
must  ever  be  a  recognition  of  the  value  of  the 
use  of  the  best  in  human  reason.  Strategy 
without  obedience  is  useless.  Obedience  in- 
cludes the  use  of  reason,  the  employment  of 
common  sense.  The  fame  and  dread  of  the 
^  people  were  spreading  far  and  wide.  The  kings 
of  Canaan  formed  a  league  against  the  oncom- 
ing hosts.  Before  they  had  time  to  take  action 
a  new  peril  threatened  Israel  in  the  strategy 
of  the  Gibeonites.  The  deceit  being  discovered, 
the  action  of  Joshua  was  immediate  and  de- 
cisive. He  felt  bound  by  the  letter  of  his  cove- 
nant, but  condemned  the  Gibeonites  to  per- 


The   Book    of    Possession  95 

petual  servitude,  making  them  hewers  of  wood 
and  drawers  of  water.  This  action  of  the 
Gibeonites  aroused  the  anger  of  the  confeder- 
ate kings.  In  their  peril  the  men  of  Gibeon 
appealed  to  Joshua.  By  forced  marches  he 
reached  the  scene  of  action,  and  the  rout  of  the 
kings  was  complete, 

Joshua  followed  up  his  advantage,  immedi- 
ately moving  forward  until  the  whole  of  South- 
ern Canaan  was  in  possession  of  Israel.  A  new 
confederacy  had  now  to  be  faced  and  fought. 
The  northern  kings  joined  in  an  attempt  to 
break  the  power  of  the  conquering  hosts. 
Turning  swiftly  north,  Joshua  routed  them, 
and  then  turned  back  to  Hazor,  where  victory 
still  attended  him.  All  this  did  not  happen 
immediately.  Indeed  we  are  told  tliat  it  had 
occupied  "a  long  time."  The  division  ends 
with  a  detailed  summary  of  the  extent  of  the 
conquest. 

B.  The  Settlement  of  the  People 

Dean  Stanley  says,  "  In  the  book  of  Joshua 
we  have  what  may  without  offence  be  termed 
'  The  Doomsday  Book  of  the  Conquest  of  Ca- 
naan.' Ten  chapters  of  that  book  are  devoted 
to  a  description  of  the  country,  in  which  not 
only  are  its  general  features  and  boundaries 
carefully  laid  down,  but  the  names  and  situa- 


96  .  Joshua 


tions  of  its  towns  and  villages  enumerated 
with  the  precision  of  geographical  terms  which 
encourages,  and  almost  compels,  a  minute  in- 
vestigation." Joshua  was  now  about  ninety 
years  old,  and  was  reminded  that  the  conquest 
was  by  no  means  complete.  There  remained 
"  much  land  to  be  possessed."  In  order  that 
the  chosen  people  might  be  able  to  complete 
the  conquest  and  perfectly  possess  the  land, 
it  was  now  to  be  divided  amongst  them. 
Toward  this  end  the  provision  made  for  the 
two  and  a  half  tribes  on  the  east  of  Jordan  was 
ratified. 

Then  followed  provision  for  Caleb,  who 
after  forty-five  years  of  waiting,  claimed  a 
definite  possession  in  the  land.  Joshua's  rec- 
ognition of  his  friend,  and  of  his  right  to  a 
choice  of  possession,  was  quick  and  generous. 
He  granted  him  the  mountain  which  he  asked, 
and  blessed  him. 

In  the  settlement  of  the  nine  and  a  half 
tribes  Judah  stood  first,  as  being  the  kingly 
and  imperial  tribe.  The  possession  allotted 
to  it  was  that  of  the  fighting  front.  It  remained 
loyal  longer  than  the  rest,  but  subsequently 
became  contaminated  with  the  abominations 
of  the  heathen.  God's  hosts  are  never  over- 
come in  fair  and  open  fighting  with  His  foes. 
It  is  the  friendship  of  the  world  which  is 


The  Book  of  Possession  97 

enmity  against  God.  The  inheritance  of 
Joseph  was  divided  between  Ephraim  and 
Manasseh.  To  Ephraim  was  allotted  a  fertile 
and  beautiful  district,  nevertheless  a  place  of 
difficulty  because  it  still  lay  in  the  power  of 
the  Canaan ites.  The  territory  of  Manasseh 
was  indicated,  and  then  Ephraim  and  Manas- 
seh, being  discontented,  complained  to  Joshua. 
His  answer  was  characteristic.  He  knew  the 
weakness  of  these  tribes,  and  that  they  would 
become  strong  only  by  conflict.  He  instructed 
them  to  go  up  to  the  mountain  and  cut  down 
the  trees,  and  drive  out  the  foes,  and  so  en- 
large their  borders  by  cultivating  their  posses- 
sion, rather  than  by  seeking  new  ground.  Af- 
ter rebuking  the  seven  tribes  for  being  slow  to 
possess  the  land,  Joshua  erected  the  tabernacle 
at  Shiloh.  He  then  appointed  three  men  from 
every  tribe  to  divide  the  land  into  seven  parts. 
One  of  these  portions  was  allotted  to  each  of 
the  remaining  tribes.  The  first  of  the  seven 
fell  to  Benjamin.  Then  follows  an  account 
of  the  portions  of  the  rest — Simeon,  Zebulun, 
Issachar,  Asher,  Naphtali,  Dan.  When  all 
had  been  provided  Joshua  asked  and  obtained 
his  portion. 

Having  thus  come  into  possession  of  the 
land,  the  cities  of  refuge  were  provided  ac- 
cording to  the  arrangements  already  made. 


98  Joshua 


Following  these  the  Levites  made  application 
for  their  cities  and  pasturage,  and  the  rulers 
and  the  people  made  ready  response.  Jacob's 
prophecy  concerning  Simeon  and  Levi,  "  I  will 
divide  them  in  Jacob,  and  scatter  them  in 
Israel,"  was  fulfilled  in  the  case  of  Levi,  in 
the  scattering  of  the  tribe  through  all  the 
others.  This  second  division  of  the  book  ends 
with  the  statement  that  the  Lord  gave,  and 
they  possessed  the  land.  His  promise  to  them 
was  fulfilled.  No  man  had  been  able  to  stand 
before  them.  Their  enemies  had  been  wholly 
delivered  into  their  hands.  They  never  com- 
pletely realized  the  purpose  of  God  in  these 
matters.  The  failure,  however,  was  wholly 
due  to  their  own  disobedience,  and  the  record 
at  this  point  fittingly  closes  with  the  declara- 
tion of  the  fidelity  of  God:  "There  failed  not 
aught  of  any  good  thing  which  the  Lord  had 
spoken  unto  the  house  of  Israel;  all  came  to 
pass."  Failure  to  possess  what  God  gives  is 
always  that  of  His  people,  and  never  the  result 
of  unwillingness  or  weakness  on  His  part. 

c.  Joshua's  Farewell 

At  the  close  of  the  war  the  two  and  a  half 
tribes  returned  to  their  possession  on  the  other 
side  of  the  Jordan.  As  they  departed  Joshua 
commended  them  for  their  fulfilment  of  their 


I 


The  Book    of    Possession  99 

promise,  and  charged  tliem  to  be  loyal  to  Je- 
hovah. As  the  time  for  Joshua's  .passing 
approached,  he  twice  gathered  the  people  to- 
gether, and  delivered  farewell  messages.  The 
burden  of  the  first  was  that  of  the  power  and 
faithfulness  of  God,  with  an  earnest  desire  for 
the  faithfulness  of  the  people  to  Him.  His 
warnings  were  perhaps  more  fiery  and  search- 
ing than  those  of  Moses.  The  address  was 
a  wonderful  revelation  of  the  strength  of  that 
man,  and  of  that  strength  as  consisting  in 
his  acute  consciousness  of  the  relationship  of 
the  people  to  Jehovah,  and  his  consequent  pas- 
sion for  their  loyalty  to  His  law.  The  second 
time  he  gathered  them  to  Shechem.  In  his 
final  address  he  traced  their  history  from  the 
call  of  Abraham  to  the  then  present  time,  em- 
phasizing the  fact  that  everything  of  greatness 
in  their  history  was  of  God.  He  finally  charged 
them,  "  now,  therefore,  fear  the  Lord,  and 
serve  Him.''  There  was  a  fine  touch  of  cour- 
ageous irony  in  the  appeal  which  followed. 
If  they  would  not  serve  God  he  called  them 
to  choose  whom  they  would  serve.  Would  they 
go  back  to  the  gods  of  their  fathers  beyond 
the  river,  or  would  they  turn  to  the  gods  of 
the  Amorites,  in  whose  land  they  dwelt?  He 
ended  by  declaring,  "  As  for  me  and  my  house, 
we  shall  serve  the  Lord." 


100  Joshua 


The  book  closes  with  death — the  death  of 
Joshua,  the  second  great  leader,  and  the  death 
of  Eleazar,  the  second  priest.  Yet  in  the  midst 
of  the  darkness  of  death  there  is  something 
almost  weird  and  yet  full  of  the  suggestion  of 
hope — the  bones  of  Joseph  were  buried  in  the 
land. 


JUDGES 


JUDGES— DELIVERANCES 


AFTER  JOSHUA 

J. — III'.  6 


THE   JUDGES 

Hi.  7 — XV  i. 


c 

APPENDIX 
xvii. — xxi. 


I.  Israel  and  tlie 

Canaanites 

i. 


i.  Judah. 
ii.  Joseph. 

iii.  The  Rest. 


1-21 

22-39 
30-36 


I!.  Israel's 
Failure 

i.  Jehovah's  Mes- 
senger        ii.  1-5 

ii.  The  People  under 
Joshua.  6-10 

iii.  Synopsis  of 

History.        11-23 

iv.  The  Enemies. 

iii.  1-6 


i.  First  Declension 


ill.  7-ii 


i.  Sin.     Idolatry. 

ii.  Punishment.     8  years'  oppression 
iii.  Deliverance.     OTHNIEL. 

II.  Second  Declension         iii.  12—31 

i.  Sin 

ii.  Punishment.     Eglon.     i8  years, 
iii.  Deliverance,    EHUD  (SHAMGAR) 


III.  Third  Declension 

i.  Sin. 
ii.  Punishment.     Jabin.     20  years. 


iv.— V. 


Deliverance.     DEBORAH.     BARAK. 


IV.  Fourth  Declension 

i.  Sin. 

ii.  Punishment, 
iii.  Deliverance.     GIDEON. 


vi.— viii.  32 


V.  Fifth  Declension        viii.  33-x.  5 

i.  Sin.     Baalim, 
ii.  Punishment.     Abimelech. 
iii.  Deliverance.    TOLA,     JAIR. 

VL  Sixth  Declension  x.  6— xii. 

i.  Sin.     Idolatry  multiplied, 
ii.  Punishment.     Philistines.    Ammon. 

18  years, 
iii.  Deliverance.   JEPHTHAH  (Successors) 

VII.  The  Seventh  Declension 
xiii 


i.  Sin. 

ii.  Punishment.     Philistines. 
iii.  Deliverance.    SAMSON. 


XVl. 

40  years. 


I.  Micah 

xvii.,  xviil 

i.  Micah's  Idolatrjr. 
xvii 

ii.  Its  Punishment 

by  Danites. 

zviii 

II.  The  Levlte 

xlx.— xxl 

i.  The  Outrage. 

sis 

ii.  War  between 
Israel  and  Ben- 
jamin. XJ 

iii.  Preservation  of 
Benjamin,     xzi 


JUDGES 

THE  book  of  Judges  historically  covers  the 
period  from  the  conquest  of  the  land  and 
the  death  of  Joshua  to  the  judgeship  of  Sam- 
uel and  the  introduction  of  the  monarchy.  It 
is  a  story,  on  the  human  side,  of  disobedience 
and  disaster,  and  on  the  Divine  of  direction 
and  deliverance.  It  is,  as  its  name  signifies, 
the  book  which  gives  us  the  account  of  the 
judges.  These  men  were  dictators  raised  up 
in  times  of  special  need  for  the  deliverance  of 
the  people.  The  chronological  history  of  the 
book  ends  with  chapter  xvi.,  which  connects 
naturally  with  the  first  book  of  Samuel.  That 
history  properly  begins  in  chapter  iii.  So 
that  we  may  consider  the  book  in  three  divi- 
sions: Conditions  after  Joshua  (i.-iii.  6) ;  the 
Period  of  the  Judges  (iii.  7-xvi.) ;  Appendix 
(xvii.-xxi.). 

A.  Conditions  after  'Joshua 

The  first  act  of  the  people  after  the  death  of 
Joshua  was  that  of  seeking  to  know  the  will  of 
God  as  to  who  should  commence  the  final 
work  of  conquest.  Judah,  the  kingly  tribe, 
was  appointed.    It  is  evident  that  this  work, 

103 


104  Judges 


begun  in  earnest,  eventually  weakened.  A 
false  toleration  towards  a  people  utterly  cor- 
rupt, who  ought  to  have  been  exterminated, 
resulted  in  the  ultimate  undoing  of  the  chosen 
nation. 

The  story  is  told  of  the  coming  of  the  messen- 
ger from  Gilgal,  who  called  them  back  to  loy- 
alty to  God.  A  brief  retrospect  follows  of  the 
condition  of  affairs  under  Joshua,  and  then  a 
synopsis  of  the  history  which  is  to  be  set  out 
in  greater  detail.  In  this  synopsis  the  rotation 
of  sin,  punishment,  and  deliverance  is  the  key- 
note to  the  historical  portion  of  the  book. 

B.  The  Period  of  the  Judges 

This  division  of  the  book  contains  the  story 
of  seven  consecutive  failures,  punishments, 
and  deliverances. 

The  first  declension  was  that  of  neglect  of 
God  and  turning  to  idols.  The  punishment 
consisted  of  eight  years  of  oppression.  When 
under  this  affliction  they  cried  to  God,  and  the 
first  of  the  judges  appeared  in  the  person  of 
Othniel.    Forty  years  of  rest  followed. 

The  second  declension  occurred  after  the 
death  of  Othniel,  when  the  people  sinned 
again.  Punishment  came  from  Eglon,  and 
lasted  for  eighteen  years.  Then  they  cried  to 
the  Lord  again,  and  Ehud,  with  whom  Sham- 


Deliverances  105 


gar  was  associated,  was  the  deliverer.  Eighty 
years  of  rest  followed. 

The  third  declension  then  followed,  and  they 
were  delivered  into  the  hands  of  Jabin. 
Twenty  years  of  oppression  resulted,  which  be- 
came most  terrible  under  Sisera.  Again  they 
cried,  and  were  heard.  The  story  of  deliver- 
ance is  full  of  romance  and  poetry,  being  as- 
sociated with  the  name  of  Deborah.  This 
daughter  of  the  people,  true  child  of  faith,  had 
suffered  under  the  intolerable  consciousness  of 
the  degradation  of  her  people.  She  gained  the 
ear  of  many  to  such  a  degree  that  she  was  ap- 
pointed to  judge  the  people,  and  at  last  she 
called  Barak  to  her  aid.  He,  inspired  by  her 
teaching,  and  she,  helped  by  his  consecration, 
went  forward,  and  Israel  was  delivered  from 
oppression.  The  great  song  of  Deborah  is  full 
of  fire  and  passion,  and  a  remarkable  index  to 
the  character  of  the  woman  herself.  It  may  be 
divided  into  two  parts.  The  first  was  a  great 
chant  of  confidence,  telling  the  story  of  the 
deepest  secret  of  the  victories  won.  The  sec- 
ond part  celebrated  the  victory.  Everything 
ended  with  a  cry :  "  So  let  all  Thine  enemies 
perish,  O  Lord."  Following  this  deliverance 
the  land  had  rest  for  forty  years. 

The  fourth  declension  issued  in  the  victory 
of  Midian,  under  whose  oppression  the  people 


106  Judges 


groaned  for  seven  years.  So  terrible  was  it 
tliat  the  people  hid  themselves  in  dens  and 
caves  and  strongholds.  At  last,  in  answer  to 
their  cry,  the  movement  of  deliverance  began, 
and  associated  with  this  was  the  name  and 
story  of  Gideon.  He  is  seen  first  at  his  work, 
with  the  bitterness  of  the  whole  situation  burn- 
ing like  a  fire  in  his  bones.  When  there  came 
to  him  the  supernatural  visitor  his  double  con- 
sciousness was  confessed.  "  Did  not  the  Lord 
bring  us  up?  "  "  The  Lord  hath  cast  us  off." 
He  was  conscious  of  the  true  relation  of  the 
people  to  Jehovah,  and  also  that  on  account 
of  their  sin  they  had  been  judged.  Called  to 
act  as  deliverer,  we  follow  him  in  his  work  of 
preparation.  This  proceeded  in  three  stages. 
It  began  at  home.  He  broke  down  the  altar  of 
Baal  in  connection  with  his  father's  house,  and 
restored  the  worship  of  God.  The  second 
movement  was  that  of  the  sending  out  of  the 
call.  The  final  one  was  his  fellowship  with 
God,  in  which  signs  were  granted  to  him.  The 
story  of  the  conflict  is  one  of  the  most  remark- 
able on  record.  In  response  to  his  call  to  all  the 
■hosts  of  the  people  only  thirty-two  thousand 
gathered.  Of  these  such  as  were  faint-hearted 
and  afraid  were  bidden  to  return,  and  twenty- 
two  thousand  went  back.  Those  remaining 
were  subjected  to  a  further  test,  with  the  re- 


Deliverances  107 


suit  that  only  three  hundred  were  left.  The 
victory  was  perfect;  but  it  was  so  won  as  to 
teach  the  people  that  the  one  and  only  condi- 
tion was  that  of  dependence  upon  God  and  im- 
plicit obedience  to  His  command.  Following 
the  deliverance  from  the  oppression  of  Midian, 
Gideon  had  to  deal  with  troubles  among  his 
own  people.  This  section  ends  with  an  ac- 
count of  the  last  things  concerning  Gideon. 
One  of  them  was  characterized  by  great  no- 
bility, and  the  other  revealed  a  weakness  which 
issued  in  trouble.  They  sought  to  make  him 
king.  He  absolutely  refused,  and  thus  indi- 
cated his  disinterestedness  and  his  loyalty  to 
God.  The  story  of  the  making  of  the  ephod  is 
somewhat  difficult  of  interpretation.  In  any 
case,  the  effect  produced  was  evil,  for  the  peo- 
ple were  thereby  seduced  from  their  loyalty, 
and  Gideon  himself  suffered  deterioration. 

The  fifth  declension  followed  immediately 
upon  the  death  of  Gideon.  They  fell  into  the 
sin  of  worshipping  the  Baalim.  Judgment 
this  time  came  from  within  rather  than  from 
without.  Abimelech,  a  natural  son  of  Gideon, 
a  man  unprincipled  and  brutal,  but  of  great 
personal  force,  secured  to  himself  the  allegi- 
ance of  the  men  of  Shechem,  and  practically 
usurped  the  position  of  king.  In  order  to  make 
his  position  secure,  he  encompassed  the  massa- 


108  Judges 

ere  of  all  the  sons  of  Gideon,  except  Jotham. 
His  parabolic  prophecy  from  the  height  of 
Mount  Gerizim  indicated  the  line  along  which 
judgment  would  fall  upon  the  sinning  people. 
The  tyranny  of  Abimelech's  rule  lasted  for 
three  years.  He  was  then  slain  by  the  hand  of 
a  woman,  and  a  period  of  forty-five  years' 
quietness  followed  under  the  dictatorship  of 
Tola  and  Jair. 

The  sixth  declension  was  characterized  by 
an  almost  utter  abandonment  of  the  people 
to  idolatry.  The  list  of  the  forms  which  this 
idolatry  took  is  appalling.  Judgment  came 
this  time  from  the  Philistines  and  the  men  of 
Ammon,  and  continued  for  eighteen  years.  At 
last,  sore  distressed,  they  cried  to  God,  and 
for  the  first  time  it  is  recorded  that  He  refused 
to  hear  them,  and  reminded  them  of  how  re- 
peatedly He  had  delivered  them.  The  true  at- 
titude of  Jehovah  toward  them,  however, 
flamed  out  in  a  remarkable  statement,  "  His 
soul  was  grieved  for  the  misery  of  Israel."  De- 
liverance came  at  length  through  Jephthah,  a 
study  of  whose  history  is  full  of  interest.  He 
was  the  son  of  a  harlot,  and  had  been  thrust 
out  from  his  inheritance  by  the  legitimate  sons 
of  his  father.  The  iron  had  entered  his  soul, 
and  he  had  gathered  to  himself  a  band  of  men, 
and  had  become  a  kind  of  outlaw  freebooter. 


Deliverances  109 


He  was  a  man  of  heroic  daring,  having  certain 
excellencies  of  character  which  marked  liim 
out  as  capable  in  a  crisis  of  need.  The  story 
of  his  victory  and  his  vow  follows.  After  his 
victory  the  men  of  Ephraim  complained  that 
they  had  not  been  called  to  help,  as  they  had 
already  done  in  the  case  of  Gideon.  This  quar- 
rel reveals  the  sad  disintegration  of  the  nation. 
The  consciousness  of  its  unity  seems  to  have 
been  largely  lost. 

The  seventh  declension  opens  with  the 
declaration,  "  Israel  again  did  that  which  was 
evil,"  and  they  were  again  delivered  to  disci- 
pline at  the  hands  of  the  Philistines,  under 
whose  oppression  they  lived  for  forty  years. 
Here  occurs  one  of  the  strangest  stories  of  the 
Old  Testament,  that  of  Samson.  It  is  the  story 
of  a  great  opportunity  and  disastrous  failure. 
Everything  would  seem  to  have  been  in  his 
favour.  His  birth  was  foretold  by  an  angel 
visitor.  This  foretelling  led  to  his  special 
training,  and  finally  he  was  moved  in  his  early 
years  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  Grown  to 
manhood's  estate,  he  went  to  Timnath,  and 
there  was  swept  away  by  his  passions  into  an 
unholy  alliance.  The  story  of  his  exploits  is 
most  remarkable.  The  circumstances  of  them 
are  not  to  his  credit.  The  overruling  hand  of 
God  is  seen  checking  the  power  of  the  Philis- 


110  Judges 

tines  through  him,  but  through  all,  his  deteri- 
oration is  manifest.  His  final  fall  occurred  at 
Gaza.  There  is  nothing,  perhaps,  in  the  sacred 
writings  at  once  more  pathetic  and  tragic  than 
Samson,  with  his  eyes  put  out,  grinding  in  the 
house  of  the  Philistines.  At  last,  out  of  his 
degradation  he  cried  to  God,  and  in  his  death 
struck  the  heaviest  blow  at  the  people  from 
whose  oppression  he  ought  to  have  delivered 
his  own  nation. 

Here  ends  the  history  of  our  book.  It  is 
taken  up  again  in  the  first  book  of  Samuel. 
The  remaining  chapters  and  the  book  of  Euth 
have  their  chronological  place  in  the  period 
already  dealt  with. 

c.  Appendix 

The  events  here  chronicled  may  have  taken 
place  closely  following  the  death  of  Joshua. 
They  give  us  a  picture  of  the  internal  condi- 
tion of  the  people,  and  it  is  most  probable  that 
they  were  added  with  that  as  the  intention  of 
the  historian.  Micah's  act  was  a  violation  of 
the  second  commandment.  His  action  was  not 
that  of  adopting  the  idolatries  of  the  heathen. 
His  mother's  language  showed  her  recognition 
of  Jehovah.  "  Blessed  be  my  son  of  the  Lord." 
Moreover,  Micah's  words  when  he  persuaded 
the  Levite  to  be  his  priest  showed  the  same 


Deliverances  111 


tiling.  ^'  Now  know  I  that  the  Lord  will  be 
my  God."  The  images  were  intended  to  aid 
him  in  his  worship  of  Jehovah.  The  whole 
story  is  a  revelation  of  a  degenerate  condition. 
Micah  had  robbed  his  mother.  On  making 
restitution  he  accompanied  the  act,  at  her  in- 
stigation, with  this  religious  movement.  The 
consent  of  the  Levite  to  become  a  priest  in  the 
house  of  Micah  for  the  sake  of  a  living  was  a 
further  revelation  of  the  same  degeneracy. 

The  story  of  the  backsliding  of  individuals 
is  follow^ed  by  an  illustration  of  its  widespread 
existence  among  the  people.  The  Danites,  in 
the  course  of  seeking  new  territory,  found 
Micah  and  the  condition  of  things  established 
in  his  house.  When  presently  they  moved  for- 
ward to  possess,  they  did  not  hesitate  to  seize 
his  images  and  capture  his  priest. 

The  story  of  the  Levite  follows,  and  is  a  clear 
revelation  of  the  startling  moral  conditions. 
Resulting  from  it,  the  nation  was  stirred  to 
its  centre,  and  a  great  moral  passion  flamed 
out.  Israel  went  to  war  with  Benjamin.  Un- 
instructed  zeal  wall,  even  in  the  cause  of  right- 
eousness, often  go  beyond  its  proper  limits. 
The  carnage  continued  until  not  above  six 
hundred  men  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  were 
left.  Then  followed  a  sudden  revulsion,  and 
pity  operated  to  the  saving  of  Benjamin. 


KUTH 


RUTH— FAITH  AMID  FAITHLESSNESS 


A 

B 

C 

THE  CHOICE  OF  FAITH 

THE  VENTURE  OF  FA'.TH 

THE  REWARD  OF  FAITH 

1.,  it. 

iii. 

iv. 

I.  Naomi's  Sorrows 

I.  Naomi                      1-5 

I.  The  Redemption 

i.  i'l3 

Doubtful 

1-12 

i.  Eliraelech  to  Moab.       1-2 

Yet  in  light  of  times 

ii.  The  Sorrows.               3-13 

IL  Ruth's  Choice 

1. 14-22 

i.  Orpah.                             14 

ii.  Ruth.                          1S-18 

11.  Ruth                         6-9 

The  Claims  of  Kinsman 
Rights 

11.  The  Marriage    13a 

iii.  The  Home-Coming  of 
Bitterness.                19-22 

111.  Boaz'  Field            ii. 

III.  Boaz                   10-18 

111.  The  Issue     13b-23 

i.  Ruth's  Purpose.             1-3 

i.  The  Appeal  to  the  next 

ii.  Boaz.                              4-16 

of  Kin 

iii.  The  means  of  Support. 

ii.  The  Tender  Love 

17-23 

RUTH 

THE  book  of  Eiith  stands  in  striking  con- 
trast to  the  book  of  Judges,  and  yet  is 
closely  connected  with  it.  In  that  book  the 
national  outlook  has  been  presented,  and  so 
dark  has  it  been  as  to  create  the  impression  of 
universal  pollution.  The  story  of  Ruth  illus- 
trates the  truth  that  God  has  never  left  Him- 
self absolutely  without  witness.  Throughout 
all  the  period  of  degeneracy  there  had  been 
loyal  and  beautiful  souls:  children  of  faith, 
living,  in  the  midst  of  the  conflict  and  strife, 
the  life  of  loyalty  to  God,  simple,  trustful,  and 
triumphant. 

This  book  is  the  story  of  a  few  such.  Some 
incidents  in  their  history  are  grouped  together 
with  fine  poetic  beauty.  It  is  indeed  an  idyll 
of  faithfulness  amid  infidelity.  It  has,  more- 
over, the  value  of  being  a  link  in  the  history, 
showing  how  God  led  on  to  the  next  stage.  All 
the  interest  of  the  book  centres  around  the  per- 
sons whose  names  are  on  every  page.  It  may 
be  divided  into  three  divisions:  the  Choice  of 
Faith  (i.  ii.)  ;  the  Venture  of  Faith  (iii.)  ;  the 
Reward  of  Faith  (iv.). 

115 


116  Ruth 

A.  The  Choice  of  Faith 

During  a  time  of  famine  Elimelech,  his  wife, 
and  two  sons,  went  into  the  country  of  Moab 
to  find  bread  and  escape  trouble.  It  is  ques- 
tionable whether  their  action  was  justified, 
and  the  sorrows  which  followed  would  seem 
to  be  of  the  nature  of  chastisement.  To  begin 
with,  their  sons  married  Moabitish  women. 
Then  Elimelech  died,  and  his  sons  also,  so 
that  sorrow  on  sorrow  came  to  the  heart  of 
Naomi.  It  is  perfectly  evident,  however,  that 
their  action  was  rather  that  of  foolish  blun- 
dering than  of  wilful  rebellion.  Through  all 
they  maintained  their  faith  in  the  one  God. 
Perhaps  it  would  be  nearer  the  actual  facts  of 
the  case  to  say  that  Naomi,  through  all  her  suf- 
fering, was  loyal.  When  the  heart  at  its  deep- 
est is  true  to  God,  grace  finds  an  opportunity 
to  work  through  chastisement  to  best  results, 
notwithstanding  the  follies  of  a  faltering  faith. 

When  at  last  Naomi  turned  her  face  again 
to  her  own  country,  with  great  generosity  she 
urged  her  daughters-in-law  to  leave  her,  and 
settle  among  their  own  people.  This  was  the 
occasion  of  that  choice  of  Ruth  which  in  its 
devotion,  and  in  the  manner  in  which  she  ex- 
pressed it,  has  become  enshrined  in  the  ad- 
miration of  the  world.    With  constant  recur- 


Faith    and    Faithlessness  117 

rence  Ruth's  hmguage  has  been  used  to  express 
the  fidelity  of  love.  It  was  the  choice  of  a 
strong  afTection.  The  young  woman  found 
her  heart  closely  knit  to  the  older  one,  and  she 
declined  to  be  severed  from  her  in  the  pathway 
that  lay  before  her,  choosing  to  share  what- 
ever the  future  might  have  in  store  for  the 
one  upon  whom  her  love  was  set.  This  hardly 
touches  the  deepest  note,  for  it  is  impossible 
to  read  her  language  without  seeing  that  the 
very  reason  of  her  love  for  Naomi  was  the  new 
faith  which  she  had  learned  from  her.  The 
deepest  note  in  her  expression  of  devotion  was 
"  thy  God  my  God,"  and  it  was  to  Jehovah  she 
appealed.  She  announced  her  devotion  to  Na- 
omi even  to  death.  The  language  of  Naomi  at 
the  home-coming  showed  that  she  looked  upon 
the  sorrows  that  had  come  to  her  as  God's  tes- 
timony against  her.  and  His  affliction  of  her. 
There  was  no  touch  of  rebellion  in  what  she 
said,  but  that  gracious  recognition  of  chastise- 
ment which  always  indicates  that  the  lessons 
have  been  learned. 

The  home-coming  was  to  poverty,  and  the 
practical  problem  of  life  faced  the  two  women. 
This  was  rendered  more  difificult  by  the  fact 
that  Ruth  was  a  Moabitess.  Yet  she  it  was 
who  faced  the  fight,  and  went  forth  as  a  gleaner 
to  gather  what  would  suffice  for  present  sus- 


118  Ruth 

tenance.  The  human  side  of  things  is  beauti- 
fully expressed  in  the  words,  "  Her  hap  was  to 
light  on  the  portion  of  the  field  belonging  unto 
Boaz."  The  lines  of  the  picture  are  few,  but 
they  are  strong,  and  a  man  of  fine  quality  is 
revealed  to  us.  His  greeting  to  his  labourers, 
"  The  Lord  be  with  you,"  and  their  ready  re- 
sponse, "  The  Lord  bless  thee,"  reveal  a  man 
of  strong  and  yet  natural  religious  life.  His 
presence  in  the  field,  overseeing  the  affairs  of 
harvest,  and  his  quick  recognition  of  the 
strange  girl  gleaning,  show  a  man  of  business 
capacity.  Then  all  the  rest  of  the  story  evi- 
dences the  graciousness  of  his  temper  and  the 
greatness  of  his  heart.  He  knew  that  in  all 
probability  a  Moabitish  woman  would  not  be 
very  earnestly  welcomed  among  his  people; 
and  he  therefore,  with  assiduous  care,  provided 
for  her.  His  influence  is  at  once  seen  in  the 
absence  of  objection  among  the  people,  and 
their  readiness  to  co-operate  with  him.  In 
short,  Boaz  stands  out  as  a  man  of  finest  fibre, 
living  simply  and  strongly  in  a  degenerate  age. 

B.  The  Venture  of  Faith 

Gleaning  as  a  means  of  livelihood  could  only 
last  through  harvest,  and  Naomi  was  anxious 
about  the  future,  especially  that  of  Ruth.  As 
the  outcome  of  her  anxiety  we  have  the  story 


Faith    and    Faitlilcssness  119 

of  her  yenture  to  interest  Boaz  more  fully,  and 
bring  about  a  marriage  between  him  and  Kuth. 
Of  course  the  expedient  to  which  she  resorted 
must  be  judged,  in  the  light  of  her  own  age, 
as  we  have  so  constantly  to  remember.  Yet, 
notwithstanding  this,  it  can  hardly  be  char- 
acterized as  other  than  doubtful,  and  on  the 
basis  of  faith  it  is  difficult  to  justify  it. 

Yet  again,  it  was  rather  an  error  of  judg- 
ment than  wilful  disobedience,  and  the  over- 
ruling love  of  God  moved  on  to  beneficent  is- 
sue. One  element,  and  perhaps  the  strongest, 
was  the  confidence  in  Boaz  which  this  venture 
revealed.  In  order  to  provide  for  the  future, 
Naomi's  appeal  should  have  been  made  to  one 
nearer  of  kin,  but  the  whole  attitude  of  Boaz 
toward  Ruth  had  inspired  such  confidence  in 
him  that  it  was  through  him  she  hoped  for  suc- 
cour. The  story  of  her  venture  was  on  the 
whole  to  his  honour  rather  than  to  theirs. 

c.  The  Reward  of  Faith 

The  nobility  and  faithfulness  of  Boaz  are 
manifest  in  this  story.  It  is  hardly  possible 
to  read  this  book  naturally  without  believing 
that  Boaz  had  already  found  himself  in  love 
with  Ruth,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  he  was 
perfectly  ready  to  take  the  responsibility  of 
the  next-of-kin,  but  there  was  one  who  had  a 


120 Ruth 

prior  right,  and  in  loyalty  to  the  law  of  his 
people  he  gave  him  the  opportunity.  It  is  an 
interesting  picture  presented  to  us  of  the  gath- 
ering of  the  elders  in  the  gate,  and  the  legal 
statement  of  the  case.  The  next-of-kin  had  a 
perfect  right  to  abandon  his  claim,  seeing  that 
another  was  ready  to  assume  it ;  and  moreover, 
it  can  hardly  be  denied  that  he  was  justified 
on  the  ground  of  not  desiring  to  run  the  risk 
of  impoverishing  his  own  family,  seeing  that 
Boaz  was  well  able  to  fulfil  all  the  obligations 
of  the  case. 

The  story  ends  with  poetic  simplicity  and 
beauty.  "  Boaz  took  Ruth,  and  she  became  his 
wife."  Nothing  need  be  added  to  this  to  indi- 
cate the  joy  and  reward  of  two  faithful  souls, 
Naomi  was  at  last  comforted.  The  women  of 
her  own  people  spoke  words  of  cheer  to  her, 
which  unquestionably  were  full  of  comfort  as 
they  sang  the  praise  of  the  one  who  had  chosen 
to  share  her  affliction,  and  had  become  the  me- 
dium of  her  succour. 

There  is  a  stately  simplicity  in  the  story 
of  the  issue.  "  They  called  his  name  Obed :  he 
is  the  father  of  Jesse,  the  father  of  David."  In 
this  final  word  of  the  book  there  is  manifest 
the  Divine  movement  in  the  history  of  the 
chosen  people.  Thus  the  kingly  line  was  or- 
dered in  the  midst  of  infidelity,  through  faith- 


Faith    and    Faithlessness  121 

ful  souls.  Presently  the  people  claiijoured  for 
a  king,  and  one  was  appointed  for  a  time, 
through  whom  they  learned  the  ditYerence  be- 
tween earthly  rule  and  the  direct  government 
of  God.  The  man  after  God's  own  heart  suc- 
ceeded him,  and  his  coming  was  from  those 
who  had  realized  the  Divine  ideal,  and  walked 
humbly  with  God.  Yet  a  larger  issue  followed 
as  the  centuries  passed.  From  this  union 
came  at  last,  as  to  the  flesh,  Jesus  the  Christ. 


I.  SAMUEL 


I.  SAMUEL— TRANSITION 


A 

B 

■ 

c 

SAMUEL 

SAUL 

DAVID 

i. — vii. 

viii. — XV. 

xvi. — xxxi. 

I.  Preparation 

i.-iv.  la 

I.  Appointment  viii.-x. 

I.  Preparation 

xvi.-xx. 

i.  Birth  and  Childhood. 

i.— ii.  II 

ii.  Life  at  ShUoh.        ii.  12-36 

i.  The  people's  demand,    viii. 
ii.  Samuel's  Search.              ix. 

i.  Anointed.                        xvi. 
ii.  Progress.        xvii.— xviii.  5 

iii.  Call.                    iii.— iv.  la. 

iii.  Anointing  and  Coronation. 

X. 

iii.  Difficulties.       xviii.  6 — xx. 

II.  Crisis      iv.  Ib.-vii.  1 

II.  Reign            xi.-xiv. 

I!.  In  Exile    xxi.-xxvii. 

i.  Eli.                           iv.  ib-22 
ii.  The  Ark.                v.— vii.  i 

i.  Kingdom  established. 

xi.,  xii. 

ii.  Wars.                     xiii.,  xiv. 

i.  Flight.                              xxi. 

ii.  Varied  experiences.  *^ 

xxii.— xxvii. 

III.  Judgeship    vii.  2-17 

i.  Twenty  years. 
ii.  Ebenezer. 

III.  Rejection            xv. 

i.  War  with  Amalek. 
ii.  Disobedience. 

III.  Returning 

xxviii.-xxxl. 

i.  Saul  and  the  Witch. 

xxviii. 

iii.  Samuel,  governing  on 

iii.  Rejection. 

ii.  David.                  xxix..  xxx. 

Circuit. 

iv.  "Samuel  mourned  for 
Saul." 

iii.  Death  of  Saul.             xxxi. 

I.  SAMUEL 

THE  first  book  of  Samuel  covers  a  period  of 
transition  in  the  history  of  the  nation. 
It  deals  with  the  process  from  the  judges  to 
the  kings.  The  condition  of  the  chosen  peo- 
ple under  the  judges  we  have  seen  to  have  been 
one  of  terrible  degeneracy.  It  was  during  this 
period  that  they  practically  rejected  God  from 
being  King.  The  clamour  for  an  earthly  king 
which  followed  was  the  natural  outcome  of 
this  practical  rejection. 

In  this  book  we  have  the  history  of  the  peo- 
ple from  the  last  of  the  judges,  Samuel, 
through  the  troublous  times  of  Saul,  in  which 
they  learned  what  government  by  man  really 
meant,  to  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  the 
king  chosen  by  God,  David. 

The  book  naturally  falls  into  three  sections 
around  the  names  of  these  three  men.  The 
periods  of  their  influence  overlap,  but  there 
is  sufficient  definiteness  in  the  changes  to  cre- 
ate the  possibility  of  the  following  analysis: 
Samuel  (i.-vii.) ;  Saul  (viii.-xv.) ;  David  (xvi.- 
xxxi.). 

A.  Samuel 

In  the  dark  and  troublous  times  Jehovah 

125 


126  I.    Samuel 


is  seen  working  toward  deliverance,  by  answer- 
ing the  prayer  of  faith  as  it  operated  in  the 
heart  of  a  simple  and  trusting  woman.  There 
was  much  of  human  passion  manifest  in  her 
desire,  but  the  fact  that  she  turned  to  Jehovah 
is  evidence  of  her  trust  in  Him ;  and  upon  the 
basis  of  that  evidence  He  prepared  a  way  for 
the  future  guidance  of  the  people.  Her  boy 
Samuel  was  dedicated  for  life  to  the  service  of 
God. 

The  story  of  the  life  at  Shiloh  reveals  two 
movements  going  forward  simultaneously  in 
Israel,  those  namely  of  degeneration  and  re- 
generation. The  corruption  of  the  priesthood 
was  appalling.  Within  the  precincts  of  the 
Tabernacle  Samuel  was  preserved  from  pollu- 
tion, and  grew  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord. 

At  last,  while  yet  a  boy,  Samuel  was  dis- 
tinctly called,  and  the  first  message  entrusted 
to  him  was  a  terrible  one.  A  further  period 
of  training  and  growth  followed  before  he  was 
ready  to  assume  the  work  of  leadership.  Dur- 
ing that  period  the  Lord  vindicated  him  by 
permitting  no  word  he  spoke  to  fall  to  the 
ground,  that  is,  to  fail  of  fulfilment. 

The  crisis  of  judgment  foretold  by  Samuel 
came  in  connection  with  the  Philistine  attack 
upon  the  peo-ple.  In  the  midst  of  the  disaster, 
hoping  to  save  themselves,  the  men  of  Israel 


Transition  127 


carried  the  ark  of  God  into  the  fray.  It  was 
an  entirely  superstitious  use  thereof,  and  was 
utterly  unavailing.  The  Philistines  captured 
the  ark  itself. 

The  history  of  their  possession  of  it  is  a 
most  interesting  one,  in  that  it  reveals  how, 
when  a  people  of  God  fail  to  bear  testimony 
for  Him  among  the  nations.  He  becomes  His 
own  Witness.  They  first  lodged  it  at  Ashdod, 
in  the  house  of  the  fish  god,  Dagon,  with  dis- 
astrous results  to  the  idol.  With  speed  and 
in  fear  they  carried  it  to  Gath,  and  a  plague 
fell  upon  the  people.  They  moved  it  hastily 
to  Ekron,  and  painful  and  troublesome  tu- 
mours broke  out  upon  the  people.  At  each 
move  judgment  became  more  severe,  and  Phi- 
listia  found  that,  if  she  had  been  able  to  con- 
quer and  break  the  power  of  Israel,  it  was  a 
different  thing  w^hen  she  had  to  deal  wuth  Is- 
rael's God.  At  last  they  decided  to  send  the 
ark  back,  accompanied  by  offerings  which  in- 
dicated their  recognition  of  the  fact  that  their 
plagues  had  been  the  visitation  of  God.  Joshua 
of  Beth-shemesh  received  the  ark  in  a  way 
worthy  of  an  Israelite. 

A  dark  period  of  twenty  years  is  now  passed 
over  without  detailed  record.  It  would  seem 
that  during  that  time  Israel  w^as  under  Philis- 
tine rule  without  any  definite  centre  of  wor- 


128  I.    Samuel 


ship.  During  this  period  Samuel  was  advanc- 
ing from  youth  to  manhood,  and  approaching 
the  hour  of  his  leadership.  This  was  ushered 
in  by  the  lamenting  of  the  people  after  God. 
Of  this  he  took  advantage,  calling  them  to  re- 
turn to  Him,  and  put  away  all  strange  gods. 
They  obeyed,  and  were  summoned  to  Mizpeh. 
Here,  by  a  direct  Divine  intervention,  the 
power  of  Philistia  was  broken,  and  her  cities 
restored  to  Israel.  Samuel  erected  an  altar, 
and  called  it  Ebenezer.  This  man  of  clear 
vision  recognized  both  the  government  of  God 
and  its  beneficent  method.  The  Lord  had 
helped  them,  through  ch-astisement,  to  sorrow 
for  sin,  and  through  such  sorrow  to  freedom 
from  oppression. 

In  a  brief  paragraph  the  story  of  his  actual 
judgeship  is  told.  At  Ramah  was  his  home, 
and  from  there  he  journeyed  in  circuit  once  a 
year  to  Bethel,  Gilgal,  and  Mizpeh,  thus  main- 
taining oversight,  and  administering  the  af- 
fairs of  the  people. 

B.  Saul 

The  book  now  merges  into  its  second  divi- 
sion, which  has  to  do  with  Saul.  The  people 
clamoured  for  a  king.  The  occasion  of  their 
request  was  the  mal-administration  of  the  sons 
of  Samuel,  and  their  sinful  practices.     The 


Transition  129 


real  principle  uuderlyincj  it  was  a  desire  on 
their  part  to  be,  as  they  said,  "  like  all  the  na- 
tions." They  had  been  chosen  to  be  unlike 
the  nations,  a  people  directly  governed  by  Je- 
hovah. Samuel  declared  to  them  what  the  is- 
sue of  their  wish  would  be  if  it  were  granted. 

Saul  was  in  every  way  a  remarkable  man. 
In  the  pursuit  of  his  filial  duty  he  was  led  into 
contact  with  Samuel.  While  they  w^ere  alone, 
he  commu-nicated  to  him  his  Divine  appoint- 
ment. How  long  elapsed  between  this  and  his 
formal  presentation  to  the  people  we  do  not 
know.  This  took  place  at  Mizpeh.  Here  Saul 
manifested  the  first  sign  of  weakness  of  char- 
acter which  eventuated  in  his  failure.  His  hid- 
ing behind  the  stuff  is  often  quoted  as  evidence 
of  his  modesty.  Modesty,  however,  becomes 
sin  when  it  prevents  any  man  from  stepping 
at  once  into  the  place  to  which  God  is  calling 
him. 

Returning  to  his  house  at  Gibeah  Saul  did 
not  take  up  the  responsibilities  of  the  kingship 
until  the  Ammonite  invasion  stirred  him,  and 
he  gained  a  complete  victory  over  them.  Sam- 
uel immediately  gathered  the  people  to  Gilgal, 
and  Saul  was  confirmed  in  the  kingship.  On 
that  occasion  Samuel  delivered  what  was 
practically  his  last  great  address  to  the  nation. 
A  study  of  that  address  will  show  how  clearly 


130  I.    Samuel 


Samuel  understood  that  these  people  could 
only  be  great  as  they  remained  loyal  to  the 
throne  of  God.  Two  chapters  give  an  account 
of  the  wars  Saul  waged.  The  Philistines 
gathered  themselves  together  with  the  express 
intention  of  destroying  the  power  of  the  chosen 
people.  It  was  in  the  midst  of  the  fear  w^hich 
possessed  the  Israelites  that  Saul  manifested 
his  self-independence  by  offering  sacrifice  in 
the  absence,  and  without  the  instruction,  of 
Samuel.  The  king's  deterioration  in  character 
is  manifest,  moreover,  in  the  fact  that  he  re- 
mained idle  in  Gibeah  with  his  army,  and  it 
was  at  this  time  that  Jonathan  made  his  great 
strategic  attack  upon  the  Philistines,  which 
resulted  in  their  rout. 

Saul  was  commissioned  by  Jehovah  through 
Samuel  to  smite  Amalek,  and  in  connection 
with  that  campaign  occurred  the  sin  which 
filled  his  cup  to  the  brim,  and  caused  him  to 
be  rejected. 

While  he  was  victorious,  he  was  disobedient 
in  that  he  spared  Agag  and  part  of  the  spoil. 
The  two  men  are  seen  in  striking  contrast  at 
this  point.  Saul,  the  man  of  great  opportu- 
nity, miserably  failing,  and  passing  along  the 
pathway  of  disobedience  to  ruin.  Samuel,  re- 
jected long  ago  of  the  people,  still  mighty  in 
his  allegiance  to  God,  burning  in  anger,  de- 


Transition  131 


nouncing  in  force,  and  finally,  in  a  white  heat 
of  loyalty,  himself  hewing  Agag  in  pieces.  It 
was  the  last  interview  between  the  king  and 
the  prophet  prior  to  the  latter^s  death.  Very 
touching  is  the  statement,  "  Samuel  mourned 
for  Saul."  When  he  failed,  Samuel  denounced 
him  without  sparing,  and  then  in  loneliness 
mourned  over  him. 

c.  David 

We  now^  come  to  the  third  section  of  the 
book,  in  which  David  is  the  principal  figure. 
Samuel  was  rebuked  for  his  prolonged  mourn- 
ing, and  was  commissioned  to  arise  and  anoint 
the  new  king.  Through  the  melancholy  of 
Saul,  David  found  his  way  to  the  court.  Then 
immediately  the  two  men  are  seen  in  the  pres- 
ence of  a  national  danger.  Saul,  notwith- 
standing his  position  and  his  army,  was  utterly 
incompetent.  David  without  human  resource, 
but  conscious  of  the  true  greatness  of  his  peo- 
ple, and  sure  of  the  strength  of  God,  gained 
his  victory  over  Goliath.  One  of  the  most 
charming  love-stories  of  the  Bible  is  that  of 
the  friendship  between  Jonathan  and  David. 
Coincident  with  the  commencement  thereof, 
the  hatred  of  Saul  against  David  deepened, 
and  manifested  itself  in  deeply  laid  schemes 
and  unworthy  methods,  in  which  he  attempted 


132  I.    Samuel 


to  rid  himself  of  his  rival.  These  were  try- 
ing days  for  the  young  man  anointed  to  the 
kingly  office,  and  it  was  natural  that  he  should 
flee  to  Samuel  for  protection.  Saul  fast  be- 
came an  irresponsible  madman,  while  David, 
through  all  the  painful  discipline,  was  being 
prepared  for  the  work  that  lay  before  him. 

At  last  the  land  itself  seemed  too  hot  to 
hold  him,  and  he  took  refuge  in  flight.  The 
period  of  his  exile  was  characterized  by  varied 
experiences.  Once  he  found  refuge  at  Achish 
among  the  Philistines,  and  there  had  to  feign 
madness.  Coming  at  last  to  Adullam,  he 
gathered  around  him  a  band  of  the  outcasts  of 
his  own  people.  During  this  period  Samuel 
died.  Twice  the  life  of  Saul  was  in  David's 
hands,  and  on  each  occasion  he  spared  it.  So 
terrible  was  the  pressure  of  these  dark  days 
that  David  himself  became  pessimistic.  "  He 
said  in  his  heart,  I  shall  now  perish  one  day 
by  the  hand  of  Saul,"  and  he  passed  into  Gath, 
thus  taking  refuge  among  the  Philistines. 

Perhaps  there  is  no  chapter  in  Old  Testa- 
ment history  more  tragic  than  that  of  Saul's 
end.  The  last  manifestation  of  his  degrada- 
tion was  that  of  his  visit  to  the  witch  of  Endor. 
The  men  of  Philistia  became  afraid  of  David, 
and  he  was  dismissed  from  their  midst.     He 


Transition  133 


returned  to  Ziklag,  and  found  that  it  bad  been 
sacked  by  the  Amalekites. 

The  closing  chapter  of  our  book  is  draped 
in  sackcloth  and  ashes.  It  tells  the  story  of 
the  end  of  the  career  of  one  of  the  most  disas- 
trous failures.  Saul  died  upon  the  field  of  bat- 
tle by  his  own  hand.  The  chief  spiritual  value 
of  this  whole  book  lies  in  the  solemn  lessons  it 
teaches  by  the  life  and  failure  and  death  of 
this  man.  For  evermore  his  story  proclaims 
the  fact  that  great  advantages  and  remark- 
able opportunities  are  no  guarantees  of  suc- 
cess, unless  the  heart  be  firm  and  steady  in  its 
allegiance  to  principle  and  its  loyalty  to  God. 


II.    SAMUEL 


II.  SAMUEL— THEOCRATIC  MONARCHY 




A 

B 

c 

DAVID'S  RISE 

DAVID'S  FALL 

APPENDIX 

i.-x. 

xi. — XX. 

xxi.—xxw. 

I. 

The  Reign  over 

J 

The  Sin             xi.,  xii. 

I.  The  Government 

Judah            1.— Iv. 

i. 

War.                              xi.  1 

of  God 

xxi.  &  xxiv. 

i 

His  lamentation  for  Saul 

ii 

Sin.                                   2-27 

and  Jonathan.                   i. 

iii. 

Repentance.                    xii. 

i.  Famine.                           xxi. 

ii 

His  anointing  as  King 
of  Judah,                   ii.  1-4 

ii.  The  Census.                  xxiv. 

iii 

War  between  Judah 

II. 

The  Punishment 

II.  The  Character  of 

and  Israel            ii.  5— iv. 

xill.-xviii. 

David 

xxii.-xxiJi.  7 

II. 

The  Reign  over  the 

i 

In  the  Family. 

i.  Psalm.                           xxii. 

whole  Nation 

xiii. — xiv.  24 

God's  Government. 

v.— X. 

Amnon  and  Tamar. 

ii.  Psalm.                     xxiii.  1-7 

i 

Crowning.                   v.  1-5 

Absalom. 

David's  Failure. 

ii 

First  Victories.               6-25 

ii 

In  the  Kingdom. 

xiv.  25— xviii. 

God's  Faithfulness. 

iii 

The  provision  for  the  Ark. 

vi. 

Absalom. 

III.  The  Heroic  Age 

iv. 

Concerning  the  Temple,  vii. 

xxili.  8-39 

V 

Conquests.               viii.  1-14 

III 

.  The  Restoration 

The  mighty  men. 

vi 

The  appointment  of 

xix.— XX. 

Officers.                      15-18 

Here,  as  at  the  close  of  the 

Vii. 

Kingly  kindness 
(Mephibosheth).             ix. 

i 

The  King's  retura.         xix. 

First     Book,    several    matters 

ii 

Insurrection  quelled,      xx. 

are    dealt    with,    not    chrono- 

viii. 

Victories  over  Amraon 
and  Syria.                        x. 

logically,     but    as     illustrating 
the  times  under  consideration. 

II.    SAMUEL 

THIS  book  deals  almost  exclusively  with 
tlie  history  of  David.  Not  with  the  whole 
of  it,  for  it  begins  in  I.  Samuel,  and  runs  on 
into  I.  Kings,  and  is  dealt  with  from  another 
standpoint  in  I.  Chronicles.  It  is,  however, 
the  principal  history  of  his  kingship,  and  pre- 
sents to  us  the  picture  of  the  theocratic  mon- 
archy. The  people  had  clamoured  for  a  king. 
God  first  gave  them  one  after  their  own  heart ; 
He  then  gave  them  one  after  His  own  heart. 
By  him  also  the  failure  of  mediation  in  govern- 
ment was  manifested.  Yet  he,  by  relation  to 
God  maintained  even  through  times  of  sinning, 
contributed  to  the  movement  of  history  toward 
the  one  true  King.  There  are  three  main  divi- 
sions: David's  Rise  (i.-x.)  ;  David's  Fall  (xi.- 
XX.) ;  Illustrative  Appendix  (xxi.-xxiv.). 

A.  David^s  Rise 

In  this  first  division  of  the  book  there  are 
two  movements,  the  one  dealing  with  David's 
reign  over  Judah,  and  the  other  with  his  reign 
over  the  whole  nation. 

The  book  opens  with  the  story  of  the  bring- 
ing to  David  by  an  Amalekite  of  the  news  of 

187 


138  II.    Samuel 


the  death  of  Saul.  The  story  was  evidently  a 
fabrication.  David  dealt  with  him  severely, 
and  then  sang  his  great  lamentation  over  the 
death  of  Saul  and  Jonathan.  Over  Saul  and 
Jonathan  it  is  stately  and  dignified,  but  it 
merges  into  extreme  tenderness  when  it  deals 
with  his  friend  Jonathan  only. 

Anointed  king  of  Judah,  David's  first  act 
was  that  of  inquiring  of  God  as  to  what  he 
should  do.  The  spirit  of  Saul,  which  was  that 
of  antagonism  to  David,  was  perpetuated  in 
Abner,  who  set  himself  to  consolidate  the  king- 
dom of  Israel  around  the  house  of  Saul.  Joab, 
a  strange  and  rugged  character,  at  once  fierce 
and  faithful,  was  nevertheless  unswerving  in 
his  loyalty  to  David.  In  the  first  battle  be- 
tween Israel  and  Judah  under  these  respective 
leaders,  Asahel  was  slain.  His  death  entered 
like  iron  into  the  soul  of  Joab,  who  never 
rested  until  his  vengeance  was  satisfied  on  Ab- 
ner. The  struggle  was  a  long  and  w^eary  one, 
but,  as  the  chronicler  declares,  "  David  waxed 
stronger  and  stronger,  but  the  house  of  Saul 
waxed  weaker  and  weaker." 

David  had  won  the  heart  of  all  Israel  by  his 
consistent  justice  and  his  manifestation  of 
magnanimity  toward  those  who  stood  in  his 
way.  The  people  recognized  the  kingly  quali- 
ties of  the  man,  and  he  was  at  last  crowned 


Theocratic    INIonarcliy  139 

king  of  the  whole  nation.  His  first  victory 
was  that  of  the  taking  of  Jebus.  An  element 
of  weakness  manifested  itself  at  this  point, 
when,  having  come  into  possession  of  the  king- 
dom, he  multiplied  his  concubines  and  wives. 

Victorious  in  war,  the  king  was  not  unmind- 
ful of  the  central  truth  of  that  national  life 
over  which  he  was  called  to  preside.  He 
brought  the  ark  into  the  capital.  In  close  con- 
nection with  the  account  of  his  doing  so,  the 
story  of  his  desire  to  build  the  Temple  is  told. 
It  was  a  perfectly  natural  and,  indeed,  a 
proper  desire.  So  much  was  this  the  case  that 
it  appealed  to  Nathan,  who  advised  him  to  do 
all  that  was  in  his  heart.  It  was  not,  however, 
in  the  will  of  God  that  he  should  carry  out  this 
work,  and  the  prophet  was  sent  to  deliver  the 
message  which  was  neither  in  agreement  with 
David's  desire  nor  with  his  own  opinion.  The 
story  reveals  the  triumph  both  of  Nathan  and 
David  in  their  ready  submission  to  the  declara- 
tion of  the  will  of  God.  The  prophet  unhesi- 
tatingly delivered  his  message,  even  though 
it  contradicted  his  own  expressed  opinion. 
David  immediately  acquiesced  in  the  will  of 
God,  and  worshipped. 

The  story  of  David's  victories  has  a  closer 
connection  with  his  desire  to  build  the  Temple 
than  appears  upon  the  surface.    By  these  vie- 


140  II.    Samuel 


tories  he  not  only  strengthened  his  position, 
but  he  gathered  treasure.  The  house  of  the 
Lord  was  still  in  his  mind,  and  although  he 
knew  that  he  would  not  be  permitted  to  build, 
he  was  yet  gathering  in  preparation  for  the 
work  of  his  son. 

There  is  an  exquisite  tenderness  about  the 
story  of  David  and  Mephibosheth.  The  king's 
love  for  Jonathan  was  still  fresh.  One  cam 
easily  imagine  how,  in  the  days  of  his  growing 
prosperity,  he  would  think  of  the  old  strenu- 
ous times,  and  his  friend's  loyalty  to  him  un- 
der circumstances  so  full  of  stress  and  peril. 
For  David,  the  house  of  Saul,  which  had  done 
him  so  much  harm,  was  redeemed  by  his  love 
for  Jonathan,  and  he  instituted  inquiry  as  to 
whether  there  were  any  left  of  that  house  to 
whom  he  might  show  kindness  for  the  sake  of 
his  friend.  This  inquiry  was  rewarded  by  the 
finding  of  Mephibosheth,  whose  very  lameness 
was  tragic  and  pathetic,  in  that  it  had  been 
caused  by  the  flight  of  his  nurse  on  the  awful 
day  of  Jezreel,  when  his  father  and  grand- 
father had  fallen  together.  To  him  the  king 
restored  the  lands  of  Saul,  and  set  him  as  an 
honoured  guest  at  his  own  table. 

The  record  proceeds  to  give  an  account  of 
victories  gained  over  Ammon  and  Syria.  Joab 
is  revealed   in   all   the   rugged  and   terrible 


Theocratic    INIonarcliy  141 

strength  of  his  nature.  It  is  interesting  to 
note  that  he  made  no  allowance  for  the  possi- 
bility of  ultimate  defeat  in  his  conflict  with 
Ammon.  When  arranging  for  the  battle,  he 
divided  his  forces,  but  did  so  in  order  that  if 
the  S3'rians  on  the  one  side  should  be  too 
strong  for  him,  the  people  under  Abishai,  his 
brother,  should  help  him;  or  if,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  children  of  Ammon  should  be  too 
strong  for  Abishai,  he  would  help  him.  It  does 
not  seem  to  have  occurred  to  him  that  the  com- 
bination may  have  been  too  much  for  them 
both.  This  is  the  true  quality  of  the  soldier. 
We  are  not  surprised  that  the  issue  was  vic- 
tory for  Joab.  This  story  constitutes  the  cul- 
mination of  the  account  of  David's  rise  to 
power,  and  prepares  for  the  terrible  story  of 
his  fall,  by  showing  us  the  general  circum- 
stances under  which  that  fall  occurred. 

B.  David^s  Fall 

In  all  the  Bible  there  is  no  chapter  more 
tragic  or  more  full  of  solemn  and  searching 
warning  than  that  which  tells  the  story  of 
David's  fall.  Carefully  pondering  it,  we  no- 
tice the  logical  steps  downward,  following  in 
rapid  succession.  First  David  tarried  at  Jeru- 
salem. It  was  the  time  of  war,  and  his  place 
w^as  with  the  army,  but  he  remained  behind 


142  II.    Samuel 


in  the  sphere  of  temptation.  In  briefest  quo- 
tations we  may  indicate  the  downward  move- 
ment. "  He  saw/'  "  he  sent  and  inquired,"  "  he 
took.''  The  king  is  fallen,  in  answer  to  that 
inner  weakness  which  has  already  been  mani- 
fested as  existing,  from  the  high  level  of  purity 
to  that  of  terrible  sin.  His  sin  against  Uriah, 
one  of  the  bravest  of  his  soldiers,  was  even 
more  dastardly  than  that  against  Bathsheba. 
From  the  merely  human  standpoint  the  unut- 
terable folly  of  the  whole  thing  is  evident,  as  it 
is  seen  how  he  put  himself  into  the  power  of 
Joab  by  sharing  with  him  his  guilty  secret.  In 
a  year  the  prophet  Nathan  visited  him  and 
charged  him  with  his  sin.  One  can  almost 
imagine  that  after  the  year  of  untold  misery 
this  visit  of  Nathan  came  as  a  relief  to  the 
guilty  man.  His  repentance  was  genuine  and 
immediate. 

The  sincerity  of  David's  repentance  was 
manifested  in  his  attitude  in  the  presence  of 
the  punishment  which  now  commenced  to  fall 
upon  his  head.  When  the  child  died,  David 
worshipped.  The  sin  of  Ammon  afflicted  him 
grievously,  but  because  it  was  after  the  pattern 
of  his  own,  his  arm  was  nerveless.  Perhaps 
the  severest  suffering  of  all  came  to  him 
through  the  rebellion  of  Absalom.  The  story 
is  indeed  full  of  tragedy.     The  heartlessness 


Theocratic    Monarcliy  1 43 

and  cruelty  of  Absalom  fell  like  an  avalanche 
of  pain  upon  the  heart  of  David,  and  it  is  a 
question  whether  he  suffered  more  in  the  day 
of  Absalom's  short-lived  victory  or  in  the  dark 
and  dreadful  hour  of  his  defeat  and  slayin^^. 
His  lament  over  Absalom  is  a  perfect  revela- 
tion of  grief. 

At  last,  the  rebellion  being  quelled,  the  king 
was  brought  back  to  the  kingdom,  and  there 
was  a  reconstruction,  new  officers  being  ap- 
pointed in  the  different  departments  of  state. 

c.  Appendix 

As  at  the  close  of  the  first  book,  so  here  sev- 
eral matters  are  dealt  with,  not  in  chronolog- 
ical order  or  relation,  but  as  illustrating  the 
times  which  have  been  under  consideration. 
This  appendix  contains  matter  which  reveals 
the  direct  government  of  God,  two  utterances 
of  David  which  are  a  revelation  of  his  real 
character,  and  an  account  of  some  of  the  deeds 
of  the  mighty  men,  which  shows  the  heroic 
spirit  of  the  period. 

The  account  of  the  famine  was  one  written 
to  give  a  purely  national  lesson.  Saul  had 
broken  faith  with  the  Gibeonites,  and  the  guilt 
of  his  action  had  neither  been  recognizee!  nor 
expiated.  The  sin  of  the  ruling  house  was  the 
sin  of  the  people,  and  it  is  noted  by  God,  and 


144  II.    Samuel 


must  be  accounted  for.  Hence  the  famine, 
which  was  only  stayed  when,  by  the  sacrifice 
of  the  sons  of  Saul,  the  nation  had  come  to 
consciousness  of  its  guilt,  and  repented 
thereof. 

The  character  of  David  is  revealed  in  two 
psalms.  In  the  first  we  find  the  deepest  things. 
Such  convictions  as  those  of  the  absolute  sov- 
ereignty of  Jehovah,  of  His  omnipotent  power 
to  deliver,  of  the  necessity  for  obedience  to 
His  law,  and  of  assurance  that  in  the  case  of 
such  obedience  He  ever  acts  for  His  people, 
constituted  the  underlying  strength  of  David's 
character.  In  all  likelihood  the  psalm  was 
written  before  his  sin,  and  if  so  it  will  readily 
be  understood  how  terrible  was  his  sorrow  as 
he  subsequently  recognized  his  failure. 

The  second  contains  the  last  words  of  the 
great  king.  They  breathe  the  consciousness  of 
his  own  failure,  and  yet  sing  the  song  of  the 
Divine  faithfulness. 

The  reign  of  David  was  pre-eminently  the 
heroic  age  in  Israel's  history.  This  is  demon- 
strated in  the  whole  list  of  the  mighty  men  and 
the  illustrations  of  their  exploits  which  are 
given.  It  is  interesting  to  remember  that  these 
were  men  who  had  gathered  to  him  in  Adul- 
1am,  men  who  elsewhere  are  described  as  in 
debt,  in  danger,  and  discontented.    They  were 


Theocratic    Monarchy  145 

men  possessed  of  natural  powers  wliicli  had 
heen  spoiled,  hut  in  whom  such  powers  had 
heen  redeemed  and  realized. 

The  book  closes  with  one  other  picture,  re- 
minding us  of  the  direct  government  of  the 
people  by  God  in  that  He  visited  king  and  na- 
tion w  ith  punivshment  for  the  numbering  of  the 
people.  It  has  been  objected  that  there  was 
nothing  sinful  in  this  taking  of  a  census,  see- 
ing that  it  had  been  done  before  in  the  history 
of  the  people  by  the  direct  command  of  God. 
But  therein  lay  the  contrast  between  previous 
numberings  and  this.  Tliey  were  by  the  com- 
mandment of  God.  This  was  done  from  some 
different  motive.  That  the  act  was  sinful  is 
evident  from  David's  consciousness  that  it  was 
so,  and  in  the  presence  of  his  confession  it  is 
not  for  us  to  criticise.  As  we  have  said,  the 
motive  undoubtedly  explains  the  sin.  Per- 
haps, while  that  motive  is  not  explicitly  stated, 
we  may  gain  some  idea  of  it  from  the  protest 
of  Joab,  "  Now  the  Lord  thy  God  add  unto  the 
people,  how  many  soever  they  be,  an  hundred- 
fold, and  may  the  eyes  of  my  lord  the  king 
see  it:  but  why  doth  my  lord  the  king  delight 
in  this  thing?  "  A  spirit  of  vain-glory  in  num- 
bers had  taken  possession  of  the  people  and 
the  king,  and  there  was  a  tendency  to  trust 
in  numbers  to  the  forcretfulness  of  God.    The 


146  II.    Samuel 


choice  of  David  as  to  punishment  again  re- 
vealed his  recognition  both  of  the  righteous- 
ness and  tenderness  of  Jehovah.  He  willed 
that  the  stroke  which  was  to  fall  should  come 
directly  from  the  Divine  hand  rather  than 
through  any  intermediary. 

The  book  ends  with  the  story  of  the  erection 
of  the  altar  in  the  threshing-floor  of  Araunah 
the  Jebusite,  and  in  that  we  see  finally  the 
man  after  God's  own  heart  turning  the  occa- 
sion of  his  sin  and  its  punishment  into  one  of 
worship. 


I.  KINGS 


I.  KINGS— DISRUPTION 


A 

8 

C 

D 

THE  PASSING 

SOLOMON 

DIVISION 

ELIJAH 

OF  DAVID 

i.— ii.  II 

ii.  12— xi. 

xii.—xvi. 

xvii. — xxii. 

I.  The  Rebel- 

1. "InallhisGlorij- 

I.    Rehoboam  & 

I.  The  Curse  Pro- 

lion of 

ii.  12-x. 

Jeroboam 

nounced  xvii. 

Adonijah 

i.  Solomon  and  the 

xii.-xiv. 

i.  1-37 

Traitors,     ii.  12-46 

i.  The  Revolt  of  the 

II.  The  Judgment 

ii.  The  first  Divine 

ten  Tribes,     xii. 

of  Carmel 

II.  The  Crown- 

appearing, iii.  1-15 

ii.  Warning  to 

xvlii. 

iii.  The    Greatness     of 

Jeroboam,  xiii.— 

ing  of 
Solomon 
i.  38-53. 

Solomon,  iii.  16— iv. 

iv.  His  Life  Work:  The 
Temple,     v.— viii. 

V.  The  second  Divine 

xiv.  20 

iii.    Rehoboam's 

reign.            21-31 

III.  Elijah    in   the 

Wilderness 
xix 

III.  The   Last 
Charge 

appearing,     ix.  1-9 

vi.  Material  Magnifi- 
cence,      ix.  10— X. 

II.  Kings  of 
Judah 

IV.  The  Downfall 
of  Ahab 

and 

XV.  1-24 

XX.— xxi. 

Death  of 

II.  The  Passing  of 

i.  Abijam 

i.  Benhadad.           xx. 

David 

the  Clorg  xi. 

ii.  Asa 

ii.  Ahab  and  Naboth. 

ii.  1-11 

1.  Degeneracy  and 
Doom.                1-13 

III.  Kings  of 

xxi.  I- 16 
iii.  Elijah  pronouncing 

ii.  Execution  of 

Israel 

judgment. 

Judgment.      14-43 

XV.  25— xvi. 

17-29 

iv.  Micaiah's  predic- 
tion and  Ahab's 

i.  Nadab 

ii,  Baasha 

death.        xxii.  1-40 

iii.  Ela 

V.  The  Kings  of  Israel 
and  Judah. 

iv.  Zimri 

41-53 

V.  Omri 

vi.  Ahab 

I.  KINGS 

THE  two  books  of  Kings  appear  in  the  He- 
brew Bible  as  one.  They  practically 
cover  the  whole  period  of  kingly  rule  over  the 
ancient  people.  In  the  reign  of  Solomon  the 
kingdom  reached  the  height  of  its  material 
magnificence.  With  his  passing  the  kingship 
really  ceased  to  be  the  medium  of  Divine  gov- 
ernment. The  prophetic  period  was  intro- 
duced with  the  appearance  of  Elijah.  The  first 
book  may  be  divided  thus:  the  Passing  of 
David  (i.-ii.  11);  Solomon  (ii.  12-xi.) ;  Divi- 
sion (xii-xvi.)  ;  Elijah  (xvii-xxii.). 

A.  The  Passing  of  David 

The  days  of  David's  feebleness  created  the 
opportunity  for  rebellion  against  him  under 
Adonijah,  in  which  Joab  and  Abiathar  took 
part.  In  consequence  of  this  rebellion  Solo- 
man  w^as  crowned  before  the  passing  of  David. 
The  action  of  Solomon  toward  Adonijah  was 
characteristic  of  the  best  gide  of  his  nature. 
It  was  one  in  which  clemency  and  dignified 
authority  were  blended.  The  last  charge  of 
David  was  one  in  which  he  indicated  the  path 
of  safety  for  Solomon.     It  was  that  of  abso- 

149 


150  I.    Kings 

lute  loyalty  to  God.  That  part  of  it  in  which 
David  referred  to  Joab  and  Shimei  has  been 
very  severely  criticised.  Much  of  this  criticism 
would  be  impossible  if  some  very  simple  things 
were  borne  in  mind.  First,  David  knew^  these 
men  by  experience,  and  appreciated  their  dan- 
ger to  the  state.  Second,  he  had  kept  his  cove- 
nant with  them,  and  spared  their  lives.  Third, 
in  each  case  he  left  the  matter  of  how  to  deal 
with  them  in  the  hands  of  Solomon,  assured 
of  his  wisdom.  Finally,  his  words  concerning 
the  death  of  each  are  prophetic  rather  than 
vindictive. 

B.  Solomon 

This  division  falls  into  two  parts,  first  that 
which  reveals  Solomon  in  all  his  glory,  and 
secondly  that  which  tells  of  the  passing  of 
that  glory. 

Among  the  first  acts  of  the  new  king  were 
those  in  which  he  dealt  with  the  leading  men 
of  the  kingdom  in  whose  hearts  were  the  im- 
pulses of  treachery.  There  was  no  vindictive 
vengeance,  but  there  was  no  vacillating  weak- 
ness. 

Early  in  his  reign  Jehovah  appeared  to  Solo- 
mon in  a  dream.  With  that  appearance  came 
Solomon's  great  opportunity,  both  to  manifest 
himself,  and  to  obtain  the  best.     His  choice 


Disruption  1.51 


was  characterized  by  great  wisdom,  as  it  re- 
vealed his  consciousness  of  personal  inability 
for  all  the  work  devolving  upon  him.  God 
gave  him  what  he  asked,  and  added  thereto 
the  things  he  might  have  chosen,  yet  showed 
his  wisdom  in  passing  by.  The  account  of  his 
choice  is  followed  by  a  picture  in  which  he  is 
seen  exercising  the  gift  for  which  he  had  asked, 
and  w^hich  God  had  granted  to  him. 

He  gave  himself  to  a  careful  organization 
of  his  kingdom,  gathering  around  him  a  com- 
pany of  officers  of  state,  each  having  his  own 
department,  for  which  he  was  held  responsible. 
These  were  the  days  of  the  nation's  greatest 
material  prosperity.  The  people  lived  in  mer- 
riment, and  dwelt  safely  beneath  their  own 
vines  and  fig-trees. 

Directly  he  had  set  his  kingdom  in  order, 
Solomon  turned  his  attention  to  the  buihling 
of  the  Temple.  It  is  evident  that  he  appre- 
ciated the  real  purpose  of  his  coming  to  the 
throne.  The  greatness  of  the  work  may  be 
gathered  from  the  account  of  the  enormous 
amount  of  labour  employed.  Like  the  Taber- 
nacle of  old,  its  chief  splendour  was  within, 
where  everything  was  encased  in  gold,  neither 
wood  nor  stone  being  visible. 

The  Temple  being  finished,  it  was  solemnly 
dedicated.     With  great  care,  and  impressive 


152  I.    Kings 

ceremony,  they  carried  the  ark  into  the  holy  of 
holies,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the 
house.  The  king  offered  the  dedicatory 
prayer  standing  by  the  altar  of  burnt  offering. 
Following  the  prayer,  offerings  were  pre- 
sented. At  the  close  of  the  ceremonies  the  joy- 
ful people  returned  to  their  tents.  It  w^as 
the  most  perfect  moment  of  national  realiza- 
tion in  the  land.  The  Temple  was  erected,  and 
the  presence  of  God  visibly  manifested. 

Jehovah  now  appeared  to  Solomon  for  the 
second  time,  declaring  to  him  that  his  prayer 
was  heard  and  answered,  and  urging  the  con- 
ditions which  the  people  must  fulfil.  The  ma- 
terial magnificence  of  the  kingdom  was  marred 
by  the  admixture  of  failure.  Cities  were 
presented  to  Hiram,  but  he  was  dissatis- 
fied with  them.  Cities  were  built  within  the 
kingdom,  but  they  became  hotbeds  of  evil.  A 
commerce  with  other  lands  was  established, 
but  it  became  the  medium  of  bringing  into  the 
land  things  which  in  their  effect  were  evil. 
The  coming  of  the  queen  of  Sheba  reveals  how 
far  the  fame  of  Solomon  had  spread  abroad. 
An  account  of  the  king's  wealth  cannot  be  read 
without  the  consciousness  that  the  weaker,  if 
not  the  baser,  side  of  his  nature  is  manifested 
in  the  abounding  luxury  with  which  he  sur- 
rounded himself. 


Disruption  1.5;j 


Suddenly  the  glory  passed  away,  and  in 
the  rapid  movements  we  behold  his  degeneracy 
and  doom.  His  alliance  with  commercial  en- 
terprises led  him  into  contact  with  surround- 
ing peoples,  and,  giving  himself  over  to  Ori- 
ental custom,  he  allowed  his  heart  to  go  after 
strange  women.  The  wrong  thus  begun  in- 
vaded higher  realms.  He  built  temples  for 
the  strange  women  w^ho  crowded  his  harem, 
and  gradually  but  surely  there  followed  the 
demoralization  both  of  the  king  and  his  people, 
until  at  last  the  terrible  words  are  written, 
"  The  Lord  was  angry  with  Solomon."  The 
judgment  of  God  began  to  operate  immedi- 
ately. Adversaries  were  raised  up  against 
him.  At  last  there  ended  in  gloom  and  failure 
a  life  full  of  promise,  and  that  because  the 
heart  of  the  man  turned  from  its  loyalty  to 
God  in  response  to  the  seductions  of  his  own 
sensual  nature. 

c.  Division 

Following  the  death  of  Solomon  we  have  an 
appalling  st-ory  of  the  break-up  and  degrada- 
tion of  the  people  covering  a  period  of  about 
sixty  years.  The  kingdom  was  rent  in  twain. 
Jeroboam's  sin  cursed  the  whole  after-history 
of  the  pec  pie.  The  judgment  of  God  pro- 
ceeded immediately.    Its  first  stroke  was  that 


154  I.    Kings 


of  the  sickness  of  Jeroboam's  son,  and  in  con- 
nection therewith  the  prophet  Ahijah  uttered 
the  doom  of  the  man,  declaring  that  because 
of  his  sin  he  and  all  his  were  to  be  swept  away. 
In  the  meantime  Judah  was  also  sinning.  Thus 
so  quickly  after  David,  the  nation  was  steeped 
in  idolatry,  and  utterly  failed  to  bear  to  the 
surrounding  peoples  the  testimony  to  the  pur- 
ity of  the  Divine  government  which  was  the 
purpose  for  which  they  had  been  created.  In 
Judah  under  Abijam  the  process  of  deteriora- 
tion went  forward.  The  corruption  was  not 
universal,  for  God  maintained  a  lamp  in  the 
midst  of  His  people.  With  the  accession  and 
long  reign  of  Asa  there  was  a  halt  in  the 
downward  progress.  In  the  history  of  Israel 
the  government  of  God  can  be  traced,  proceed- 
ing in  a  series  of  judgments  against  the  con- 
tinuity of  sin  which  characterized  the  reigns 
of  successive  kings.  Nadab  the  son  of  Jero- 
boam reigned  for  two  years,  and  his  influ- 
ence was  wholly  evil.  At  last  he  was  slain  by 
Baasha,  who  succeeded  him.  He  carried  out 
the  judgment  of  God  on  the  house  of  Jeroboam 
by  the  destruction  of  all  his  sons,  but  for 
twenty-four  years  continued  in  the  same  line  of 
evil.  He  was  succeeded  by  Ela,  a  man  utterly 
corrupt,  who  in  turn  was  slain  by  Zimri.  He 
carried  out  the  judgment  of  God  upon  the 


Disruption  15.5 


house  of  Baaslia,  and  aftor  four  yoars  of  civil 
war  died  by  his  own  hand.  All  this  is  indeed 
appalling.  The  throne  of  the  chosen  people 
was  possessed  by  men  of  depraved  character 
who  came  into  power  by  CQnspiracy  and  mur- 
der. After  the  death  of  Ziniri  there  was  divi- 
sion even  in  the  house  of  Israel,  half  of  the 
people  following  Tibni,  and  half  gathering  to 
Omri.  Victory,  however,  was  with  Omri,  who 
for  six  years  continued  in  courses  of  evil.  He 
was  succeeded  by  Ahab,  who  was  a  veritable 
incarnation  of  the  forces  of  sin.  He  united 
Jezebel  with  himself  in  the  actual  throne  of 
power.  She  was  a  woman  of  great  strengtli 
of  character,  an  appalling  instance  of  the  fact 
that  a  strong  woman  fallen  is  the  most  terrible 
thing  in  human  failure.  During  this  period 
there  was  hardly  a  ray  of  light,  for  although, 
as  subsequent  declarations  reveal,  a  remnant 
still  existed  loyal  to  God,  their  testimony  was 
overwhelmed  by  abounding  wickedness. 

D.  Elijah 

With  the  appearance  of  Elijah  the  voice  of 
the  prophet  was  raised  to  that  of  national  im- 
portance. From  this  point  onward  in  the  econ- 
omy of  the  Divine  government  the  prophet  was 
superior  to  the  king.  Elijah  appeared  with 
startling  and  dramatic  suddenness.    Without 


156  I.    Kings 

apology,  he  declared  himself  the  messenger  of 
Jehovah,  and  at  his  word  judgment  fell  upon 
the  people.  The  story  of  the  trial  by  fire  on 
Carmel  is  full  of  majesty,  and  needs  no  com- 
ment. The  lonely  figure  of  Elijah  is  the  cen- 
tre of  observation  as  with  calm  dignity  he 
stood  against  the  combined  evils  of  a  corrupt 
court  and  priesthood.  His  vindication  by  the 
answering  fire  of  God  was  perfect.  The 
slaughter  of  the  prophets  of  Baal  aroused  the 
ire  of  Jezebel  to  such  a  degree  that  she  sent 
a  message  full  of  fury  to  Elijah.  The  man 
who  stood  erect  in  the  presence  of  such  tre- 
mendous odds  now  fled  for  his  life.  Full  of 
tenderness  was  the  method  of  God  with  His 
overwrought  and  fearful  servant.  Attending 
first  to  his  physical  needs  He  then  granted  him 
a  revelation  of  Himself.  It  was  a  new  revela- 
tion by  which  Elijah  found  that  God  was  in 
"  the  sound  of  gentle  stillness."  It  is  evident 
that  from  this  time  of  the  failure  of  his  faith 
he  was  largely  set  aside.  Once  or  twice  only 
does  he  appear  again  in  the  narrative. 

The  rest  of  the  book  is  occupied  with  the 
story  of  the  downfall  of  Ahab.  The  first  phase 
of  it  was  public.  Benhadad  came  in  the  pride 
of  his  arms  against  Samaria.  By  the  voices 
of  prophets  Jehovah  spoke  to  Ahab,  who,  act- 
ing under  their  direction,  gained  a  complete 


Disruption  157 


victory  over  his  enemies.  In  the  very  moment 
of  triumph  he  failed  by  making  a  covenant 
with  a  man  whom  God  had  devoted  to  destruc- 
tion. The  next  step  was  that  of  his  sin  in 
connection  with  the  vineyard  of  Naboth.  Eli- 
jah suddenly  presented  himself  before  tlie  king, 
and  in  words  that  must  have  scorched  his  in- 
ner soul  he  pronounced  upon  him  the  terrible 
doom  of  his  wrongdoing.  The  third  and  final 
movement  in  the  downfall  was  that  of  his  dis- 
obedience to  the  message  of  Micaiah.  The  ar- 
row, shot  at  a  venture  so  far  as  man  was  con- 
cerned, found  its  true  mark.  Thus  ended 
the  personal  career  of  the  worst  man  that  ever 
occupied  the  throne  of  the  chosen  people. 


11.  KINGS 


11.  KINGS— CORRUPTION 


A 

B 

c 

D 

ELISHA 

CORRUPTION 

HEZEKIAH  AND 
JOSIAH 

CAPTIVITY 

i.—ix. 

X. — xvii. 

xvin.—xxiii.  30 

xxiii.  31— XXV. 

I.  Elijah               i. 

I.  Israel                         x. 

I.  Hezekiah 

I.  Tribu- 
tary 

i.  The  sin  and  sick- 

i. The  zeal  of  Jehu.           1-28 

xviii.-xx. 

ness  of  Ahaziah 

ii.  The  failure  of  Jehu.     29-36 

i.  His  Accession  and 

xxiii.  31- 

ii.  Elijah  on  behalf 

Character. 

xxiv.7 

of  God 

II.  Judah              xi.,  xii. 

xviii.  I -1 2 

Egypt. 

iii.  The  judgment 

i.  Athaliah  and  Jehoash.    xi. 
ii.  Jehoash.                            xii. 

ii.  The  coming  of 
Sennacherib. 

Babylon. 

11.  Elijah  and 

xviii.  13-37 

Ellsha 

III.  Israel                   xiii. 

iii.  Hezekiah  Isaiah 

ii.  1-18 

i.  Jehoahaz.    Jehoash 
ii.  Death  of  Elisha 

Victory.           xix. 

i.  The  translation 
of  Elijah 

iv.  The  last  things,  xx. 

ii.  The  succession 

IV.  Judah         xiv.  1-22. 

of  Elisha 

i.  Amaziah 

II.  The  Reaction 

11.  Begin- 

III. Elisha 

ii.  Azariah 

xxi. 

ning  oi 

ii.  19-ix. 

i.  Manasseh. 

Cap- 

i. Healing  of  the 

V.  Israel 

1-18 

tivity 

waters  of  Jericho, 
ii.  19-22 

xiv.  23.— XV.  12 

ii.  Amon.             19-26 

xxiv.  8-20 

ii.  Punishment  of 
mocking  Children. 

i.  Jeroboam  II.         xiv.  23-28 
ii.  Zechariah.     xiv.  29— x\'.  12 

23-25 

iii.  The  sign  at  the 
war  with  Moab. 

VI.  Israel  and  Judah 

III.  Josiah 

III.  Carried 

XV.  13— xvi.  20 

xxii.-xxiii.  30 

away. 

iv.  Wonders,     iv.— vii. 

i.  Israel's  throne.      x\'.  13-31 

i.  The  finding  of  the 

XXV. 

ii.  Judah's  troubles. 

Law.                xxii. 

V.  The  restoration   of 
the   Shunammite's 

XV.  32— x\'i.  20 

ii.  Reform  and  death. 

Land.        viii.  1-6 

xxiii.  1-30 

vi.  ForeteUs  Benha- 

VII.  Passing  of  Israel 

dad's  death.    7-15 

xvii. 

Vii.  Final  Events. 

i.  Victory  of  Assj'ria.        1-23 

viii.  i6-ix. 

ii.  Samaria  colonized.       24-41 

II.  KINGS 

THE  first  book  of  Kings  ended  with  the  dark 
days  immediately  following  the  death  of 
Ahab,  and  the  passing  into  comparative 
obscurity  of  Elijah.  This  book  centres  first 
around  Elisha.  The  course  of  corruption  to 
captivity  is  then  traced  in  sections  alternating 
between  Israel  and  Judah.  Conspicuous 
breaks  in  the  history  are  caused  by  the  reigns 
of  Hezekiah  and  Josiah.  For  purposes  of  sur- 
vey we  may  divide  the  book  into  four  sections : 
Elisha  (i.-ix.);  Corruption  (x.-xvii.)  ;  Heze- 
kiah and  Josiah  (xvii.-xxiii.  30)  ;  Captivity 
(xxiii.  31-xxv.). 

A.  Elisha 

The  book  opens  with  the  story  of  the  sin  and 
sickness  of  Ahaziah,  who  sought  counsel  from 
Baal-zebub,  the  god  of  Ekron.  Elijah,  who 
had  been  in  seclusion,  suddenly  appeared,  and 
protested  against  the  action  of  the  king. 
Twice  Ahaziah  attempted  to  capture  him,  and 
in  each  case  the  answer  of  God  on  behalf  of 
His  servant  was  the  swift  judgment  of  fire. 

There  is  something  pathetic  and  almost 
weird  in  the  last  stories  of  Elijah.    It  would 

161 


162  II.    Kings 


seem  as  though  he  tried  to  escape  into  loneli- 
ness for  that  passing  which  he  knew  was  at 
hand.  Elisha,  upon  whom  his  mantle  had  al- 
ready been  cast,  followed  him  loyally,  deter- 
mined to  stand  by  him.  Having  witnessed  his 
translation,  he  at  once  commenced  his  own 
ministry,  and  two  incidents  are  recorded,  one 
beneficent,  the  healing  of  the  waters,  and  the 
other  punitive,  the  destruction  of  the  children. 
The  last  is  misinterpreted  if  looked  upon  as  an 
act  of  personal  vengeance.  It  was  rather  an 
evidence  of  the  sacredness  of  his  office,  and  of 
the  sin  of  refusing  him  as  the  messenger  of 
God. 

The  ministry  of  Elisha  stands  in  many  re- 
spects in  vivid  contrast  to  that  of  Elijah. 
There  is  a  gentleness  about  it  which,  in  spite 
of  ourselves,  reminds  us  of  the  Messiah  in  His 
day.  Instead  of  suddenly  appearing  at  criti- 
cal moments  with  thunder  and  a  flame,  he 
seems  to  have  moved  about  amongst  the  peo- 
ple doing  good  wherever  he  came.  Incidents 
follow  each  other  in  quick  succession.  He 
made  provision  for  the  need  of  the  widow 
whose  creditors  were  threatening  her.  He 
showed  kindness  to  the  Shunammite  woman 
who  had  showed  him  hospitality.  At  Gilgal 
he  healed  the  pottage,  and  fed  a  hundred  men 
with  twenty  loaves.    During  all  this  time  he 


Corruption  1 03 


was  at  the  head  of  the  prophetic  school;  and 
journeying  from  place  to  place,  became  known 
everywhere  as  the  messenger  of  God.  The  sim- 
plicity of  his  life  is  suggested  by  the  provision 
which  the  Shunammite  woman,  wealthy 
though  she  was,  made  for  his  evident  recpiirc- 
ments.  His  apartment  was  a  little  chamber 
on  the  wall,  containing  a  bed  and  a  table,  a 
stool  and  a  candlestick.  His  dignity  is  mani- 
fest in  the  attitude  towards  him,  especially  of 
this  woman,  who  in  her  converse  with  him, 
stood  ever  in  the  doorway,  recognizing  the 
sacredness  of  his  office. 

The  account  of  the  healing  of  Naaman  re- 
veals Elisha's  perpetual  attitude  of  dignified 
loyalty  to  God.  He  rebuked  the  king,  who  was 
filled  with  fear  at  the  coming  of  Naaman. 
He  demanded  on  the  part  of  Naaman  absolute 
obedience,  while  he  refused  to  take  anything 
in  the  nature  of  personal  reward  for  that 
which  had  been  wrought  by  the  hand  of 
God. 

The  incident  of  the  swimming  of  the  iron 
axe-head  is  interesting,  but  quite  secondary. 
In  the  hour  of  national  peril  Elisha  rose  above 
the  gentler  works  which  chiefly  characterized 
his  ministry.  Revealing  the  plans  of  tlie  Syri- 
ans, he  saved  his  people  from  peril,  and  finally 
foretold  the  relief  of  Samaria.    The  influence 


164  II.    Kings 


of  Elisha  is  incidentally  seen  in  the  converse 
of  the  king  with  Gehazi,  and  the  restoration 
of  the  lands  of  the  Shunammite  woman  for 
the  sake  of  the  prophet.  Visiting  Damascus, 
he  foretold  the  death  of  Benhadad,  and  Ha- 
zaeFs  share  in  the  future  suffering  of  Israel. 

The  story  of  Judah's  corruption  is  then  told, 
and  that  of  the  anointing  of  Jehu,  and  his 
carrying  out  of  the  purpose  of  Divine  judgment 
in  the  case  of  the  house  of  Ahab. 

B.  Corruption 

The  story  of  the  rapid  and  fearful  corrup- 
tion of  the  whole  nation  alternates  between 
Israel  and  Judah.  Both  sections  of  the  na- 
tion are  seen  sinking  deeper  and  ever  deeper 
into  sin  and  decay.  Jehu  was  used  as  the 
scourge  of  God  in  sweeping  out  Ahab's  pos- 
terity, and  in  breaking  and  destroying  the 
power  of  Baalism.  His  own  story  was,  how- 
ever, one  of  personal  failure.  The  reign  of 
Jehoash  in  Judah  lasted  for  forty  years.  All 
that  was  beneficent  in  it  would  seem  to  have 
been  due  directly  to  the  influence  of  Jehoiada 
the  priest,  for  "  he  did  that  which  was  right  in 
the  eyes  of  the  Lord  all  his  days  wherein  Je- 
hoiada the  priest  instructed  him." 

In  Israel  the  story  of  the  process  of  cor- 
ruption continued  under  Jehoahaz.     He  was 


Corruption  1 05 


succeeded  by  Jeboasb,  in  wbose  reigu  Elisba 
died. 

Turning  back  to  Judab  wo  find  Amaziab  on 
tbe  tbrone.  Success  attended  bis  arms,  but 
issued  in  tbe  lifting  up  of  bis  beart,  and  liis 
foolish  challenge  of  Jeboasb,  king  of  Israel. 
Defeated,  be  seems  to  bave  been  kept  a  pris- 
oner until  tbe  death  of  Jeboasb,  and  was  then 
succeeded  by  Azariah,  tbe  Uzziah  of  Isaiah's 
prophecy. 

There  follows  a  section  in  which  Israel  and 
Judab  are  both  seen.  Jeroboam  the  Second 
occupied  the  throne  of  Israel,  and  in  his  reign 
Jonah,  the  son  of  Amittai,  exercised  bis  min- 
istry. The  throne  of  Judab  was  occupied  by 
Uzziah,  w^hose  reign  was  in  tbe  main  char- 
acterized by  obedience  to  the  Divine  will.  Yet 
the  people  continued  to  sin,  and  tbe  king  was 
smitten  with  leprosy.  Turning  to  Israel,  we 
have  the  chronicle  of  a  period  the  most  ter- 
rible in  all  its  history.  To  the  throne  man 
succeeded  man  by  the  way  of  murder.  Zecba- 
riah  was  slain  by  Shallum.  After  a  month's 
occupancy  of  the  throne,  Shallum  was  slain 
by  Menahem,  who  reigned  for  t(^n  years  in  evil 
courses.  He  was  at  last  succeeded  by  Pekabiah, 
his  son,  who,  after  reigning  for  two  years  in 
persistent  evil,  was  slain  by  Pekah.  He  occu- 
pied the  throne  for  twenty  years,  but  at  last 


166  II.    Kings 


was  slain  bj  Hoshea.  Israel  was  practically 
under  a  military  despotism,  downtrodden  and 
oppressed,  and  sinning  with  high  hand  against 
God. 

The  state  of  affairs  was  very  little  better  in 
Judah.  Jotham  followed  Uzziah,  and  was  in 
turn  succeeded  by  Ahaz,  during  whose  reign 
the  sin  of  Judah  had  its  most  terrible  expres- 
sion. Isaiah  was  uttering  his  message,  and 
Micah  also,  but  so  far  as  the  nation  or  its 
kings  were  concerned  the  testimony  of  truth 
was  lost,  and  the  name  of  God  was  being 
blasphemed  among  the  heathen. 

In  Israel  Hoshea  was  the  last  of  the  kings. 
The  stroke  of  Divine  judgment,  long  hanging 
over  the  guilty  people,  fell.  Shalmaneser  first 
made  them  tributary,  and  after  three  years 
carried  them  away  captive. 

c.  Hezekiah  and  Josiah 

The  third  division  of  the  book  includes  the 
story  of  the  reigns  of  Hezekiah  and  Josiah, 
with  a  period  of  reaction  and  sin  between  the 
two.  Hezekiah  did  right  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord,  and  instituted  reforms  more  widespread 
and  drastic  than  had  been  attempted  by  any  of 
his  predecessors.  It  was  during  his  reign,  in 
the  sixth  year,  that  Israel  was  carried  away 
into  captivity.     This  in  itself  would  have  an 


C()iTiij)ti()n  1() 


>/ 


influence  upon  Judah  for  a  time  at  least,  as 
there  is  no  doubt  that  the  prophets  would  care- 
fully point  out  the  real  reason  of  this  judg- 
ment. 

When  he  had  occupied  the  throne  for  four- 
teen years  a  most  formidable  foe  appeared  in 
the  person  of  Sennacherib.  Tn  the  hour  of 
peril  he  turned  to  his  old  and  trusted  friend, 
Isaiah,  who  charged  him  to  pray  for  that  rem- 
nant of  God's  people  which  still  remained. 
He  also  foretold  the  judgment  which  would 
fall  upon  Assyria,  which  prophecy  was  ful- 
filled in  the  destruction  of  the  army,  while 
Sennacherib  escaped  to  Nineveh,  only  to  be 
slain  at  the  house  of  his  own  god.  The  last 
things  in  the  life  of  Hezekiah  were  manifesta- 
tions of  his  weakness.  Yet  his  reign  was  in 
many  respects  a  most  remarkable  one.  Every- 
thing seemed  to  be  against  him,  and  yet  the 
story  reveals  how  much  one  man  seriously 
loyal  to  truth  may  accomplish  in  the  midst  of 
most  adverse  and  diflScult  circumstances. 

Then  comes  the  acount  of  reaction,  which 
w^as  manifested  in  two  reigns  both  utterly  evil, 
that  of  Manasseh  lasting  for  fifty-five  years, 
and  that  of  Amon  lasting  for  two.  Manas- 
seh's  sin  was  not  merely  one  of  personal 
w^rong-doing,  but  also  of  the  dclibc^rate  undo- 
ing of  what  his  father  had  been  at  such  pains 


168  II.    Kings 


to  accomplish.     After  a  brief  reign  of  two 
years  Anion  was  slain  by  his  servants. 

With  the  accession  of  Josiah  there  came 
the  last  attempt  at  reformation  before  the 
final  sweeping  away  into  captivity.  His  first 
act  was  that  of  the  restoration  of  the  Temple. 
In  connection  with  it  came  the  discovery  of 
the  book  of  the  law.  The  condition  of  affairs 
in  Judah  may  be  gathered  from  the  fact  of  such 
a  finding.  So  sadly  was  the  Temple  neglected 
and  deserted  that  it  w^ould  seem  as  though 
neither  king  nor  priest  knew  of  the  where- 
abouts of  this  book.  The  reformation  pro- 
ceeded along  deeper  lines  as  the  result  of  its 
discovery.  So  far  as  Josiah  was  concerned 
the  whole  procedure  was  the  outcome  of  sin- 
cerity and  loyalty.  The  people,  how^ever, 
were  following  the  lead  of  the  king.  There 
was  no  turning  on  their  part  to  God ;  and  con- 
sequently there  was  no  turning  on  the  part  of 
God  from  His  purpose  of  judgment.  Josiah 
was  gathered  to  rest  before  the  falling  of  the 
final  stroke. 

D.  Captivity 

The  judgments  fell  at  last  in  rapid  succes- 
sion. Jehoahaz  succeeded  to  the  throne,  and, 
notwithstanding  all  that  had  been  done  during 
the  reign  of  Josiah,  returned  immediately  to 
evil  courses  in  his  brief  reign  of  three  months. 


Corruption  100 


He  was  deposed  by  the  kin^-  of  Ej2:y])t,  and 
Jehoiakim  was  set  upon  the  tlirone  as  tribu- 
tary to  Pharaoh.  For  eh^ven  years,  as  the 
vassal  of  E^ypt,  he  continued  in  evil  courses. 
He  became  tributary  to  Babylon  under 
Nebuchadnezzar.  Finally  Jehoiachin,  who 
succeeded  Jehoiakim,  was  carried  away  by 
Nebuchadnezzar,  and  in  his  place  Zedekiah 
was  made  ruler  as  the  representative  and  vas- 
sal of  Nebuchadnezzar.  His  occupancy  of  the 
position  lasted  for  eleven  years,  during  which 
he  also  continued  in  evil  courses.  In  process  of 
time  he  rebelled  against  the  king  of  Babylon, 
and  was  captured.  The  picture  of  this  man  is 
tragic  and  awful.  With  eyes  put  out,  and 
bound  in  fetters,  he  was  carried  to  the  court 
of  his  conqueror,  the  type  and  symbol  of  the 
condition  of  the  people  who  had  rebelled 
against  God,  and  had  been  broken  in  pieces. 

Thus  on  the  human  side  the  record  ends  in 
tragic  and  disastrous  failure.  To  those  whose 
eyes  are  fixed  upon  the  eternal  throne  it  is 
certain  that  the  Divine  purpose  must  be  ac- 
complished. The  people  had  passed  into  a 
period  of  long  years  of  servitude  and  suffer- 
ing, during  which  they  were  still  watched 
over  by  their  one  and  only  King,  and  by  these 
very  conditions  prepared  for  co-operation  ac- 
cording to  the  covenant  of  grace  in  the  ulti- 
mate movements  of  the  overruling  God. 


I.  CHRONICLES 


I.  CHRONICLES— 
THE  TEMPLE,  DESIRED  AND  APPROACHED 


A 

B 

GENEALOGIES 

DAVID 

t.—x. 

xi.—xxix. 

,, 

General 

I.  David  made  King 

xi..  xii. 

The  Nations 

i. 

i.  The  Crowning  at  Hebron, 
ii.  The  Taking  of  Jebus. 

xi.  1-3. 
4-9 

i 

Beginnings.    Adam  to 

iii.  The  Mighty  Men. 

10-47 

ii 

Ishmael. 
Related  to  Israel. 

1-28 
39-54 

iv.  The  Gathering  of  the  People. 

H.  The  Ark 

xii. 
xiil.-xvli. 

II. 

Particular 

i.  From  Kiriath-jearim  to  House  of  Obed-edom. 

The  Chosen 

li.-x. 

Death  of  Uzza. 

XUl. 

i 

ii 
iii 

Sons  of  Israel. 

Judah.                          ii.  3 

Simeon.    Reuben.    Gad 

ii.  1-2 
— iv.  23 

ii.  Parenthesis. 

iii.  From  Obed-edom  to  Jerusalem. 
Michal's  Contempt 

xiv. 
XV.— xvi.  6 

Manasseh.                      iv 

Levi. 

Issachar.  Benjamin.   Na 

Manasseh.     Ephraim. 

.  24-y. 
vi. 

iv.  Parenthesis 

The  Psalm 

xvi.  7-43 

V 

phtali. 

V.  Desire  to  Build  a  Home  for  the  Ark.           xvii. 

Asher. 

Nathan 

vi 

Benjamin. 
Couclusioa. 

vni. 

ill.  David's  Reign 

xviil.-xxl. 

vii 

ix.,  X. 

i.  Victories  and  Gathering  of  Treasure  for 

Temple. 

xvm.— XX. 

ii.  The  Numbering  of  the  People. 

xxi. 

IV.  The  Temple 

xxil.-xxlx. 

i.  The  Site. 

xxii.  I 

ii.  Preparation  of  Material. 

2-5 

iii.  Charge  to  Solomon. 

6-16 

iv.  Charge  to  Princes. 

17-19 

^ 

V.  Arrangements  of  Levites. 
vi.  Arrangements  of  Song  Service, 
vii.  Arrangements  of  Porters. 

xxiii.,  xxiv. 

XXV. 

xxvi.  i-iQ 

viii.  Arrangements  of  Keepers  of  Treasure. 

Parenthesis.    Internal  Order  of  the  Kingdom. 

xxvn. 

ix.  The  Final  Charge. 

xxviii. 

X.  The  Ceremon}'^  of  Giving. 

xxix.  I-2S 

xi.  Death  of  Dayid. 

96-30 

I.  CHRONICLES 

THE  two  books  of  Chronicles  cover  the 
period  of  history  already  studied  in  I. 
and  II.  Kings.  They  record  this  history, 
however,  from  an  entirely  different  stand- 
point. The  outlook  is  almost  exclusively  con- 
fined to  Judah,  the  chronicler  never  referring 
to  Israel  save  in  cases  of  absolute  necessity. 
Within  the  tribe  of  Judah,  moreover,  the  his- 
tory is  that  of  the  house  of  David,  all  other 
matters  being  referred  to  only  as  they  affect, 
or  are  affected  by,  the  Davidic  line.  More- 
over, the  story  of  these  two  books  centres 
around  the  Temple.  The  chief  matter  in 
David's  reign  is  his  interest  in  preparing  for 
it,  while  in  Solomon's  the  chief  interest  is  in 
the  building  thereof.  The  distinctive  note  of 
the  books  is  that  of  religion  and  its  bearing 
on  the  national  life.  In  the  first  certain  gene- 
alogies are  given,  which  lead  up  to  David,  and 
proceed  from  him.  Tlien  the  story  of  his  time 
is  told  in  its  relation,  pre-eminently,  to  the 
religious  life.  It  has  been  truly  said  that 
while  the  Kings  describe  the  history  from  the 
prophetic  standpoint,  the  Chronicles  describe 
it  from  the  priestly.    The  book  may  be  divided 

173 


174  I.    Chronicles 


into  two  parts:  Genealogies  (i.-x.),  David  (xL- 
xxix. ) . 

A.  Genealogies 

The  period  included  in  these  genealogical 
tables  is  that  from  Adam  to  the  restoration 
under  Nehemiah,  which  are  not  exhaustive, 
but  serve  a  clearly  defined  purpose  in  that 
they  indicate  the  Divine  choice  of  the  channels 
through  which  God  moved  to  the  accomplish- 
ment of  His  purpose.  Side  issues  are  traced 
in  certain  directions,  but  only  as  they  touch 
upon  the  line  of  the  Divine  progress.  This 
fact  is  illustrated  at  the  very  beginning.  The 
only  son  of  Adam  mentioned  is  Seth.  Through 
him  the  line  is  traced  through  Enoch  to  Noah. 
Then  the  genealogies  of  Japheth  and  Ham  are 
given  because  of  the  relationship  of  their  de- 
scendants to  the  chosen  people  of  God.  The 
direct  line  of  the  Divine  movement  is  taken  up 
through  Shem,  and  finds  a  ncAV  departure  in 
Abram.  There  is  another  digression  from 
Abram  in  the  tracing  of  the  descent  through 
Ishmael,  and  also  that  through  the  sons  of 
Keturah.  The  direct  procession  continues 
through  Isaac.  A  third  excursion  traces  the 
descendants  of  Esau.  Through  Israel  the 
programme  is  carried  forward.  His  twelve 
sons  are  mentioned,  and  all  of  them  are  subse- 


Temple,  Desired  and  Approaclied     175 

quently  referred  to  except  Dan  and  Zebulun. 
The  direct  line  of  interest  in  tracinj^;  the 
Divine  method  passes  tlirou^h  Judah,  and  so 
on  through  Jesse  to  David.  Of  his  sons  nine- 
teen are  named,  but  further  descent  is  traced 
through  Solomon  and  the  kings  of  Judah  on 
to  the  period  of  captivity.  In  tracing  these 
genealogies  it  is  interesting  to  notice  how 
choice  is  based  upon  character;  and  more- 
over, how  in  the  Divine  progress  there  is  con- 
stant deviation  from  the  line  of  merely  natu- 
ral descent.  The  actual  firstborn  of  the  sons 
of  Israel  was  Reuben,  but  he  through  sin  for- 
feited the  birthright,  which  passed  to  Joseph. 
And  yet  again,  the  Prince  foretold  was  to 
come,  not  through  Joseph,  though  to  him  had 
been  given  the  birthright,  but  through  Judah. 
A  long  section  is  devoted  to  the  priestly 
tribe.  In  the  final  movement  the  genealogies 
of  each  of  the  sons  of  Levi  culminated  in  the 
person  of  one  man,  that  of  Kohath  in  Reman, 
that  of  Gershom  in  x\saph,  that  of  Merari  in 
Ethan.  This  division  ends  with  the  story  of 
the  death  of  the  king  chosen  by  men.  It  is  a 
terrible  picture  of  a  man  of  magnificent  capa- 
bility going  down  in  utter  ruin.  Routed  by 
his  enemies,  he  died  by  his  own  hand  in  the 
midst  of  the  field  of  defeat.  The  reason  of 
such  failure  is  clearly  declared.    He  trespassed 


176  I.    Chronicles 


against  God,  and  then  sought  counsel  of  one 
who  had  a  familiar  spirit.  Magnificent  in- 
deed was  the  ruin,  but  it  was  ruin.  Saul  was 
a  man  than  whom  no  other  had  greater  op- 
portunities, but  his  failure  was  disastrous. 
Of  good  standing  in  the  nation,  distinctly 
called  and  commissioned  by  God,  honoured 
with  the  friendship  of  Samuel,  surrounded  by 
a  band  of  men  whose  hearts  God  had  touched, 
everything  was  in  his  favour.  From  the  be- 
ginning he  failed,  and  step  by  step  passed 
along  a  decline  of  conduct  and  character  until 
he  passed  away,  having  failed  himself,  and 
dragged  his  nation  to  such  confusion  as  threat- 
ened its  very  existence. 

B.  David 

In  this  division  of  the  book  there  are  four 
movements:  the  story  of  David's  crowning, 
events  connected  with  the  ark  of  God,  the  ac- 
count of  his  reign,  and  matters  concerning 
the  building  of  the  Temple. 

The  chronicler  passes  over  in  silence  the 
story  of  the  seven  years  in  which  David 
reigned  over  Judah,  and  commences  with  the 
crowning  at  Hebron.  Immediately  he  had 
thus  been  recognized  as  king  of  the  whole  na- 
tion he  captured  Jebus,  which  became  the  city 
of  his  heart,  and  the  metropolis  of  the  nation. 


Temple,  Desired  and  Approached     177 

Tlio  account  of  the  mi<»hty  meu  and  tlicir  deeds 
is  full  of  colour.  It  is  particularly  interesting 
in  view  of  what  these  men  were  in  the  days  of 
David's  exile.  From  being  a  company  in  debt, 
in  danger,  and  discontented,  they  became 
"  mighty  men  of  valour  .  .  .  trained  for 
war,"  their  one  unifying  inspiration  being 
their  loyalty  to  David.  They  "  came  with  a 
perfect  heart  to  Hebron,  to  make  David  king." 
Thus  he  entered  upon  his  kingdom  under  the 
most  auspicious  circumstances. 

The  king's  consciousness  of  the  true  strength 
of  his  kingdom  is  manifest  in  his  anxiety  con- 
cerning the  ark  of  God.  It  had  been  at  Kiri- 
ath-jearim,  and  neglected  for  long  years.  He 
now  set  himself  to  bring  it  into  the  midst  of 
the  people  as  a  recognition  of  the  nation's  re- 
lationship to  Jehovah.  The  long  neglect  of 
the  ark  would  seem  to  have  rendered  the  peo- 
ple unfamiliar  with  all  the  particular  regula- 
tions for  its  removal,  which  they  attempted  by 
a  device  of  their  own.  The  swift  judgment  on 
the  man  who  stretched  out  a  hand  to  save  the 
ark  is  evidence  at  once  of  the  presence  of  God 
among  His  people,  and  of  the  necessity  for  per- 
fect conformity  to  His  minutest  instructions. 

At  this  time  there  commenced  a  commercial 
friendship  with  Hiram,  which  continued  into 
the  reign  of  Solomon.    The  statement  is  now 


178  I.    Chronicles 


made  of  David's  multiplication  of  wives.  The 
silence  of  the  chronicler  concerning  his  sin  is 
remarkable  throughout  this  book.  Two  vic- 
tories over  the  Philistines  are  described. 

Again  David  turned  his  attention  to  the  ark, 
bringing  it  up  from  the  house  of  Obed-edom  to 
Jerusalem.  Companies  of  instrumentalists 
and  singers  accompanied  the  ark,  and  with 
high  jubilation  it  was  borne  by  the  priests  into 
the  tent  prepared.  One  shadow  fell  across 
the  brightness  of  the  day.  It  was  that  of  the 
mockery  of  Michal,  SauPs  daughter.  The  in- 
cident illustrates  the  perpetual  inability  of 
the  worldly-minded  to  appreciate  the  gladness 
of  the  spiritual.  The  chronicler  gives  us  the 
psalm  sung  by  the  trained  musicians  on  this 
occasion.  It  is  a  compilation  of  parts  of  three 
to  be  found  in  our  Psalter,  and  is  a  general 
ascription  of  praise,  merging  into  a  call  to 
remember  the  works  of  God,  and  His  govern- 
ment covenant  with  the  people. 

The  presence  of  the  ark  in  the  city  seems  to 
have  created  the  desire  in  the  heart  of  David 
to  provide  for  it  a  permanent  and  more  worthy 
resting-place.  Of  this  desire  he  spoke  to  Na- 
than, who,  acting  without  Divine  consultation, 
charged  him  to  go  forward.  Both  prophet  and 
king,  however,  had  to  learn  that  God's  ways 
are  not  man's  ways.    While  David's  desire  was 


Temple,  Desired  and  A])])n)ac]icd     170 

not  granted,  yet,  when  in  coinnnmion  with 
God,  he  had  been  brought  to  the  place  of  a 
resting  worshipper,  he  was  permitted  to  innke 
great  preparation  for  the  building  of  the  Tem- 
ple by  his  son. 

The  next  section  tells  the  story  of  David's 
reign,  and  first  gives  the  account  of  his  vic- 
tories over  surrounding  foes.  In  view  of  his 
desire  to  build  the  Temple  of  God,  it  is  of 
special  interest  to  notice  how  in  all  these  wars 
he  was  amassing  treasure  with  that  end  in 
view.  The  victories  of  David  w^ere  the  direct 
result  of  God's  blessing  upon  him.  Yet  in  the 
midst  of  them  he  sinned  his  greatest  sin,  and 
that  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  in  his  deep- 
est heart  he  desired  to  build  God's  house.  One 
statement  in  this  book  is  all  that  in  any  sense 
can  be  construed  into  a  reference  to  that  sin. 
"  But  David  tarried  at  Jerusalem." 

The  cause  of  David's  action  in  numbering 
the  people  is  distinctly  stated  to  be  Satan. 
Therein  lies  a  revelation  of  its  nature.  The 
one  sin  of  Satan  is  that  of  pride  and  ambition, 
and  this  was  the  sin  of  David.  In  the  place 
where  the  mercy  of  God  operated  in  staying 
the  plague  resulting  from  his  sin,  David  chose 
to  build  the  house  of  his  God.  The  threshing- 
floor  of  Oman  the  Jebusite  was  chosen  as  the 
site  of  the  Temple. 


180  I.    Chronicles 


During  the  latter  days  of  his  life  the  deep 
underlying  desire  became  again  the  supreme 
matter.  In  perfect  acquiescence  with  the  will 
of  God,  he  gave  up  all  thought  of  building,  and 
set  himself  to  preparing  everything  for  an- 
other hand  to  carry  out  the  work.  His  charge 
to  his  son  is  full  of  beauty.  He  frankly  told 
him  how  God  refused  to  permit  him  to  build, 
and  named  the  reason.  He  was  careful,  more- 
over, to  teach  Solomon  that  his  appointment 
to  build  was  of  God,  and  thereby  created  a 
solemn  sense  of  responsibility  in  the  matter. 

His  interest  in  the  Temple  was  not  only 
manifested  in  his  material  preparation.  He 
practically  abdicated  the  throne  to  Solomon 
in  order  to  supervise  the  setting  in  order  of 
the  worship.  Arrangements  were  made  for 
the  work  of  the  Levites,  and  with  great  care 
and  remarkable  democracy  of  choice  the 
courses  of  the  priests  were  next  set  in  order. 

It  is  easy  to  imagine  what  delight  the  poet- 
king  took  in  arranging  the  song  service  of  the 
new  Temple.  Music  had  played  a  very  im- 
portant part  in  his  career.  His  skill  therein 
had  been  his  first  introduction  to  Saul.  His 
psalms  breathe  the  spirit  of  the  varied  experi- 
ences through  which  he  passed.  The  days  of 
his  simple  life  as  a  shepherd,  the  period  of  his 
exile  and  suffering,  the  hours  of  battle  and 


Temple,  Desired  and  A])proachc(]     181 

weariness,  the  triumph  of  his  crowniiif]^,  th(» 
agony  of  his  sin,  the  joy  of  pardon — these  and 
many  other  experiences  are  reflected  in  the 
great  collection.  And  now  at  the  end  he  gave 
himself  to  arranging  the  service  of  song  in 
the  Temple  which  was  to  be  built.  Finally  he 
arranged  the  courses  of  the  porters,  and  tlie 
duties  of  such  as  had  charge  of  all  the  stores 
set  apart  for  the  sacred  work. 

Before  coming  to  the  last  charges  of  David, 
in  a  parenthetical  section  (cliap.  xxvii.),  we 
have  an  idea  of  the  internal  order  of  the  king- 
dom under  the  government  of  David.  This 
chapter  is  a  striking  revelation  of  the  fact  that 
the  greatness  of  David  as  a  king  was  not  con- 
fined to  his  victories  in  war.  He  was  no  less 
great  in  the  arts  of  peaceful  administration. 
The  tilling  of  the  ground,  and  its  careful  culti- 
vation, the  rearing  of  cattle,  and  all  matters 
pertaining  to  the  internal  welfare  of  his  peo- 
ple were  arranged  for  under  duly  qualified 
and  appointed  oversight.  There  is  no  doubt 
that  under  the  reign  of  David  the  Hebrew 
people  realized  their  greatest  strength,  even 
though  they  did  not  reach  the  height  of  their 
material  magnificence.  Fundamentally  a  man 
of  God,  David  was  also  a  warrior,  a  poet,  and 
an  administrator,  and  with  his  passing  the  day 
of  Hebrew  greatness  passed  its  meridian. 


182  I.    Chronicles 


The  book  ends  with  an  account  of  the  solemn 
charge  he  gave  to  Solomon,  and  of  the  cere- 
mony in  which  he  gave  to  the  Lord  all  that  he 
had  gathered  for  the  carrying  out  of  the  work 
of  the  Temple.  Finally  the  chronicler  declares 
that  David  "  died  in  a  good  old  age,  full  of 
days,  riches,  and  honour."  It  had  been  in 
very  truth  a  great  reign.  Through  varied  ex- 
periences the  king  had  come  at  last  to  the 
highest  that  was  in  him,  and,  as  Paul  declared, 
"after  he  had  in  his  own  generation  served 
the  counsel  of  God,  he  fell  on  sleep." 


II.  CHEONICLES 


II.  CHRONICLES— 
THE  TEMPLE,  POSSESSED  AND  ABANDONED 


A 

B 

SOLOMON 

THE    KINGS 

OF  JUDAH 

i. — ix. 

X. — xxxvi. 

I. 

First  Vision 

I.  The  Revolt  of  the  Ten 

and  Things 

Tribes             x.-xi.  4 

Foliowing 

i.-vii.  10 

II.  Period  of  Degen- 

i. 

The  Vision,  i.  1-13 

eracy            xi.  5-xvl. 

i.  Rehoboam.               xi.  5— xii. 
ii.  Abijah.                                xiii. 

ii. 

National  Pros- 
perity..         .. 

1.  14—11.  18 

III.  Reform  under  Jehos* 

iii.  Asa.                           xiv.— xvi. 

haphat           xvii.— xx. 

i.  Reform.                              xvii. 

iii. 

The  Temple 

ii.  Lapse  and  Restoration. 

xviii.,  xix. 

iii.— V.  I 

IV.  Period  of  Degen- 

iii. Prevailing  Prayer.             xx. 

iv. 

Ceremonies  of 

eracy           xxi.-xxiil. 

Consecration 

i.  Jehoram.                             xxi. 

V.  2— vii.  10 

V.  Reform  under 

Joash                    xxiv. 

ii.  Ahaziah.                        xxii.  1-9 
iii.  Athaliah.          xxii.  10 — xxiii. 

i.  Influence  of  Jehoida 
ii.  Failure  of  Joash 

II. 

Second  Vision 

VI.  Period  of  Degener- 

and Tilings 

acy            XXV,— xxviii. 

i.  Amaziah.                          xxv. 

Following 

ii.  Uzziah.                               xxvi. 

vll.  U-ix. 

VII.  Reform  under 

iii.  Jotham.                            xxvii. 
iv.  Ahaz.                               xxviii. 

i 

The  Second 

Hezekiah 

Vision,  vii.  11-22 

xxix.— xxxii. 

i.  Consciousness  of  Sin  and 
consequent  Cleansing,  xxix. 

ii 

Various  Acts  of 

ii.  The  Passover.                   xxx. 

the  King.    viii. 

VIII.  Period  of 

iii.  Practical  Reforms.          xxxi. 
iv.  The  Trial  of  Faith. 

iii 

The  Queen  of 

Degeneracy       xxxiii. 

Sennacherib.                xxxii. 

Sheba.  ix.    1-28 

i.  Manasseh.                           1-20 

iv 

Epilogue. 

IX.  Reform  under 

ii.  Amon.                                21-25 

29—31 

Josiah     xxxiv.,  xxxv. 

i.  Tosiah's  first  Reforms, 
ii.  The  Finding  of  the  Book  of 
the  Law. 

X.  Period  of 

Degeneracy 

iii.  The  Passover. 

xxxvl.  1-10 

i.  Jehoahaz.                              1-4 
ii.  Jehoiakim.                            5-8 
iii.  Jehoiachin.                       9-10 

XI.  Captivity     xxxvi.  11-23 

II.  CHRONICLES 

THIS  is  really  the  second  half  of  the  one 
Book  of  Chronicles.  The  essential  values 
are  the  same  as  those  in  I.  Chronicles.  The 
history  centres  round  the  religious  life  of  the 
people,  and  is  confined  to  Judah  and  the  Da- 
vidic  line  of  kings.  Degeneracy  resulted  from 
neglect  of  the  house  of  God,  and  each  reform 
was  associated  with  return  thereto.  The  story 
is  a  very  sad  one,  opening  with  all  the  glory 
of  Solomon's  reign,  and  ending  with  captivity 
and  the  patronage  of  Cyrus.  Its  broad  divi- 
sions are  Solomon  (i.-ix.)  ;  the  Kings  of  Ju- 
dah (x.-xxxvi.). 

A.  Solomon 

This  book  opens  with  the  story  of  Solomon's 
entering  upon  full  possession  of  his  kingdom, 
and  taking  up  the  great  work  entrusted  to  him 
of  building  the  Temple.  He  commenced  by 
gathering  the  people  with  him  to  a  sacred  act 
of  worship.  God  met  him  in  a  special  vision 
of  the  night,  as  a  result  of  which  wisdom 
was  granted  to  him,  and  the  promise  was 
made  of  great  material  prosperity.  Then  fol- 
lowed the  days  of  Israel's  greatest  glory  so 

185 


186  II.    Chronicles 

far  as  material  things  were  concerned.  Pros- 
perity is  always  a  more  insidious  danger  than 
adversity  to  the  man  of  faith. 

Solomon  devoted  himself  to  his  great  work 
of  building  the  Temple.  In  all  fundamental 
essentials  it  was  on  the  pattern  of  the  Taber- 
nacle which  Moses  had  made.  Its  proportions 
and  relations  were  identical,  but  it  was  larger. 
The  period  occupied  in  building  was  seven 
years.  The  work  being  completed,  with  filial 
and  godly  care  the  king  carried  into  the  sacred 
enclosure  all  that  his  father  had  collected  and 
dedicated  to  the  purpose.  Thus,  nearly  half  a 
millennium  after  the  Exodus,  the  chosen  peo- 
ple were  found  in  the  land,  having  a  king  on 
the  throne,  and  a  Temple  in  the  midst  of  the 
chief  city  at  the  centre  of  the  national  life. 
The  only  principles  of  permanence,  however, 
are  faithfulness  and  purity,  and  already  the 
elements  of  decay  were  at  work  in  the  heart  of 
the  king  and  among  the  people. 

The  w^ork  of  construction  being  completed, 
there  followed  the  glad  and  solemn  ceremony 
of  dedication  by  the  people,  and  consecration 
by  God.  With  awe-inspiring  dignity  the  ark 
of  God  was  carried  to  its  resting-place.  As  at 
the  erection  of  the  Tabernacle  of  old,  so  now 
in  the  new  Tabernacle  God  answered  the  work 
of  man  as  the  cloud  of  glory  possessed  and 


Temple,  Possessed  and  iVbandonrd     1S7 

filled  the  sacred  place,  so  that  the.  ministra- 
tions of  the  priests  had  to  cease.  In  the  pres- 
ence of  that  manifestation  tlie  kini;-  pro- 
nounced a  blessin<::  on  tlie  jx'ople,  wliirli 
merged  into  a  blessing  oll'ered  to  (Jod.  After 
praise  the  king  offered  his  prayer,  which  was 
great  in  its  comprehensiveness  and  in  its  un- 
derstanding of  the  heart  of  God.  As  the  cere- 
monies had  begun  with  sacrifice  and  song,  so 
they  closed,  and  it  is  quite  easy  to  realize  how 
joyful  and  glad  of  heart  the  people  were  as 
they  dispersed. 

The  greatest  work  of  Solomon's  life  being 
now  completed,  God  appeared  to  him  in  a 
second  vision,  in  which  lie  first  declared  that 
the  work  done  was  accepted,  and  the  prayer 
offered  heard  and  answered.  Then,  with  the 
tenderness  and  faithfulness  of  infinite  love, 
He  restated  for  the  king  the  conditions  of  his 
safety. 

Then  follows  the  record  of  certain  doings  of 
the  king  in  matters  of  administration.  He 
consolidated  the  internal  streng-th  of  the  na- 
tion by  building  cities.  He  organized  the 
labour  of  the  conquered  peoples  within  his 
dominions.  He  set  in  order  the  Temple  wor- 
ship.    He  enlarged  his  commercial  activities. 

The  fame  of  Solomon's  wisdom  attracted 
the  queen  of  Sheba,  who  came  principally  to 


188  II.    Chronicles 

discuss  with  him  certain  problems  on  her 
mind.  He  welcomed  her  with  fine  courtesy, 
and  answered  her  questions  to  her  satisfaction. 
The  chronicler  ends  the  story  with  the  account 
of  the  wealth  Solomon  gathered,  and  the  mag- 
nificence which  characterized  his  reign.  No 
account  of  his  failure  and  fall  is  given.  The 
purpose  of  the  writer  was  served  when  he  had 
made  clear  the  relationship  existing  between 
loyalty  to  the  Temple  of  God,  with  its  worship 
and  success,  and  the  greatness  of  king  and 
people. 

B.  The  Kings  of  Judah 

Despotism  is  seldom  transmissible.  That 
Solomon  had  been  an  autocrat,  and  had  ruled 
with  a  hand  of  iron  under  the  glove  of  velvet, 
is  evidenced  by  the  words  of  the  men  of  Israel : 
"  Thy  father  made  our  yoke  grievous."  With 
his  death  men  breathed  anew,  and  discovered 
their  chains.  As  a  result  of  the  quarrel  be- 
tween Jeroboam  and  Rehoboam,  the  nation 
was  rent  in  twain.  Ten  tribes  revolted,  and 
the  history  of  the  book  gathers  round  the 
kings  of  Judah,  beginning  with  Rehoboam. 
Throughout  his  reign,  and  that  of  Abijah, 
there  was  war  between  Israel  and  Judah,  and 
a  process  of  corruption  in  the  kingdom.  Asa 
reigned  for  a  long  period,  and  in  the  earlier 


Temple,  Possessed  and  Abandoned     180 

years  gave  the  nation  some  gleams  of  a  better 
order.  In  the  latter  years,  however,  he  sadly 
failed,  turning  to  Syria  for  help. 

With  the  accession  of  Jehoshaphat,  a  period 
of  definite  reformation  opened  for  Jiidah.  He 
commenced  by  organizing  what  in  these  days 
would  be  called  special  missions  conducted 
through  the  cities  of  Judah  by  representative 
princes,  the  Levites,  and  the  priests.  Coinci- 
dent wuth  this  activity  within,  a  remarkable 
fear  of  the  Lord  fell  upon  the  peoples  without, 
so  that  they  ceased  to  make  war  upon  Jehosha- 
phat. Economically  he  strengthened  his  king- 
dom by  the  building  of  castles  and  cities,  by 
commerce,  and  by  the  carrying  out  of  many 
works.  After  a  while  he  had  a  strange  lapse 
in  his  loyalty  to  God,  in  that  he  made  affinity 
with  Ahab,  perhaps  the  most  evil  king  that 
ever  sat  upon  the  throne  of  Israel.  His 
repentance,  however,  was  manifest  in  the 
new  mission  which  he  presently  undertook 
throughout  the  land,  to  bring  his  people  back 
to  the  Lord,  and  to  consolidate  the  internal  ad- 
ministration in  righteousness. 

He  was  undoubtedly  a  man  of  simple  and 
yet  splendid  faith.  This  is  seen  in  the  story 
of  how,  when  his  kingdom  was  threatened  with 
powerful  and  terrible  invasion,  he  gatheriMl 
his  people  about  him  and  prayed.    The  answer 


190  II.   Chronicles 

was  not  delayed.  It  was  a  moment  bright 
with  light  amid  the  darkness.  Once  more  in 
the  history  of  His  own  people  the  arm  of  the 
Lord  was  seen  acting  in  strength,  as  when  in 
the  ancient  days  it  broke  the  power  of  Egypt. 
The  story  of  Jehoshaphat's  life  and  reign  con- 
cludes with  a  brief  statement  of  yet  another 
lapse,  in  that  he  made  commercial  alliances 
with  Ahaziah,  the  king  of  Israel.  His  enter- 
prises were  unsuccessful,  because  God  broke 
his  ships  in  pieces. 

With  the  passing  of  Jehoshaphat  another 
period  of  degeneracy  and  darkness  set  in  over 
the  kingdom  of  Judah.  He  was  succeeded  by 
his  firstborn,  Jehoram,  a  man  of  utterly  evil 
nature,  who  attempted  to  make  his  throne  se- 
cure by  the  murder  of  his  brothers.  In  the 
midst  of  his  wickedness  a  message  came  to  him 
by  writing  from  Elijah.  It  was  a  terrible  sen- 
tence of  judgment,  which  was  fully  carried 
out  after  eight  years  of  reign.  He  was  im- 
mediately succeeded  by  Ahaziah,  his  youngest 
son,  whose  brief  reign  of  one  year  was  influ- 
enced for  evil  by  Athaliah,  his  mother.  Dark 
and  terrible  days  followed  his  death,  during 
which  this  woman,  Athaliah,  reigned  over  the 
land.  Her  first  act  was  that  of  the  destruction 
of  all  the  seed  royal  of  the  house  of  Judah,  ex- 
cept Joash,  who  was  rescued,  and  for  six  years 


Temple,  Possessed  and  A])an(l()ncd     11)1 

preserved  within  the  temph^  by  Jehoshabeath, 
and  the  higli  priest,  Jehoiada. 

The  reform  under  Joasli  was  really  due  to 
the  influence  of  this  man  Jehoiada.  It  centres, 
as  always  in  this  book,  around  the  Temple. 
While  Jehoiada  lived,  worship  was  main- 
tained, but  after  his  death  the  kin^r  who  had 
been  zealous  in  reform  became  determined  in 
wickedness. 

The  account  of  the  rei<xn  of  Amaziah  opens 
with  a  remarkable  statement :  "  He  did  that 
which  was  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  but 
not  with  a  perfect  heart."  Notwithstanding 
the  general  direction  of  his  life,  either  through 
personal  indulgence  or  ambition  or  careless- 
ness, the  whole  heart  was  not  set  upon  doing 
the  will  of  God,  and  consequently  the  reign 
was  characterized  by  failure.  Uzziah,  who 
succeeded  him,  and  reigned  fifty-two  years, 
was  a  man  of  strong  character,  and  the  early 
part  of  his  occupancy  of  the  throne  was  char- 
acterized by  true  prosperity.  The  last  years 
of  his  reign  were  full  of  suffering  and  sadness. 
In  an  evil  moment  of  pride  he  entered  into 
the  sacred  courts,  and  violated  the  ancient  or- 
der of  God  concerning  the  offering  of  sacri- 
fices. He  was  smitten  with  leprosy,  and  lived 
for  the  latter  part  of  his  life  a  prisoner,  iso- 
lated from  his  fellow-men.    He  was  succeeded 


192  II.    Chronicles 

by  Jotham,  who  reigned  in  equity,  and  re- 
frained from  his  father's  sin.  During  the 
whole  of  this  period,  however,  the  corruption 
of  Judah  went  forward,  and  the  great  ministry 
of  Isaiah  commenced.  The  reign  of  Ahaz  was 
marked  by  terrible  and  rapid  degeneracy. 
With  appalling  fearlessness  he  restored  all  the 
evils  of  idolatry,  even  including  the  terrible 
offering  of  children  to  Moloch.  The  evil  of  his 
character  is  manifest  in  the  fact  that  calami- 
ties did  not  seem  to  have  the  effect  of  rous- 
ing him  to  consciousness  of  his  sin.  "  In  the 
time  of  his  distress  did  he  trespass  yet  more 
against  the  Lord,  this  same  king  Ahaz." 

With  the  accession  of  Hezekiah  a  great 
change  came  over  the  life  of  Judah.  Among 
all  the  reforming  kings  he  was  undoubtedly 
the  most  remarkable.  This  was  in  all  proba- 
bility due  to  the  influence  of  Isaiah.  His 
reformation  commenced  in  his  own  deep  con- 
sciousness of  the  wretched  condition  of  the 
people,  and  the  reason  thereof.  His  first  re- 
forming act  w^as  that  of  cleansing  the  house 
of  God,  and  restoring  it  as  the  place  of  wor- 
ship. He  then  made  arrangements  for  the 
keeping  of  the  Passover,  and  with  a  largeness 
of  heart  sent  messengers  throughout  Israel, 
inviting  them  to  come  and  take  part  therein. 
Only  a  remnant  responded.  The  observance 
of  the  feast  was  followed  by  the  work  of  re- 


Temple,  Possessed  and  Abandoned     IIKJ 

organization  in  tlio  nation.  The  story  is  told 
in  general  terms,  and  special  note  is  made  of 
the  thoroughness  with  which  the  king  carried 
out  the  work.  "  In  every  work  that  he  began 
to  do  in  the  service  of  the  house  of  God,  and 
in  the  law,  and  in  the  connnandments,  to  seek 
liis  God,  he  did  it  with  all  his  heart,  and  pros- 
pered.'' Then  came  a  trial  of  his  faith  in  the 
invasion  of  Sennacherib.  In  the  presence  of 
the  peril  his  heart  did  not  fail.  He  acted  with 
promptitude  by  stopping  the  supply  of  water, 
by  strengthening  the  fortifications,  by  mob- 
ilizing his  army,  and  then  sought  refuge  in 
prayer  and  in  fellowship  with  the  prophet  Isa- 
iah. The  chronicler  then  briefly  relates  the 
story  of  his  illness,  and  of  that  failure  which 
characterized  his  last  days. 

Manasseh  the  son  of  Hezekiah  seems  to  have 
set  himself  to  the  most  wilful  and  persistent 
form  of  every  abomination.  The  strong  hand 
of  God  was  stretched  out  against  him,  and  he 
was  carried  away  in  irons,  broken  and  de- 
feated. In  his  distress  he  cried  out  for  help  to 
God.  His  repentance  was  evidently  the  chief 
subject  in  the  mind  of  the  chronicler,  and  con- 
stitutes a  wonderful  picture  of  the  readiness  of 
God  to  pardon.  Amon,  on  coming  to  the 
throne,  followed  the  earlier  example  of  his 
father,  and  was  so  utterly  corrupt  iliat  his  own 
servants  conspired  against  him  and  slew  him. 


194  II.   Chronicles 

The  story  of  the  reign  of  Josiah  is  full  of 
brightness.  Ascending  the  throne  when  eight 
years  old,  at  the  age  of  sixteen  he  began  to 
seek  after  God.  Four  years  later  he  set  him- 
self to  the  actual  work  of  reformation.  It  was 
during  the  cleansing  of  the  Temple  that  the 
book  of  the  law  was  discovered,  the  result  of 
which  was  a  still  greater  determination  on 
his  part  to  reform  the  nation.  He  observed  the 
Passover.  Following  the  story  of  his  death, 
we  read  of  the  lamentation  of  the  people.  The 
reformation  under  him  was  due  entirely  to 
their  love  for  him,  and  not  to  any  return  on 
their  part  to  God. 

The  story  of  final  movements  in  the  down- 
ward course  of  the  nation  concludes  the  book. 
Jehoahaz  reigned  for  three  months.  He  was 
deposed  by  the  king  of  Egypt,  who  appointed 
Jehoiakim.  After  eleven  years  of  evil  courses 
he  was  carried  away  by  Nebuchadnezzar  to 
Babylon.  He  was  succeeded  by  Jehoiachin, 
who  also  was  carried  away  by  Nebuchadnez- 
zar. Zedekiah,  appointed  by  Nebuchadnezzar 
to  the  succession,  rebelled  against  him,  and 
continued  his  evil  courses  for  eleven  years. 
The  Chaldeans  carried  the  remnant  away  to 
Babylon.  The  book  closes  with  the  statement 
of  the  proclamation  of  Cyrus,  which  also  opens 
the  book  of  Ezra. 


EZRA 


EZRA— A  RETURNING  REMNANT 


A 

B 

2ERUBBABEL 

EZRA 

i.—vi. 

vii.—x. 

I.  Return 

I..il. 

\ 

I.  Return 

vii..  vi 

i.  The  Edict  of  Cyrus. 

i. 

Interval  of  Sixty  Years. 

ii.  The  Returning  Exiles. 

ii. 

i.  The  Coming  of  Ezra. 

V 

Note  : 

The  Small  Number  of  Levites. 
The  Nethinim. 

ii.  The  Returning  Exiles, 
iii.  The  Preliminary  Convention. 

viii.  I- 

The  Totals. 

iv.  The  Return. 

31 

II.  Reorganisation 

lil. 

-vl. 

II.  Reformation 

ix.. 

i.  Resumption  of  Worship. 

iii. 

i.  The  Conditions  in  Jerusalem. 

iz.  z 

ii.  Opposition. 

iv. 

ii.  Ezra's  Intercession. 

9 

a.  General  Statement. 

b.  Particular  Account. 

1-6 
7-43 

iii.  The  Reformation. 

iii.  Resumption  of  Building. 

V. 

1 

iv.  Darius. 

vi. 

1 

EZRA 

THE  book  of  Ezra  contains  an  account  of  a 
most  important  epoch  in  the  hiptory  of 
the  people  of  God.  After  seventy  years  of  cap- 
tivity, through  the  decree  of  a  Gentile  king,  a 
return  was  made  possible.  This  book  gives  us 
the  story  of  that  return,  and  of  the  rebuilding 
of  the  Temple.  It  is  not  consecutive  history, 
for,  while  in  conjunction  with  the  book  of  Ne- 
hemiah  it  covers  a  period  of  about  one  hun- 
dred years,  there  is  in  the  midst  of  tliis  book 
a  gap  of  sixty  years.  There  are  two  main  divi- 
sions: first,  the  story  of  the  return  under 
Zerubbabel  and  the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple 
(i.-vi.);  then,  after  sixty  years,  that  of  the 
coming  of  Ezra,  and  the  work  he  undertook 
(vii.-x).  It  may  therefore  be  simply  divided 
around  the  names  of  these  two  men. 

A.  Zerubbabel 

The  story  which  centres  around  Zerubbabel 
is  that  of  the  return  of  a  remnant  of  the  peo- 
ple to  Jerusalem,  and  their  reorganization. 

The  purposes  of  God  may  seem  to  tarry; 
they  are  never  abandoned.  Indeed,  there  is  a 
very  true  sense  in  which  they  never  even  tarry 

197 


198  Ezra 

for  a  moment.  The  chosen  nation  had  become 
a  people  scattered  and  peeled,  having  lost  na- 
tional position  and  power,  and  to  a  large  ex- 
tent national  consciousness.  Through  the  sev- 
enty years  God  prepared  a  remnant,  through 
processes  of  suffering,  to  return  and  rebuild, 
and  hold  the  fort  until  He,  the  true  Seed  and 
Servant,  should  come.  The  history  of  the  re- 
turn sets  forth  clearly  the  truth  concerning 
this  overruling  of  God.  Through  a  most  un- 
likely instrument,  Cyrus,  the  way  was  made 
plain. 

The  list  of  those  returning  is  principally 
remarkable  from  the  small  number  of  the 
Levites  it  contains.  Nearly  ten  times  as  many 
priests  as  Levites  went  back  to  the  land.  An- 
other point  is  that  of  the  Nethinim.  They 
seem  to  have  been  prominent  in  these  times, 
for  they  are  only  once  mentioned  elsewhere. 
It  is  almost  impossible  to  determine  their 
origin. 

The  leaders  in  this  return  were  evidently 
conscious  of  the  matters  of  real  importance 
in  the  life  of  the  people.  Directly  they  were 
settled  in  their  cities,  the  altar  of  God  was  es- 
tablished at  Jerusalem.  As  far  as  possible 
they  restored  the  Divinely  appointed  order  of 
w^orship,  and  immediately  commenced  the 
work  of  rebuilding  the  Temple.    The  founda- 


A    Returning    Remnant  100 


tions  were  laid,  and  in  the  second  year  of  the 
return,  with  fitting  eeremonies  of  praise,  they 
rejoiced. 

This  work  stirred  up  the  opposition  of  the 
Samaritans.  This  was  first  manifested  in  an 
attempt  to  induce  Zerubbabel  and  those  as- 
sociated with  him  to  admit  into  partnership 
such  as  were  really  enemies  of  the  work.  This 
being  definitely  refused,  these  enemies  set 
themselves  in  every  way  to  harass  the  work 
and  hinder  it,  until  at  last  they  were  successful 
in  obtaining  letters  from  the  reigning  monarch 
which  interdicted  the  work.  Thus  for  a  long 
period  the  rebuilding  of  the  house  of  God 
ceased,  while  the  building  of  the  houses  of  the 
people  went  forward  unchecked. 

A  study  of  the  prophecies  of  Haggai  and 
Zechariah  make  it  perfectly  evident  that  the 
cessation  of  the  work  of  building  was  un- 
worthy of  the  men  who  had  commenced. 
Judged  by  all  human  standards,  tlicy  could 
fairly  urge  the  difficulties  of  the  situation,  and 
the  necessity  for  obedience  to  the  edict  of  the 
reigning  king.  Judged  by  the  Divine  stand- 
ard, as  the  burning  words  of  the  prophets  made 
perfectly  clear,  they  had  no  right  to  cease. 
Under  the  inspiration  of  these  prophetic  mes- 
sages, governor  and  priest,  Zerubbabel  and 
Jeshua,  commenced  the  work  again.     Again 


200  Ezra 

opposition  was  raised.  To  this  they  gave  no 
heed,  and  Tattenai  sent  a  letter  to  Darius  con- 
cerning the  edict  of  Cyrus. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Tattenai  felt 
that  the  finding  of  such  a  decree  was  unlikely, 
if  not  impossible.  That  the  search  was  a  thor- 
ough one  is  indicated  by  the  statement  of 
where  the  roll  was  found.  The  searchers  natu- 
rally commenced  in  the  house  of  the  archives 
in  Babylon.  It  was  not  there,  but  at  Ach- 
metha,  in  the  royal  palace,  that  it  was  discov- 
ered. In  consequence  of  this  the  edict  of 
Darius  not  only  gave  them  permission  to  carry 
forward  their  work,  but  compelled  Tattenai  to 
help  them  with  great  gifts.  At  last  the  Tem- 
ple was  finished,  and  solemnly  dedicated  to 
God  with  sacrificial  offerings  and  songs  of 
thanksgiving. 

B.  Ezra 

Between  chapters  vi.  and  vii.  there  was  an 
interval  of  at  least  sixty  years,  uneventful  in 
the  history  of  the  people  settled  in  Jerusalem. 
That  they  had  largely  failed  in  the  purposes 
of  Zerubbabel  is  evident  from  the  work  done 
by  Ezra,  and  subsequently  by  Nehemiah. 
Again  the  wonderful  overruling  of  God  is  seen 
in  the  working  of  the  minds  of  two  men  m 
Babylon.     Ezra  was  stirred  with  desire  to 


A    Returning    Remnant  201 

help  bis  people  in  Jerusalem.  Artaxerxes  was 
moved  with  fear  lest  there  should  be  "  wrath 
against  the  realm  of  the  king  and  his  sons." 
It  is  perfectly  evident  that  be  bad  some  clear, 
consciousness  of  the  power  of  God.  Thus  by 
the  creation  of  different  emotions  in  the  hearts 
of  two  men,  which  brought  them  into  co-opera- 
tion with  each  other,  and  thus  with  His  pur- 
pose, He  moved  forward. 

Ezra  gathered  together  members  of  the 
priestly  and  royal  houses,  and  a  further  con- 
tingent of  the  people  at  Ahava,  in  order  that 
be  might  review  them,  and  prepare  for  the 
journey.  Finding  that  there  were  no  Levites 
in  the  company,  he  sent  to  Iddo,  and  in  re- 
sponse to  his  appeal  certain  of  their  number 
joined  him.  The  character  of  Ezra  is  remark- 
ably revealed  in  his  refusing  to  seek  help  from 
an  earthly  king.  It  is  a  fine  illustration  of 
the  independence  and  dependence  of  such  as 
follow  the  Lord.  The  king's  voluntary  gifts 
were  gladly  accepted;  but  to  ask  for  soldiers 
would  have  been  to  make  a  tacit  confession 
of  questioning  in  his  heart  as  to  the  ability  or 
willingness  of  God  to  help.  After  a  long  jour- 
ney they  arrived  in  safety  at  Jerusalem,  and 
made  their  offerings. 

Ezra  found  a  condition  of  affairs  at  Jerusa- 
lem which  was  a  sad  revelation  of  the  deterio- 


202  Ezra 

ration  of  the  people.  There  had  been  no  re- 
turn to  idolatry,  but  there  had  been  an  inter- 
mixture with  the  people  of  the  land,  and  the 
chief  offenders  had  been  the  princes  and  the 
rulers.  He  was  moved  with  righteous  indig- 
nation, and  sank  into  silent  astonishment  until 
the  time  of  the  evening  oblation.  Then  before 
God  he  poured  out  his  soul  in  prayer. 

The  sincerity  of  Ezra's  vicarious  repentance 
produced  immediate  result.  The  people  who 
had  gathered  about  him  through  the  long  hours 
of  the  day  came  to  a  consciousness  of  the  enor- 
mity of  their  sin  as  they  saw  how  he  was  af- 
fected thereby.  At  last  one  of  their  num- 
ber spoke  to  him,  acknowledging  the  sin,  and 
suggesting  a  remedy.  He  at  once  became  a 
man  of  action,  first  calling  them  to  a  sacred 
covenant  that  they  would  put  away  the  evil 
thing  from  amongst  them;  and  then  leading 
them  in  the  carrying  out  of  their  covenant. 


NEHEMIAH 


NEHEMIAH— CONSOLIDATION 


THE  BUILDING  OF  THE 
WALL 

t. — vii,  jja 


THE  READING  OF  THE 
LAW 

vii.  73b~x. 


THE  SETTLEMENT  OF 
THE  CITIES 

xi, — xiii. 


L  Initiation  i.,  is. 

i.  Nehemiah's  Grief  coa- 
cerning  Jerusalem.       i. 

ii.  Nehemiah's  Coming  to 
Jerusalem.  ii. 


II.  Process 


ill.-v. 


i.  The  Building  of  the  Wall, 
iii. 
ii.  Opposition  and  Persis- 
tence, iv. 

iii.  Internal  Difficulties,    v. 


111.  Completion 

vl.— vii.  73a 

i.  Opposition  and  Victory. 
vi. 

ii.  The  People,    vii.  1-733. 


I.  The  Reading  of  the 
Law  and  Feast 
Of  Tabernacles 
vii.  73b-viii. 

i.  The  Reading  of  the  Law. 
vii.  73b — viii.  12 

ii.  The  Feast  of  Tabernacles. 
13-18 


II.  The  Great  Prayer  iX 
oftheLevites  «. 

i.  The  Day  of  Humiliation. 


ii.  The  Offering  of  Praise 
iii.  Prayer. 


5-39 
30-38 


III.  The  Re-establish' 
ment  of  a  Cov« 
enant 

X. 

i.  The  Sealing.  1-28 

ii.  The  Covenant.  99-39 


1.  The  People  in  Jeru' 
salem     xi.— xii.  26 

i.  The  princes  and  ten  per 
cent,  compulsoriiy,  and 
some  voluntarily,  xi.  x,  2 

ii.  Lists.  zi.  3— 'Sii.  36 


II.  The   Dedication    of 
the  Wall 

xii.  27-xi{i=  3 

i.  Dating  Difficult 
ii.  Ceremony 

a.  Two  Processions  of 

Singers,    xii.  27-47 

b.  The  Reading  of 

the  Law.     xiii.  1-2 

c.  Separation.  3 


III.  Nehemiah's  final 
Reformation 

xiii.  4^31 

i.  Twelve  years  later, 
ii.  Correction  of  four  Abuses, 
iii.  His  Method  (ver.  35> 


NEHEMIAH 

THIS  is  the  last  book  of  Old  Testament  his- 
tory. An  interval  of  about  twelve  years 
occurred  between  the  reformation  under  Ezra 
and  the  coming  of  Nehemiah.  The  story  is 
that  of  the  continuation  of  the  work  com- 
menced by  Zerubbabel  in  the  matter  of  the  re- 
building of  the  wall.  The  book  is  intensely 
interesting,  among  other  reasons  because  in 
large  measure  it  is  autobiographical.  Nehe- 
miah tells  his  own  story,  and  with  a  freshness 
and  vigour  and  transparent  honesty  which 
make  it  for  evermore  one  full  of  interest.  Be- 
yond the  account  of  the  building  of  the  wall 
we  have  that  of  a  further  reformation  in  which 
Nehemiah  and  Ezra  were  united  as  leaders, 
and  finally  an  account  of  the  settlement  of  the 
cities. 

The  book  may  therefore  be  divided  broadly 
thus:  The  Building  of  the  Wall  (i.-vii.  73a)  ; 
The  Reading  of  the  Law^  (vii.  73b-x)  ;  The 
Settlement  of  the  Cities  (xi-xiii.). 

A.  The  Building  of  the  Wall 

Nehemiah's  position  as  cupbearer  at  the 
court  of  the  Gentile  king  w^as  one  of  honour, 

205 


206  Xehemiah 


and  admitted  biin  into  relationship  of  some 
nearness  and  familiarity.  In  the  midst  of 
these  circumstances  he  had  not  forgotten  his 
relationship  to  the  chosen  people,  but  on  the 
contrary  was  interested  in  them,  and  made  in- 
quiry of  those  who  came  to  the  court  concern- 
ing Jerusalem.  The  news  they  brought  was 
full  of  sadness,  and  grief  possessed  his  heart. 
He  carried  his  burden  to  God  in  prayer,  ask- 
ing that  He  would  give  him  favour  in  the 
eyes  of  the  king  he  served.  There  was  thus 
evidently  in  his  heart  a  resolution  to  do 
more  than  pity,  if  the  door  of  opportunity 
offered. 

The  sadness  in  his  heart  could  not  wholly 
be  hidden,  and  when  the  king  detected  it  Ne- 
hemiah  was  filled  with  fear.  Through  the 
fear  a  splendid  courage  manifested  itself,  and 
he  asked  that  he  might  be  allowed  to  go  and 
help  his  brethren.  The  request  was  granted, 
and  he  departed  for  Jerusalem.  Having  ar- 
rived, he  carefully  ascertained  the  true  state 
of  affairs,  and  then  called  the  elders  to  arise 
and  build.  Opposition  was  at  once  manifested 
on  the  part  of  surrounding  enemies,  and  with 
strong  determination  Nehemiah  made  it  per- 
fectly clear  that  no  co-operation  would  be  per- 
mitted with  those  who  were  derisive  of  the 
effort. 


Consolidation  207 


The  account  of  the  method  of  arrangement 
for  the  building  of  the  wall  shows  how  system 
characterized  Nehemiah's  procedure.  The 
description  given  takes  in  the  whole  city's  cir- 
cumference. The  arrangements  made  indi- 
cated the  necessity  for  speedy  work,  and  were 
characterized  by  a  sense  of  the  importance  of 
division  of  labour,  and  a  fitting  apportion- 
ment thereof  in  the  matter  of  persons  and 
neighbourhoods. 

As  the  work  proceeded  the  opposition  of 
outsiders  turned  from  derision  to  anger,  but 
rose  no  higher  at  the  moment  than  that  of  con- 
tempt. An  illuminative  sentence,  "  the  peo- 
ple had  a  mind  to  work,''  shows  how  com- 
pletely Nehemiah  had  captured  and  inspired 
them,  and  we  are  not  surprised  when  we  read 
that  the  wall  was  half  finished.  At  this  point 
opposition  became  more  severe,  and  a  positive 
attempt  was  made  by  conspiracy  to  hinder  the 
progress  of  the  work.  In  Nehemiah's  method 
there  was  neither  foolish  independence  of  God 
nor  foolhardy  neglect  of  human  responsibility. 
"  We  made  our  prayer  and  set  a  watch." 

A  new  difficulty  arose  among  the  people 
themselves.  The  rich  had  exacted  usury  from 
their  poorer  brethren  to  such  an  extent  as 
to  oppress  and  impoverish  them.  Nehemiah 
again  acted  with  promptitude.    There  is  a  fine 


208  Nehemiah 


touch  in  his  declaration,  "  I  consulted  with 
myself,  and  contended  with  the  nobles."  Set- 
ting an  example  of  self-denial,  in  that  he  took 
no  usury,  nor  even  the  things  which  were  his 
right  as  the  appointed  governor  of  the  people, 
he  produced  immediate  results  in  that  all  the 
nobles  did  the  same.  Thus  the  people  were  re- 
lieved, and  went  forward  with  their  work  with 
new  enthusiasm. 

^ -"    Opposition  now  moved  on  to  a  new  plane. 

^  Having  begun  in  contempt,  and  proceeded 
through  conspiracy,  it  now  adopted  a  method 
of  cunning.  Affecting  friendship,  the  enemies 
of  Nehemiah  four  times  proposed  conference 
with  him,  which  he  resolutely  declined.  This 
was  followed  by  an  open  letter  containing  a 
slander.  With  singular  directness  he  denied 
the  slander,  and  carried  on  his  building.  Find- 
ing that  he  was  not  to  be  seduced,  they  at- 
tempted to  fill  him  with  fear.  This  attempt 
he  scorned,  and  hastened  the  workers. 
Through  the  whole  period  he  was  harassed  by 
the  complicity  of  certain  nobles  with  Tobiah. 
At  last  the  wall  was  finished  by  the  setting 
up  of  the  doors,  and  the  placing  in  order  of 
porters,  singers,  and  Levites.  Arrangements 
were  made  for  the  safety  of  the  city  in  the 
presence  of  surrounding  enemies  by  careful 
provision  as  to  the  hour  for  opening  and  clos- 


Consolidation  200 


in<^  the  eitv  gates,  and  by  au  arrangement  of 
watchers. 

R.  The  Reading  of  the  Law 

In  this  section  of  the  book,  Ezra  appears 
upon  the  scene.  A  most  remarkable  religious 
convention  was  held.  The  first  day  witnessed 
tlie  assembling  of  the  people,  and  was  given 
to  the  reading  of  the  law.  This  w^as  not  merely 
the  reading  aloud  of  passages  therefrom,  but 
was  reading  accompanied  by  exposition  under- 
taken by  men  specially  appointed  to  act  in 
conjunction  with  Ezra.  It  was  a  day  of  con- 
viction, resulting  in  great  sadness  in  the  heart 
of  the  people.  On  the  second  day  a  smaller 
gathering  of  the  rulers  was  held,  who  came 
in  order  more  perfectly  to  understand  the  law 
of  God.  An  immediate  application  was  made 
by  the  observance  of  the  feast  of  tabernacles. 

Following  the  feast,  after  a  brief  interval, 
came  the  great  day  of  humiliation.  The  peo- 
ple separated  themselves  entirely  from  all 
that  were  not  actually  within  the  covenant, 
and  gave  themselves  to  confession  and  hum- 
bling before  God.  In  all  this  they  were  led 
by  the  Levites,  and  the  great  prayer  they  of- 
fered is  given  in  full.  Its  first  section  was 
an  ascription  of  praise;  its  second  set  forth 
Jehovah's  grace  in  contrast  with  the  repeated 


210  Nehemiah 


failure  of  the  people;  and  the  last  movement 
was  that  of  definite  seeking  for  His  continued 
goodness  and  help. 

Following  upon  the  humiliation  of  the  peo- 
ple they  entered  into  new  covenant  relation- 
ships with  God.  This  covenant  was  sealed 
representatively  by  priests,  Levites,  and 
rulers.  To  its  terms  all  the  people  agreed. 
They  were  set  forth  in  general  phrases  and  in 
particular  application.  Generally  the  peo- 
ple promised  "  to  walk  in  God's  law  .  .  . 
to  observe  and  do  all  the  commandments." 
Particularly  the  covenant  referred  to  matters 
in  which  the  people  had  been  in  danger  of 
failure,  those  namely  of  intermarriage  with 
the  heathen,  of  neglect  of  the  Sabbath,  of  Tem- 
ple maintenance  and  arrangement,  and  of  the 
offering  of  first-fruits  and  tithes. 

c.  The  Settlement  of  the  Cities 

In  this  third  and  final  division  of  the  book 
the  arrangements  made  for  the  settlement  of 
the  cities  are  given.  In  the  first  section  we 
have  the  account  particularly  of  the  settlement 
of  Jerusalem.  Perhaps  not  more  than  fifty 
thousand  had  returned  from  captivity.  By 
no  means  all  of  these  had  come  to  Jerusalem. 
Many  of  them  were  scattered  through  the  sur- 
rounding cities.     Jerusalem   was   peculiarly 


Consolidation  2\^ 


difficult  of  settlement,  in  that  it  was  the  centre 
of  danger  and  of  possible  attack.  It  was 
therefore  arranged  that  the  princes  should 
dwell  in  the  city,  and  ten  per  cent,  of  the  peo- 
ple, selected  by  lot,  must  take  up  their  abode 
there.  In  addition  to  these  there  were  certain 
who  voluntarily  came  forward  to  dwell  in  the 
place  of  danger. 

It  would  seem  as  though  the  dedication  of 
the  wall  had  been  postponed  for  some  consid- 
erable time.  The  actual  time  is  of  no  moment. 
The  ceremony  of  dedication  proceeded  in  three 
stages — first,  two  processions  of  singers  who 
chanted  the  praises  of  God ;  secondly,  the  read- 
ing of  the  law;  and  finally,  the  separation  of 
the  mixed  multitude  from  the  people  of  God. 

After  the  building  of  the  wall  Nehemiah 
had  evidently  gone  back  to  the  court  of  the 
king.  Twelve  years  later  he  returned,  and  the 
last  deeds  recorded  were  such  as  reveal  the  con- 
tiued  strength  and  loyalty  of  the  man.  There 
were  four  abuses  which  confronted  him.  Eli- 
ashib  the  priest  had  given  place  within  the 
very  Temple  of  God  to  Tobiah.  Nehemiah 
flung  out  occupant  and  furniture,  and  restored 
the  chamber  to  its  proper  use.  In  the  second 
place  he  found  that  the  Levites,  instead  of  be- 
ing able  to  devote  their  whole  time  to  the  serv- 
ice of  the  Temple,  had  to  earn  their  living,  be- 


212  Nehemiah 


cause  the  people  neglected  the  bringing  in  of 
the  tithe.  He  corrected  this  abuse.  In  the 
third  place  he  found  that  the  Sabbath  was 
violated,  and  he  restored  the  Divine  order. 
Finally,  the  people  had  again  made  mixed 
marriages,  and  with  characteristic  roughness 
and  force  he  dealt  with  the  matter. 


ESTHER 


ESTHER— GOD  AMID  THE  SHADOWS 


A 

B 

C 

D 

THE  KINGS 

THE  COUNTRY 

THE    KING'S 

THE  COUNTRY 

CONCLUSi 

COURT 

COURT 

1. — iii. 

iv.  1-3 

iv.  4 — via. 

IX. 

jr. 

I.  The  Feast 
at  ShU' 
Shan 

1. 

I.  Mordecai 
1-2 

I.  Esther  and 
Mor- 
decai 
iv.  4-17 

I.  Poetic 

Retri- 
bution 
1-19 

Ahasuer 
an< 
Mo 
del 

II.  The  New 
Queen  ii. 

II.  The  Jews 

II.  Esther  and 

the  King 

V.  1-8 

II.  The  Feast 

ofPurim 

20-32 

IILHaman  Hi. 

III.  Haman 

9-14 

IV.  The 

Sleep- 
less 
King   vl. 

V.  The 

Queen's 

Banquet 

vil. 

VI.  Mordecai 

vIU. 

ESTHER 

THE  eyonts  recorded  in  the  book  of  Esther 
occurred  between  the  completion  of  the 
Temple  and  the  mission  of  Ezra  (between 
Ezra  vi.  and  vii.).  In  all  likelihood  the  narra- 
tive, as  we  have  it,  was  taken  directly  from  the 
Persian  records.  This  would  account  for  much 
that  has  created  difficulty  in  the  minds  of  some 
as  to  the  presence  of  this  book  in  the  canon  of 
Scripture.  The  fact  that  the  name  of  God  is 
not  mentioned  would  be  perfectly  natural  if 
the  historian  were  a  Persian.  That  many 
things  are  chronicled  without  apology,  which 
are  the  customs  of  a  godless  nation,  would  also 
be  explained  thereby. 

All  this,  however,  makes  the  persons  and 
teaching  of  the  book  more  valuable.  It  is  a 
fragment  of  profane  history  captured  for 
sacred  purposes.  The  story  reveals,  to  such 
as  have  eyes  to  see,  that  same  principle  of  the 
overruling  of  God  on  behalf  of  His  people 
which  marks  all  their  history.  Here,  however, 
it  is  seen  operating  on  their  behalf  in  a  foreign 
land. 

The  principal  value  of  the  book  is  not  its 

215 


216  Esther 


revelation  of  His  care  for  individuals,  though, 
of  course,  that  also  is  present.  It  is  rather 
that  of  His  preservation  of  the  people  as  a 
whole,  in  an  hour  when  they  were  threatened 
w^ith  wholesale  slaughter ;  and  moreover  it  em- 
phasizes His  care  even  for  those  who  had  not 
returned  with  Zerubbabel.  The  feast  of  Pu- 
rim,  observed  even  to-day,  is  the  living  link  to 
the  events  recorded,  and  historically  sets  the 
seal  upon  the  accuracy  of  the  story.  That 
feast  celebrates,  not  so  much  the  defeat  of 
Haman,  or  the  advancement  of  Mordecai,  as 
the  deliverance  of  the  people.  The  book  is 
pre-eminently  dramatic,  and  is  best  analyzed 
around  the  scenes:  The  King's  Court,  Ahasu- 
erus  (i.-iii.)  ;  the  Country,  Mordecai,  and  the 
Mourning  Jews  (iii.-iv.  3)  ;  the  King's  Court, 
the  unnamed  God  (iv.  4-viii.)  ;  the  Country, 
Purim,  the  Rejoicing  Jews  (ix.) ;  Conclusion 

(X.). 

A.  The  King's  Court,  Ahasuerus 

The  first  scene  presented  to  us  is  that  of  a 
great  feast  in  the  palace  of  the  king.  In  the 
midst  of  it  the  king  commanded  his  queen, 
Vashti,  to  his  presence.  The  one  redeeming 
feature  in  the  revelation  of  the  conditions  at 
the  court  of  Ahasuerus  was  that  of  Vashti's 
refusal  to  obey  the  command  of  the  king.  She 


God    amid    the    Shadows  217 

paid  the  price  of  her  loyalty  to  her  woman- 
hood in  being  deposed. 

Mordecai's  action  in  the  case  of  Esther  is 
open  to  question.  His  love  for  her  was  evi- 
dent, and  the  picture  of  him  walking  before 
the  court  of  the  w^omen's  house  into  which  she 
had  been  taken  indicated  his  continued  inter- 
est in  her.  His  advice  that  she  should  not  be- 
tray her  nationality  was  questionable,  as  her 
position  at  the  court  of  the  king  was  one  of 
peril  for  a  daughter  of  the  covenant.  Her 
presence  in  the  palace  was  part  of  that  process 
by  which  the  overruling  of  God  preserved  His 
people,  and  frustrated  their  foe. 

Haman  is  now  introduced,  a  man  haughty 
and  imperious,  proud  and  cruel.  His  malice 
was  stirred  against  Mordecai,  and  also,  there- 
fore, against  all  his  people,  and  he  made  use 
of  his  influence  with  the  king  to  obtain  author- 
ity practically  to  exterminate  the  whole  of 
them. 

B.  The  Country,  Mordecai,  and  the  Mourn- 
ing Jews 

The  intention  of  Haman  became  known  to 
Mordecai,  who  at  once  took  up  his  position 
outside  the  king's  gate,  and  there  raised  a  loud 
and  bitter  cry.  The  royal  proclamation  filled 
the  people  through  the  provinces  with  sorrow, 


218  Esther 


and  they  mourned  with  fasting  and  weeping 
and  wailing. 

c.  The  King's  Court,  the  Unnamed  God 

The  news  of  this  mourning  reached  Esther 
in  the  royal  palace,  and  she  sent  to  make  in- 
quiries. Thus  between  the  extreme  need  of 
her  people  and  the  king  she  became  a  direct 
link.  The  custom  and  law  of  the  court  for- 
bade her  approach  to  her  lord  save  at  his  com- 
mand. The  urgency  of  the  case  appealed  to 
her,  however,  and  with  splendid  heroism  she 
ventured.  Conscious  of  her  need  of  moral 
support,  she  asked  that  the  people  would  fast 
with  her.  There  was  a  note  of  sacrifice  and 
abandonment  in  her  words,  "  If  I  perish,  I 
perish." 

Her  venture  was  crowned  with  success.  It 
might  have  been  quite  otherwise,  and  the  gra- 
ciousness  of  the  king,  notwithstanding  Esther's 
violation  of  the  law  of  the  palace,  was  un- 
doubtedly due  to  the  disposition  of  that  God 
in  Whose  hand  are  the  ways  of  kings,  whether 
they  will  or  not.  Her  request  was  at  first  of 
the  simplest.  She  invited  the  king  and  Ha- 
man  to  a  banquet.  The  overwhelming  pride 
of  Haman  was  manifest  in  his  gathering  of 
his  friends,  to  whom  he  boasted  of  his  riches, 
of  his  advancement,  and  now  of  this  last  fa- 


God    amid    the    Shadows  219 

vour,  that  he  alone  was  invited  to  accompany 
the  king  to  the  banquet  of  Esther.  Acting 
upon  the  advice  of  wife  and  friends,  he  com- 
mitted the  folly  of  making  the  time  of  the  ban- 
quet merry  for  himself  by  first  erecting  a  gal- 
lows for  Mordecai. 

In  the  economy  of  God  vast  issues  follow 
apparently  trivial  things.  In  the  case  of  Ahas- 
uerus  a  sleepless  night  was  the  means  through 
which  God  moved  forward  for  the  preservation 
of  His  people.  To  while  away  its  hours,  the 
records  were  read  to  the  king,  and  a  deed  of 
Mordecai  therein  recorded  led  to  the  hasty 
and  strange  happenings  which  filled  the  heart 
of  Haman  with  anger  and  terror.  Mordecai 
was  lifted  from  obscurity  to  the  most  conspicu- 
ous position  in  the  kingdom.  Events  moved 
rapidly  forward.  By  the  way  of  the  banquet 
Haman  passed  the  gallows.  It  was  a  fierce 
and  terrible  judgment,  and  yet  characterized 
by  poetic  justice. 

D.  The  Country^  Purim,  the  rejoicing  Jevts 

The  peril  of  the  Hebrew  people  was  not  yet, 
however,  averted.  The  royal  proclamation  had 
gone  forth  that  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  the 
twelfth  month  they  should  be  exterminated. 
By  the  constitution  no  royal  proclamation 
could  be  reversed.    The  king  granted  Morde- 


220  Esther 


cai  to  write  and  sign  letters  to  his  people,  per- 
mitting them  to  arm  and  defend  themselves. 
The  fateful  day  arrived,  but  it  was  one  on 
which  the  changed  conditions  in  the  case  of 
Haman  and  Moredcai  were  repeated  through- 
out the  whole  of  the  provinces. 

In  memory  of  the  deliverance  the  feast  of 
Purim  was  established.  According  to  Jewish 
tradition  "all  the  feasts  shall  cease  in  the 
days  of  the  Messiah,  except  the  feast  of  Pu- 
rim." It  is  a  remarkable  thing  that  while 
there  have  been  breaks  in  the  observance  of 
the  other  great  feasts,  and  some  of  them  have 
been  practically  discontinued,  this  has  been 
maintained. 

Conclusion 

Whatever  view  w^e  may  hold  of  this  book  of 
Esther,  it  is  certain  that  Jewish  leaders  have 
treated  it  as  an  exposition  of  the  method  by 
which  God  wrought  deliverance  for  His  peo- 
ple in  a  time  of  peril,  even  w^hile  they  were  in 
exile. 


END  OF  VOL.  I 


Date  Due 


Jt  3  0   4i;     5ife»>iAii 


Ag  1  4  '43 


Ag  17  '^c 


'*'•  '^  0  -'f 


*Pg6'4ii||r  2  7  '47 

Ap29'i^lF  S     -^ 


m 


lli..    o 


^; 


